THREE SERMONS UPON SPECIAL OCCASIONS.

Preached by JOHN DONE Deane of St. Paul's London.

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS JONES, and are to sold at his Shop in the Strand at
the Black Raven near St. Clements Church. 1623.

A SERMON UPON THE XV. VERSE OF THE XX. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES

Wherein occasion was justly taken for the Publication of some Reasons, which
his Sacred MAJESTY had been pleased to give, of those Directions for
PREACHERS, which he had formerly sent forth.

Preached at the CROSS the 15th. of September. 1622.

By JOHN DONE, Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Saint PAVLS, London.

And now by commandment of his Majesty published, as it was then preached.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for Thomas Jones, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Strand at the black Raven, near unto Saint Clements Church. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE, Marquess of Buckingham, High ADMIRAL of
ENGLAND, etc.
WHen I would speak to the KING, by your LORDSHIPS Means, I do: Now, when I
would speak to the Kingdom, I would do that by your Lordshippes Means to: and
therefore I am bold to transfer this Sermon to the World, through your
Lordships hands, and under your Name. For the first part of the Sermon, the
Explication of the Text, my profession, and my Conscience is warant enough that
I have spoken as the Holy Ghost intended, For the second part, the Application
of the Text, it will be warrant enough, that I have spoken as his Majesty
intended, that your Lordship admits it to issue in your Name. It is because
Kings favor the Church, that the Prophet says they are her Foster-Fathers;
and then, those persons, who have also interest in the favor of Kings, are her
Foster-Brothers: and such use to love well. By that Title, (as by many other
also) your Lordship loves the Church; as you are her Foster-Brother: loved of
him who loves her. And by that Title you love all them in the Church, who
endeavor to advance both the unity of our Church in it self, and the unity of
the Church, with the godly designs of our religious King. To which Service, I
shall ever sacrifice all the labors of

Your Lordships humblest and thankefullest Servant in Christ Jesus: JOHN DONE.
IVDGES. 5. 20. De coelo dimicatum est contra eos: stellae manentes in Ordine,
and cursu suo aduersus Siseram pugnauerunt. They fought from Heaven; The stars
in their courses fought against Sisera.
ALl the words of God are always sweet in themselves, says David; but
sweeter in the mouth, and in the pen of some of the Prophets, and some of the
Apostles, then of others, as they differed in their natural gifts, or in their
education: but sweetest of all, where the Holy Ghost has been pleased to set
the word of God to Music, and to convey it into a Song; and this Text is of
that kind: part of the Song which Deborah and Barak sung after their great
victory upon Sisera; Sisera who was Iabin the King of Canaans General against
Israel. God himself made Moses a Song, Deuteronomy. 31. 19.
and expressed his reason why; The children of Israel, says God, will forget
my Law; but this song they will not forget; and whenever they sing this song,
this song shall testify against them, what I have done for them, how they have
forsaken me. And to such a purpose has God left this Song of Deborah and Barak
in the Scriptures, that all Murmurers, and all that stray into a diffidence of
Gods power, or of his purpose to sustain his own cause, and destroy his own
Enemies, might run and read, might read and sing, the wonderful deliverances
that God has given to his people, by weak and unexpected means. This world
begun with a Song, if the Chalde Paraphrasts, upon Salomons Song of Songs have
taken a true tradition; That as soon as Adams sin was forgiven him, he
expressed (as he calls it in that Song) Sabbatum suum, his Sabbath, his peace of
conscience, in a Song; of which, we have the entrance in that Paraphrase. This
world begun so; and so did the next world too, if we count the beginning of
that (as it is a good computation to do so) from the coming of Christ Jesus:
for that was expressed on Earth, in diverse Songs; in the blessed Virgins
Magnificat; My soul does magnify the Lord: In Zacharies Benedictus; Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel; and in Simeons, Nunc dimittis, Lord, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace. This world began so, and the other; and when
both shall join, and make up one world without end, it shall continue so in
heaven, in that Song of the Lamb, Apoc. 15. 3.
Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints. And, to Tune us, to Compose and give us a Harmony
and Concord of affections, in all perturbations and passions, and discords in
the passages of this life, if we had no more of the same Music in the
Scriptures (as we have the Song of Moses at the Red Sea, and many Psalms of
David to the same purpose) this Song of Deborah were enough, abundantly enough,
to slumber any storm, to becalme any tempest, to rectify any scruple of Gods
slacknesse in the defense of his cause, when in the History and occasion of
this, Song, expressed in the Chapter before this, we see, That Israel had done
evil in the fight of the Lord again, and yet again, God came to them: That
God himself had sold Israel into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan, and yet he
repented the bargain, and came to them; That in twenty years oppression he
came not, and yet he came. That When Sisera came against them, with nine
hundred Chariots of Iron, and all preparations, proportionable to that, and God
called up a woman, a Prophetess, a Deborah against him, because Deborah had a
zeal to the cause, and consequently an enmity to the enemy, God would effect
his purpose by so weak an instrument, by a woman, but by a woman, which had no
such interest, nor zeal to the cause; by Iael: And in Iaels hand, by such an
instrument, as with that, scarce any man could do it, if it were to be done
again with a hammer she drives a nail through his temples, and nails him to
the ground, as he lay sleeping in her tent: And then the end of all, was the
end of all, not one man of his army left alive. O my Soul, why, art thou so
sad, why art thou so disquieted within me? Sing unto the Lord an old song, the
song of Deborah and Barak, That God by weak means does might works, That all
Gods creatures fight in his behalf, They fought from beanen, the stars in
their Order, fought against Sisera.

You shall have but two parts out of these words; And to make these two parts,
Division.
I consider the Text, as the two Hemispheres of the world, laid open in a flat,
in a plain Map. All those parts of the world, which the Ancients have used to
consider, are in one of those Hemispheres; All Europe is in that, and in that
is all Asia, and Afrike too: So that when we have seen that Hemisphere, done
with that, we might seem to have seen all, done with all the world; but yet
the other Hemisphere, that of America is as big as it; though, but by occasion
of new, and late discoueries, we had had nothing to say of America. So the
first part of our Text, will be as that first Hemisphere; all which the
ancient Expositors found occasion to note out of these words, will be in that:
but by the new discoueries of some humors of men, and rumors of men, we shall
have occasion to say somewhat of a second part to. The parts are, first, the
Literal, the Historical sense of the words; And then an emergent, a
collateral, an occasional sense of them. The explication of the words, and
the Application, Quid tunc, Quid nunc, How the words were spoken then, How they
may be applied now, will be our two parts. And, in passing through our first,
we shall make these steps. First, God can, and sometimes does effect his
purposes by himself; entirely, immediately, extraordinarily, miraculously by
himself: But yet, in a second place, we shall see, by this story, That he
looks for assistance, for concurrence of second causes, and subordinate
means: And that therefore, God in this Song of Deborah, has provided an
honorable commemoration of them, who did assist his cause; for, the Princes
have their place, Verse 15,
The Princes of Issachar were with her: And then, the Governors, The great
Persons, the great Officers of the State, have their place in this honor, That
they offered themselves willingly to that service; Verse 9.
And after them, Verse 10,
the Merchants, for those who are said there, to ride upon white Asses, to be
well mounted, according to the manner of those Nations, are, by Peter Martyr,
amongst our Expositors, and by Serarius the Jesuit, amongst the others, fitly
understood, to be intended of Merchants; And in the same verse, the Judges are
honorably remembered, Those that fit in Judgment; And a far vnlikelier sort
of people, then any of these, in the same verse too, Those that walked by the
way; Idle, and discoursing men, that were not much affected, how business
went, so they might talk of them: And lastly, the whole people in general,
Verse 2.
how poor soever, they have evidence from this record, That they offered
themselves (and what will they deny, that offer themselves) and willingly, to
this imploiment. And then, God having here afforded this honorable mention of
them, who did assist him, he lays also a heavy note upon such, who for
collateral respects preuaricated, or withdraw themselves from his service:
perticularly upon Ruben, Verse 16.
who was divided by greatness of heart, And upon Dan, Verse 17.
who remained in his ships. And therefore to the encouragement of those who did
assist him, in any proportion, though their assistance were no ways competent
against so potent an enemy, God fought for himself too, They sought from
Heaven, The stars in their order fought against Sisera. And these will be the
branches, or circumstances of our first part: for the particulars of the
second, we shall open them more commodiously for your memory and use, then,
when we come to handle them, then now. Now we proceed to those of the first
part.

And into those I pass with this protestation, Part 1.
That in all which I shall say this day, being to speak often of God, in that
Notion, as he is Lord of Hosts, and fights his own battles, I am far from
giving fire to them that desire war. Peace in this world, is a precious
Earnest, and a fair and lovely Type of the everlasting peace of the world to
come: And war in this world, is a shrewd and fearful Emblem of the
everlasting discord and tumult, and torment of the world to come: And
therefore, our Blessed God, bless us with this external, and this internal,
and make that lead us to an eternal peace. But I speak of this subject,
especially to establish and settle them, that suspect Gods power, or Gods
purpose, to succor those, who in foreign parts, groan under heavy pressures
in matter of Religion, or to restore those, who in foreign parts, are deuested
of their lawful possessions, and inheritance; and because God has not done
these great works yet, nor yet raised up means, in appearance, and in their
apprehension, likely to effect it, That therefore God likes not the cause; and
therefore they begin to be shaked in their own Religion at home, since they
think that God neglects it abroad. But, beloved, since God made all this world
of nothing, cannot he recover any one piece thereof, or restore any one piece,
with a little? In the Creation, his production of specifique forms, and
several Creatures in the several days, was much, very much; but not very
much, compared with that, which he had done immediately before, when he made
Heaven and Earth of nothing. For, for the particular Creatures, God had then
Praeiacentem Materiam, he had stuff before him; enough to cut out Creatures of
the largest sise, his Elephants of the Earth, his Whales and Leuiathans in the
Sea. In that matter there was Semen Creaturarum, The Seed of all Creatures in
that stuff. But for the stuff it self, the Heaven and Earth, God had not
Semen Coeli, any such seed of Heaven as that he could say to it, do thou hatch
a Heaven; he had not any such Semen terrae, as that he could bid that grow up
into an Earth: There was nothing at all, and all, that is, was produced from
that; and then who shall doubt of his proceeding, if by a little he will do
much? He suffered his greater works to be paraleld, or to be counterfeit by
Pharaohs Magicians, but in his least, in the making of Lice, he brought them
to confess Digitum Dei, the finger of God; and that was enough; The arm of
God, the hand of God needs not; where he will work, his finger is enough, It
was not that imagination, that dream of the Rabbis, that hindered the
Magicians, who say, that the Devil cannot make any Creature, less then a
Barley corn; As it is with men, they misconceiue it to be with the Devil too;
harder to make a little clock, a little picture, any thing in a little, then
in a larger form. That was no part of the reason in that case: but since man
ordinarily esteems it so, and ordinarily admires great works in little form,
why will he not be content to glorify God that way, in a faithful confidence,
that he can and will do great works by weak means. Should God have stayed
to levy, and arm, and train, and muster, and present men enough to discomfit
Sennacherib? He took a nearer way; he slew almost two hundredth thousand of
them, in one night by an Angel. Esa. 37. 3
Should God have troubled an Angel to satisfy Elisha his servant? 2. Reg. 5.
1.
Only by apparition in the clouds, he brought him to acknowledge, that there
were more with them, then with the Enemy, when there was none. He troubled not
so much as a cloud, he employed no Creature at all, against the Philistines,
when they came up with thirty thousand Chariots; 1. Sam. 23
but he breathed a dampe, an astonishment into them, he imprinted a divine
terror in their hearts, and they fought against one another. God foresaw a
diminution of his honor, lud. 6.
in the augmentation of Isreal's forces, and therefore he reduced Gideons thirty
two thousand to three hundred persons. It was so in persons, God does much with
few, and it was so in time, God does much, though late; though God seem a long
time to have forgot his people, yet in due time, that is, in his time, he
returns to them again. S. Augustine makes a useful Historical note, That
that land to which God brought the Children of Israel, was their own land
before; they were the right heirs to it, lineally descended from him, who was
the first possessor of it, after the flood: but they were so long out of
possession of it, as that they were never able to set their title on foot; nay,
they did scarce know their own title, and yet God repossessed them of it,
reinuested them in it. It is so for persons, and times in his ways in this
world, Much with few, much though late, and it is so in his ways to the next
world too: for persons, Elias knew of no more but himself, that served the
right God aright: God makes him know that there were seven thousand more; seven
thousand was much to one, but it was little to all the world: and yet these
seven thousand have peopled heaven, and sent up all those Colonies thither; all
those Armies of Martyrs, those flocks of Lambs, innocent children, those
Fathers, the Fathers of the Church, and Mothers, holy Matrons, and daughters,
blessed Virgins, and learned and laborious Doctors; these seven thousand have
filled up the places of the fallen Angels, and repeopled that Kingdom: And
wheresoever we think them most worn out, God at this time has his remnant
(as the Apostle Romans 11. 5.
says) and God is able to make up the whole garment of that remnant. So he
does much with few, in the ways to heaven; and that he does much though late,
in that way too, thou may discern in his working upon thy self. How often
have thou suffered thy Soul, to grow clean out of all reparations into ruin,
by thine inconsiderate and habitual course of sin, and never repaired it by
any good use of hearing the word, or receiving the Sacrament in a long time,
and when thou have at any time, come to a survey of thy conscience, how have
thou been affected with an inordinate apprehension of Gods anger, and his
inaccessiblenesse, his inexorablenesse toward thee, and sunk even into the
jaws of desperation; And yet, Quia manet semen dei, because the seed of God
has remained in thee, 1. 10. 3. 4.
Incubat Spiritus, the Holy Ghost has sat upon that seed, and hatched a new
Creature in thee, a modest, but yet infallible assurance of the Mercy of thy
God. Recollect all; in raising of sieges, and discomfiting of Armies, in
restoring possessions, and reinuesting right heirs, in repairing the ruins of
the Kingdom of heaven, depopulated in the fall of Angels, in reestablishing
peace of conscience; in a presumptuous confidence, or ouer-timorous diffidence
in God, God glorifies himself that way, to do much with little.

He does so; but yet he will have something. God is a good Husband, a good
Steward of Man's contributions, but contributions he will have: he will have a
concurrence, a cooperation of persons. Even in that great work, which we
spoke of at first, the first creation, which was so absolutely of Nothing, yet
there was a Faciamus, let us, us, make Man; though but one God, yet more
Persons in that work. Matt. 43.
Christ had been able to have done as the Devil would have had him do, to
have made bread of stones, when he had so great a number to feed in the
Wilderness; but he does not so: He asks his Disciples, Quot panes habetis;
How many loafes have you? and though they were but five, yet since they were
some, he multiplies them, and feeds above five thousand with those five. He
would have a remnant of Gedeons Army to fight his battles: A remnant of
Isreal's believers to make up his Kingdom; A remnant of thy Soul, his seed
wrapd up somewhere, to save thy Soul; And a remnant of thy self, of thy Mind,
of thy Purse, of thy Person, for thy temporal deliverance. God goes low, and
accepts small Sacrifices; a Pigeon, a handful of Flower, a few ears of Corn;
but a Sacrifice he will have. The Christian Church implies a shrewd distress,
when she prouides that reason, that clause in her prayer, Quia non est alius,
Give Peace in our time, O Lord, because there is no other that fights for us:
If the bowels of compassion be eaten out, if the band of the Communion of
Saints be dissolved, we fight for none, none fights for us, at last ney there we
nor they shall fight for Christ, nor Christ for them nor us, but all become a
prey to the general enemy of the name of Christ; for God requires something,
some assistance, some concurrence, some cooperation, though he can fight from
heaven, and the Stars, in their order, can fight against Sisera.

And therefore, though God give his glory to none, his glory, that is to do
all with Nothing, yet he gives them their glory, that do any thing for him,
or for themselves. And as he has laid up a record, for their glory and
Memorial, who were remarkable for Faith (for the eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews, is a Catalogue of them.) So in this Song of Deborah and Barake, he
has laid up a Record for their glory, who expressed their faith in Works,
and assisted his service. That which is said in general, The Memory of the
just is blessed, Prou. 13. 7.
but the name of the wicked shall rot, That is applied and promised in
particular, by him, who can perform it, by Christ, to that woman, who anointed
him, That whersoeuer his Gospel should be Preached in the whole world, Mat.
26. 13
there should also this that this woman had done, be told for a memorial of
her. She assisted at his Funeral (as Christ himself interprets her action,
That she did it to bury him) and has her glory: how shall he glorify them,
that advance his glory? She has her reward in his death; what shall they
have, that keep him, and his Gospel alive? Not a verse in Deborah and Baraks
song, and yet that is honorable evidence: Not a commemoration at the Preaching
of the Gospel; and yet that is the honorable testimony in this place, and at
these Exercises, of such as have contributed to the conueniencies of these
Exercises, but they shall have a place in the Book of life; indelibly in the
Book of life, if they proceed in that devotion of assisting Gods cause, and
do not think, that they have done all, or done enough, if they have done
something some one time. The Moral man has said well, and well applied it; A
Ship is a Ship for ever, if you repair it. Plutar.
So, says he, Honor is Honor, and so say we, A good Conscience is a good
Conscience for ever, if you repair it: But, says he well, Aliquid famae
addendum, ne putrescat. Honor will putrify, and so will a good Conscience
too, if it be not repaired. He that has done Nothing must begin, and he that
has done something for Gods cause, must do more, if he will continue his
name in the Book of Life; though God leave no one particular action, done for
his glory, without glory; as those who assisted his glory here, have a
glorious Commemoration in this Song.

In the fifteenth verse, Princes have their place; The Princes of Issachar,
were with Deborah. when the King goes to the field, Many, who are in other
cases Privileged, are by their Tenures bound to go. It is a high Tenure to
hold by a Crown; And when God, of whom, and whom only they hold, that hold
so, goes into the field, it becomes them to go with him. But as God sits in
Heaven, and yet goes into the field, so they of whom God has said, Ye are
Gods, the Kings of the Earth, may stay at home, and yet go too. They go in
their assistance to the War; They go in their Mediation for Peace; They go
in their Example, when from their sweetness, and moderation in their
Government at home, their flows out an instruction, a persuasion to Princes
abroad. Verse 16.
Kings go many times, and are not thanked, because their ways are not seen:
and Christ himself would not always be seen; In the eight of John, he would
not be seen. When they took up stones to stone him, he withdrew himself
inuisibly, he would not be seen: When Princes find that open actions
exasperate, Verse 17.
they do best, if they be not seen. In the sixth of John, Christ would not
be seen. When they would have put upon him, that which was not fit for him to
take, when they would have made him King, he withdrew himself, and was not
seen. When Princes are tempted to take Territories, or possessions in to their
hands, to which other Princes have just pretenses, they do best, if they
withdraw themselves from engagements in unnecessary Wars, for that, that
only was Iosiahs ruin. Kings cannot always go in the sight of Men, and so
they lose their thanks; but they cannot go out of the sight of God, and there
they never lose their reward: For the Lord that sees them in secret, shall
reward them openly, with peace in their own States, and Honor in their own
Chronicles, as here, for assisting his cause, he gave the Princes of Issachar
a room, a strain in Deborah and Barakes Song.

And in the ninth verse, the Governors, the great Officers, have their place,
in this praise, My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered
themselves willingly. It is not themselves in person; Great Officers cannot do
so; They are Intelligences that move great Spheres, but they must not be
moved out of them. But their glory here is their willingness. That before
they were inquired into, how they carried themselves in their Offices, before
they were intimidated, or soupled with fines and ransomes, voluntarily they
assisted the cause of God. Some in the Roman Church write, that the Cardinals
of that Church, are so incorporated into the Pope, so much of his body, and so
blood of his blood, that in a fever they may not let blood without his leave.
Truly, the great Persons and Governors in any state, are so noble and near
parts of the King, as that they may not bleed out in any subuentions and
assistances of such causes underhand, as are not auowd by the King; for, it is
not evident that that cause is Gods caufe; at least not evident that that way
is an assistance of Gods cause, But a good, and tractable, and ductile
disposition, in all courses which shall lawfully be declared to be for Gods
glory, then, not Contra, but Praeter, not against, but besides, not in
opposing, but in preventing the Kings will, before he urge, before he press,
to be willing and forward in such assistances, this gives great Persons,
Governors, and Officers, a verse in Baraks and Deborahs Song, and Deborah and
Baraks Song is the Word of God.

The Merchants have their place in that verse too. For, (as we said before)
those who ride upon white Asses, (which was as honorable a transportation, as
Coaches are now) are by Peter Martyr amongst ours, and by Serarius the Jesuit
amongst others, well understood to be the Merchants. The greatness and the
dignity of the Merchants of the East is sufficiently expressed in those of
Babylon, Thy Merchants were the great Men of the Earth. And for the Merchants
of the West, we know that in diverse foreign parts, their Nobility is in their
Merchants, their Merchants are their Gentlemen. And certainly, no place of the
world, for Commodities and Situation, better disposed then this Kingdom, to
make Merchants great. You cannot show your greatness more, then in serving
God, with part of it; you did serve before you were free; but here you do both
at once, for his service is perfect freedom. I am not here to day, to beg a
Benevolence for any particular cause on foot now: there is none; but my Errand
in this first part is, first to remove iealousies and suspicions of Gods
neglecting his business, because he does it not at our appointment, and then
to promoue and advance a disposition, to assist his cause and his glory, in all
ways, which shall be declared to conduce thereunto, whether in his body, by
relieuing the poor, or in his house by repairing these walls, or in his honor
in employments more public: And to assure you that you cannot have a better
debtor, a better play master then Christ Jesus: for all your Entayles, and all
your perpetuities do notso nail, so hoope in, so riuet an estate in your
posterity, as to make the Son of God your Son too, and to give Christ
Jesus a Childs part, with the rest of your Children. It is noted (perchance
but out of leuity) that your Children do not keep that which you get: It is
but a calumny, or but a fascination of ill wishers. We have many happy
instances to the contrary, many noble families derived from you; One, enough
to enoble a World; Queen ELIZABETH was the great granchild of a Lord Mayor of
London. Our blessed God bless all your Estates, and bless your posterity in
a blessed enjoying thereof; But truly it is a good way to that, amongst all your
purchases, to purchase a place in Barak and Deborahs Song, a testimony of the
Holy Ghost, that you were forward in all due times in the assistance of Gods
cause.

That testimony, in this Service in our Text, have the Judges of the Land, in
the verse too, ye that sit in Judgment. Certainly, Men exercised in Judgment,
are likeliest to think of the last Judgment. Men accustomed to give
Judgment, likeliest to think of the Judgment they are to receive. And at
that last Judgment the Malediction of the left hand falls upon them that have
not harbored Christ, not fed him, not clothed him, And when Christ comes to
want those things in that degree, that his Kingdom, his Gospel, himself
cannot subsist, where it did, without such a sustentation, an omission in such
an assistance, is much more heavy. All Judgments end in this, Suum cuique, to
give every one his own. Give God his own, and he has enough; give him his
own, in his own place, and his cause will be preferred before any Civil or
Natural obligation. But God requires not that: pay every other Man first, owe
nothing to any Man; pay your Children, apportion them convenient portions. Pay
your estimation, your reputation, live in that good fashion which your rank
and calling calls for: when all this is done, of your superfluities begin to
pay God, and even for that you shall have your room in Deborah, and Baraks
Song, for Assistants, and Coadiutors to him.

For a far vnlikelier sort of people, then any of these, have that in the
same verse also, Ambulantes super viam, They that walk up and down idle,
discourcing Men, Men of no Calling, of no Profession, of no sense of other Men's
miseries, and yet they assist this cause. Men that suck the sweet of the
Earth, and the sweat of other Men: Men that pay the State nothing in doing the
offices of mutual society, and embracing particular vocations; Men that make
themselves but pipes to receive and convey, and vent rumors, but spunges to
suck in, and power out foul water; Men that do not spend time, but wear
time, they trade not, they plough not, they preach not, they plead not, but
walk, and walk upon the way, till they have walked out their six months for
the renewing of bands, even these had some remorse in Gods cause, even these got
into Deborah and Baraks Song for assisting there.

And less; that is, Poorer then these: for in the Second verse, the people are
as forward as the Governors, in the Ninth, They offered themselves willingly.
They might offer themselves, their persons. It is likely they did; and likely
that many of them had nothing to offer but themselves. And when Men of that
poverty offer, part easily with that which was hardly got, how acceptable to
God, that Sacrifice is, we see in Christ's testimony of that Widow, who
amongst many great giuers gave her Mite, That she gave more then all they,
because she gave all: which testified not only her Liberality to God, but
her Confidence in God, that though she left nothing, she should not lack:
for that right use does Saint Augustine make of that example, Diuites
largiuntur securi de diuitijs, pauper securus de Domino: A rich man gives, and
feels it not, fears no want, because he is sure of a full chest at home; A
poor man gives, and feels it as little, because he is sure of a bountiful
God in Heaven.

God then can work alone; there we set out: yet he does require assistance;
that way we went: And to those that do assist, he gives glory here; so far
we are gone: but yet this remaynes, that he lays notes of blame, and reproach
upon them, whom collateral respects withdrew from this assistance. For there
is a kind of reproach and increpation laid upon Reuben in that question, Why
abodest thou amongst the sheepfolds? The divisions of REVBEN were great
thoughts of heart. Verse 16.
Ambition of precedencie in places of employment, greatness of heart, and a
lothnesse to be under the command of any other, and so an incoherence, not
concurring in Counsels and Executions, retard oftentimes even the cause of
God. So is there also a reproach and increpation upon Dan, Verse 17.
in that question, why did Dan remain in his ships; A confidence in their own
strength, a sacrificing to their own Nets, an attributing of their security
to their own wisdom or power, may also retard the cause of God; that stayed
Dan behind.

Thus then they have their thanks that do, thus their marks that do not
assist in Gods cause: though God to encourage them that do, accomplish his
work himself, They fought from heaven, The Stars in their order fought
against Sisera. They fought, says the Text, but does not tell us who; least
men should direct their thanks for that which is past, or their prayers for
future benefits, to any other, even in heaven, then to God himself. The stars
are named; It could not be feared that Men would pray to them, sacrifice to
them, Angels and Saints are not named; Men might come to ascribe to them, that
which appertained to God only Now these Stars, says the text, fought in their
courses, Manentes in Ordine, they fought not disorderly. It was no Enchantment,
no Sorcery, no disordring of the frame, or the powers, or the influence of
these heavenly bodies, in favor of the Israelites; God would not be beholden to
the Devil, or to Witches, for his best friends. It was no disorderly
Enchantment, nor it was no Miracle, that disordered these Stars; as in
Iosuahs time, the Sun and Moon were disordred in their Motions; But as
Josephus, who relates this battle more particularly, says, with whom all
agree, The nature all Influence of these heavenly bodies, at this time, had
created and gathered such storms and hayles, as blowing vehemently in the
Enemies face, was the cause of this defeat: for so we might have said, in
that deliverance, which God gave us at Sea, They fought from heaven, The
Stars in their order fought against the Enemy. Without coniuring, without
Miracle, from heaven, but yet by natural means, God preserved us. For that is
the force of that phrase, and of that manner of expressing it, Manentes in
Ordine, The Stars, containing themselves in their Order, fought. And that
phrase induces our second part, the accommodation, the occasional application
of these words: God will not fight, nor be fought for disorderly; And therefore
in illustration, and confirmation of those words of the Apostle, Let all things
be done decently, and in order, Aquinas, in his Commentaries upon that place,
cites, and applies this Text, as words to the same purpose, and of the same
signification. You, says Saint Paul, you who are Stars in the Church, must
proceed in your warfare, decently, and in order, for the stars of heaven, when
they fight for the Lord, they do their service, Manentes in Ordine, containing
themselves in their Order. And so inour order, we are come to our second part.
In which, we owe you by promise made at first, an Analysis, a distribution of
the steps and branches of this part, now when we are come to the handling
thereof: And thus we shall proceed; first, the War, which we are to speak
of here, is not as before, a Worldly war, it is a Spiritual War: And then
the Munition, the provision for this war, is not as before, temporal
assistance of Princes, Officers, Judges, Merchants, all sorts of People, but it
is the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the preaching thereof. Preaching is Gods
ordinance, with that Ordinance he fights from heaven, and batters down all
errors. And thirdly, to maintain this War, he has made Preachers Stars; and
vae si non, woe be unto them, if they do not fight, if they do not preach:
But yet in the last place, they must fight, as the Stars in heaven do, In
their order, in that Order, and according to those directions, which, they, to
whom it appertains, shall give them: for that is to fight in Order. And in
these four branches, we shall determine this second part.

First then we are in Contemplation of a Spiritual war; now, though there be
a Beatie Pacifici, a blessing reserved to Peacemakers, to the Peacemaker, our
Peacemaker, who has sometimes effected it in some places, and always
seriously and chargeably, and honorably endeavored it in all places, yet there
is a spiritual War, in which, Maledicti Pacifici; Cursed be they that go
about to make Peace, and to make all one, The wars between Christ and
Beliall. Let no man sever those whom God has joined, but let no Man join
those whom God has severed neither; and God has severed Christ and Belial:
and that was Gods action, Ponam inimicitias; The seed of the woman, and the
Seed of the Serpent, we and the Devil, should never have fallen out; we
agree but too well; but God has put an enmity between us. God has put Truth
and Falsehood, Idolatry and Sincerity so far asunder, and infused such an
incompatibilitie, and imprinted such an implacabilitie between them, as that
they cannot flow into one another: And therefore, there, Maledicti Pacifici, It
is an opposition against God, by any colorable Modifications, to reconcile
opinions diametrally contrary to one another, in fundamental things. Day and
Night may join and meet. In Diluculis and in Crepusculis, The dawning of the
day, in the Morning, and the shutting in of the day in the Evening, make day
and night so much one, as sometimes you cannot tell which to call them: but Lux
and tenebrae, light and darkness, Midnight and Noone never met, never joined.
There are points, which passions of men, and vehemence of disputation, have
carried farther a sunder then needed: and these indeed have made the greatest
noise; because upon these, for the most part, depends the matter of profit: and
Beati pacifics, blessed were that labor, and that labourer, that could
reconcile those things; and of that there might be hope, because it is often
but the Persons that fight, it is not the thing, the matters are not so
different. But then there are matters so different, as that a Man may sit at
home, and weep, and wish, praise God that he is in the right, and pray to God
for them that are in the wrong, but to think that they are indifferent, and
all one, Maledicti Pacifici, he that has brought such a Peace, has brought a
curse upon his own Conscience, and laid, not a Satisfaction, but a
Stupefaction upon it. A Turk might perchance say, in scorn of us both, They
call you Heretics, you call them Idolaters, why might not Idolaters, and
Heretics agree well enough together? But a true Christian will never make
Contrarieties in fundamental things indifferent, never make foundations, and
superedifications, the Word of God, and the Traditions of Men, all one. Every
man is a little world, says the Philosopher; Every man is a little Church too;
and in every man, there are two sides, two armies: the flesh fights against the
Spirit. This is but a Civil war, nay it is but a Rebellion indeed; and yet
it can never be absolutely quenched. So every Man is also a Soldier in that
great and general war, between Christ, and Beliall, the word of God, and
the will of man. Every man is bound to hearken to a peace, in such things as
may admit peace, in differences, where men differ from men; but bound also to
shut himself up against all ouertures of peace, in such things, as are in
their Nature irreconcilable, in differences where men differ from God. That
war God has kindled, and that war must be maintained, and maintained by
his way; and his way, and his Ordinance in this war, is Preaching.

If God had not said to Noah, Fac tibi Arcam; and when he had said so, if he
had not given him a Deseigne, a Model, a Platform of that Arc, we may doubt
credibly, whether ever man would have thought of a Ship, or of any such way of
trade and Commerce. Shipping was Gods own Invention, and therein Laetentur
Insulae, as David says, Let the Islands rejoice. So also, if Christ had not
said to his Apostles, Ite praedicate, Go and preach: and when he had said so,
said thus much more, Qui non crediderit damnabitur, He that believes not your
Preaching shall be damned: certainly man would never have thought of such a
way of establishing a kingdom, as by Preaching. No other Nation had any such
Institution, as Preaching. In the Roman State, there was a public Officer,
Conditor precum, who upon great emergent occasions, deprecations of imminent
dangers, or Gratulations for evident benefits, did make particular Collects
answerable to those occasions: And some such occasional Panegyriques, and
gratulatory Orations for temporal benefits, they had in that state. But a
fixed and constant course of containing Subjects in their Religious and Civil
duties, by preaching, only God ordained, only his Children enjoyed. Christ
when he sent his Apostles, did not give them a particular command, Ite orate,
go and pray in the public Congregation; All Nations were accustomed to that;
Christ made no doubt of any man's opposing, or questioning public Prayer; and
therefore for that, he only said, Sic orabitis, Not go, and pray, but, when
you pray, pray thus, he instructed them in the form; the duty was well known
to all before. But, for Preaching, He himself was anointed for that, The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, Esa. 61. 1
because the Lord has anointed me to preach: His unction was his function.
He was anointed with that power, and he has anointed us with part of his
own unction: All power is given unto me, says he, in Heaven and in Earth; and
therefore (as he adds there) Go ye, Math. 28. 19.
and preach: Because I have all power, for preaching, take ye part of my
power, and preach too. For, Preaching is the power of God unto Salvation, and
the savor of life unto life. When therefore the Apostle faies, I. These. 5. 19.
Quench not the Spirit, Nec in te, nec in alio, says Aquinas; Quench it not in
your self, by forbearing to hear the Word preached, quench it not in others,
by discouraging them that do preach. For so Saint Chrysostom, (and not he
alone) understood that place, That they quench the spirit, who discountenance
preaching, and dishearten Preachers. St. Chrysostom took his example from the
Lamp that burnt by him, when he was preaching; (It seems therefore he did
preach in the afternoon) and he says, you may quench this Lamp, by putting
in water, and you may quench it by taking out the oil. So a Man may quench the
spirit in himself, if he smother it, suffocate it, with worldly pleasures, or
profits, and he may quench it in others, if he withdraw that favor, or that
help, which keeps that Man, who has the spirit of Prophecy, the unction of
Preaching, in a cheerful discharge of his duty. Preaching then being Gods
Ordinance, to beget Faith, to take away preaching, were to disarme God, and to
quench the spirit; for by that Ordinance, he fights from heaven.

And to maintain that fight, he has made his Ministers Stars; as they are
called, in the first of the Revelation. And they fight against Sisera, that is,
they preach against Error. They preach out of Necessity; Necessity is laid
upon me to preach, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
says the Apostle; and upon a heavy penalty, if they do not; Vaemihi si non,
VVoe be unto me if I do not preach the Gospel. Neither is that spoak there
with the case of a Future, as the Roman translation has it, Si non
Euangelizauero, If I do not hereafter preach; If I preach not at one time or
other; If I preach not when I see how things will go, what kind of preaching
will be most acceptable: But it is Si non Euangelizem, If I preach not now;
now, though I had preached yesterday; for so Saint Ambrose preached his Sermon
de sancto Latrone, of the good Thief, Hesterno die, yesterday I told you etc.
So Saint Augustine preached his Sermon upon All Saints day: And so did Saint
Bernard his twelfth Sermon upon the Psalm: Qui habitat. Now, though I preachd
but lately before; and now, though I had but late warning to preach now; So S.
Basil preached his 2. Sermon upon the Hexameron, the fix days work, when he
had but that Morning for Meditation: and more then so, in his 2. Sermon de
Baptissimo; for, it seems he preached that without any premeditation Prout
suggerit spiritus sanctus. Now, though I had not time to labor a Sermon, and
now, though I preach in another man's place; for so Saint Augustine preached his
Sermon upon the 95. Psalm: where he says, Frater noster Seuerus, our brother
Seuerus should by promise have preached here, but since he comes not, I will.
Now, that is whenever Gods good people may be edified by my preaching: Vaesi
non, woe be unto me, if I do not preach. The Dragon drew a third part of the
stars from heaven. Apoc. 12. 3.
Antichrist by his Persecutions, and Excommunications Silenced many; all that
would not Magnify him. And many amongst us, have silenced themselves:
Abundance silences some, and lazines and Ignorance some, and some their own
indiscretion, and then they lay that upon the Magistrate. But God has placed
us in a Church, and under a Head of the Church, where none are Silenced, nor
discountenanced, if being stars, called to the Ministry of the Gospel, and
appointed to fight, to preach there, they fight within the discipline and
limits of this Text, Manentes in Ordine, containing themselves in Order.

In this phrase, as we told you before, out of Aquinas, the same thing is
intended, as in that place of Saint Paul, Let all things be done decently, and
in Order. That the vulgat edition reads, Fiant honest; and then says Saint
Ambrose, Honest fit, quod cum pace fit, That is done honestly, and decently,
which is done quietly, and peaceably. Not with a peace, and indifferency to
contrary Opinions in fundamental doctrines, not to shuffle religions together,
and make it all one which you chufe, but a peace with persons, an abstinence
from contumelies, and reuilings. It is true that we must hate Gods enemies
with a perfect hatred, and it is true that Saint Chrysostom says, Odium
perfectum est, odium consummatissimum, that is not a perfect hatred, that
leaves out any of their Errors vnhated. But yet a perfect hatred is that too,
which may consist with perfection, and Charity is perfection: a perfect hatred
is that which a perfect, that is, a charitable man may bear, which is still to
hate Errors, not Persons. When their insolences provoke us to speak of them,
we shall do no good therein, if therein we proceed not decently, and in order.
Christ says of his Church: Terribilis vt Castrorum acies, Cant. 6. 3.
It is powerful as an Army; but it is vt acies ordinata, as an army
disciplined, and in order: for without order, an army is but a great Riot; and
without this decency, this peaceablenesse, this discretion, this order, zeal
is but fury, and such preaching is but to the obduration of ill, not to the
edification of good Christians. Saint Paul in his absence from the Colossians,
reioyces as much in beholding their Order, Col. 2. 5.
as in their steadfastness in the faith of Christ Jesus: Nay, if we consider
the words well, as Saint Chrysostom has done, we shall see that it is only
their Order that he reioyces in: for Non dixit fidem, sed firmamentum fidei,
says that Father, It was not their faith, but that which established their
faith, that was their order, that occasioned his joy. For when there is not an
uniform, a comely, an orderly presenting of matters of faith, faith it self
grows loose, and loses her estimation; and preaching in the Church comes to
be as pleading at the Bar, and not so well: there the Counsel speaks not
himself, but him that sent him, here we shall preach not him who sent us,
Christ Jesus, but our selves. Study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
is the Apostles commandment to every particular man amongst the Thessalonians.
I These. 4. 11.
It seems some amongst them disobeyd that: and therefore he writes no more to
particular persons, but to the whole Church, in his other Epistle, and with more
vehemence, then a small matter would have required: We command you in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 3. 6.
that you withdraw your self from all that walk Inordinate, as the vulgat
reads that in one place, and Inquiete, as they translate the same word, in
another, disorderly, unquietly: from all such as preach suspiciously, and
iealously; and be the garden never so fair, will make the world beleetie, there
is a Snake under every leaf, be the intention never so sincere, will presage,
and prognosticate, and prediuine sinister and mischievous effects from it. A
troubled spirit is a sacrifice to God, Psalm. 51
but a troublesome spirit is far from it. I am glad that our Ministry is
called Orders, that when we take his calling, we are said to take Orders. Yours
are called Trades, and Occupations, and Mysteries: Law and Physic are called
Sciences, and Professions: many others have many other names, ours is Orders.
When by his Majesty's leave we meet in our Conuocations, and being met have his
further leave, to treat of remedies for any disorders in the Church, our
Constitutions are Canons, Canons are Rules, Rules are Orders: Parliaments
determine in Laws, Judges in Decrees, we in Orders. And by our Service in
this Mother Church, we are Canenici, Canons, Regular, Orderly men; not
Canonistae, men that know Orders, but Canonici, men that keep them where we
are also called Prebendaries, rather a Praebendo, then a Praebenda, rather for
giving example of obedience to Orders, then for any other respect. In the
Remane Church the most disorderly men, are their men in Orders. I speak not of
the viciousness of their life, I am no Judge of that, I know not that: but
they are so out of all Order, that they are within Rule of no temporal Law,
within jurisdiction of no Cuill Magistrate, no secular Judge. They may kill
Kings, and yet can be no Traitors; they assign their reason, Because they are
no Subjects. He that kills one of them, shall be really hanged; and if one of
them kill, he shall be Metaphorically hanged, he shall be suspended. We
enjoy gratefully, and we use modestly the Privileges which godly Princes, out
of their piety have affoorded us, and which their godly Successors have given
us again by their gracious continuing of them to us; but our Profession of it
self, naturally (though the very nature of it dispose Princes to a gracious
disposition to us) exempts us not from the tie of their Laws. All men are in
deed, we are in Deed and in name too, Men of Orders; and therefore ought to be
most ready of all others to obey.

Now, beloved, Aquin.
Ordo semper dicitur ratione principij: Order always presumes a head, it
always implies some by whom we are to be ordered, and it implies our
conformity to him. Who is that? God certainly, without all question, God. But
between God, and Man, we consider a twofold Order. One, as all creatures
depend upon God, as upon their beginning, for their very Being; and so every
creature is wrought upon immediately by God, and whether he discern it or no,
does obey Gods order, that is, that which God has ordained, his purpose, his
providence is executed upon him, and accomplishd in him. But then the other
Order is, not as man depends upon God, as upon his beginning, but as he is to
be reduced and brought back to God, as to his end: and that is done by means
in this world. What is that means? for those things which we have now in
consideration, the Church. But the body speaks not, the head does. It is the
Head of the Church that declares to us those things whereby we are to be ordered.

This the Royal and religious Head of these Churches within his Dominions has
lately had occasion to do. And in doing this, does he innouate any thing, ofter
to do any new thing? Do we repent that Canon, and Constitution, in which at
his Majesty's first coming we declared with so much alacrity, as that it was
the second Canon we made, That the King had the same authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings of Judah, and the Christian Emperors in
the primitive Church had? Or are we ignorant what those Kings of Judah, and
those Emperors did? We are not, we know them well. Take it where the power of
the Empire may seem somewhat declined in Charles the great; we see by those
Capitularies of his, that remain yet, what orders he gave in such causes; there
he says in his entrance to them, Nemo praesumptuosum dicat; Let no man call
this that I do an usurpation, to prescribe Orders in these cases, Nam legimus
quid Josias fecerit, We have read what Josiah did, and we know that we have
the same Authority that Iosiab had. But, that Emperor consulted with his
Clergy, before he published those Orders. It is true, he says he did. But
he, from whom we have received these Orders, did more then so; His Majesty
forbore, till a representation of some inco^ueniences by disorderly preaching,
was made to him, by those in the highest place in our Clergy, and other grave
and reverend Prelates of this Church; they presented it to him, and thereupon
he entered into the remedy. But that Emperor did but declare things constituted
by other Counsels before: but yet the giving the life of execution to those
Constitutions in his Dominions, was introductory, and many of the things
themselves were so. Amongst them, his 70. Capitularie is appliable to our
present case; there he says, Episcopi videant, That the Bishops take care,
that all Preachers preach to the people the Exposition of the Lords Prayer: and
he enioynes them too, Ne quid nouum, ne quid non Canonicum, That no man preach
any new opinion of his own; nay, though it be the opinion of other learned
men in other places, yet if it be Non Canonicum, not declared in the universal
Church, not declared in that Church, in which he has his station, he may not
preach it to the people: And so he proceeds there to Catechistical Doctrine.

That is not new then, which the Kings of Judah did, and which the Christian
Emperors did. But it is new to us, if the Kings of this kingdom have not done
it. Have they not done it? How little the Kings of this kingdom did in
Ecclesiastical causes then, when by their conniuence that power was deuold
into a foreign Prelates hand, it is pity to consider, pity to remember,
pity to bring into Contemplation; And yet truly even then our Kings did
exercise more of that power, then our adversaries who oppose it, will confess.
But, since the true jurisdiction was vindicated, and reapplyed to the Crown,
in what just height Henry the eight, and those who governed his Sons
minority, Edward the sixth, exercised that jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
causes, none, that knows their story, knows not. And, because ordinarily, we
settle our selves best in the Actions, and Precedents of the late Queen of
blessed and everlasting memory, I may have leave to remember them that know,
and to tell them that know not, one act of her power and her wisdom, to this
purpose. When some Articles concerning the falling away from Justifying grace,
and other points that beat upon that haunt, had been ventilated, in
Conuenticles, and in Pulpits too, and Preaching on both sides past, and that
some persons of great place and estimation in our Church, together with him who
was the greatest of all, amongst our Clergy, had upon mature deliberation
established a resolution what should be thought, and taught, held and preached
in those points, and had thereupon sent down that resolution to be published in
the University, not vulgarly neither, to the people, but in a Sermon, Ad
Clerum only, yet her Majesty being informed thereof, declared her displeasure
so, as that, scarce any hours before the Sermon was to have been, there was a
Countermaund, an Inhibition to the Preacher for meddling with any of those
points. Not that her Majesty made her self Judge of the Doctrines, but that
nothing, not formerly declared to be so, ought to be declared to be the Tenet,
and Doctrine of this Church, her Majesty not being acquainted, nor supplicated
to give her gracious allowance for the publication thereof.

His sacred Majesty then, is herein upon the steps of the Kings of Judah, of
the Christian Emperors, of the Kings of England, of all the Kings of England,
that embraced the Reformation of Queen Elizabeth her self; and he is upon his
own steps too. For, it is a seditious calumny to apply this which is done now,
to any occasion that rises but now: as though the King had done this now, for
satisfaction of any persons at this time, for some years since, when he was
pleased to call the Heads of Houses from the University, and intimate to them
the inconveniences that arose from the Preaching of such men, as were not at
all conversant in the Fathers, in the School, nor in the Ecclesiastical
Story, but had shut up themselves in a few later Writers; and gave order to
those Governors for remedy herein. Then he began, then he laid the foundation
for that, in which he has proceeded thus much further now, to reduce
Preaching nearer to the manner of those Primitive times, when God gave so
evident, and so remarkable blessings to men's Preaching.

Consider more particularly that which he has done now; His Majesty has
accompanied his most gracious Letter to the most Reueuerend Father in God, my
Lords Grace of Canterbury, with certain Directions how Preachers ought to
behave themselves in the exercise of that part of their Ministry. These being
derived from his Grace, in due course to his reverend Brethren, the other
Bishops, our Worthy Diocesan, ever vigilant for the Peace and unity of the
Church, gave a speedy, very speedy intimation thereof, to the Clergy of his
Jurisdiction; so did others, to whom it appertained so to do in theirs. Since
that, his Majesty, who always taking good works in hand, loves to perfect
his own works, has vouchsafed to give some Reasons of this his proceeding;
which being signified by him to whom the State and Church owes much, The right
Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the great Seal,
and after by him also, who began at first, his Majesty's pleasure appearing
thereby, (as he is too Great, and too Good a King to seek corners, or
disguises, for his actions) that these proceedings should be made public, I
was not willing only, but glad to have my part therein, that as, in the fear
of God, I have always preached to you the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who is the
God of your Salvation; So in the testimony of a good conscience, I might now
preach to you, the Gospel of the Holy ghost, who is the God of peace, of
unity, and concord.

These Directions then, and the Reasons of them, by his Majesty's particular
care, every man in the Ministry may see and write out, in the several
Registers Offices, with his own hand for nothing, and for very little, if he
use the hand of another. Perchance you have, at your conuenience, you may see
them. When you do, you shall see, That his Majesty's general intention therein
is, to put a difference, between grave, and solid, from light and humerous
preaching. Origin does so, when upon the Epistle to the Romans, he says,
There is a great difference, Inter praedicare, and docere: A man may teach an
Auditory, that is, make them know something that they knew not before, and yet
not preach; for Preaching is to make them knowthings appertaining to their
salvation. But when men do neither, neither Teach, nor Preach, but (as his
Majesty observes the manner to be) To soar in points too deep, To muster up
their own Reading, To display their own Wit, or Ignorance in meddling with
Civil matters, or (as his Majesty adds) in rude and indecent reuiling of
persons: this is that which has drawn down his Majesty's piercing Eye to see
it, and his Royal care to correct it. He corrects it by Christ's own way,
Quid ab initio, by considering how it was at first: for, (as himself to right
purpose cites Tertullian) Id verum quod primum; That is best, which was first.
He would therefore have us conversant in Antiquity: For, Nazianzen asks that
question with some scorn, Quis est qui veritatis prepugnatorem, vnius diei
spatio, velut eluto statuam, fingit. Can any man hope to make a good Preacher,
as soon as a good Picture? In three or four days, or with three or four
Books? His Majesty therefore calls us to look, Quid primum, what was first in the
whole Church? And again, Quid primum, when we received the Reformation in this
Kingdom, by what means, (as his Majesty expresses it) Papistry was driven
out, and Puritanisme kept out, and we delivered from the Superstition of the
Papist, and the madness of the Anabaptists, as before he expresses it: and
his religious and judicious eye sees clearly, That all that Doctrine, which
wrought this great cure upon us, in the Reformation, is contained in the two
Catechismes, in the 39. Articles, and in the 2. Books of Homilies. And to
these, as to Heads, and Abunda^ies, from whence all knowledge necessary to
salvation, may abundantly be derived, he directs the meditations of Preachers.

Are these new ways? No way new: for they were our first way in receiving
Christianity, and our first way in receiving the Reformation. Take a short
view of them all: as it is in the Catechismes, as it is in the Articles, as it
is in the Homilies. First you are called back to the practice of Catechizing:
Remember what Catechizing is; it is Institutio viua voce. And in the Primitive
Church, when those persons, who coming from the Gentiles to the Christian
Religion, might have been scandalized with the outward Ceremonial, and
Rituall worship of God in the Church, (for Ceremonies are stumbling blocks to
them who look upon them without their Signification, and without the reason of
their Institution) to avoid that danger, though they were not admitted to fee
the Sacraments administered, nor the other Service of God performed in the
Church, yet in the Church, they received Instruction, Institution, by word of
mouth, in the fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, and that was
Catechizing. The Christians had it from the beginning, and the Jews had it
too: for their word Chanach, is of that signification, Initiare, to enter.
Train up a child in the way he should go, Pro. 22. 6
and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Train up, say our
Translation in the Text; Catechize, say our Translators in the Margin,
according to the natural force of the Hebrew word. And Sepher Chinnuch, which
is Liber Institutionum, that is, of Catechism, is a Book well known amongst
the Jews, every where, where they are now: Their Institution is their
Catechism. And if we should tell some men, that Caluins Institutions were a
Catechism, would they not love Catechizing the better for that name? And would
they not love it the better, if they gave me leave to tell them that of which
I had the experience. An Artificer of this City brought his Child to me, to
admire (as truly there was much reason) the capacity, the memory, especially
of the child. It was but a Girl, and not above nine years of age, her parents
said less, some years less; we could scarce propose any Verse of any Book,
or Chapter of the Bible, but that that child would go forward without Book.
I began to Catechize this child; and truly, she understood nothing of the
Trinity, nothing of any of those fundamental points which must save us: and
the wonder was doubled, how she knew so much, how so little.

The Primitive Church discerned this necessity of Catechizing: And therefore
they instituted a particular Office, a Calling in the Church of Catechisers.
Which Office, as we see in Saint Cyprians 42. Epistle, that great man Optatus
exercised at Carthage, and Origin at Alexandria. When St. Augustine took the
Epistle, and the Gospel, and the Psalm of the day, for his Text to one
Sermon, did he, think you, much more then paraphrase, then Catechize? When
Athanasius makes one Sermon, and, God knows, a very short one too, Contra
omnes Haereses, To overthrow all Heresies in one Sermon; did he, think you, any
more then propose fundamental Doctrines, which is truly the way to overthrow
all Heresies? When Saint Chrysostom enters into his Sermon upon the 3. Chapter
to the Galatians, with that preparation, Attendite diligenter, non enim rem
vulgarem pollicemur, Now hearken diligently, says he, for it is no ordinary
matter that I propose. There he proposes Catechisticall Doctrine of faith and
works. Come to lower times, when Chrysologus makes six or seven Sermons upon
the Creed, and not a several Sermon upon every several Article, but takes the
whole Creed for his Text, in every Sermon, and scarce any of those Sermons a
quarter of an hour long, will you not allow this manner of Preaching to be
Catechizing? Go as low as can be gone, to the Jesuits; and that great
Catechizer amongst them, Canisius says, Nos hoc munus suscipimus: We, we
Jesuits make Catechizing our Profession. I doubt not but they do recreate
themselves sometimes in other matters too, but that they glory in, that they
are Catechisers. And in that Profession, says he, we have Saint Basil, Saint
Augustine, Saint Ambrose, Saint Cyrill, in our Society; and truly as
Catechizers, they have; as State-Friers, as Jesuits, they have not. And in the
first Capacity they have him, who is more then all; for as he says rightly,
Ipse Christus Catechista, Christ's own Preaching was a Catechizing. I pray God
that Jesuits conclusion of that Epistle of his, be true still; There he says,
Sinihil aliud, If nothing else, yet this alone should provoke us to a greater
diligence in Catechizing; Improbus labor, and indefessa cura, That our
Adversaries, the Protestants do spend so much time, as he says, day and night
in catechizing. Now, if it were so then, when he writ, and be not so still
amongst us, we have intermitted one of our best advantages: and therefore God
has graciously raised a blessed and a Royal Instrument, to call us back to
that, which aduantaged us, and so much offended the Enemy. That man may sleep
with a good Conscience, of having discharged his duty in his Ministry, that
has preached in the forenoone, and Catechized after. Quaere, says Tertullian,
(and he says that with indignation) an Idolatriam committat, qui de Idolis
catechizat: Will any man doubt, says he, whether that man be an Idolatrer,
that catechises Children, and Servants in Idolatry? Will any man doubt, whether
he be painful in his Ministry, that catechises children, and servants in
the sincere Religion of Christ Jesus. The Roman Church has still made her use
of us; of our fortunes, when she gouernd here, and of our example, since she
did not: They did, as they saw us do; And thereupon they came to that order,
in the Council of Trent, That upon Sundays and Holidays, they should Preach
in the forenoone, and Catechize in the afternoon; till we did both, they did
neither. Mat. 18. 3
Except ye become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, says Christ. Except ye, ye the people be content at first to feed
on the milk of the Gospel, and not presently to fall to gnawing of bones, of
Controversies, and unrevealed Mysteries, And except ye, the Ministers and
Preachers of the Gospel, descend and apply your selves to the Capacity of
little Children, and become as they, and build not your estimation only upon
the satisfaction of the expectation of great and curious Auditories, you stopp
theirs, you loose your own way to the kingdom of Heaven. Not that we are to
shut up, and determine our selves, in the knowledge of Catechisticall
rudiments, but to be sure to know them first. The Apostle puts us upon that
progress, Heb. 6. 1.
Let us learn the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and go on to
perfection. Not leave at them; but yet not leave them out: endeavor to
increase in knowledge, but first make sure of the foundation. And that increase
of knowledge, is royally, and fatherly presented to us, in that, which is
another limne of his Majesty's directions, the 39. Articles.

The Foundation of nceessary knowledge, is in our Catechismes; the
Superedification, the extention in these Articles. For they carry the
understanding, and the zeal of the ablest Man; high enough, and deep enough.
In the third Article there is an Orthodoxe assertion of Christ's descent into
Hell; who can go deeper? In the 17. Article there is a Modest declaration of
the Doctrine of Predestination; who can go higher? neither do these Articles
only build up Positive Doctrine; If the Church had no adversaries, that were
enough; but they embrace Controversies too, in points that are necessary. As
in the two and twentieth Article of Purgatory, of Pardons, of Images, of
Inuocations: and these not in general only, but against the Romish Doctrine
of Pardons, of Images, of Invocation. And in the eight and twentieth Article
against Transubstantiation, and in such terms, as admit no meeting, no
reconciliation; but that it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, and
has given occasion to many Superstitions. And in one word, we may see the
purpose and scope of these Articles, as they were intended against the Roman
Church, in that Title which they had in one Edition (in which though there were
some other things, that justly gave offense, yet none was given nor taken in
this) That these Articles were conceived and published, to condemn the
Heresies of the Manichees, of the Arrians, of the Nestorians, of the Papists,
and others. And therefore in these reasons, which his Majesty has descended
to give of his Directions, himself is pleased to assign this, That the people
might be seasoned in all the Heads of the Protestant Religion. Not only of
the Christian against Jews, Turks, and Infidels, but of the Protestant
against the Roman Church.

The Foundation is in the Catechism; the growth and extention in the Articles,
and then the Application of all to particular Auditories in the Homilies:
which, if his Majesty had not named, yet had been employed in his
recommendation of the Articles. For the five and thirtieth Article appoynts the
reading of them: both those, which were published in the time of Edward the
sixth, and those which after. In the first Book, the very first Homilies are,
of the Sufficiency of Scriptures, and of the absolute necessity of Reading
them; sufficiently opposed against that which has been said in that Church,
both of the impertinencie, of Scriptures, as not absolutely necessary, and of
the insufficiency of these Scriptures, if Scriptures were necessary. And in
the second Book, the second Homily is against Idolatry; and so far against
all approaches toward it, by having any Images in Churches, as that perchance
Moderat Men, would rather think that Homily to severe in that kind, then
suspect the Homilies of declination toward Papistrie. Is it the name of
Homelies that Scandalizes them? would they have none? Saint Cyrills 30.
Paschall Sermons, which he preached in so many several Easter days, at his
Arch-bishoprike of Alexandria, and his Christmas days Sermons too, were
ordinarily exscrib'd, and rehearsed over again, by the most part of the
Clergy of those parts: and in their Mouths they were but Homilies. And
Caluins Homilies upon Job (as Beza in his Preface before them, calls them) were
ordinarily repeated over again in many places of France: and in their mouths
they were but Homilies. It is but the name, that scandalizes; and yet the name
of Homilia and Concio, a Homily and a Sermon, is all one. And if some of these
were spoken, and not read, and so exhibited in the name of a Sermon, they
would like them well enough. Certainly his Majesty mistook it not, that in
our Catechismes, In our Articles, in our Homilies, there is enough for
Posttiue, enough for Controuerted Divinity; For that Jesuit, that intended to
bring in the whole body of Controuerted Divinity into his book, (whom we
named before) desired no other Subject, no other occasion to do that, but the
Catechism of that Church; neither need any sober Man, that intends to handle
Controversies ask more, or go further.

His Majesty therefore, who as he understands his duty to God, so does he his
Subjects duties to him, might justly think, That these so well grounded
Directions, might, (as himself says) be received upon implicit obedience.
Yet he vouchsafes to communicate to all, who desire satisfaction, the Reasons
that moved him. Some of which I have related, and all which, all may, when they
will see, and have. Of all which the Sum is, His Royal and his Pastoral
care, that by that Primitive way of Preaching, his Subjects might be armed
against all kind of Adversaries, in fundamental truths. And when he takes
knowledge, That some few Churchmen, but many of the people, have made sinister
constructions of his sincere intentions, As he is grieved at the heart, (to
give you his own words) to see every day so many d fections from our religion
to Popery and Anabaptisme; So without doubt he is grieved with much bitterness,
that any should so pervert his meaning, as to think, that these Directions
either restraind the Exercise of Preaching, or abated the number of Sermons, or
made a breach to Ignorance and Superstition, of which three scandals he has
been pleased to take knowledge. What could any Calumniator, any Libeller on the
other side, have imagined more opposite, more contrary to him, then approaches
toward Ignorance, or Superstition? Let us say for him, Can so learned, so
abundantly learned a prince be suspected to plot for Ignorance? And let us
bless God, that we hear him say now, That he does constantly profess
himself an open adversary to the Superstition of the Papist (without any
milder Modification) and to the madness of the Anabaptist: And that the
preaching against either of their Doctrines is not only approved, but much
commended by his royal Majesty, if it be done without rude and indecent
reuiling. If he had affected Ignorance in himself, he would never have read so
much; and if he had affected Ignorance in us, he would never have writ so
much, and made us so much the more learned by his Books. And if he had had any
declination toward Superstition, he would not have gone so much farther, then
his rank and quality pressed him to do, in declaring his opinion concerning
Antichrist, as out of Zeal, and zeal with knowledge he has done. We have
him now, (and long, long, O eternal God, continue him to us,) we have him now
for a father of the Church, a Foster-father; such a father as Constantine, as
Theodosius was; our posterity shall have him for a Father, a Classique father;
such a father as Ambrose, as Austin was. And when his works shall stand in the
Libraries of our Posterity, amongst the Fathers, even these Papers, these
Directions, and these Reasons shall be pregnant evidences for his constant zeal
to Gods truth, and in the mean time, as arrows shot in their eyes, that
imagine so vain a thing, as a defection in him, to their superstition. Thus
far he is from admitting Ignorance, and from Superstition thus far, which
seems to be one of their fears. And for the other two, (which concur in
one) That these Directions should restrain the Exercise of Preaching, or abate
the number of Sermons, his Majesty has declared himself to those Reverend
Fathers, To be so far from giving the least discouragement to solid Preaching,
or to discreet and religious Preachers, or from abating the number of Sermons,
that he expects at their hands, that this should increase their number, by
renewing upon every Sunday in the afternoon, in all Parish Churches throughout
the kingdom, that primitive, and most profitable exposition of the Catechism.
So that here is no abating of Sermons, but a direction of the Preacher to
preach usefully, and to edification.

And therefore, to end all, you, you whom God has made Stars in this
Firmament, Preachers in this Church, deliver your selves from that imputation,
Job 25. 5
The Stars were not pure in his sight; The Preachers were not obedient to him
in the voice of his Lieutenant. And you, you who are Gods holy people, and
zealous of his glory, as you know from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15 14.
that Stars differ from Stars in glory, but all conduce to the benefit of man:
So, when you see these Stars, Preachers to differ in gifts; yet, since all
their ends are to advance your salvation, encourage the Catechizer, as well as
the curious Preacher. Look so far toward your way to Heaven, as to the
Firmament, and consider there, that that star by which we sail, and make
great voyages, is none of the stars of the greatest magnitude; but yet it is
none of the least neither; but a middle star. Those Preachers which must save
your souls, are not ignorant, unlearned, extemporall men; but they are not
over curious men neither. Your children are you, and your servants are you; and
you do not provide for your salvation, if you provide not for them, who are so
much yours, as that they are you. No man is saved as a good man, if he be not
saved as a good Father, and as a good Master too, if God have given him a
family. That so, Priest and people, the whole Congregation, may by their
religious obedience, and fighting in this spiritual warfare in their Order,
minister occasion of joy to that heart, which has been grieved; in that
fullness of joy, Which David expresses. Psalm 21.
The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation how
greatly shall he rejoice? Thou have given him his hearts desire, and thou have
not withholden the request of his lips: for the King trusts in the Lord, and
by the mercy of the most High, he shall not be moved. And with that Psalm, a
Psalm of Confidence in a good King, and a Psalm of Thanksgiving for that
blessing, I desire that this Congregation may be dissolved; for this is all
that I intended for the Explication, which was our first, and for the
Application, which was the other part proposed in these words.

FINIS.
A SERMON UPON THE VIII. VERSE OF THE I. CHAPTER OF THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.

Preached To the Honorable Company of the VIRGINIAN PLANTATION. 13o. Nouemb.
1622.

BY JOHN DONE Deane of St. Paul's, London.

LONDON. Printed by A. MAT: for THOMAS JONES and are to sold at his Shop in the
Strand, at the black Raven, near unto Saint Clements Church. 1622.

TO THE HONORABLE COMPANY OF THE VIRGINIAN Plantation.
BY your favors, I had some place amongst you, before: but now I am an
Aduenturer; if not to VIRGINIA, yet for VIRGINIA; for, every man, that Prints,
Adventures. for the Preaching of this Sermon, I was but under your Inuitation;
my Time was mine own, and my Medtations mine own: and I had been excusable
toward you, if I had turned that Time, and those Meditations, to GOD's service,
in any other place. But for the Printing of this Sermon, I am not only under
your Inuitation, but under your Commandment; for, after it was preached, it
was not mine, but yours,: And therefore, if I gave it at first, I do but
restore it now. The first was an act of Love; this, of Justice; both which
Virtues, Almighty God evermore promoue, and exalt in all your proceedings. Amen.

Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus JOHN DONE
ACTS 1. 8. But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon
you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea,
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the Earth.
THere are reckoned in this book, 22. Sermons of the Apostles; and yet the
book is not called the Preaching, but the Practice, not the Words, but the
Acts of the Apostles: and the Acts of the Apostles were to convey that name of
Christ Jesus, and to propagate his Gospel, over all the world: Beloved you are
Actors upon the same Stage too: the vttermonst part of the Earth are your
Scene: act over the acts of the Apostles; be you a light to the Gentiles, that
sit in darkness; be you content to carry him over these Seas, who dried up
one red Sea, for his first people, and has powered out another red Sea, his
own blood, for them and us. When man was fallen, God clothed him; made him a
Leather Garment; there God descended to one occupation; when the time of man's
redemption was come, then God, as it were, to house him, became a Carpenters
Son; there God descended to another occupation. Naturally, without doubt, man
would have been his own Tailor, and his own Carpenter; something in these two
kinds man would have done of himself, though he had had no pattern from God:
but in preserving man who was fallen, to this redemption, by which he was to be
raisd, in preserving man from perishing, in the Flood, God descended to a third
occupation, to be his Shipwright to give him the model of a ship, an Arc, and
so to be the author of that, which man himself in likelihood, would never have
thought of, a means to pass from Nation to Nation. Now, as GOD taught us to
make clothes, not only to cloth our selves, but to cloth him in his poor
and naked members here; as God taught us to build houses, not to house
ourselves, but to house him, in erecting Churches, to his glory: So God taught
us to make Ships, not to transport ourselves, but to transport him, That when
we have received power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon us, we might be
witnesses unto him, both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

As I speak now principally to them who are concernd in this Plantation of
Virginia, yet there may be diverse in this Congregation, who, though they have
no interest in this Plantation, yet they may have benefit and edification, by
that which they hear me say, so Christ spoke the words of this Text,
principally to the Apostles, who were present and questioned him at his
Ascension, but they are in their just extention, and due accommodation,
appliable to our present occation of meeting here: As Christ himself is
Alpha, and Omega, so first, as that he is last too, so these words which he
spoke in the East, belong to us, who are to glorify him in the West; That we
having received power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon us, might be
witnesses unto him, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

The first word of the Text is the Cardinal word, the word the hinge upon
which the whole Text turns; The first word, But, is the But, that all the rest
shoots at. First it is an exclusive word; something the Apostles had required,
which might not be had; not that; And it is an inclusiue word; something
Christ was pleased to afford to the Apostles, which they thought not of; not
that, not that which you beat upon, But, but yet, something else, something
better then that, you shall have. That which this but, excludes, is that which
the Apostles express in the Verse immediately before the Text, a Temporal
Kingdom; VVilt thou restore again the kingdom of Israel? No; not a temporal
Kingdom; let not the riches and commodities of this World, be in your
contemplation in your adventures. Or, because they ask more, VVilt thou now
restore that? not yet: If I will give you riches, and commodities of this
world, yet if I do it not at first, if I do it not yet, be not you
discouraged; you shall not have that, that is not Gods first intention; and
though that be in Gods intention, to give it you hereafter, you shall not have
it yet; that's the exclusive part; But; there enters the inclusiue, You shall
receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and you shall be
witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth. In which second part, we shall pass by
these steps; Superueniet Spiritus, The holy Ghost shall come upon you, The
Spirit shall witness to your Spirit, and rectify your Conscience; And then,
by that, you shall receive power; A new power besides the power you have from
the State, and that power shall enable you, to be witnesses of Christ, that is;
to make his doctrine the more credible, by your testimony, when you conform
you selnes to him, and do as he did; and this witness you shall bear, this
conformity you shall declare, first in Jerusalem, in this City; And in Iudaea,
in all the parts of the Kingdom; and in Samaria, even amongst them who are
departed from the true worship of God, the Papists; and to the uttermost part
of the Earth, to those poor Souls, to whom you are continually sending.
Summarily, If from the Holy Ghost you have a good testimony in your own
Conscience, you shall be witnesses for Christ, that is; as he did, you shall
give satisfaction to all, to the City, to the Country, to the Calumniating
Adversary, and the Naturals of the place, to whom you shall present both
Spiritual and Temporal benefit to. And so you have the Model of the whole
frame, and of the partitions; we proceed now to the furnishing of the
particular rooms.

1. Part.
FIrst then, this first word, But, excludes a temporal Kingdom; the Apostles
had filld themselves with an expectation, with an ambition of it; but that was
not intended them. It was no wonder, that a woman could conceive such an
expectation, and such an ambition, as to have her two sons sit at Christ's
right hand, Mat. 20. 20
and at his left, in his Kingdom, when the Apostles expected such a Kingdom,
as might afford them honors and preferment upon Earth. More then once they
were in that disputation, in which Christ deprehended them, Which of them
should be the greatest in his Kingdom. Mat. 1. 81.
Neither has the Bishop of Rome, any thing, wherein he may so properly call
himself Apostolical, as this error of the Apostles, this their infirmity,
that he is evermore to conversant upon the contemplation of temporal
Kingdoms. They did it all the way, when Christ was with them, and now at his
last step, Cum actu ascendisset, Athanaz.
when Christ was not Ascending, but in part ascended, when one foot was upon
the Earth, and the other in the cloud that took him up, they ask him now,
will thou at this time, restore the Kingdom? so women put their husbands, and
men their fathers, and friends, upon their torture, at their last gasp, and
make their deathbed a rack to make them stretch and increase ioyntures, and
portions, and legacies, and sign Scedules and Codicils, with their hand, when
his hand that presents them, is ready to close his eyes, that should sign
them: And when they are upon the wing for heaven, men tie lead to their feet,
and when they are laying hand-fast upon Abraham's bosom, they must pull their
hand out of his bosom again, to obey importunities of men, and sign their
papers: so vnderminable is the love of this World, which determines every
minute. GOD, as he is three persons, has three Kingdoms; There is Regnum
potentiae, The Kingdom of power; and this we attribute to the Father; it is
power and providence: There is Regnum gloriae, the Kingdom of glory; this we
attribute to the Son and to his purchase; for he is the King that shall say,
Mat. 25. 34
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the World. And then between these three is Regnum gratiae, The
kingdom of Grace, and this we attribute to the Holy Ghost; he takes them, whom
the king of power, Almighty God has rescued from the Gentiles, and as the king
of grace, He gives them the knowledge of the mystery of the kingdom of GOD,
Mar. 4. 11.
that is, of future glory, by sactifying them with his grace, in his Church.
The two first kingdoms are in this world, but yet neither of them, are of this
world; because both they refer co the kingdom of glory. The kingdom of the
Father, which is the providence of God, does but preserve us; The kingdom of
the Holy Ghost which is the grace of God, does but prepare us to the kingdom
of the Son, which is the glory of GOD; and that's in heaven. And therefore,
though to good men, this world be the way to that kingdom, yet this kingdom
is not of this world, says Christ himself: Though the Apostles themselves,
Ioh 18. 36.
as good a School as they were bred in, could never take out that lesson, yet
that lesson Christ gives, and repeates to all, you seek a Temporal kingdom,
But, says the Text, stop there, A kingdom you must not have.

Beloved in him, whose kingdom, and Gospel you seek to advance, in this
Plantation, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, if you seek to establish a
temporal kingdom there, you are not rectified, if you seek to be Kings in
either acceptance of the word; To be a King signifies Liberty and indepency,
and Supremacy, to be under no man, and to be a King signifies Abundance, and
Omnisufficiencie, to need no man. If those that govern there, would establish
such a government, as should not depend upon this, or if those that go
thither, propose to themselves an exemption from Laws, to live at their
liberty, this is to be Kings, to deuest Allegiance, to be under no man: and
if those that adventure thither, propose to themselves present benefit, and
profit, a sudden way to be rich, and an abundance of all desirable
commodities from thence, this is to be sufficient of themselves, and to need no
man: and to be under no man and to need no man, are the two acceptations of
being Kings. Whom liberty draws to go, or present profit draws to adventure,
are not yet in the right way. O, if you could once bring a Catechism to be as
good ware amongst them as a Bugle, as a knife, as a hatchet: O, if you would be
as ready to hearken at the return of a Ship, how many Indians were converted
to Christ Jesus, as what Trees, or druggs, or Dies that Ship had brought, then
you were in your right way, and not till then; Liberty and Abundance, are
Characters of kingdoms, and a kingdom is excluded in the Text; The Apostles
were not to look for it, in their employment, nor you in this your Plantation.

At least CHRIST expresses himself thus far, in this answer, that if he
would give them a kingdom, Non adbuc.
he would not give it them yet. They ask him, VVilt thou at this time,
restore the kingdom? and he answers, It is not for you to know the times:
whatsoever God will do, Man must not appoint him his time. The Apostles
thought of a kingdom presently after Christ's departure; the coming of the
Holy Ghost, who ledd them into all truths, soon delivered them of that error.
Other men in favor of the Jews, interpreting all the prophesies, which are of
a Spiritual kingdom, the kingdom of the Gospel, (into which, the Jews
shall be admitted) in a literal sense, have thought that the Jews shall have,
not only a temporal kingdom in the same place, in Jerusalem again, but
because they find that kingdom which is promised, (that is the kingdom of the
Gospel) to be expressed in large phrases, and in an abundant manner, applying
all that largeness to a temporal kingdom, they think, that the Jews shall
have such a kingdom, as shall swallowe and annihilate all other kingdoms, and
be the sole Empire and Monarchy of the world. After this, very great men in
the Church upon these words, of One thousand years after the Resurrection,
have immagin'd a Temporal Kingdom of the Saints of God here upon Earth, Apo.
20,
before they entered the joys of Heaven: and Saint Augustine himself, De
Ciuitat. Dei 20. 7.
had at first some declinations toward that opinion, though he dispute
powerfully against it, after: That there should be Sabatismus in terris; that
as the world was to last Six thousand years in troubles, there should be a
Seventh thousand, in such joys as this world could give.

And some others, who have avoided both the Temporal kingdom imagined by the
Apostles, presently after the Ascension, And the Imperial kingdom of the
Jews, before the Refurrection, And the Carnal kingdom of the Chiliasts, the
Millenarians, after the Refurrection, though they speak of no kingdom, but
the true kingdom, the kingdom of glory, yet they err as much in assigning a
certain time when that kingdom shall begin, when the end of this world,
when the Refurrection, when the Judgment shall be. Non est vestrum nosse
tempora, says Christ to his Apostles then; and lest it might be thought, that
they might know these things, when the Holy Ghost came upon them, Christ denies
that he himself knew that, as Man; and as Man, Christ knew more, then ever the
Apostles knew. Whatsoever therefore Christ intended to his Apostles here, he
would not give it presently, non adhuc, he would not bind himself to a
certain time, Non est vestrum nosse tempora, It belongs not to us to know Gods
times.

Beloved, use goly means, and give God his leisure. You cannot beget a Son,
and tell the Mother, I will have this Son born within five Months; nor, when
he is borne, say, you will have him past danger of Wardship within five
years. You cannot sow your Corn to day, and say it shall be above ground to
morrow, and in my Barn next week. How soon the best Husbandman, sowed the
best Seed, in the best ground? GOD cast the promise of a Messiah, as the seed
of all, in Paradise; In Semine Mulieris; The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpents head; and yet this Plant was Four thousand years after before it
appeared; this Messiah Four thousand years before he came. GOD showed the
ground where that should grow, Two thousand years after the Promise; in
Abraham's Family; In semine tuo, In thy Seed all Nations shall be blessed. God
hedgd in this Ground almost One thousand years after that; In Micheas time, Et
tu Bethlem, Thou Bethlem shall be the place; and God watered that, and weeded
that, refreshed that dry expectation, with a Succession of Prophets; and yet it
was so long before this expectation of Nations, this Messiah came. So GOD
promised the Jews a Kingdom, in Jacobs Prophecy to Judah, Genesis 49.
That the Scepter should not depart from his Tribe. In Two hundred years more,
he says no more of it; Deu. 17. 14.
then he ordaines some institutions for their King, when they should have one.
And then it was Four hundred years after that, before they had a King. GOD
meant from the first hour, to people the whole earth; and God could have made
men of clay, as fast as they made Brickes of Clay in Egypt; but he began upon
two, and when they had been mulplying and replenishing the Earth One thousand
six hundred years, the Flood washed all that away, and GOD was almost to
begin again upon eight persons; and they have served to people Earth and
Heaven too; Be not you discouraged, if the Promises which you have made to
your selves, or to others, be not so soon discharged; though you see not your
money, though you see not your men, though a Flood, a Flood of blood have
broken in upon them, be not discouraged. Great Creatures ly long in the womb;
Lions are litterd perfect, but Bearewhelps licked unto their shape; actions
which Kings undertake, are cast in a mould; they have their perfection quickly;
actions of private men, and private purses, require more hammering, and more
filing to their perfection. Only let your principal end, be the propagation
of the glorious Gospel, and though there be an Exclusive in the Text, GOD
does not promise you a Kingdom, ease, and abundance in all things, and that
which he does intend to you, he does not promise presently, yet there is an
Inclusiue too; not that, But, but something equiuolent at least, But ye shall
receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

2. Part.
NOw our Savior Christ does not say to these men, since you are so importunate
you shall have no Kingdom; now nor never; Sed.
it is, not yet? But, he does not say, you shall have no kingdom, nor any thing
else; it is not that; But; the importunity of beggars, sometimes draws us to
such a froward answer, for this importunity, I will never give you any thing.
Our pattern was not so froward; 1 Samuel 16
he gave them not that, but as good as that. Samuel was sent to superinduct a
King upon Saul, to anoint a new King. He thought his Commission had been
determined in Eliab, Surely this is the Lords Anointed. But the Lord said, not
he; nor the next, Aminadab; nor the next, Shamah; nor none of the next seven;
But; but yet there is one in the field, keeping sheep, anoint him; David is
he. Saint Paul prayed earnestly, and frequently, to be discharged of that
Stimulus Carnis: God says no; not that; but Gratia measufficit, Thou shall
have grace to overcome the tentation, though the tentation remain. God says
to you, No Kingdom, not ease, not abundance; nay nothing at all yet; the
Plantation shall not discharge the Charges, not defray it self yet; but yet
already, now at first, it shall conduce to great uses; It shall redeem many a
wretch from the Jaws of death, from the hands of the Executioner, upon whom,
perchauuce a small fault, or perchance a first fault, or perchance a fault
heartily and sincerely repented, perchance no fault, but malice, had otherwise
cast a present, and ignominious death. It shall sweep your streets, and wash
your doors, from idle persons, and the children of idle persons, and employ
them: and truly, if the whole Country were but such a Bridewell, to force
idle persons to work, it had a good use. But it is already, not only a
Spleen, to draine the ill humors of the body, but a Liver, to breed good
blood; already the employment breeds Mariners; already the place gives
essays, nay Fraytes of Marchantable commodities; already it is a mark for the
Envy, and for the ambition of our Enemies; I speak but of our Doctrinall, not
National Enemies; as they are Papists, they are sorry we have this Country;
and surely, twenty Lectures in matter of Controversy, do not so much vex
them, as one Ship that goes, and strengthens that Plantation. Neither can I
recommend it to you, by any better Retorique then their malice. They would
gladly have it, and therefore let us be glad to hold it.

Thus then this Text proceeds, Spiritus Sanctus.
and gathers upon you. All that you would have by this Plantation, you shall
not have; GOD binds not himself to measures; All that you shall have, you
have not yet; GOD binds not himself to times, but something you shall have;
nay, you have already, some great things; and of those that in the Text is, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon you. we find the Holy Ghost to have come upon men,
four times in this Book. First, Acts 2, 1.
upon the Apostles at Pentecost. Then, when the whole Congregation was in
prayer for the imprisonment of Peter and John. 4. 31.
Again, when Peter preached in Cornelius his house, 10. 44.
the Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard him. And fourthly, when Saint
Paul laid his hands upon them, who had been formerly baptized at Ephesus. 19.
6.
At the three latter times, it is evident that the Holy Ghost fell upon whole
and promiscuous Congregations, and not upon the Apostles only: and in the
first, at Pentecost, the contrary is not evident; nay, the Fathers, for the
most part, that handle that, concur in that, that the Holy Ghost fell then
upon the whole Congregation, men and women. The Holy Ghost fell upon Peter
before he preached, and it fell upon the hearers when he preached, and it has
fallen upon every one of them, who have found motions in themselnes, to
propagate the Gospel of Christ Jesus by this means. The Son of GOD did not
abhor the Virgins womb, when he would be made man; when he was man, he did
not disdain to ride upon an Ass into Jerusalem: the third person of the
Trinity, the Holy Ghost is as humble as the second, he refuses Nullum
vehiculum, no conueyance, no door of entrance into you; whether the example
and precedent of other good men, or a probable imagination of future profit, or
a willingness to concur to the vexation of the Enemy, what collateral
respect soever drew thee in, if now thou art in, thy principal respect be the
glory of God, that occasion, whatsoeur it was, was vehiculum Spiritus Sancti,
that was the Petard, that broke open thy Iron gate, that was the Chariot, by
which he entered into thee, and now he is fallen upon thee, if thou do not
Depose, (lay aside all consideration of profit for ever, never to look for
return) No not Sepose, (leave out the consideration of profit for a time) (for
that, and Religion may well consist together,) but if thou do but Post-pose
the consideration of temporal gain, and study first the advancement of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost is fallen upon you, for by that, you
receive power, says the Text.

There is a Power rooted in Nature, Potestatem.
and a Power rooted in Grace; a power yssuing from the Law of Nations, and a
power growing out of the Gospel. In the Law of Nature and Nations, A Land
never inhabited, by any, or utterly derelicted and immemorially abandoned by
the former Inhabitants, becomes theirs that will possess it. So also is it, if
the inhabitants do not in some measure fill the Land, so as the Land may bring
forth her increase for the use of men: for as a man does not become
proprietary of the Sea, because he has two or three Boats, fishing in it, so
neither does a a man become Lord of a maine Continent, because he has two or
three Cottages in the Skirts thereof. That rule which passes through all
Municipal laws in particular States, Interest reipublic and vt quis re sua
been vtatur, The State must take order, that every man improoue that which he
has, for the best advantage of that State, passes also through the Law of
Nations, which is to all the world, as the Municipall Law is to a particular
State, Interest mundo, The whole world, all Mankind must take care, that all
places be emprou'd, as far as may be, to the best advantage of Mankind in
general. Again if the Land be peopled, and cultiuated by the people, and that
Land produce in abundance such things, for want whereof their neghbours, or
others (being not enemies) perish, the Law of Nations may justify some force;
in seeking, by permutation of other commodities which they need, to come to
some of theirs. Many cases may be put, when not only Comerce, and Trade, but
Plantations in lands, not formerly, our own, may be lawful. And for that,
Accepistis potestatem, you have your Commission, your Patents, your Charters,
your Seals from him, upon whose acts, any private Subject, in Civil matters,
may safely rely. But then, Accipietis potestatem, You shall receive power,
says the text; you shall, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you; that is, when
the instinct, the influence, the motions of the Holy Ghost enables your
Conscience to say, that your principal end is not gain, nor glory, but to
gain Souls to the glory of GOD, this Seals the great Seal, this iustifies
Justice it self, this authorizes Authority, and gives power to strength it
self. Let the Conscience be upright, and then Seals, and Patents, and
Commissions are wings; they assist him to fly the faster; let the Conscience
be lame, and distorted, and he that goes upon Seals, and Patents, and
Commissions, goes upon weak and feeble crouches. When the Holy Ghost is come
upon you, your Conscience rectified, you shall have Power, a new power out of
that; what to do? that follows, to be witnesses unto Christ.

Infamy is one of the highest punishments that the Law inflicts upon man;
Testes.
for it lies upon him even after death: Infamy is the worst punishment, and
Intestabilitie, (to be made intestable) is one of the deepest wounds of infamy;
and then the worst degree of intestabilitie, is not to be believed, not to be
admitted to be a witness of any other: he is Intestable that cannot make a
Testament, not give his own goods; and he Intestable that can receive nothing
by the Testament of another; he is Intestable, in whose behalf no testimony
may be accepted; but he is the most miserably Intestable of all, the most
detestably intestable, that discredits another man by speaking well of him, and
makes him the more suspicious, by his commendations. A Christian in profession,
that is not a Christian in life, is so intestable so, he discredits Christ,
and hardens others against him. John Baptist was more then a Prophet, because
he was a Witness of Christ; and he was a Witness, becaue he was like him, he
did as he did, he lead a holy and a religious life; so he was a Witness. That
great and glorious name of Martyr, is but a Witness. Saint Stephen was
Proto-martyr, Christ's first Witness, because he was the first that did as he
did, that put on his colors, that drunk of his Cup, that was baptized with
his Baptism, with his own blood: so he was a Witness. To be Witnesses for
Christ, is to be like Christ; to conform your selves to Christ; and they in
the Text, and you, are to be witnesses of Christ in Jerusalem, and in all
Iudaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

Saint Hierome notes that John Baptist was not bid to bear witness in
Jerusalem, Jerusalem.
in the City, but in the Wilderness; he, and none but he: there were but few
men to witness to there; and those few that were, came thither with a good
disposition to be wrought upon there; and there there were few witnesses to
oppose John's Testimony, few tentations, few worldly allureme^ts, few worldly
businesses. One was enough for the Wilderness; but for Jerusalem, for the
City, where all the excuses in the Gospel do always meet, they have bought
commodities, and they must utter them, they have purchased Lands, and they must
state them, they have married Wives, and they must study them, to the City, to
Jerusalem, Christ sends all his Apostles, and all little enough. He has sent
a great many Apostles, Preachers, to this City; more then to any other, that I
know. Religious persons as they call them, Cloistered Friars are not sent to
the City; by their first Canons, they should not preach abroad: but for those
who are to do that service, there are more in this City, then in others, for
there are more Parish Churches here then in others. Now, beloved, if in this
City, you have taken away a great part of the revenue of the Preacher, to your
selves, take thus much of his labor upon your selves to, as to preach to one
another by a holy and exemplar life, and a religious conversation. Let those of
the City, who have interest in the Government of this Plantation, be Witnesses
of Christ who is Truth it self, to all other Governors of Companies, in all
true and just proceedings: that as CHRIST said to them who thought themselves
greatest, Except you become as this little Child, so we may say to the
Gouenours of the grearest Companies, Except you proceed with the integrity,
with the justice, with the clearenesse, of your little Sister, this Plantation,
you do not take, you do not follow a good example. This is to bear witness
of Christ in Jerusalem, in the City, to be examples of Truth, and Justice,
and Clearenesse, to others, in, and of this City.

The Apostles were to do this in Iudaea Iudaea.
too, their service lay in the Country as well as in the City. Birds that are
kept in cages may learn some Notes, which they should never have sung in the
Woods or Fields; but yet they may forget their natural Notes too. Preachers
that bind themselves always to Cities and Courts, and great Auditories, may
learn new Notes; they may become occasional Preachers, and make the emergent
affairs of the time, their Text, and the humors of the hearers their Bible;
but they may loose their Natural Notes, both the simplicity, and the
boldness that belongs to the Preaching of the Gospel: both their power upon
low understandings to raise them, and upon high affection to humble them. They
may think that their errand is but to knock at the door, to delight the
ear, and not to search the House, to ransacke the conscience. Christ left the
Ninteie and nine for one Sheep; populous Cities are for the most part best
provided; remoter parts need our labor more, and we should not make such
differences. Yeoman, and Labourer, and Spinster, are distinctions upon Earth;
in the Earth, in the grave there is no distinction. The Angel that shall call
us out of that dust, will not stand to suruay, who lies naked, who in a Coffin,
who in Wood, who in Lead, who in a fine, who in a courser Sheet; In that one
day of the Resurrection, there is not a forenoone for Lords to rise first, and
an afternoon for meaner persons to rise after. Christ was not whipped to save
Beggars, and crowned with Thorns to save Kings: he dyed, he suffered all, for
all; and we whose bearing witness of him, is to do, as he did, must confer
our labors upon all, upon Jerusalem, and upon Iudaea too, upon the City, and
upon the Country too. You, who are his witnesses too, must do so too; preach
in your just actions, as to the City, to the Country too. Not to Seal up the
secrets, and the mysteries of your business within the bosom of Merchants,
and exclude all others who nourish an incompatibility between Merchants and
Gentlemen; that Merchants shall say to them in reproach, you have played the
Gentlemen, and they in equal reproach, you have played the Merchant; but as
Merchants grow up into worshipful Families, and worshipful Families let fall
branches amongst Merchants again, so for this particular Plantation, you may
consider City and Country to be one body, and as you give example of a just
government to other companies in the City, (that's your bearing witness in
Jerusalem,) so you may be content to give reasons of your proceedings, and
account of moneys levied, over the Country, for that's your bearing witness in
Iudaea.

But the Apostles Dioces is enlarged, Samaria.
farther then Jerusalem, farther the Iudaea, they are carried into Samaria; you
must bear witness of me in Samaria. Beloved, when I have remembered you, who
the Samaritans were, Men that had not renounced GOD, but mingled other Gods
with him, Men that had not burnt the Law of GOD, but made Traditions of Men
equal to it, you will easily guess to whom I apply the name of Samaritans
now. A Jesuit has told us (an ill Intelligencer I confess, but even his
Intelligencer, the Devil himself, says true sometimes) Maldonate says, the
Samaritans were odious to the Jews, upon the same grounds as Heretics and
Scismatiques to us; and they, we know were odious to them for mingling false
Gods, and false worships with the true. And if that be the Caracter of a
Samaritan, we know who are the Samaritans, who the Heretics, who the
Scismatiques of our times. In the highest approach to Christ, the Jews said,
Samaritanus es and Daemonium habes, Thou art a Samaritan and have a Devil. In
our just detestation of these Men, we justly fasten both those upon them. For
as they delight in lies and fill the world with weekly rumors, Daemonium
habit, they have a Devil, quia mendax est and pater eius. John 8. 44.
As they multiply assassinats upon Princes, and Massacres upon people,
Daemonium habent, they have a Devil, quia (...) ab initio: as they toss, and
tumble, and dispose kingdoms, Daemonium habent, they have a Devil, Omina haec
dabo was the Devils complement: Mat. 4. 10.
but as they mingle truths and falsehoods together in Religion, as they carry
the word of GOD, and the Traditions of Men, in an even balance, Samaritani
sunt, they are Samaritanes. At first Christ forbad his Apostles, to go into
any City of the Samaritans: 10. 5.
after, they did preach in many of them. Bear witness first in Jerusalem;
Acts 8. 25.
and in Iudaea; give good satisfaction especially to those of the household of
the faithful, in the City and Country, but yet satisfy eue^ those
Samaritans too.

They would be satisfied, what Miracles you work in Virginia; and what people
you have converted to the Christian Faith, there. If we could as easily call
natural effects Miracles, or casual accidents miracles, or Magical illusions,
miracles, as they do, to make a miraculous drawing of a tooth, a miraculous
cutting of a corn, or, as Iustus Baronius says, when he was converted to them;
that he was miraculously cured of the Cholique, by stooping to kiss the Popes
foot, If we would pile up Miracles so fast, as Pope John 22. did in the
Canonization of Aquinas, Tot Miracula confecit, quot determinauit questiones,
he wrought as many miracles, as he resolved questions, we might find Miracles
too. In truth, their greatest Miracle to me, is, that they find men to believe
their miracles. If they rely upon miracles, they imply a confession that they
induce new doctrines; that that is old and received, needs no miracles; If they
require miracles, because, though that be ancient Doctrine, it is newlybroght
into those parts, we have the confession of their Jesuit, Acosta, that they do
no miracle in those Indies, and he assigns very good reasons, why they are not
necessary, nor to be expected there. But yet, yet bear witness to these
Samaritans, in the other point; labor to give them satisfaction in the other
point of their chardge, What Heathens you have converted to the Faith, which is
that which is intended in the next, which is the last branch, You are to be
witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

Literally, Fines terrae.
the Apostles were to be such witnesses for Christ: were they so? did the
Apostles in person, preach the Gospel, over all the World? I know that it is
not hard to multiply places of the Fathers, in confirmation of that opinion,
that the Apostles did actually, and personally preach the Gospel in all
Nations, in their life. Christ says, the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
preached Mat. 24 14
in all the World; and there he tells the Apostles, that they shall see
something done, after that; Therefore they shall live to it. So he says to
them, You shall be brought before Rulers and Kings for my sake; Mark. 13. 9.
but the Gospel must first be published among all Nations: In one Evangelist
there is the Commission; Preach in my name to all Nations. Luk 24. 47
And in another, the Execution of this Commission, And they went and preached
every where. Mar. 16. 20
And after the Apostle certifies, and returns the execution of this
Commission, The Gospel is come and brings forth fruit to all the world: Col.
1. 5.
and upon those, and such places, have some of the Fathers been pleased, to
ground their literal exposition, of an actual and personal preaching of the
Apostles over all the world. But had they dreamed of this world which has been
discovered since, into which, we dispute with perplexity, and intricacy
enough, how any men came at first, or how any beasts, especially such beasts
as men were not likely to carry, they would never have doubted to have admitted
a Figure, in that, Luc. 1. 1.
The Gospel was preached to all the world; for when Augustus his Decree went
out, That all the World should be taxed, the Decree and the Tax went not
certainly into the West Indies; when Saint Paul says, Romans 1. 8.
That their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole world, 16. 19.
and that their obedience was come abroad unto all men, surely the West Indies
had not heard of the faith and the obedience of the Romans. But as in Moses
time, they called the Mediterranean Sea, the great Sea, because it was the
greatest that those men had then seen, so in the Apostles time, they called
that all the world, which was known and traded in then; and in all that, they
preached the Gospel. So that as Christ when he said to the Apostles; Mar. vlt.
vlt
I am with you, unto the end of the World, could not intend that of them in
person, because they did not last to the end of the world, but in a succession
of Apostolic men, so when he says, the Apostles should preach him to all the
world, it is of the Succession too.

Those of our profession that go, you, that send them who go, do all an
Apostolical function. What action soever, has in the first intention thereof,
a purpose to propagate the Gospel of Christ Jesus, that is an Apostolical
action, Before the end of the world come, before this mortality shall put on
immortality, Romans 8.
before the Creature shall be delivered of the bondage of corruption under which
it groans, before the Martyrs under the Altar shall be silenced, before al
thing's shall be subdued to Christ, his kingdom perfited, and the last Enemy
Death destroyed, the Gospel must be preached to those men to whom ye send; to
all men; further and hasten you this blessed, this joyful, this glorious
consummation of all, and happy reunion of all bodies to their Souls, by
preaching the Gospel to those men. Preach to them Doctrinally, preach to the^
Practically; Enamore them with your Justice, and, (as far as may consist with
your security) your Civility; but inflame them with your godliness, and your
Religion. Bring them to love and Reverence the name of that King, that sends
men to teach them the ways of Civility in this world, but to fear and adore
the Name of that King of Kings, that sends men to teach them the ways of
Religion, for the next world. Those amongst you, that are old now, shall pass
out of this world with this great comfort, that you contributed to the
beginning of that Common Wealth, and of that Church, though they live not to
see the groath thereof to perfection: 1 Cor. 3. 6.
Apollos watered, but Paul planted; he that begun the work, was the greater
man. And you that are young now, may live to see the Enemy as much empeach'd by
that place, and your friends, yea Children, as well acco^ modated in that place,
as any other. You shall have made this Island, which is but as the Suburbs of
the old world, a Bridge, a Gallery to the new; to join all to that world that
shall never grow old, the Kingdom of heaven, You shall add persons to this
Kingdom, and to the Kingdom of heaven, and add names to the Books of our
Chonicles, and to the Book of Life.

To end all, as the Orators which declaimd in the presence of the Roman
Emperors, in their Panegyriques, took that way to make those Emperors see,
what they were bound to do, to say in those public Orations, that those
Emporors had done so, (for that increased the love of the Subject to the
Prince, to be so told, that he had done those great things, and then it
conuayd a Counsel into the Prince to do them after.) As their way was to
procure things to be done, by saying they were done, so beloved I have taken a
contrary way: for when I, by way of exhortation, all this while have seemed to
tell you what should be done by you, I have, indeed, but told the Congregation,
what has been done already: neither do I speak to move a wheel that stood
still, but to keep the wheel in due motion; nor persuade you to begin, but to
continue a good work, nor propose foreign, but your own Examples, to do
still, as you have done hitherto. For, for that, that which is especially in my
contemplation, the conversion of the people, as I have received, so I can give
this Testimony, that of those persons, who have sent in moneys, and concealed
their names, the greatest part, almost all, have limited their devotion, and
contribution upon that point, the propagation of Religion, and the conversion
of the people; for the building and beautifying of the house of GOD, and for
the instruction and education of their young Children. Christ Jesus himself is
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. In the advancing of his glory, be
you so to, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; here; and hereafter,
when time shall be no more, no more yesterday, no more to day, yet for ever and
ever, you shall enjoy that joy, and that glory, which no ill accident can
attain to diminish, or Eclipse it.

Prayer.
WE return to thee again, O GOD, with praise and prayer; as for all thy
mercies from before minutes began, to this minute, from our Election to this
present beam of Sanctification which thou have shed upon us now. And more
particularly, that thou have afforded us that great dignity, to be, this way,
witnesses of thy Son Christ Jesus, and instruments of his glory. Look
graciously, and look powerfully upon this body, which thou have been now some
years in building and compacting together, this Plantation. Look graciously
upon the Head of this Body, our Sovereign and bless him with a good disposion
to this work, and bless him for that disposition: Look graciously upon them,
who are as the brain of this body, those who by his power. counsel, and
advise, and assist in the Government thereof: bless them with disposition to
unity and concord, and bless them for that disposition: Look graciously upon
them who are as Eyes of this Body, those of the Clergy, who have any interest
therein: bless them with a disposition to preach there, to pray here, to
exhort every where for the advancement thereof, and bless them for that
disposition. Bless them who are the Feet of this body, who go thither, and
the Hands of this body, who labor there, and them who are the Heart of this
body, all that are heartily affected, and declare actually that heartinesse to
this action, bless them all with a cheerful disposition to that, and bless
them for that disposition. Bless it so in this calm, that when the tempest
comes, it may ride it out safely; bless it so with friends now, that it may
stand against Enemies hereafter; prepare thy self a glorious harvest there,
and give us leave to be thy Laborers, That so the number of thy Saints being
fulfilled, we may with better assurance join in that prayer, Come Lord Jesus
come quickly, and so meet all in that kingdom which the Son of GOD has
purchased for us, with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood. To
which glorious Son of GOD, etc.

Amen.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 10. line 14 for Three, read There,

2 l. 2 for Co read To.

20 l. 7 Dele Interrogat.?

29 l. 20 Dele So.

39 l. 13 Dele Yet.

Other errors there are, in mis-printing, or in transposing letters, or in
misplacing Citations in the Margin, which will not (I think) hinder any
willling Reader.

Encaenia. THE FEAST OF DEDICATION. CELEBRATED AT LINCOLNES INN, in a Sermon
there upon Ascension day, 1623.

At the Dedication of a new Chapel there, Consecrated by the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Bishop of LONDON.

Preached by JOHN DONE, Deane of St. PAVLS.

LONDON, Printed by AVG. MAT. for THOMAS JONES, and are to be sold at his Shop
in the Strand, at the black Raven, near unto Saint Clements Church. 1623.

TO THE MASTERS OF THE BENCH, AND the rest of the Honorable Society of
LINCOLNES INN.
IT pleased you to exercise your interest in me, and to express your favor to
me, in inuiting me to preach this Sermon: and it has pleased you to do both
over again, in inuiting me to publish it. To this latter service I was the
more inclinable, because, though in it I had no occasion to handle any matter
of Controversy between us, and those of the Roman Persuasion, yet the whole
body and frame of the Sermon, is opposed against one pestilent calumny of
theirs, that we have cast off all distinction of places, and of days, and all
outward means of assisting the devotion of the Congregation. For this use, I
am not sorry that it is made public, for I shall never be sorry to appear
plainly, and openly, and directly, without disguise or modification, in the
vindicating of our Church from the imputations and calumnies of that Adversary.
If it had no public use, yet I should satisfy my self in this, that it is
done in obedience to that, which you may call your Request, but I shall call
your Commandment upon

Your very humble Servant in Christ Jesus. JOHN DONE.
The Prayer before the Sermon.
OEternall, and most gracious God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and in him,
of all those that are his, As thou did make him so much ours, as that he
became like us, in all things, sin only excepted, make us so much his, as
that we may be like him, even without the exception of sin, that all our
sins may be buried in his wounds, and drowned in his Blood. And as this day
we celebrate his Ascension to thee, be pleased to accept our endeavor of
conforming our selves to his pattern, in raising this place for our Ascension
to him. Lean upon these Pinnacles, O Lord, as thou diddist upon Jacobs Ladder,
and hearken after us. Be this thine Arc, and let thy Dove, thy blessed
Spirit, come in and out, at these Windows: and let a full pot of thy Manna, a
good measure of thy Word, and an effectual preaching thereof, be evermore
preserved, and evermore be distributed in this place. Let the Leprosy of
Superstition never enter within these Walls, nor the hand of Sacrilege ever
fall upon them. And in these walls, to them that love Profit and Gain,
manifest thou thy self as a Treasure, and fill them so; To them that love
Pleasure, manifest thy self, as Marrow and Fatness, and fill them so; And to
them that love Preferment, manifest thy self, as a Kingdom, and fill them so;
that so thou may be all unto all; give thy self wholly to us all, and make
us all wholly thine. Accept our humble thanks for all, etc.

JOHN 10. 22. And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the Dedication; and it was
Winter; and Jesus walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.
SAint Basil in a Sermon upon the 114. Basil.
Psalm; upon the like occasion as draws us together now, The consecration of
a Church, makes this the reason and the excuse of his late coming thither to
do that Service, that he stayed by the way, to consecrate another Church: I
hope every person here has done so; consecrated himself, who is a Temple of
the Holy Ghost; before he came to assist, or to testify the consecration of
this place of the Service of God. Bern. Ser. 1.
Nostra festiuitas hec est, quia de Ecclesia nostra; says Saint Bernard. This
Festival belongs to us, because it is the consecration of that place, which is
ours, Magis autem nostra, quia de nobis ipsis: But it is more properly our
Festival, because it is the consecration of our selves to Gods service. For,
Sanctae Animae propter inhabitantem Spiritum; your Souls are holy, by the
inhabitation of Gods holy spirit, who dwells in them. Sancta corpor a propter
inhabitantem animam; Your Bodies are holy, by the inhabitation of those
sanctified Souls. Sancti parietes, propter Corpora Sanctorum. These walls are
holy, because the Saints of God meet here within these walls to glorify him.
But yet these places are not only consecrated and sanctified by your coming;
but to be sanctified also for your coming; that so, as the Congregation
sanctifies the place, the place may sanctify the Congregation too. They must
accompany one another; holy persons and holy places; If men would wash sheep in
the Baptisterie, in the Font, those sheep were not christened. If profane men,
or idolatrous men, pray here after their way, their prayers are not sanctified
by the place. Neither if it be after polluted, does the place retain that
sanctity, which is this day to be derived upon it, and to be imprinted in it.

Our Text settles us upon both these considerations, Diuisie.
The holy place, and the holy person. It was the Feast of the Dedication:
there is the holiness of the place; And the holy person, was holiness it self
in the person of Christ Jesus, who walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.
These two will be our two parts: And the first of these we shall make up of
these pieces. First, we shall see a lawful use of Feasts, of Festival days.
And then of other Feasts, then were instituted by God himself; diverse were so;
this was not. And thirdly, not only a festival solemnizing of some one thing,
at some one time, for the present, but an Anniuersary returning to that
folemnitie every year; And lastly, in that first part, this Festival in
particular, The Feast of the Dedication of the Temple: that fanctified the
place, that shall determine that part. In the second part, The holiness of the
person, we shall carry your thoughts no farther, but upon this, That even this
holy person Jesus himself, would have recourse to this place, thus dedicated,
thus sanctified: And upon this, that he would do that especially at such
times, as he might countenance and authorize the Ordinances and Institutions
of the Church, which had appointed this Festival. And this, says the Text, he
did in the Winter: First, Etsi Hiems, though it were Winter, he came, and
walked in the Porch, a little inconvenience kept him not off: And, Quia Hiems,
because it was Winter, he walked in the Porch which was covered, not in the
Temple which was open. So that here with modesty, and without scandal he
condemned not the favoring of a man's health, even in the Temple, And it was at
Jerusalem, the Feast of the Dedication; and it was Winter; and Jesus walked in
the Temple in Salomons Porch.

In our first part, 1. Part. Festa.
Holy places, we look first upon the times of our meeting there, Holy days.
The root of all those is the Sabbath, that God planted himself, even in
himself, in his own rest, from the Creation. But the root, and those branches
which grow from that root, are of the same nature, and the same name: And
therefore as well of the flower, as of the root of a Rose, or of a Violet, we
would say, This is a Violet, this is a Rose, so as well to other Feasts of Gods
institution, as to the first Sabbath, God gives that name; he calls those
several Feasts which he instituted, Sabboths; enioynes the same things to be
done upon them, inflicts the same punishments upon them that break them.
Leuit. 23.
So that there is one Morality, that is the soul of all Sabboths, of all
Festiualls; howsoever all Sabboths have a ceremonial part in them, yet there
is a Moral part that inanimates them all; they are elemented of Ceremony, but
they animated with Morality. And that Morality is in them all, Rest: for if
Adam could name creatures according to their nature, God could name his Sabbath
according to the nature of it, and Sabbath is Rest. It is a Rest of two kinds;
our rest, and Gods rest. Our rest is the cessation from labor on those days;
Gods rest, is our sanctifying of the day: for so in the religious sacrifice of
Noah, when he was come out of the Arc, Genes. 8.
God is said to have smelt, Odorem quietis, the savor of rest: upon those
days we rest from serving the world, and God rests in our serving of him. And
as God takes a tenth part of our goods, in Tithes, but yet he takes more too,
he takes Sacrifices, so though he take a seventh part of our time in the
Sabbath, yet he takes more too, he appoints other Sabboths, other Festiualls,
that he may have more glory, and we more Rest: for all wherein those two
concur, are Sabboths Vacate and videte quoniam ego sum Dominus says God.
Psalm. 46. 10
First vacate, rest from your bodily labors, distinguish the day, and then
videte, come hither into the Lords presence, and worship the Lord your God,
sanctify the day: And in all the Sabboths there is still a Cessate, Leuit. 23.
and a Humiliate animas, bodily rest, and spiritual sanctifying of the day.
Holy days then, that is, days seposed for holy uses, and for the outward and
public service of God, are in Nature, and in that Moral Law which is written
in the heart of man. That such days there must be is Moral; and this is
Moral too, that all things in the service of God be done in order; and this
also, that obedience be given to Superiors, in those things wherein they are
Superiors. And therefore it was to the Jews, as well Moral, to observe the
certain days which God had determined, as to observe any at all. Not that
Gods commandment limitting the days, infused a Morality into those
particular days: for Morality is perpetual; and if that had been Moral, it
must have been so before, and it must be so still; Gods determining the days
did not infuse, not induce a Morality there, but it awakened a former
Morality, that is, an obedience to the commandment, for that time, which God
had appointed that for them; for this Obedience, and Order is perpetual, and
so, Moral. We depart therefore from that error, which those ancient Heretics,
the Ebionites begun, and some labored to refresh in Saint Gregory's time, and
which continues in practice in some places of the world still; To observe both
the Jews Sabbath, and the Christians, Satterday, and Sunday too; because the
Sabbath is called Pactum sempiternum: Exodus 31.
for to that any of Saint Augustines Answers will serve; either that it is
called everlasting, because it signified an everlasting rest; (where be pleased
to note by the way, that Holy days, Sabbaths, are not only instituted for
Order, but they have their Mystery, and their Signification; for Holy days,
Col. 2. 16.
(as the Text calls them there) and New Moons, and the Sabbath, were but
shadows of things to come:) or else the Sabbath was called everlasting to
them, because it bound them everlastingly, and they might never intermit it, as
some other ceremonies they might. But their Sabboths bind not us; we depart
from them who think so; and so we do from them, who think we are bound to no
Festiualls at all, or at least to none but the Sabbath. For God requires as
much service from us, as from the Jews, and to them he enlarged his Sabboths,
and made them diverse. But those were of Gods immediate institution: but all that
the Jews observed were not so; and that's our next consideration, Festiualls
instituted by the Church.

At first, Sine Mandato.
when God was alone, it is but Faciamus, let us, us the Trinity make man. This
was, when God was, as we may say, in Coelibatu. But after God has taken his
spouse, married the Church, then it is Capite nobis vulpes, Cant. 2. 15
do you take the little Foxes, you the Church; for our vines have grapes; the
vines are ours; yours and mine says Christ to the Church: and therefore do you
look to them, as well as I. The Tables of the law God himself writ, and gave
them written to Moses: he left none of that to him; not a power to make other
Laws like those laws: but for the Tabernacle, which concerned the outward
worship of God, Exodus 25. 9.
that was to be made by Moses, Iuxta similitudinem, according to the pattern
which God had showed him. God has given the Church a pattern of Holy days, in
those Sabboths which he himself instituted, and according to the pattern, the
Church has instituted more: Aug.
and Recte festa Ecclesiae colunt quise Ecclesiae filios recognoscunt: They who
disdain not the name of sons of the Church, refuse not to celebrate the
days which are of the Churches institution. There was no immediate
commandment of God for that Holy day, which Mor dechai, Ester 9. 23
by his letters established; but yet the Jews undertook to do as Mordechai
had written to them. There was no such commandment for this Holy day, in the
Text; and yet that was obferued, as long as they had any being. And where the
reason remains, the practice may; The Jews did, we may institute new Holy
days. And not only transitory days, for a present thanks giving for a
present benefit, but Anniuersaries, perpetual memorials of Gods deliverances.
And that's our next step.

Both the Holy days, Anniuersaria.
which we named before, which were instituted with out special Commandment
from God, were so. That of Mordechai, he commanded to be kept every year for
two days, and this in the Text, Judas Maccabeus commanded to be kept yearly
for eight days, which was more then was appointed to any of the Holy days,
instituted by God himself, for the Festival alone. According to which
pattern, Felix.
one Bishop of Rome, ordained that the Festiuals of the Dedication of Churches
should be yearly celebrated in those places; Greg.
and another extended the Festival to eight days; at least at the first
dedication thereof, if not every year: that God might not only be put into
the possession of the place, but settled in it. God by Moses made the children
of Israel a Song, Deuteronomy. 31. 19
because, as he says, howsoever they did by the Law, they would never forget
that Song, and that Song should be his witness against them. Therefore would
God have us institute solemn memorialls of his great deliverances, that if
when those days come about, we do not glorify him, that might aggrauate our
condemnation. Every fifth of August, the Lord rises up, to hearken whether we
meet to glorify him, for his great deliverance of his Majesty, before the
blessed us with his presence in this Kingdom: and when he finds us zealous in
our thanks for that, he gives us farther blessings. Certainly he is up as
early every fifth of November, to hearken if we meet to glorify him for that
deliverance still; and if he should find our zeal less then heretofore, he
would wonder why. Gods principal, his radical Holy day, the Sabbath, had a
weekly return; his other Sabbaths, instituted by himself, and those which
were instituted by those paternes, that of Mordechai, that of the Maccabees,
and those of the Christian Church, They all return once a year. God would
keep his Courts once a year, and see whether we make our apparances as
heretofore; that if not, he may know it. Feasts in general, Feasts
instituted by the Church alone, Feasts in their yearly return and
observation, have their use, and particularly those Feasts of the Dedication of
Churches, which was properly and literally the Feast of this Text. It was the
Feast of Dedication.

As it diminishes not, preiudices not Gods Eternity, (...)
that we give him his Quando, certain times of Invocation, God is not the
less yesterday, Temple.
and to day, and the same for ever, because we meet here to day, and not
yesterday, so it diminishes not, preiudices not Gods Vbiquitie and
Omnipresence, that we give him his Vbi, certain places for Invocation. That's
not the less true, that the most High dwells not in Temples made with hands,
Acts 7. 48.
though God accept at our hands our dedication of certain places to his
service, and manifest his working more effectually, more energetically in those
places, then in any other. for when we pray, Our Father which art in Heaven,
Chrysostom.
It is not (says Saint Chrysostom) that we deny him to be here, where we
kneel when we say that Prayer, but it is that we acknowledge him to be there,
where he can grant, and accomplish our prayer. It is as Origin has very well
expressed it, Origin.
Vt in melioribus mundi requiramus Deum: That still we look for God in the
best places; look for him, as he hears our petitions, here, in the best
places of this world, in his House, in the Church; look for him as he graunts
our petition, on, in the best place of the next world, at the right hand, and
in the bosom of the Father. Deuteronomy. 30. 13
When Moses says that the word of God is not beyond Sea, he adds, It is not
so beyond Sea, as that thou must not have it without sending thither. When he
says there, it is not in heaven, he adds, not so in heaven, as that one must
go up, before he can have it. The word of God, is beyond Sea, the true word,
truly preached in many true Churches there, but yet we have it here, within
these Seas too; God is in Heaven, but yet he is here, within these walls too.
And therefore the impiety of the Manicheans exceeded all the Gentiles, who
concluded the God of the Old Testament to be an impotent, an imperfect God,
because he commanded Moses first to make him a Tabernacle, and then Solomon
to make him a Temple, as though he needed a House. God does not need a house,
but man does need, that God should have a House. And therefore the first
question, that Christ's first Disciples asked of him, was Magister, vbi habitas,
they would know his standing house, where he has promised to be always
within, and where at the ringing of the Bell, some body comes to answer you,
to take your errand, to offer your Prayers to God, to return his pleasure in
the preaching of his Word to you. The many and heavy Laws, with which sacred
and secular stories abound, against the profanation of places, appropriated to
Gods service, and that religious custom, that passed almost through all civil
Nations, that an oath, which was the bond between man, and man, had the
stronger Obligation, if that were taken in the Church, in the presence of God,
(for such was the practice of Rome toward her enemies, Tango ar as
inediosqueignes, to make their vows of hostility in the Church, and at time of
divine Service, (and such is their practice still, they seal their Treasons in
the Sacrament) such was Romes practice toward others, and such was the
practice of others toward Rome, (for so Anniball says, that his father
Amilcar swore him at the Altar, that he should never be reconciled to Rome,
(And such is your practice still, as often as you meet here, you renew your
band to God, that you will never be reconciled to the Superstitions of Rome)
all these, and all such as these, and such as these are infinite, heap up
testimonies, that even in Nature there is a disposition to apply, and
appropriate certain places to Gods service. And this impression in nature is
illustrated in the Law, as the time, so the place is distinguished, Ye shall
keep my Sabboths, Levi. 19. 30
there is the time, and you shall reverence my Sanctuary, there is the place.
But that they may be reverenced, that they may be Sanctuaries, they are to be
sanctified; and that's the Encaenia, the Dedication.

Even in those things which accrue unto God, Encaenia.
and become his, by another title, then as he is Lord of all, by Creation, that
is, by appropriation, by dedication to his use and Service, There is a Lay
Dedication, and an Ecclesiastical Dedication. I hope the distinction of
Laytie, and Clergy, the words, scandalize no man. Luther, and Calvin too might
have just cause to decline the words, as they did; when so much was
ouer-attributed to that Clergy which they intend, as that they were so Sors
Domini, the Lords portion, as that the world had no portion in them, and yet
they had the greatest portion of the world; and how little soever they had to
do with God, yet no State, no King might have any thing to do with them. But,
as long as we declare, that by the Layetie we intend the people glorifying God
in their secular callings, and by the Clergy, persons seposed by his
ordinance, for spiritual functions, The Layetie no farther remoou'd then the
Clergy, The Clergy no farther entitled then the Layetie, in the blood of
Christ Jesus, neither in the effusion of that blood upon the Cross, nor in the
participation of that blood in the Sacrament, and that an equal care in
Clergy, and Layetie, of doing the duties of their several callings, gives
them an equal interest in the joys, and glory of heaven, I hope no man is
scandalized with the names. The Lay Dedication then is, the voluntary
surrendering of this piece of ground thus built, to God. For we must say, as
Saint Peter said to Ananias, Acts 5. 4.
Whiles it remained, was that not your own? and now, when that is raised
(saving that there was Dedicatio Intentionalis, a purpose from the beginning to
appropriate it, to this holy use) might you not, till this hour, have made
this room your Hall, if you would? But this is your Dedication, that you have
cheerfully pursued your first holy purposes, and deliver now into the hands of
this servant of God, the Right Reverend Father the Bishop of this See, a place
to be presented to God for you, by him, not misbecomming the Majesty of the
great God, who is pleased to dwell thus amongst us. What was spent in Salomons
Temple is not told us. What was prepared, before it was begun, is such a sum,
as certainly, if all the Christian Kings that are, would send in all that they
have, at once, to any one service, all would not equal that sum. They gave
there, till they who had the ouerseeing thereof, complained of the abundance,
and proclaimed an abstinence. Yet there was one, who gave more then all they;
for Christ says the poor widow gave more then all the rest, because she gave
all she had. There is a way of giving more then she gave; and I, who by your
favors was no stranger to the beginning of this work, and an often refresher
of it to your memories, and a poor assistant in laying the first stone, the
material stone, as I am now, a poor assistant again in this laying of this
first formal Stone, the Word and Sacrament, and shall ever desire to be so in
the service of this place, I, I say, can truly testify, that you (speaking of
the whole Society together of the public stock, the public treasury, the
public revenue) you gave more then the widow, who gave all, for you gave more
then all. A stranger shall not entermeddle with our joy, as Solomon says:
strangers shall not know, how ill we were provided for such a work, when we
begun it, nor with what difficulties we have wrastled in the way; but strangers
shall know to Gods glory, that you have perfected a work of full three times as
much charge, as you proposed for it at beginning: so bountifully does God
bless, and prosper intentions to his glory, with enlarging your hearts within,
and opening the hearts of others, abroad. And this is your Dedication, and that
which without prejudice, and for distinction, we call a Lay Dedication, though
from religious hearts, and hands.

There is another Dedication; Ecclesiastica
that we have called Ecclesiastical, appointed by God, so as God speaks in the
ordinances, and in the practice of his Church. Haereditary Kings are begotten
and conceived the natural way; but that body which is so begotten of the blood
of Kings, is not a King, no nor a man, till there be a Soul infused by God.
Here is a House, a Child conceived (we may say borne) of Christian parents, of
persons religiously disposed to Gods glory; but yet, that was to receive
another influence, an inanimation, a quickening, by another Consecration.
Oportet denuo nasci, holds even in the children of Christian parents; when they
are borne, they must be borne again by Baptism: when this place is thus given
by you, for God, oportet denuo dari, it must be given again to God, by him,
who receives it of you. It must; there seems a necessity to be implied,
because even in Nature, there was a consecration of holy places; Jacob in his
journey, Genesis 28. 20.
before the Law, consecrated even that stone, which he set up, in intention to
build God a House there. In the time of the Law, Number. 7. 1.
this Feast of Dedication, was in practice; first in the Tabernacle; that and
all that appertained to it, was anointed, and sanctified: So was Salomons
Temple after; so was that which was reedified after their return from Babylon,
and so was this in the Text, after the Heathen had defiled and profaned the
Altar thereof, and a new one was erected by Judas Maccabeus. Thus in Nature,
thus in Law, and thus far thus in the Gospel too: that as sure as we are that
the people of God had material Churches in the Apostles first times, so sure
we are, that those places had a Sanctity in them. If that place of Saint Paul,
1 Cor. 11. 22
Despise ye the Church of God? be to be understood of the local, of the
material Church, and not of the Congregation, you see there is a rebuke for
the profanation of the place, and consequently a sanctity in the place. But
as soon as the Church came evidently by the favor of Princes, to have liberty
to make laws, and power to see them practiced, it was never pretermitted to
consecrate the places. Before that, we find an ordinance by Pope Hyginus (he
was within 150. after Christ, and the eighth Bishop of that See after Saint
Peter) even of particulars in the Consecrations. But after, Athanas.
Athanasius in his Apology to Constantius, makes that protestation for all
Christians, That they never meet in any Church, till it be consecrated: And
Constantine the Emperor least he should be at any time unprovided of such a
place, (as we read in the Ecclesiastical story) in all his wars, carried
about bout with him a Tabernacle which was consecrated: In Nature, in the Law,
in the Gospel, in Precept, in Practice, these Consecrations are established.

This they did. Vsus.
But to what use did they consecrate them? not to one use only; and therefore
it is a frivolous contention, whether Churches be for preaching, or for
praying. But if Consecration be a king of Christning of the Church, and that at
the Christning it have a name, we know what name God has appointed for his
House, Domus mea, Domus orationis vocabitur. My House shall be called the
House of Prayer. And how impudent and inexcusable a falsehood is that in
Bellarmine, That the Lutherans and Caluinistes do admit Churches for Sermons
and Sacraments, Sed reprehendunt quod fiant ad orandum, They dislike that they
should be for Prayer: when as Calvin himself, (who may seem to be more
subject to this reprehension then Luther) (for there is no such Liturgy in the
Caluinists Churches, as in the Lutheran) yet in that very place which
Bellarmine cites, says Conceptae preces in Ecclesia Deo gratae; and for
singing in Churches, (which in that place of Calvin cannot be only meant of
Psalms, for it was of that manner of singing, which being formerly in use in
the Eastern churches, S. Ambrose, in his time, brought into the Church of
Millan, and so it was deriud over the Western churches, which was the
modulation and singing of Versicles and Antiphons and the like) this singing,
says Calvin, was in use amongst the Apostles themselves, Et sanctissimum and
saluberimum est institutum. l. 3. 20. 32.
It was a most holy and most profitable Institution. Still consider
Consecration to be a Christning of the place; and though we find them often
called Templa propter Sacrificia, for our sacrifices of prayer, and of praise,
and of the merits of Christ, and often called Ecclesiae ad conciones, Churches,
in respect of congregations, for preaching, and often called Martyria, for
preserving with respect, and honor the bodies of Martyrs, and other Saints of
God, there buried, and often, often, by other names, Dominica, Basilica, and
the like, yet the name that God gave to his house, is not Concionatorium, nor
Sacramentarium, but Oratorium, the House of Prayer. And therefore without
prejudice to the other functions too, (for as there is a vae upon me, Si non
Euangelizauero, If I preach not my self, so may that vae be multiplied upon
any, who would draw that holy ordinance of God into a dis-estimatio^, or into a
slacknesse,) let us never intermit that duty, to present our selves to God in
these places, though in these places there be then, no other Service, but
Common prayer. For then does the House answer to that name, which God has
given it, if it be a house of Prayer.

Thus then were these places to receive a double Dedication; Modus.
a Dedication, which was a Donation from the Patron, a Dedication which was a
consecration from the Bishop, for to his person, and to that rank in the
Hierarchy of the Church, the most ancient Canons limited it; and to those
purposes, which we have spoken of; of which, Prayer is so far from being
none, as that there is none above it. A little should be said, (before we shut
up this part) of the manner, the form of Consecrations. In which, in the
Primitive Church, as soon as Consecrations came into free use, they were full
of Ceremonies. And many of those Ceremonies derived from the Jews: and not
unlawful, for that. The Ceremonies of the Jews, which had their foundation in
the prefiguration of Christ, and were types of him, were unlawful after Christ
was come; because the use of them, then, employed a denial or a doubt of his
being come. But those Ceremonies, which, though the Jews used them, had their
foundation in Nature, as bowing of the knee, lifting up the eyes, and hands,
and many, very many others, which either testified their devotion that did
them, or exalted their devotion that saw them done, are not therefore excluded
the Church, because they were in use amongst the Jews. That Pope whom we named
before, Hyginus, the eighth after Saint Peter, he instituted, Ne Basilica sine
Missa consecretur. That no Church be consecrated without a Mass. If this must
bind us, to a Mass of the present Roman Church, it were hard; and yet not
very hard truly; for they are easily had. But that word, Mass, is in Saint
Ambrose, in Saint Augustine in some very ancient Councels; and surely intends
nothing, to this purpose, but the Service, the Common Prayer of the Church,
then in use, there. And when the Bishop Panigarola says in his Sermon upon
Whitsunday, that the Holy Ghost found the blessed Virgin and the Apostles at
Mass, I presume he means no more, then that they were met at such public
Prayer, as at those times they might make. Sure Pope Clemens, and Pope Hyginus
mean the same thing, when one says Missa consecretur, and the other Diuinis
Precibus: One says, Let the Consecration be with a Mass, the other, with
Divine Service; the Liturgy, the Divine Service was then the Mass. In a word,
a constant form of Consecrations, we find none that goes through our
Ritualls: the Ceremonies were still more or less, as they were more or less
obnoxious, or might be subject to scandalize, or to be mis-interpreted. And
therefore I am not here either to direct, or so much as to remember, that
which appertains to the manner of these Consecrations; only in concurring in
that, which is the Soul of all, humble and hearty prayer, that God will hear
his Servants in this place, I shall not offend to say, that I am sure my zeal
is inferior to none. And more I say not of the first Part, The Holy place; and
but a little more, of the other; though at first it were proposed for an equal
part, The Holy Person, That at the Feast of the Dedication, Jesus walked in the
Temple in Salomons Porch.

In this second part, 2. Part.
we did not spread the words, not shed our considerations upon many
particulars: the first was, that even Jesus Jesus in Templo.
himself had recourse to this Holy place. In the new Jerusalem, in Heaven,
there is no Temple. Apo. 21. 22
I saw no Temple there says Saint John: for the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb are the Temple of it. In Heaven, where there is no danger of falling,
there is no need of assistance. Here the Temple is called Gnazar, 2. Paral. 4.
9
that is Auxilium: A Helper: the strongest that is, needs the help of the
Church: And it is called Sanctificium, by Saint Hierom, Psalm. 78. 69.
a place that is not only made holy by Consecration, but that makes others
holy by GOD in it. And therefore Christ himself, whose person and presence
might consecrate the Sanctum Sanctorum, would yet make his often repair to
this Holy place; not that he needed this subsidy of Local holiness in
himself, but that his example might bring others who did need it; and those
who did not; and, that even his own Preaching might have the benefit and the
blessing of Gods Ordinance in that place, he says of himself, Math. 26.
Quotidie apud vos sedebam docens in Templo, and Semper docui in Synagoga, and
in Templo; as in the Acts, the Angel that had delivered the Apostles out of
prison, sends them to Church, Acts 5.
Stantes in Templo loquimini plebi. The Apostles were sent to preach, but to
preach in the Temple, in the place appropriated and consecrated for that holy
use and employment.

He came to this place, Tempus.
and he came at those times, which no immediate command of God, but the Church
had instituted. Facta sunt Encaenia, says the Text; It was the Feast of the
Dedication. We know what Dedication this was; That of Solomon was much
greater; A Temple built where none was before; That of Esdras at the return
was much greater then this, An entire reedification of that demolished Temple,
where it was before. This was but a zealous restoring of an Altar in the
Temple: which having been profaned by the Gentiles, the Jews themselves
threw down, and erected a new, and dedicated that. Salomons Dedication is
called a Feast, 2 Chr. 5. 3.
a Holy day: by the very same name that the Feast of unleavened bread, and the
Feast of the Tabernacle is called so often in Scripture, which is Kag. The
Dedication of Ezra Ezra 6. 16.
is sufficiently declared to be a solemn Feast too. But neither of these
Feasts, though of far greater Dedications, were Anniuersarie; neither
commanded to be kept every year; and yet this, which was so much lesser then
the others, the Church had put under that Obligation, to be kept every year;
and Christ himself contemnes not, condemns not, disputes not the institution
of the Church. But as for matter of doctrine he sends even his own Disciples,
to them who sat in Moses Chair, so for matter of Ceremony, he brings even his
own person, to the celebrating, to the authorizing, to the countenancing of
the Institutions of the Church, and rests in that.

Now it was Winter, says the Text: Christ came etsi Hyems, Etsi Hyems
though it were Winter; so small an inconvenience kept him not off. Beloved, it
is not always colder upon Sunday, then upon Satterday; nor at any time colder in
the Chapel; then in Westminster Hall. A thrust keeps some off in Summer; and
cold in Winter: and there are more of both these in other places, where for
all that, they are more content to be. Remember that Peter was warming
himself, and he denied Christ. They who love a warm bed, let it be a warm
Study, let it be a warm profit, better then this place, they deny CHRIST in
his Institution. That therefore which CHRIST says, Mat. 24. 20.
Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, nor upon the Sabbath; we may
apply thus, Pray that upon the Sabbath (I told you at first, what were
Sabboths,) the Winter make you not fly, not abstain from this place. Put off
thy shoes, Exodus 35.
says God to Moses, for the place is holy ground. When Gods ordinance by his
Church call you to this holy place, put off those shoes, all those earthly
respects, of ease or profit, Christ came, Etsi Hyems.

But then, Quia Hyems, Quia Hyems
Because it was Winter, He did walk in Salomons Porch, which was covered, not
in Atrio, in that part of the Temple, which was open, and exposed to the
weather. We do not say, that infirm and weak men, may not favor themselves,
in a due care of their health, in these places. That he who is not able to
raise himself, must always stand at the Gospel, or bow the knee at the name
of Jesus, or stay some whole hours, altogether uncovered here, if that
increase infirmities of that kind. And yet Courts of Princes, are strange
Bethesdaes; how quickly they recover any man that is brought into that Poole?
How much a little change of air does? and how well they can stand, and stand
bare many hours, in the Privy Chamber, that would melt and flow out into
Rhumes, and Catarrs, in a long Gospel here? But, Citra Scandalum, a man may
favor himself in these places: but yet this excuses not the irreuerent manner
which has overtaken us in all these places; That any Master may think
himself to have the same liberty here, as in his own house, or that that
Servant, that never puts on his hat in his Masters presence all the week, on
Sunday, when he and his Master are in Gods presence, should have his hat on
perchance before his Masters. Christ shall make Master and Servant equal; but
not yet; not here; nor ever, equal to himself, how ever they become equal
to one another. Gods service is not a continual Martyrdom, that a man must
be here, and here in such a posture, and such a manner, though he dye for
it; but Gods House is no Ordinary neither; where any man may pretend to do
what he will, and every man may do, what any man does. Christ slept in a
storm; I dare not make that general; let all do so. Christ favored himself
in the Church; I dare not make that general neither: to make all places
equal, or all persons equal in any place.

It Is time to end. Saint Basil Basil.
himself, as acceptable as he was to his Auditory, in his second Sermon upon
the 14. Psalm, takes knowledge that he had preached an hour, and therefore
broke off: I see it is a Compass, that all Ages have thought sufficient. But
as we have contracted the consideration of great Temples, to this lesser
Chapel, so let us contract the Chapel to our selves: Et facta sint Encaenia
nostra, let this be the Feast of the Dedication of our selves to God. Christ
calls himself a Temple, John 2. 19.
Soluite templum hoc: Destroy this Temple. 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19.
And Saint Paul calls us so twice; Know ye not that ye are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost? Facta sint Encaenia nostra: Encaenia signifies Renouationem, a
renewing: and Saint Augustine Aug.
says that in his time, Si quis noua tunica indueretur, Encaeniare diceretur.
If any man put on a new garment, he called it by that name, Encaenia sua. Much
more is it so, if we renew in our selves the Image of God, and put off the
Old man, and put on the Lord Jesus Christ. This is truly Encaeniare, to
dedicate, to renew our selves: and so Nazian. Nazian.
in a Sermon, or Oration, upon the like occasion as this, calls, Conuersionem
nostram, Encaenia, our turning to God, in a true repentance, or renewing, our
dedication. Let me charge your memories, but with this note more, That when
God forbad David the building of an House, Because he was a man of blood, at
that time David had not embrued his hands in Vriahs blood; nor shed any blood,
but lawfully in just wars; yet even that made him incapable of this favor to
provide God a house. Some callings are in their nature more obnoxious, and more
exposed to sin, then others are: accompanied with more tentations; and so
retard us more in holy duties. And therefore as there are particular sins
that attend certain places, certain ages, certain complexions, and certain
vocations, let us watch our selves in all those, and remember that not only the
highest degrees of those sins, but any thing that conduces thereunto, prophanes
the Consecration, and Dedication of this Temple, our selves, to the service of
God; it annihilates our repentance, and frustrates our former reconciliations
to him. Almighty God work in you a perfect dedication of your selves at this
time; that so, receiving it from hands dedicated to God, he whose holy Office
this is, may present acceptably this House to God in your behalfes, and
establish an assurance to you, that God will be always present with you and
your Succession in this place.

Amen.

