TWO SERMONS PREACHED BEFORE KING CHARLES, Upon the xxvi verse of the first
Chapter of GENESIS.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. MDCXXXIIII.

Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.


NEver such a frame so soon set up, as this in this chapter: For, for the thing
it self, there is no other thing to compare it with; for it is all, it is the
whole world. And for the time, there was no other time to compare it with; for
this was the beginning of time, In the beginning God created heaven and earth.
That earth, which in some thousands of years men could not look over, nor
discern what form it had (for neither Lactantius, almost three hundred years
after Christ; nor S. Augustine, more then a hundred years after him, would
believe the earth to be round) That earth, which no man in his person is ever
said to have compassed till our age: That earth, which is too much for man yet
(for as yet a very great part of the earth is unpeopled) That earth, which, if
we will cast it all but into a Map, costs many months labor to grave it; nay,
if we will but cast a piece of an acre of it into a garden, costs many years
labor to fashion and furnish it; all that earth: And then that heaven, which
spreads so far, as that subtle men have, with some appearance of
probability, imagined, that in that heaven, in those manifold Spheres of the
Planets and the Stars, there are many earths, many worlds, as big as this
which we inhabit: That earth and that heaven, which spent God himself,
Almighty God, six days in finishing, Moses sets up in a few syllables, in one
line, In principio, In the beginning God created heaven and earth. If a Livie
or a Guicciardine, or such extensive and voluminous authors had had this story
in hand, God must have made another world, to have made them a library to hold
their books, of the making of this world. Into what wire would they have drawn
out this earth! Into what leaf-gold would they have beat out these heavens! It
may assist our conjecture herein, to consider, that amongst those men, who
proceed with a sober modesty and limitation in their writing, and make a
conscience not to clog the world with unnecessary books; yet the volumes which
are written by them, upon the beginning of Genesis, are scarce less then
infinite. God did no more but say, Let this and this be done; and Moses does no
more but say, that upon Gods saying it was done. God required not Nature to
help him to do it; Moses required not Reason to help him to believe: The holy
Ghost hovered upon the waters, and so God wrought; The holy Ghost hovered upon
Moses too, and so he wrote: And we believe these things to be so, by the same
Spirit in the mouth of Moses, by which they were made so in Gods hand: Only
(Beloved) remember, that a frame may be thrown down in much less time then it
was set up. A child, an ape can give fire to a cannon; and a vapor can shake
the earth: and when Christ said, Throw down this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it, they never stood upon the consideration of throwing it down;
they knew that might be soon done: but they wondered at the speedy raising of
it. Now, if all this earth were made in that minute, may not all come to the
general dissolution in this minute? Or may not thy acres, thy miles, thy
shires shrink into feet, and so few feet, as shall but make up thy grave? when
he who was a great lord must be but a cottager, and not so well; for a cottager
must have so many acres to his cottage: but in this case, a little piece of an
acre, five foot, is become the house it self, the house and the land; the grave
is all: lower then that, the grave is the land, and the tenement, and the
tenant too. He that lies in it, becomes the same earth that he lies in; they
all make but one earth, and but a little of it. But then raise thy self to a
higher hope again: God has made better land, the land of promise; a stronger
city, the new Jerusalem; and inhabitants for that everlasting city, us, whom
he made, not by saying, Let there be men; but by consultation, by deliberation;
God said, Let us make man, etc.

We shall pursue our great examples, Divisio.
God in doing, Moses in saying, and so make haste in applying the parts. But
first receive them: and since we have the whole world in contemplation,
consider in these words, the four quarters of the world, by application, by
fair and just accommodations of the words. First, in the first word that God
speaks here, Faciamus, Let Us, in the plural, (a denotation of diverse persons
in the Godhead) we consider our East, where we must begin, at the knowledge and
confession of the Trinity: for though in the way to heaven we have traveled
beyond the Gentiles, when we come to confess but one God (the Gentiles could
not do that) yet we are still among the Jews, if we think that one God to be
but one person. Zech. 6.12.
Christ's name is Oriens, the East; if we will be named by him, (called
Christians) we must look to this East, the confession of the Trinity: there is
then our East in the Faciamus, Let Us, Us make man: And then our West is in the
next word, Faciamus hominem: Though we be thus made; made by the council, made
by the concurrence, made by the hand of the whole Trinity: yet we are made but
men; and man but in the appellation in this Text; and man there is but Adam;
and Adam is but earth, but red earth, died red in blood, in blood, in soul, the
blood of our own souls. To that West we must all come, to the earth; The sun
knows his going down: Psalm. 104.19.
even the sun, for all his glory and height, has a going down, and he knows
it. The highest cannot divest mortality, nor the discomfort of mortality. Luc.
12.54.
When you see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway you say, There comes a
storm, says Christ: When out of the region of your West, (that is, your latter
days) there comes a cloud, a sickness; you feel a storm: even the best moral
constancy is shaken. But this cloud, and this storm, and this West there must
be; and that is our second consideration. But then the next word designs a
North, a strong and powerful North, to scatter and dissipate these clouds: Ad
imaginem and similitudinem; that we are made according to a pattern, to an
image, to a likeness, which God proposed to himself for the making of man.
This consideration, that God did not rest in that preexistent matter, out of
which he made all other creatures, and produced their forms out of their
matter, for the making of man; but took a form, a pattern, a model for that
work: This is the North-winde that is called upon to carry out the perfumes of
the garden, Cant. 4.16.
to spread the goodness of God abroad: this is that which is intended in Job;
Job. 37.22.
Fair weather comes out of the North. Our West, our declination is in this,
that we are but earth; our North, our dissipation of that darkness is in this,
that we are not all earth: though we be of that matter, we have on another
form, another image, another likeness. And then whose image and likeness it
is, is our Meridionall height, our Noon, our South-point, our highest
elevation; In imagine nostra, Let us make man in our image. Though our sun
set at noon, Amos 8.9.
as the prophet Amos speaks; though we die in our youth, or fall in our height;
yet even in that sunne-set we shall have a noon: for this image of God shall
never depart from our soul, no not when that soul departs from our body: And
that is our South, our Meridionall height and glory. And when we have thus seen
this East, in the Faciamus; that I am the workmanship and care of the whole
Trinity; and this West; in the Hominem; that for all this, my matter, my
substance is but earth; But then a North, a power of overcoming that law and
miserable state, In imagine, that though in my matter the earth, I must die;
yet in my form, in that image which I am made by, I cannot die: And after all,
a South, a knowledge that this image is not the image of angels themselves, to
whom we shall be like; but it is by the same life by which those angels
themselves were made, the image of God himself: when I have gone over this
East, and West, and North, and South here in this world, I should be sorry, as
Alexander was, if there were no more worlds. But there is another world, which
these considerations will discover and lead us to, in which our joy and our
glory shall be to see that God essentially, and face to face, after whose
image and likeness we were made before. But as that Pilot, which has
harbored his ship so far within land, as that he must have change of winds,
in all the points of the compass, to bring her out, cannot hope to bring her
out in one day: so being to transport you by occasion of these words, from this
world to the next, and in this world, through all the compass, all the four
quarters thereof; I cannot hope to make all this voyage to day. To day we shall
consider our longitude, our East and West; and our North and South at another
tide and another gale.

First then we look toward our East, I. Part. Oriens.
the fountain of light and life; There this world began: The creation was in
the East, and there our next world began too: there the gates of heaven opened
to us, and opened to us in the gates of death: for our heaven is the death of
our Savior, and there he lived, and died there, and there he looked into our
West, from the East, from his terrasse, from his pinnacle, from his exaltation
(as himself calls it) the Cross. The light which arises to us in this East,
the knowledge which we receive in this first word of our text, Faciamus, Let us
(where God, speaking of himself, speaks in the plural) is the manifestation of
the Trinity; The Trinity, which is the first letter in his Alphabet, that
ever thinks to read his name in the Book of life; the first note in his
Gammut, that ever thinks to sing his part in the Triumphant Church. Let him
have done as much as all the worthies, and suffer as much as all natures
martyrs, the penurious Philosophers; let him have known as much as they pretend
to know, Omne scibile, all that can be known; nay, and Inintelligibilia,
In-investigabilia (as Tertullian speaks) un-understandable things, unrevealed
decrees of God: let him have writ as much as Aristotle writ, or as is written
upon Aristotle (which is multiplication enough) yet he has not learned to
spell, that has not learned the Trinity: he has not learned to pronounce the
first word, that cannot bring three persons into one God. The subject of
natural Philosophers, are the four elements, which God made: the subject of
supernatural Philosophy, Divinity, are the three elements which God is; and
(if we may so speak) which make God, that is, constitute God, notify God to
us, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. The natural man, that hearkens to his own
heart, and the law written there, may produce actions that are good; good in
the nature, and matter, and substance of the work: he may relieve the poor, he
may defend the oppressed; but yet he is but as an open field: and though he be
not absolutely barren, he bears but grass. The godly man, he that has taken
in the knowledge of a great and powerful God, and enclosed and hedged in
himself with the fear of God, may produce actions better then the mere nature
of man, because he referres his actions to the glory of an imagined God: but
yet this man, though he be more fruitful then the former, more then a grassie
field, is but a ploughed field, and bears but corn, and corn (God knows) choked
with weeds. But the man that has taken hold of God, by those handles, by which
God has delivered and manifested himself, in the notions of Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; he is no field, but a garden, a garden of Gods planting, paradise,
in which grow all things good to eat, and good to see (spiritual refection,
and spiritual recreation too) and all things good to cure: he has his being,
and his diet, and his physic there, in the knowledge of the Trinity: his
being, in the mercy of the Father; his physic, in the merits of his Son;
his dier, his daily bread, in the daily visitations of the holy Ghost. God is
not pleased, not satisfied with our bare knowledge that there is a God; for, it
is impossible to please God without faith: Hebr. 11.6.
and there is no such exercise of faith in the knowledge of a God, but that
reason and nature will bring a man to it. When we profess God in the Creed, by
way of belief, Credo in Deum, I believe in God; in the same article we profess
him to be a Father too; I believe in God the Father Almighty: and that notion,
the Father, necessarily implies a second person, a Son. And then we profess
him to be maker of heaven and earth: and in the creation the holy Ghost, the
Spirit of God, is expressly named: so that we do but exercise reason and
nature in directing our selves upon God: we exercise not Faith (and without
faith it is impossible to please God) till we come to that which is above
nature, till we apprehend a Trinity: we know God, we believe in the Trinity.
The Gentiles multiplied gods; there were almost as many gods as men that
believed in them; and I am got out of that throng, and out of that noise, when
I am come into the knowledge of one God: but I am got above stairs, got into
the bedchamber, when I am come to see the Trinity, and to apprehend not
only, that I am in the care of a great and powerful God, but that there is a
Father that made me, a Son that redeemed me, a holy Ghost that applies this
good purpose of the Father and Son upon me, to me. The root of all is God.
But it is not the way to receive fruits, to dig to the root, but to reach to
the boughs. I reach for my creation, to the Father; for my redemption, to the
Son; for my sanctification, to the holy Ghost: and so I make the knowledge of
God a tree of life unto me, and not otherwise. Truly it is a sad contemplation
to see Christians scratch, and wound, and tear one another with the
ignominious invectives and uncharitable names of Heretic and Schismatic,
about ceremonial and problematicall, and indeed but critical verbal
controversies; and in the mean time, the foundation of all, the Trinity,
undermined by those numerous, those multitudinous ant-hills of Socinians, that
overflow some parts of the Christian world, and multiply every where. And
therefore the adversaries of the Reformation were wise in their generation,
when, to supplant the credit of both those great assistants of the Reformation,
Luther and Calvin, they impute to Calvin fundamental error in the divinity
of the second person of the Trinity, the Son; And they impute to Luther a
detestation of the word Trinity, and an expunction thereof, in all places of
the Liturgy, where the Church had received that word: They knew well, if that
slander could prevail against those persons, nothing that they could say, could
prevail upon any good Christians. But though in our Doctrine we keep up the
Trinity aright; yet God knows, in our Practice we do not: I hope it cannot be
said of any of us, that he believes not the Trinity: but who amongst us thinks
of the Trinity, considers of the Trinity? Father and Son do naturally imply
and induce one another, and therefore they fall oftener into our consideration;
but for the holy Ghost, who feels him, when he feels him? who takes knowledge
of his working, when he works? Indeed our Fathers provided not well enough for
the worship of the whole Trinity, nor of the holy Ghost in particular, in the
endowments of the Church, and consecrations of the Churches, and possessions in
their names: what a spiritual dominion in the Prayers and worship of the
people, what a temporal dominion in the possessions of the world, had the
Virgin Marie, Queen of heaven, and Queen of earth too! She was made
joynt-purchaser of the Church with the Son, and had as much of the worship
thereof as he, though she paid her Fine in milk, and he in blood: And, till a
new sect came in her Sons name, and in his name, the name of Jesus, took the
Regencie so far out of that Queen-mothers hands, and sued out her sons
liverie so far, as that, though her name be used, the Virgin Marie is but a
Feofee in trust for them; all was hers. And if God oppose not these new
usurpers of the world, posterity will soon see S. Ignatius worth all the
Trinity in possessions and endowments; and that sumptuous and splendid
foundation of his first Temple at Rome, may well create a conjecture and
suspicion. Travel no farther; Survey but this City, and, of their not one
hundred Churches, the Virgin Marie has a dozen: The Trinity has but one;
Christ has but one; the holy Ghost has none. But not to go into the City,
nor out of our selves, which of us does truly and considerately ascribe the
comforts that he receives in dangers or in distresses, to that God of all
comfort, the Comforter, the holy Ghost? We know who procured us our
presentation, and our dispensation: you know who procured you your offices, and
your honors: Shall I ever forget who gave me my comfort in sickness? who gave
me my comfort in the troubles, and perplexities, and diffidencies of my
conscience? The holy Ghost, the holy Ghost brought you hither; The holy Ghost
opens your ears and your hearts here. Till in all your distresses you say,
Veni Creator Spiritus, Come holy Ghost; and that you feel a comfort in his
coming: you can never say, Veni Domine Jesu, Come Lord Jesus, come to
judgment. Never to consider the day of judgment, is a fearful thing; but to
consider the day of judgment without the holy Ghost, is a thousand times more
fearful.

This seal then, this impression, this notion of the Trinity, being set upon
us in this first plural word of our Text, Faciamus, Let us (for Father, Son,
and holy Ghost made man) and this seal being reimprinted upon us in our second
Creation, or Regeneration, in Baptism, (man is baptized in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost) this notion of the Trinity,
being our distinctive character from Jew and Gentile; this being our
specificall form; why does not this our form, this soul of our Religion
denominate us? why are we not called Trinitarians, a name that would embrace
the profession of all the persons; but only Christians, which limits and
determines us upon one? The first Christians, amongst whose manifold
persecutions, scorn and contempt was not the least, in contempt and scorn were
called Nazaraei, Nazarites, in the mouth of the vulgar; and Galilaei,
Galileans, in the mouth of Julian; and Judaei, Jews, in the mouth of Nero, when
he imputed the burning of Rome (his own art) to them; and Christiani,
Christians, so that (as Tertullian says) they could accuse Christians of
nothing, but the name of Christians: and yet they could not call them by their
right name of Christians, which was gentle, quiet, easy, patient men, made to
be trodden upon; but they gave them diverse names in scorn, yet never called them
Trinitarians. Christians themselves amongst themselves were called by diverse
names in the Primitive Church, for distinction; Fideles, the Faithful; and
Fratres, the Brethren; and Discipuli, Disciples; and after, by common custom
at Antioch, Christians: and after that (they say, by a council which the
Apostles held at the same City, at Antioch) there passed an express Canon of
the Church, that they should be called so, Christians: And before they had this
name at Antioch, first by common usage, after by a determinate Canon, to be
called Christians, from Christ; at Alexandria, they were called (most likely
from the name of Jesus) Jesseans. And so Philo Judaeus, in that book which he
writes de Jessaeis, intends by his Jesseans, Christians. And in diverse parts of
the world, into which Christians travel now, they find some elements, some
fragments, some relics of the Christian religion, in the practice of some
religious men, whom those Countries call Jesseans, doubtlesly derived and
continued from the name of Jesus. So that the Christians took many names to
themselves for distinction (Brethren, Disciples, Faithful) and they had many
names put upon them in scorn (Nazarites, Galileans, Jews, Christians) and yet
they were never by custom amongst themselves, never by commandment from the
Church, never in contempt from others, called Trinitarians, the profession of
the Trinity being their specific form, and distinctive character. Why so?
Beloved, the name of Christ involved all: not only because it is a name that
has a dignity in it, more then the rest (for Christ is an anointed person, a
King, a Messiah; and so the profession of that name conferres an unction, a
regal and a holy unction upon us, for we are thereby a royal priesthood) but
because in the profession of Christ, the whole Trinity is professed. How often
does the Son say that the Father sent him! And how often that the Father
will, and that he will send the holy Ghost! John 17.3.
This is life eternal (says he) to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent; and sent with all power in heaven and in earth.
This must be professed, Father and Son; and then no man can profess this, no
man can call Jesus the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: So that as in the
persecutions in the Primitive Church, the Martyrs which were hurried to
tumultuary executions, and could not be heard for noise, in excusing themselves
of treason, and sedition, and crimes imputed to them, to make their cause
odious, did use in the sight of the people (who might see a gesture, though
they could not hear a protestation) to sign themselves with the sign of the
Cross, to let them know for what profession they died; so that the sign of
the Cross, in that use thereof, in that time, was an Abridgement and a
Catechism of the whole Christian religion: So is the professing of the name of
Christ, the professing of the whole Trinity. As he that confesses one God, is
got beyond the mere natural man; And he that confesses a Son of God, beyond
him: so is neither got to the full truth, till he confess the holy Ghost too.
The fool says in his heart, There is no God: The fool, says David; the
emphaticall fool, in the highest degree of folly: But though he get beyond that
folly, he is a fool still, if he say, There is no Christ; for Christ is the
wisdom of the Father: And a fool still, if he deny the holy Ghost. Etiam
Christiani nomen superficies est, is excellently said by Tertullian; The name
and profession of a Christian, is but a superficial outside, sprinkled upon my
face in Baptism, or upon my outward profession in actions, if I have not in my
heart a sense of the holy Ghost, that applies the mercies of the Father, and
the merits of the Son to my soul. As S. Paul said, Whilst you are without
Christ, you are without God; It is an Atheism (with S. Paul) to be no
Christian: So whilst you are without the holy Ghost, you are without Christ.
It is Antichristian to deny, or not to confess the holy Ghost. For as Christ
is the manifestation of the Father, so the holy Ghost is the application of the
Son. Therein are we Christians, that in the profession of that name of
Christ, we profess all the three Persons: In Christ is the whole Trinity;
because, as the Father sent him, so sent he the holy Ghost: And that is our
specific form; that is our distinctive character from Jew and Gentile, the
Trinity.

But then is this specific form, this distinctive character, the notion of the
Trinity, conveyed to us, exhibited, imprinted upon us in our creation in this
word, this plural word, in the mouth of our own God, Faciamus, Let Us, Us. It
is here, and here first. This is an intimation, and the first intimation of the
Trinity from the mouth of God, in all the Bible. It is true, that though the
same faith, which is necessary to salvation now, were always necessary, and so
in the old Testament they were bound to believe in Christ, as well as in the
new, and consequently in the whole Trinity; yet not so explicitly, nor so
particularly as now: now Christ, calling upon God, in the name of the Father,
says, I have manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world. John 17.6.
They were men appropriated to God, men exempt out of the world: yet they had
not a clear manifestation of Father and Son, the doctrine of the Trinity,
till Christ manifested it to them. I have manifested thy Name, thy name of
Father and Son. And therefore the Jewish Rabbis say, that the Septuagint,
the first Translatours of the Bible, did disguise some places of the
Scriptures, in their translation, lest Ptolomey (for whom they translated it)
should be scandalized with those places: And that this text was one of those
places, which, (say they) though it be otherwise in the copies of the
Scriptures which we have now, they translated Faciam, and not Faciamus: that
God said here, I will make, in the singular, and not, Let us make man, in the
plural; lest that plural word might have misled King Ptolomey to think that
the Jews had a plural religion, and worshipped diverse gods. So good an
evidence do they confess this text to be, for some kind of plurality in the
Godhead.

Here then God notified the Trinity; and here first. For though we accept an
intimation of the Trinity, in the first line of the Bible, where Moses joined
a plural name, Elohim, with a singular verb, Bara; and so in construction it
is Creavit Dii, Gods created heaven and earth: yet besides that, that is rather
a mysterious collection, then an evident conclusion of a plurality of persons:
though we read that in that first verse, before this in the 26; yet Moses writ
that, which is in the beginning of this chapter, more then 2000. years after
God spoke this that is in our text: so long was Gods plural before Moses his
plural; Gods Faciamus before Moses Bara Elohim. So that in this text begins
our Catechism: here we have (and here first) the saving knowledge of the
Trinity. For, when God spoke here, to whom could God speak, but to God? Non
cum rebus creandis, non cum re nihili, says Athanasius, speaking of Gods first
speaking, when he said of the first creature, Let there be light. God spoke not
then to future things, that were not. When God spoke first, there was no
creature at all to speak to: when God spoke of the making of man, there were no
creatures. But were there any creatures able to create, or able to assist him
in the creation of man? who? Angels? some had thought so in S. Basils time; and
to them S. Basil says, Suntne illi? God says, Let us make man to our image;
and could he say so to Angels? Are Angels and God all one? or is that that is
like an Angel, therefore like God? It was sua ratio, suum verbum, sua
sapientia, says that Father: God spoke to his own word and wisdom; to his own
purpose and goodness: And the Son is the word and wisdom of God; and the
holy Ghost is the goodness and the purpose of God, that is, the
administration, the dispensation of his Church. It is true, that when God
speaks this over again, in the Church (as he does every day, now this minute)
then God speaks to his Angels, to the Angels of the Church, to his Ministers:
he says, Faciamus, Let Us, Us both together, you and we, make a man: join mine
ordinance (your preaching) with my Spirit (says God to us) and so make man:
Preach the oppressor, and preach the wanton, and preach the calumniatour, into
an other nature; make that ravening wolf, a man; that licentious goat, a man;
that insinuating serpent, a man by thy preaching. To day if you will hear his
voice, hear us; for here he calls upon us to join with him for the making of
man. But for his first Faciamus, which is in our text, it is excellently said,
Dictum in senatu, Rupertus.
and soliloquio: It was spoken in a senate, and yet in solitariness; spoken in
private, and yet publicly spoken; spoken where there were diverse, and yet but
one, one God, and three persons.

If there were no more intended in this plural expression, Us, but (as some
have conceived) that God spoke here in the person of a Prince and Sovereign
Lord; and therefore spoke, as Princes do, in the plural, We command, and we
forbid: yet S. Gregory's caution would justly fall upon it, Reverenter
pensandum est, It requires reverent consideration, if it be but so: for God
speaks so, like a King, in the plural, but seldom, but five times (in my
account) in all the scriptures; and in all five, in cases of important
consequence. In this text first, where God creates man, whom he constitutes his
Viceroy in the world; here he speaks in his Royal plural: And then in the
next Chapter, where he exempts man's term in this vice-regencie to the end of
the world, in propounding man means of succession; Faciamus, Let us make him a
helper: there he speaks in his Royal plural. And also in the third Chapter,
in declaring the heinousness of man's fault, and arraigning him, and all us in
him, God says, Sicut unus ex nobis, Man is become as one of us, not content to
be our Viceroy, but our selves: there is his Royal plural too: And again, in
that declaration of his justice, in that confusion of the builders of Babylon,
Descendamus, Confundamus, Let us do it. And then lastly, in that great work of
mingling mercy with justice, which (if we may so speak) is Gods masterpiece,
when he says, Quis ex nobis? Who will go for us, and publish this? In these
places, and these only (and not all these neither, if we take it exactly
according to the original; for in the second, the making of Eve, though the
vulgar have it in the plural, it is indeed but singular in the Hebrew) God
speaks as a King, in his Royal plural still. And when it is but so,
Reverenter pensandum est, says that Father, It behooves us to hearken
reverently to him, for kings are images of God; such images of God, as have
ears, and can hear; and hands, and can strike. But I would ask no more
premeditation at your hands, when you come to speak to God in this place, then
if you sued to speak with the King: to speak with no more fear of God here,
then if you went to the King under the conscience of a guiltiness toward him,
and a knowledge that he knew it. And that is your case here; sinners, and even
manifest sinners: for even midnight is noon in the sight of God; and when your
candles are put out, his sun shines still. Nec quid absconditum a calore ejus
(says David) There is nothing hid from the heat thereof: Psalm. 19.6.
not only no sin hid from the light thereof, from the sight of God; but not
from the heat thereof, not from the wrath and indignation of God. If God speak
plurally, only in the majesty of a sovereign Prince, still Reverenter
pensandum, that calls for reverence. What reverence? There are national
differences in outward reverence and worships: some worship princes, and
parents, and masters, in one; some in another fashion: children kneel to ask
blessing of parents, in England; but where else? servants attend not with the
same reverence upon masters in other nations, as with us: Accesses to their
princes, are not with the same difficulty, nor the same solemnity in France,
as in Turkey. But this rule goes through all nations, that in that disposition,
and posture, and action of the body, which in that place is esteemed most
humble and reverent, God is to be worshipped. Do so then here. God is your
Father; ask blessing upon your knees; pray in that posture: God is your King;
worship him with that worship which is highest in our use and estimation. We
have no Grandes, that stand covered to the King: where there are such, though
they stand covered in the Kings presence, they do not speak to him for matters
of grace, they do not sue to him: so, ancient Canons make difference of persons
in the presence of God: where and how this and this shall dispose of themselves
in the Church of God, dignity, and age, and infirmity will induce
differences. But for prayer, there is no difference: one humiliation is
required of all: As when the King comes in here, howsoever they sat diversely
before, all return to one manner of expressing their acknowledgement of his
presence: so at the Oremus, Let us pray, Let us all fall down, and worship, and
kneel before the Lord our maker.

So he speaks in our Text: not only as the Lord our King, intimating his
providence and administration; but as the Lord our maker; and then a maker so,
as that he made us in a Council; Faciamus, Let us: and that he speaks as in
council, is an other argument for reverence. For what trust or freedom soever
I have by his favor with any Counselor of state; yet I should surely use
another manner of consideration to this plurality in God, to this meeting in
Council, to this intimation of a Trinity, then to those other actions, in
which God is presented to us singly, as one God; for so he is presented to the
natural man as well as to us. And here enters the necessity of this
knowledge, Oportet denuo nasci; without a second birth, no salvation: And so no
second birth without Baptism; no Baptism, but in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. It was the entertainment of God himself, his delight,
his contemplation, for those infinite millions of generations, when he was
without a world, without creatures, to joy in one another, in the Trinity, as
Gregory Nazianzene, and a Poet as well as a Father, as most of the Fathers
were, expresses it: -- Ille suae splendorem cernere formae
Gaudebat --


It was the Fathers delight to look upon himself in the Son, -- Numenque suum
triplicique parique
Luce nitens --
And to see the whole Godhead, in a threefold and equal glory. It was Gods
own delight, and it must be the delight of every Christian, upon particular
occasions to carry his thoughts upon the several persons of the Trinity. If I
have a bar of iron, that bar in that form will not nail a door: If a sow
of lead, that lead in that form will not stop a leak: If a wedge of gold, that
wedge will not buy my bread. The general notion of a mighty God, may less fit
my particular purposes: But I coin my gold into current money, when I apprehend
God in the several notions of the Trinity; That, if I have been a prodigal
son, I have a Father in heaven, and can go to him, and say, Father, I have
sinned, and be received by him; That, if I be a decayed father, and need the
sustentation of my own children, there is a Son in heaven, that will do more
for me then my own children (of what good means or good nature soever they be)
can or will do; If I be dejected in spirit, there is a holy Spirit in heaven,
which shall bear witness to my spirit, that I am a child of God: And if the
ghosts of those sinners, whom I made sinners, haunt me after their deaths, in
returning to my memory, and reproaching my conscience with the heavy
judgments that I have brought upon them; If after the death of my own sin,
when my appetite is dead to some particular sin, the memory and sinful
delight of those passed sins, the ghosts of those sins haunt me again: yet
there is a holy Ghost in heaven, that shall exorcise these, and shall
overshadow me. The God of the whole world is God alone, in the general notion,
as he is so, God; but he is my God most especially, and most appliably, as he
is received by me in the several notions of Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

This is our East; II. Part. Occidens.
here we see God, God in all the persons, consulting, concurring to the making
of us. But then my West presents it self; that is an occasion to humble me, in
the next word: he makes but man; a man, that is, but Adam, but Earth. I
remember 4. names, by which man is often called in the scriptures: and of these
four, three do absolutely carry misery in their significations; three to one
against any man, that he is miserable: One name of man is Ish; and that they
derive a sonitu; Man is but a voice, but a sound, but a noise: he begins the
noise himself, when he comes crying into the world; and when he goes out,
perchance friends celebrate, perchance enemies calumniate him, with a diverse
voice, a diverse noise. A melancholic man is but a groaning; a sportfull man,
but a song; an active man, but a trumpet; a mighty man, but a thunderclap:
every man but Ish, but a sound, but a noise. An other name is Enosh. Enosh, is
mere calamity, misery, depression. It is indeed most properly oblivion; And
so the word is most elegantly used by David, Quid est homo? where the name of
man is Enosh: And so that which we translate, What is man, that thou art
mindful of him? is indeed, What is forgetfulness, that thou should
remember it; that thou should think of that man, whom all the world has
forgotten? first man is but a voice, but a sound: but because fame and honor
may come within that name of a sound, of a voice; therefore he is overtaken
with another damp, man is but oblivion: his fame, his name shall be forgotten.
One name man has, that has some taste of greatness and power in it, Gheber;
and yet, I that am that man (says the Prophet, for there that name of man
Gheber is used) I am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of Gods
wrath. Man Ish is so miserable, Lam. 3.1.
as that he afflicts himself, cries, and whines out his own time; and man
Enosh, so miserable, as that others afflict him, and bury him in ignominious
oblivion: and man, that is, Gheber, the greatest and powerfullest of men, is
yet but that man, that may possibly, that may justly see affliction by the rod
of Gods wrath. And from Gheber, he made Adam, which is the fourth name of man,
indeed the first name of man, the name in this text, and the name to which
every man must be called, and refer himself, and call himself by; earth, and
red earth.

Now God did not say of man, as of other creatures, Let us, or let the earth
bring forth herbs, and fruits, and trees, as upon the third day; Now let the
earth bring forth cattle and worms, as upon the sixth day, the same day that
he made man: Non imperiali verbo, sed familiari manu, says Tertullian; God
calls not man out with an imperious command, but he leads him out with a
familiar, with his own hand. And it is not, Fiat homo, but, Faciamus; not, Let
there be, but, Let us make man. Man is but an earthen vessel. It is true: but
when we are upon that consideration, God is the potter: if God will be that, I
am well content to be this: let me be any thing, so that that I am be from my
God. I am as well content to be a sheep as a lion, so God will be my shepherd;
and the Lord is my shepherd: to be a cottage, as a castle; the house, as a
city, so God will be the builder: and the Lord builds, and watches the city,
the house; this house, this city, me: to be rye, as wheat, so God will be the
husbandman: and the Lord plants me, and waters, and weeds, and gives the
increase: and to be clothed in leather, as well as in silk, so God will be the
merchant: and he clothed me in Adam, and assures me of clothing, in clothing
the lilies of the field; and is fitting the robe of Christ's righteousness to
me now this minute: Adam is as good to me, as Gheber; a clod of earth, as a
hill of earth, so God be the potter.

God made man of earth, not of air, not of fire. Man has many offices, that
appertain to this world, and whilst he is here, must not withdraw himself from
those offices of mutual society, upon pretense of zeal, or better serving God
in a retired life. A ship will no more come to the harbor without ballast,
then without sails: A man will no more get to heaven without discharging his
duties to other men, then without doing them to God himself: Man lives not by
bread only, says Christ; Luke 4.4.
but yet he lives by bread too: every man must do the duties, every man must
bear the encumbrances of some calling.

Pulvis es, Thou art earth: he whom thou treadest upon, is no less; and he
that treads upon thee, is no more. Positively, it is a low thing to be but
earth: and yet the low earth, is the quiet center: there may be rest,
acquiescence, content in the lowest condition: But comparatively, earth is as
high as the highest. Challenge him that magnifies himself above thee, to meet
thee in Adam; there bid him, if he will have more nobility, more greatness
then thou, take more original sin then thou have. If God have submitted thee
to as much sin, and penalty of sin, as him; he has afforded thee as much, and
as noble earth as him. And if he will not try it in the root, in your
equality in Adam; yet, in another test, another furnace, in the grave, he
must: there all dusts are equal. Except an epitaph tell me who lies there, I
cannot tell by the dust; nor by the epitaph know, which is the dust it speaks
of, if another have been laid there before, or after, in the same grave: nor
can any epitaph be confident in saying, Here lies; but, Here was laid: for so
various, so vicissitudinarie is all this world, as that even the dust of the
grave has revolutions. As the motions of an upper sphere imprint a motion in a
lower sphere, other then naturally it would have; so the changes of the life
work after death. And as envy supplants and removes us alive; a shovell
removes us, and throws us out of our grave, after death. No limbeck, no
weights can tell you, This is dust royal, this plebeian dust: no commission,
no inquisition can say, This is catholic, this is heretical dust. All lie
alike, and all shall rise alike: alike, that is, at once, and upon one command.
The saint cannot accelerate, the reprobate cannot retard the resurrection. And
all that rise to the right hand, shall be equally kings; and all at the left,
equally what? the worst name we can call them by, or affect them with, is
devil: and then they shall have bodies to be tormented in, which devils have
not. Miserable, unexpressible, unimaginable, macerable condition, where the
sufferer would be glad to be but a devil; where it were some happiness, and
some kind of life, to be able to die; and a great preferment, to be nothing!

He made us all of earth, and all of red earth: our earth was red, even when it
was in Gods hands: a redness that amounts to a shamefastness, to a blushing
at our infirmities, is imprinted in us by Gods hands: for this redness is but
a conscience, a guiltiness of needing a continual supply, and succession of
more and more grace: and we are all red, red so, even from the beginning, and
in our best state. Adam had, the angels had thus much of this infirmity, that
though they had a great measure of grace, they needed more. The prodigal
child grew poor enough after he had received his portion: and he may be
wicked enough, that trusts upon former or present grace, and seeks not more.
This redness, a blushing, that is, an acknowledgement that we could not
subsist with any measure of faith, except we pray for more faith; nor of grace,
except we seek more grace, we have from the hand of God: and an other redness
from his hand too, the blood of his Son; for that blood was effused by
Christ, in the vail of this ransom for us all, and accepted by God in the vail
thereof for us all: and this redness is in the nature thereof as extensive, as
the redness derived from Adam is: both reach to all; so we were red earth in
the hands of God, as redness denotes our general infirmities: and as redness
denotes the blood of his Son, our Savior, all have both. But that redness
which we have contracted from blood shed by our selves, the blood of our own
souls, by sin, was not upon us when we were in the hands of God: that
redness is not his tincture, not his complexion: no decree of his is writ in
any such red ink. Our sins are our own, and our destruction is from our selves.
We are not as accessaries, and God as principal in this soul-murder: God
forbid. We are not as executioners of Gods sentence, and God the malefactor in
this souldamnation: God forbid. Cain came not red in his brothers blood out of
Gods hands; nor David red with Vriahs blood; nor Achitophel with his own; nor
Judas with Christ's, or his own. That that Pilate did illusorily, God can do
truly, wash his hands from the blood of any of those men. It were a weak plea
to say, I killed not that man; but it is true, I commanded one who was under my
command, to kill him: It is rather a prevarication, then a justification of
God, to say, God is not the author of sin in any man: but is is true, God
makes that man's sin, that sin. God is innocence: and the beams that flow
from him, are of the same nature and color. Christ, when he appeared in
heaven, was not red, but white; his hand, his head, and hairs too: he, and that
that grows from him; he, and we, as we come from his hands, are white too: his
angels, that provoke us to the imitation of that pattern, are so in white; two
men, Acts 1.10.
two angels stood by the apostles in white apparel: the imitation is laid upon
us, by precept too: Eccles 9.8.
At all times let thy garments be white; those actions, in which thou appearest
to the world, innocent. It is true that Christ is both; My beloved is white and
ruddy, Cant. 5.10.
says the Spouse: but the white was his own; his redness is from us. That
which Zipporah said to her husband Moses in anger, the Church may say to Christ
in thankfulness, Vere sponsus sanguinum, Thou art truly a bloody husband to
me; Damim, sanguinum; of bloods, bloods in the plural: for all our bloods are
upon him. This was a mercy to the militant Church, that even the triumphant
Church wondered at it. They knew not Christ, when he came up into heaven in red;
Who is this that comes in red garments? Isa. 63.1.
wherefore is thy apparel red, like him that treads in the wine press? They
knew he went down in white, in entire innocence; and they wondered to see him
return in red: but he satisfies them; Calcavi, You think I have trodden the
wine press, and you mistake it not: I have trodden the wine press: and Calcavi
solus, and that alone: All the redness, all the blood of the whole world is
upon me: and as he adds, Non vir de gentibus; Of all people there was none
with me; with me so, as to have any part in the merit; so, of all people there
was none with me: without me so, as to be excluded by me, without their own
fault, from the benefit of the merit. This redness he carried up to heaven;
Col. 1.21.
for by the blood of his cross came peace, both to the things in heaven, and
the things on earth. For the peccabilitie, that possibility of sinning, which
is in the nature of the angels of heaven, would break out into sin, but for
that confirmation, which those angels have received in the blood of Christ.
This redness he carried to heaven; and this redness he has left upon earth,
that all we, miserable clods of earth, might be tempered with his blood: that
in his blood, exhibited in his holy and blessed Sacrament, our long robes might
be made white in the blood of the Lamb: that, though our sins be robes,
habits of long continuance in sin; yet, through that redness which our
sins have cast upon him, we might come to participate of that whiteness,
that righteousness, which is his own: We; that is, all we: for, as to take us
in, who are of low condition, and obscure station, a cloud is made white, by
his sitting upon it; He sat upon a white cloud: so, to let the highest see,
that they have no whiteness, but from him, he makes the throne white by
sitting upon it: He sat upon a great white throne. It had been great, if it had
not been white: white is the color of dilatatio^; Goodness enlarges the
throne. It had not been white, if he had not sat upon it. That goodness only
which consists in glorifying God, and God in Christ, and Christ in the
sincerity of the truth, is true whiteness. God has no redness in himself,
no anger toward us, till he considers us as sinners. God casts no redness
upon us, inflicts no necessity, no constraint of sinning upon us: we have died
our selves in sins as red as scarlet, we have drowned our selves in such a
red sea. But as a garment that was washed in the Red sea, Psalm. 106.22.
would come out white, ( so wonderful works has God done at the Red sea,
says David) so does his whiteness work through our red, and makes this Adam,
this red earth, Calculum candidum, that white stone, that receives a new name,
not Ish, not Enosh, not Gheber; no name that tastes of misery, nor of vanity;
but that name renewed and manifested, which was imprinted upon us in our
elections, the sons of God; the irremoveable, the undisinheritable sons of
God.

Be pleased to receive this note at parting, that there is Macula alba, a spot,
and yet white, as well as a red spot: a whiteness, that is an indication of a
leprosy, as well as a redness. It is whole-Pelagianisme, to think nature
alone sufficient; half-Pelagianisme, to think grace once received to be
sufficient; super-Pelagianisme, to think our actions can bring God in debt to
us by merit, and supererogation, and Catharisme, imaginary purity, in
canonizing our selves as present saints, and condemning all that differ from
us, as reprobates. All these are white spots, and have the color of goodness;
but are indications of leprosy. So is that, that God threatens, Joel 1.7.
Decorticatio ficus and albi rami; that the fig tree shall be barked, and the
boughs thereof left white. To be left white without bark, was an indication of
a speedy withering. Ostensa candescunt, and arescunt, says S. Gregory of that
place: the bough that lies open without bark, looks white, but perishes. The
good works that are done openly to please men, have their reward (says Christ)
that is, shall never have reward. To pretend to do good, and not mean it; to do
things good in themselves, but not to good ends; to go toward good ends, but
not by good ways; to make the deceiving of men thine end, or the praise of men
thine end; all this may have a whiteness, a color of good: but all this is a
barking of the bough, and an indication of a mischievous leprosy. There is no
good whiteness, but a reflection from Christ Jesus, in an humble
acknowledgement that we have none of our own; and in a confident assurance,
that in our worst estate we may be made partakers of his. We are all red earth.
In Adam, we would not; since Adam, we could not avoid sin, and the
concomitants thereof, miseries; which we have called our West, our cloud, our
darkness. But then we have a North, that scatters these clouds, in the next
word, Adimaginem; that we are made to another pattern, in another likeness
then our own. Faciamus hominem. So far we are gone, East and West; which is
half our compass, and all this days voyage: for we are struck upon the sand,
and must stay another tide and another gale for our North and South.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON PREACHED BEFORE KING CHARLES, Upon the xxvi verse of the
first Chapter of GENESIS

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. MDCXXXIIII.

Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.


BY fair occasion from these words, we proposed to you the whole compass of
man's voyage, from his launching forth in this world, to his anchoring in the
next; from his hoysing sail here, to his striking sail there: in which compass
we designed to you his four quarters: first, his East, where he must begin,
the fundamental knowledge of the Trinity (for that we found to be the
specification and distinctive character of a Christian) where, though that be
so, we showed you also, why we were not called Trinitarians, but Christians:
and we showed you the advantage that man has, in laying hold upon God in these
several notions; That the prodigal son has an indulgent father; that the
decayed father has an abundant son; that the dejected spirit has a Spirit
of comfort to fly to in heaven. And as we showed you from S. Paul, that it was
an Atheism to be no Christian: ( Without God, says he, as long as without
Christ) so we lamented the slacknesse of Christians, that they did not
seriously and particularly consider the persons of the Trinity, and especially
the holy Ghost, in their particular actions: And then we came to that
consideration, whether this doctrine were established, or directly insinuated,
in this plural word of our text, Faciamus, Let us make man: and we found that
doctrine to be here, and here first, of any place in the Bible: and finding God
to speak in the plural, we accepted (for a time) that interpretation which
some had made thereof, That God spoke in the person of a Sovereign Prince, and
therefore (as they do) in the plural, We: And thereby having established
reverence to Princes, we claymed, in Gods behalf, the same reverence to him;
that men would demean themselves here, when God is spoken to in prayer, as
reverently as when they speak to the King. But afterward we found God to speak
here not only as our King, but as our Maker, as God himself, and God in
council, Faciamus: And we applied thereunto the difference of our respect to a
person of that honorable rank, when we came before him at the councel-table,
and when we came to him at his own table; and thereby advanced the seriousness
of this consideration, God in the Trinity. And farther we sailed not with our
Eastern wind. Our West we considered in the next word, Hominem; That, though
we were made by the whole Trinity, yet the whole Trinity made us but men, and
men in this name of our text, Adam; and Adam is but earth: and that is our
West, our declination, our Sunset. We passed over the four names, by which
man is ordinarily expressed in the scriptures; and we found necessary misery
in three of them; and possible, nay, likely misery in the fourth, in the best
name. We insisted upon the name of our text, Adam, earth; and had some use of
these notes; first, That if I were but earth, God was pleased to be the potter;
If I but a sheep, he a shepherd; If I but a cottage, he a builder: So he work
upon me, let me be what he will. We noted, that God made us earth, not air,
not fire; that man has bodily and worldly duties to perform, and is not all
spirit in this life. Devotion is his soul: but he has a body of discretion
and usefulness to invest in some calling. We noted too, that in being earth we
are equal: we tried that equality, first in the root, in Adam; there if any
man will be nobler earth then I, he must have more original sin then I: for
that was all Adams patrimony, all that he could give. And we tried this
equality in another furnace, in the grave; where there is no means to
distinguish royal from plebeian, nor catholic from heretical dust. And
lastly we noted, that this our earth was red; and considered in what respect it
was red, even in Gods hands; but found that in the bloud-rednesse of sin, God
had no hand; but sin, and destructions for sin, were wholly from our
selves: which consideration we ended with this, that there was Macula alba, a
white spot of leprosy, as well as a red: and we found the overvaluation of our
own purity, and the uncharitable condemnation of all that differ from us, to
be that white spot. And so far we sailed with that Western wind, and are
come to our third point in this our compass, our North.

In this point, III. Part. Aquilo.
the North, we place our first comfort. The North is not always the
comfortablest clime; nor is the North always a type of happiness in the
scriptures. Many times God threatens storms from the North: but even in those
Northern storms, we consider their action, that they scatter, they dissipate
those clouds which were gathered, and so induce a serenitie. Job 37.22.
And so fair weather comes from the North. The consideration of our West, our
low estate, that we are but earth, but red earth, died red by our selves; and
that imaginary white, which appears so to us, is but a white of leprosy: this
West inwraps us in heavy clouds of murmuring in this life, that we cannot live
so freely as beasts do; and in clouds of desperation for the next life, that we
cannot die so absolutely as beasts do. We die all our lives; and yet we live
after our deaths: These are our clouds; and then the North shakes these clouds.
Prove. 25.13.
The North-winde drives away the rain, says Solomon. There is a North in our
text, that drives all these tears from our eyes. Cant. 4.16.
Christ calls upon the North as well as the South, to blow upon his garden, and
to diffuse the perfumes thereof. Adversity, as well as prosperity, opens the
bounty of God unto us; and oftentimes better. But that is not the benefit of
the North, in our present consideration: but this is it, that first our Sun
sets in the West. The Eastern dignity which we received in our first creation,
as we were the work of the whole Trinity, falls under a Western cloud, that
that Trinity made us but earth. And then blows our North, and scatters this
cloud; that this earth has a nobler form then any other part or limb of the
world: for we are made by a fairer pattern, by a nobler image, by a higher
likeness. Faciamus; Though we make but a man, Let us make him in our image,
after our likeness.

The variety which the holy Ghost uses here in the pen of Moses, has given
occasion to diverse, to raise diverse observations upon these words, which seem
diverse, Image and Likeness; as also in the variety of the phrase: for it is
thus conceived and laid, In our image; and then, After our likeness. I know
it is a good rule that Damascen gives, Parva non sunt parva, ex quibus magna
proveniunt; Nothing is to be neglected, as little, from which great things may
arise: If the consequence may be great, the thing must not be thought little.
No Jod in the scripture shall perish; therefore no Jod is superfluous: if it
were superfluous, it might perish. Words, and less particles then words, have
busied the whole Church.

In the Council of Ephesus, where Bishops in a great number excommunicated
Bishops in a greater; Bishop against Bishop, and Patriarch against Patriarch;
in which case, when both parties had made strong parties in Court, and the
Emperor forbore to declare himself on either side for a time, he was told,
that he refused to assent to that which 6000 Bishops had agreed in: the strife
was but for a word, whether the blessed Virgin might be called Deipara, The
mother of God; for Christipara, The mother of Christ; which Christ all agree to
be God. Nestorius and all his party agreed with Cyril, that she might be. In
the Council of Calcedon, the difference was not so great, as for a word
composed of syllables. It was but for a syllable, whether Ex or In. The
heretics condemned then, confessed Christ to be Ex duabus naturis, to be
composed of two natures, at first; but not to be In duabus naturis, not to
consist of two natures after. And for that In, they were thrust out. In the
Council of Nice, it was not so much as a syllable made of letters; for it was
but for one letter; whether Homoousion, or Homousion, was the issue. Where the
question has not been of diverse words, nor syllables, nor letters, but only
of the place of words, what tempestuous differences have risen! How much has
sola sides and sides sola changed the case! Nay, where there has been no
quarrel for precedencie, for transposing of words, or syllables, or letters,
where there has not been so much as a letter in question, how much does an
accent vary a sense! An interrogation or no interrogation, will make it
directly contrary. All Christian expositours read those words of Cain, My
sin is greater then can be pardoned, Genesis 4.13.
positively; and so they are evident words of desperation. The Jews read them
with an interrogation, Are my sins greater then can be pardoned? and so they
are words of compunction and repentance. The prophet Micheas says, Mich. 5.3.
that Bethlehem is a small place: Matthew. 2.6.
The Evangelist S. Matthew says, No small place. An interrogation in Micheas
mouth reconciles it; Art thou a small place? amounts to that, Thou art not.
Sounds, voices, words, must not be neglected: for Christ's forerunner, John
Baptist, qualified himself no otherwise; he was but a voice: and Christ himself
is Verbum; The Word is the name even of the Son of God. No doubt but
Statesmen and Magistrates find often the danger of having suffered small
abuses to pass uncorrected. We that see State-businesse but in the glass of
story, and cannot be shut out of chronicles, see there, upon what little
objects the eye and the jealousy of the State is oftentimes forced to bend it
self. We know in whose times in Rome a man might not weep, he might not sigh,
he might not look pale, he might not be sick, but it was informed against, as a
discontent, as a murmuring against the present government, and an inclination
to change. And truly many times, upon Damascens true ground, though not
always well applied, Parva non sunt parva; Nothing may be thought little, when
the consequence may prove great. In our own sphere, in the Church, we are sure
it is so; great inconveniences grew upon small tolerations. Therefore in that
business, which occasioned all that trouble which we mentioned before, in the
Council of Ephesus, when S. Cyril wrote to the Clergy of his diocese about
it, at first he says, Praestiterat abstinere, It had been better these
questions had not been raised: but (says he) Si his nugis nos adoriantur, If
they vex us with these impertinences, these trifles: And yet these, which were
but trifles at first, came to occasion Councels; and then to divide Council
against Council; and then to force the Emperor to take away the power of both
Councels, and govern in Council by his Vicar general, a secular Lord sent from
Court. And therefore did some of the Ancients (particularly Philastrius) cry
down some opinions for heresies, which were not matters of faith, but of
philosophy; and even in philosophy truly held by them who were condemned for
heretics, and mistaken by their Judges that condemned them. Little things were
called in question, lest great things should pass unquestioned: and some of
these upon Damascens true ground (still true in rule, but not always in the
application) Parva non sunt parva; Nothing may be thought little, where the
consequence may prove great. Descend we from those great spheres, the State and
the Church, into a lesser, that is, the conscience of particular men, and
consider the danger of exposing those vines to little foxes; Cant. 2.15.
of leaving small sins unconsidered, unrepented, uncorrected. In that
glistering circle in the firmament, which we call the Galaxie, the milkie-way,
there is not one star of any of the six great magnitudes, which Astronomers
proceed upon, belonging to that circle: it is a glorious circle, and possesses
a great part of heaven; and yet is all of so little stars as have no name, no
knowledge taken of them: So certainly are there many Saints in heaven, that
shine as stars, and yet are not of those great magnitudes, to have been
Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Martyrs, or Doctors, or Virgins; but
good and blessed souls, that have religiously performed the duties of inferior
callings, and no more. And as certainly are there many souls tormented in hell,
that never sinned sin of any of the great magnitudes, Idolatry, Adultery,
Murder, or the like; but inconsiderately have slid, and insensibly continued in
the practice and habit of lesser sins. But parva non sunt parva; Nothing may
be thought little, where the consequence may prove great. Matthew. 12.36.
When our Savior says, That we shall give an account for every idle word in
the day of judgment, what great hills of little sands will oppress us then!
And if substances of sin were removed, yet what circumstances of sin would
condemn us! If idle words have this weight, there can be no word thought idle
in the Scriptures: And therefore I blame not in any, I decline not in mine own
practice, the making use of the variety and copiousnesse of the holy Ghost,
who is ever abundant, and yet never superfluous in expressing his purpose in
change of words. And so no doubt we might do now in observing a difference
between these words in our text, Image, and Likeness; and between these two
forms of expressing it, In our image, and, After our likeness. This might be
done. But that that must be done, will possess all our time; that is, to
declare (taking the two for this time to be but a farther illustration of one
another; Image and Likeness, to our present purpose, to be all one) what this
image and this likeness imports; and how this North scatters our former cloud;
what our advantage is, that we are made to an image, to a pattern; and our
obligation to set a pattern before us in all our actions.

God appointed Moses to make all that he made, by a pattern. God himself made
all that he made, according to a pattern. God had deposited and laid up in
himself certain forms, patterns, Ideas of every thing that he made. He made
nothing, of which he had not preconceived the form, and predetermined in
himself, I will make it thus. And when he had made any thing, he saw it was
good; Good, because it answered the pattern, the image; Good, be^^use it was
like to that. And therefore though of other creatures God pronounced they were
good, because they were presently like their pattern, that is, like that form
which was in him for them: yet of man, he forbore to say that he was good;
because his conformity to his pattern was to appear after in his subsequent
actions. Now as God made man after another pattern, and therefore we have a
dignity above all, that we had another manner of creation then the rest: so
have we a comfort above all, that we have another manner of administration then
the rest. God exercises another manner of providence upon man, then upon other
creatures. Matthew. 10.29.
A sparrow falls not without God, says Christ: yet no doubt God works
otherwise in the fall of eminent persons, then in the fall of sparrows; for ye
are of more value then many sparrows, says Christ there of every man: and some
men single, are of more value then many men. God does not thank the ant, for
her industry and good husbandry in providing for her self. God does not
reward the foxes, Judge. 15.4.
for concurring with Samson in his revenge. God does not fee the lion, 1. King.
13.24
which was his executioner upon the Prophet which had disobeyed his
commandment; 2. King. 2.24.
nor those few she-bears, which slew the petulant children who had calumniated
and reproached Elisha. God does not fee them before, nor thank them after, nor
take knowledge of their service: But for those men that served Gods execution
upon the idolaters of the golden calf, Exodus 32.25.
it is pronounced in their behalf, that therein they consecrated themselves
unto God; and for that service God made that Tribe, the Tribe of Levi, his
portion, his clergy, Genesis 22.16.
his consecrated Tribe: So, Quia fecisti hoc, says God to Abraham, By my self
I have sworn, because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy
son, thine only son: that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thee. 2. Pet. 2.22.
So neither is God angry with the dog that turns to his vomit; nor with the
sow, that after her washing wallows in the mire. But of man in that case he
says, Hebr. 6.4.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, if they fall away, to
renew themselves again by repentance. The creatures live under his law, but a
law imposed thus, This they shall do, this they must do: Man lives under
another manner of law, This you shall do, that is, This you should do, This I
would have you do. And, Fac hoc, Do this, and you shall live; disobey, and you
shall die: but yet the choice is yours; choose you this day life or death. So
that this is Gods administration in the creature, that he has imprinted in
them an instinct, and so he has something to preserve in them: In man, his
administration is this, that he has imprinted in him a faculty of will and
election, and has something to reward in him. That instinct in the creature
God leaves to the natural working thereof in it self: but the freewill of man
God visits and assists with his grace, to do supernatural things. When the
creature does an extraordinary action above the nature thereof (as when
Balaams ass spoke) the creature exercises no faculty, no will in it self; but
God forced it to that it did. When man does any thing conducing to
supernatural ends, though the work be Gods, the will of man is not merely
passive. The will of man is but Gods agent; but still an agent it is, and an
agent in another manner then the tongue of the beast. For the will considered
as a will (and grace never destroys nature; nor, though it make a dead will a
live will, or an ill will a good will, does it make the will no will) might
refuse or omit that it does. So that because we are created by another pattern,
we are governed by another law, and another providence.

Go thou then the same way. If God wrought by a pattern, and writ by a copy,
and proceeded by a precedent; do thou so too. Never say, There is no Church
without error; therefore I will be bound by none, but frame a Church of mine
own, or be a Church to my self. What greater injustice then to propose no
image, no pattern to thy self to imitate; and yet propose thy self for a
pattern, for an image to be adored? Thou will have singular opinions, and
singular ways, differing from all other men: and yet all that are not of thy
opinion, must be heretics; and all reprobates, that go not thy ways. Propose
good patterns to thy self, and thereby become a fit pattern for others. God (we
see) was the first that made images; and he was the first that forbad them: he
made them for imitation; he forbad them, in danger of adoration. For, what a
baseness, what a madness of the soul is it, to worship that which is no
better, nay, not so good as it self! Worship belongs to the best: know then thy
distance and thy period, how far to go, and where to stop. Dishonor not God
by an image, in worshipping it; and yet benefit thy self by it in following it:
There is no more danger out of a picture, then out of a history, if thou
intend no more in either then example. Though thou have a West, a dark and a
sad condition, that thou art but earth, a man of infirmities, and
ill-counselled in thy self: yet thou have here a North, that scatters and
dispells these clouds, that God proposes to thee in his Scriptures; and
otherwise, images, patterns of good and holy men to go by. But beyond this
North, this assistance of good examples of men, thou have a South, a
Meridionall height, by which thou see thine image, thy pattern, to be no
copy, no other man, but the original it self, God himself: Faciamus ad
nostram; Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.

Here we consider first, where the image is; IIII Part. Meridies.
and then, what it does: first, in what part of man God has imprinted this his
image; and then, what this image conferres and derives upon man, what it works
in man. And as when we seek God in his essence, we are advised to proceed by
negatives (God is not mortal, not passible:) so when we seek the image of God
in man, we begin with a negative, This image is not his Body. Tertullian
declined to think it was; nay, Tertullian inclined others to think so; for he
is the first that is noted to have been the author of that opinion that God
had a body: yet S. Augustine excuses Tertullian for heresy: Because (says
he) Tertullian might mean, That it was so sure that there is a God; and that
God was a certain, though not a finite essence; that God was so far from
being nothing, as that he had rather a body. Because it was possible to give a
good interpretation of Tertullian, that charitable Father would excuse him of
heresy. I would S. Augustines charity might prevail with them that pretend to
be Augustinianissimi, and to adore him so much in the Roman Church, not to
cast the name of Heresy upon every problem, nor the name of Heretic upon
every inquirer of truth. S. Augustine would deliver Tertullian from heresy, in
a point concerning God; and they will condemn us of heresy, in every point
that may be drawn to concern, not the Church, but the Court of Rome; not their
doctrine, but their profit. Malo de misericordia Deo rationem reddere, quam de
crudelitate; I shall better answer God for my mildness, then for my
severitie. And though anger toward a brother, or a Racha, or a Fool, will bear
an action; yet he shall recover less against me at that bar, whom I have
called weak, or misse-led (as I must necessarily call many in the Roman
Church) then he whom I have passionately and peremptorily called heretic: for
I dare call an opinion heresy for the matter, a great while before I dare call
the man that holds it an heretic: for that consists much in the manner. It
must be matter of faith, before the matter be heresy; but there must be
pertinacie after convenient instruction, before the man be an heretic. But how
excusable soever Tertullian be herein, in S. Augustines charity, there was a
whole sect of heretics an hundred years after Tertullian, the Audiani, who
over literally taking those places of Scripture, where God is said to have
hands, and feet, and eyes, and ears, believed God to have a body like ours;
and accordingly interpreted this text, that in that image, and that likeness,
a bodily likeness, consisted this image of God in man. And yet even these men,
these Audians, Epiphanius (who first took knowledge of them) calls but
schismatics, not heretics: so loath is charity to say the worst of any. Yet
we must remember them of the Roman persuasion, that they come too near giving
God a body in their pictures of God the Father: and they bring the body of
God, that body which God the Son has assumed, the body of Christ, too
near in their Transsubstantiation: not too near our faith (for so it cannot
be brought too near to our sense, so it is as really there as we are there)
not too near in the ubi; for so it is there, there, that is, in that place to
which the Sacrament extends it self: for the Sacrament extends as well to
heaven, from whence it fetches grace, as to the table from whence it delivers
bread and wine: but too near in modo; for it comes not thither that way. We
must necessarily complain, that they make religion too bodily a thing. Our
Savior Christ corrected Marie Magdalenes zeal, where she flew to him in a
personal devotion; and said, John 20.17.
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father. Fix your meditations
upon Christ Jesus, so as he is now at the right hand of his Father in heaven,
and entangle not your selves so with controversies about his body, as to lose
real charity for imaginary zeal; nor enlarge your selves so far in the
pictures and images of his body, as to worship them more then him. As Damascen
says of God, that he is Superprincipale principium, A beginning before any
beginning we can conceive; and praeterea aeternitas, an eternity infinitely
elder then any eternity we can imagine: so he is superspiritualis Spiritus,
such a Superspirit, as that the soul of man, and the substance of angels, is
but a body compared to this Spirit. God has no body, though Tertullian
disputed it, though the Audians preached it, though the Papists paint it: and
therefore this image of God is not in the body of man that way.

Nor that way neither which some others have assigned, That God, who has no
body as God, yet in the creation did assume that form which man has now, and
so made man in his image, that is, in that form which he had then assumed. Some
of the ancients thought so; and some other men of great estimation in the
Roman Church have thought so too. In particular, Oleaster, a great officer in
the Inquisition of Spain. But great inquirers into other men, are easy
neglecters of themselves. The image of God is not in man's body this way.

Nor that third way which others have imagined, that is, that when God said,
Let us make man after our likeness, God had respect to that form, which in the
fullness of time his Son was to take upon him upon earth. Let us make him now
(says God) at first, like that which I intend hereafter my Son shall be: for
though this were spoken before the fall of man, and so before any occasion of
decreeing the sending of Christ; yet in the School a great part of great men
adhere to that opinion, That God from all eternity had a purpose, that his
Son should become man in this world, though Adam had not fallen; Non ut
medicus, sed ut Dominus, ad nobilitandum genus humanum, say they: Though Christ
had not come as a Redeemer, if man had not needed him by sin, but had kept
his first state; yet as a Prince, that desired to heap honor upon him whom he
loves, to do man an honor by his assuming that nature, Christ (say they)
should have come: and to that image, that form which he was to take then, was
man made in this text, say these imaginers. But (alas!) how much better were
wit and learning bestowed, to prove to the Gentiles that a Christ must come
(that they believe not) to prove to the Jews, that the Christ is come (that
they believe not) to prove to our own consciences, that the same Christ may
come again this minute to judgment (we live as though we believed not that)
then to have filled the world, and torn the Church with frivolous disputations,
Whether Christ should have come if Adam had not fallen! Woe unto fomentours of
frivolous disputations. None of these ways: not because God has a body, not
because God assumed a body; not because it was intended that Christ should be
born, before it was intended that man should be made, is this image of God in
the body of man: nor has it in any other relation respect to the body; but,
as we say in the School, arguitive, and significative; that because God has
given man a body of a noblerform then any other creature, we infer, and
argue, and conclude from thence, that God is otherwise represented in man then
in any other creature: and so far is this image of God in the body above
that in the creatures, that as you see some pictures, to which the very tables
are jewels; some watches, to which the very cases are jewels; and therefore
they have outward cases too; and so the picture and the watch are in that
outward case, of what meaner stuff soever that be: so is this image in this
body, as in an outward case, so as that you may not injure nor enfeeble this
body, neither by sinful intemperance and licentiousness, nor by inordinate
fastings or other disciplines of imaginary merits, while the body is alive;
for the image of God is in it: nor defraud the body of decent burial and due
solemnities after death; for the image of God is to return to it. But yet the
body is but the outward case, and God looks not for the gilding, or
enamelling, or painting of that; but requires the labor and cost therein to be
bestowed upon the table it self, in which this image is immediately, that is,
the soul: and that is truly the ubi, the place where this image is. And there
remains only now the operation thereof, how this image of God in the soul of
man works.

The sphere then of this Intelligence, the gallerie for this picture, the arch
for this statue, the table and frame and shrine for this image of God, is
inwardly and immediately the soul of man: not immediately so, as that the soul
of man is a part of the essence of God; for so essentially Christ only is the
image of God. S. Augustine at first thought so; Putabam te, Deus, corpus
lucidum, and me frustum de illo corpore: I took thee, O God (says that Father)
to be a globe of fire, and my soul to be a spark of that fire; thee to be a
body of light, and my soul to be a beam of that light. But S. Augustine does
not only retract that in himself, but dispute against it in the Manichees. But
this image is in our soul, as the soul is the wax, and this image the seal. The
comparison is S. Cyrils; and he adds well, that no seal but that which printed
the wax at first, can fit that wax, and fill that impression after: no image,
but the image of God, can fit our soul; every other seal is too narrow, too
shallow for it. The magistrate is sealed with the Lion; the Wolf will not fit
that seal: the magistrate has a power in his hand, but not oppression. Princes
are sealed with the Crown; the Mitre will not fit that seal. Powerfully and
graciously they protect the Church, and are supreme heads of the Church; but
they minister not the Sacraments of the Church: they give preferments, but they
give not the capacity of preferments: they give order who shall have, but they
have not Orders by which they are enabled to have that they have. Men of
inferior and laborious callings in the world are sealed with the Cross; a
Rose, or a bunch of Grapes will not answer that seal: ease and plenty in age
must not be looked for without crosses, and labor, and industry in youth. All
men, Prince and people, Clergy and Magistrate, are sealed with the image of
God, with a conformity to him; and worldly seals will not answer that, nor
fill up that seal. We should wonder to see a mother in the midst of many sweet
children, passing her time in making babies and puppets for her own delight. We
should wonder to see a man, whose chambers and galleries were full of curious
masterpieces, thrust in a villagefayre, to look upon sixpenie pictures and
threefarthing prints. We have all the image of God at home; and we all make
babies, fancies of honor in our ambitions. The masterpiece is our own, in our
own bosom; and we thrust in countrey-fayres, that is, we endure the distempers
of any unseasonable weather, in night-journeys and watchings; we endure the
oppositions, and scorns, and triumphs of a rival and competitour, that seeks
with us, and shares with us. We endure the guiltiness and reproach of having
deceived the trust which a confident friend reposes in us, and solicit his
wife or daughter. We endure the decay of fortune, of body, of soul, of honor,
to possess lovers pictures; pictures that are not originals, not made by that
hand of God, Nature; but artificial beauties: and for that body we give a
soul; and for that drug which might have been bought where they bought it, for
a shilling, we give an estate. The image of God is more worth then all
substances; and we give it for colors, for dreams, for shadows.

But the better to prevent the loss, let us consider the having of this image;
in what respect, in what operation this image is in our soul: for whether this
image be in those faculties, which we have in Nature; or in those
qualifications which we have in Grace; or in those super-illustrations, which
the blessed shall have in Glory, has exercised the contemplation of many.
Properly this image is in nature; in the natural reason, and other faculties
of the immortal soul of man; for thereupon does S. Bernard say, Imago Dei uri
potest in gehenna, non exuri; till the soul be burnt to ashes, to nothing
(which cannot be done, no not in hell) the image of God cannot be burnt out of
the soul; for it is radically, primarily in the very soul it self: and whether
that soul be infused into the elect, or reprobate, that image is in that soul:
as far as he has a soul by nature, he has the image of God by nature in it.
But then the seal is deeper cut, or harder pressed, or better preserved in some
then in others, and in some other considerations then merely natural:
therefore we may consider man, who was made here to the image of God, and of
God in three persons, to have been made so in Gods intendment three ways: Man
had this image in Nature, and does deface it; he has it also in Grace here,
and so does refresh it; and he shall have it in Glory hereafter, and that
shall fix it, establish it. And in every of these three, in this Trinity in
man, Nature, Grace, and Glory, man has not only the image of God, but the
image of all the persons of the Trinity, in every of his three capacities. He
has the image of the Father, the image of the Son, the image of the holy
Ghost, in nature; and all these also in grace; and all these in glory too. How
all these are in all, I cannot hope to handle particularly, not though I were
upon the first grain of our sand, upon the first dram of your patience, upon
the first flash of my strength: But a clear repeating of these many branches,
that these things are thus, that all the persons of the heavenly Trinity are
(in their image) in every branch of this humane Trinity in man, may (at least
must) suffice.

In nature then, man, that is, the soul of man, has this image of God; of God,
considered in his unity, entirely, altogether in this, that this soul is made
of nothing, proceeds of nothing. All other creatures are made of that
preexistent matter which God had made before; so were our bodies too, but our
souls of nothing: now not to be made at all, is to be God himself; only God
himself was never made. But to be made of nothing, to have no other parent but
God, no other element but the breath of God, no other instrument but the
purpose of God, this is to be the image of God; for this is nearest to God
himself (who was never made at all) to be made of nothing. And then man
(considered in nature) is otherwise the nearest representation of God too: for
the steps which we consider, are four; First, Esse, Being; for some things
have only a being, and no life, as stones: Secondly, Vivere, Living; for some
things have life, and no sense, as plants: and then thirdly, Sentire, Sense;
for some things have sense, and no understanding; which understanding and
reason man has with his being, and life, and sense; and so is in a nearer
station to God, then any creature, and a livelier image of him (who is the root
of being) then all they; because man only has all the declarations of beings.
Nay, if we consider Gods eternity, the soul of man has such an image of that,
as that, though man had a beginning, which the original, the eternal God
himself had not; yet man shall no more have an end, then the original, the
eternal God himself shall have. And this image of eternity, this
post-meridian, this afternoon eternity, that is, this perpetuity and
after-everlastingnesse is in man, merely as a natural man, without any
consideration of grace: for the reprobate can no more die, that is, come to
nothing, then the elect. It is but of the natural man that Theodoret says, A
King built a city, and erected his statue in the midst of that city; that
is, God made man, and imprinted his image in his soul. How will this King take
it (says that Father) to have this statue thrown down? Every man does so, if
he do not exalt his natural faculties, if he do not hearken to the law written
in his heart, if he do not run, as Plato, or as Socrates, in the ways of
virtuous actions; he throws down the statue of this King, he defaces the image
of God. How would this King take it (says he) if any other statue, especially
the statue of his enemy should be set up in his place? Every man does so too,
that embraces false opinions in matter of doctrine, or false appearances of
happiness in matter of conversation; for these a natural man may avoid in
many cases, without that addition of Grace which is offered to us as
Christians. That comparison of other creatures to man, which is intimated in
Job, is intended but of the natural man. There speaking of Behemoth, that is,
of the greatest of creatures, he says in our Translation that He is the chief
of the ways of God: S. Hierom has it, Principium; Job 40.19.
and others before him, Initium viarum Dei; that when God went the progress
over the world in the creation thereof, he did but begin, he did but set out at
Behemoth, at the best of all such creatures; He. All they were but Initium
viarum, The beginning of the ways of God: but, Finis viarum, the end of his
journey, and the eve, the vespers of his Sabbath, was the making of man, even
of the natural man. Behemoth and the other creatures were vestigia, says the
School. In them we may see where God has gone; for all being is from God and
so every thing that has a being, has filiationem vestigii, a testimony of
Gods having passed that way, and called in there: but man has filiationem
imaginis, an expression of his image; and does the office of an image or
picture, to bring him whom it represents, the more lively to our memories. Gods
abridgement of the whole world was man; reabridge man into his least volume, in
pura naturalia, as he is but mere man, and so he has the image of God in his
soul.

He has it as God is considered in his unity; for as God is, the soul of man
is, indivisibly, impartibly, one entire. And he has it also as God is notified
to us in a Trinity: for as there are three persons in the essence of God; so
are there three faculties in the soul of man. The attributes, and some kind of
speculation of the persons in the Trinity, are, power to the Father, wisdom
to the Son, and goodness to the holy Ghost. And the three faculties of the
soul have the images of these three: the Understanding is the image of the
Father, that is, Power; for no man exercises power, no man can govern well,
without understanding the natures and dispositions of them whom he governs: and
therefore in this consists the power which man has over the creature, that man
understands the nature of every creature; for so Adam did when he named every
creature according to the nature thereof: and by this advantage of our
understanding them, and comprehending them, we master them; and so,
Obliviscuntur quod natae sunt, says S. Ambrose: the lion, the bear, the
elephant, have forgot what they were born to; Induuntur quod jubentur, they
invest and put on such a disposition and such a nature as we enjoin them and
appoint them: Serviunt ut famuli (as that Father pursues it elegantly) and,
Verberantur ut timidi; they wait upon us as servants, who, if they understood
us, as well as we understand them, might be our masters; and they receive
correction from us, as though they were afraid of us, when, if they understood
us, they would know that we were not able to stand in the teeth of the lion,
the horn of the bull, in the heels of the horse; and, Adjuvantur ut infirmi,
they counterfeit a weakness, that they might be beholding to us for help; and
they are content to thank us, if we afford them rest, or any food, who, if they
understood us as well as we do them, might tear our meat out of our throats;
nay, tear out our throats for their meat. So then in this first natural
faculty of the soul, the Understanding, stands the image of the first person,
the Father, Power.

And in the second faculty, which is the Will, is the image, the attribute of
the second person, the Son, which is Wisdom: for wisdom is not so much in
knowing, in understanding, as in electing, in choosing, in assenting. No man
needs go out of himself, nor beyond his own legend, and the history of his own
actions for examples of that, That many times we know better, and choose ill
ways. Wisdom is in choosing or assenting.

And then in the third faculty of the soul, the Memory, is the image of the
third person, the holy Ghost, that is, Goodness. For to remember, to recollect
our former understanding, and our former assenting, so far as to do them, to
crown them with action, that is true goodness. The office that Christ assigns
to the holy Ghost, and the goodness which he promises in his behalf is this,
that he shall bring former things to our remembrance. John 14.26.
The wise man places all goodness in this faculty, the Memory: properly
nothing can fall into the Memory, but that which is past; and yet he says,
Whatsoever thou take in hand, Ecclus 7.36.
remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. The end cannot be yet come,
and yet we are bid to remember that. Visus per omnes sensus recurrit, says S.
Augustine: as all senses are called sight in the Scriptures (for there is
Gustate Dominum, and Audite, and Palpate; Taste the Lord, and Hear the Lord,
and Feel the Lord; and still the Videte is added, Taste and see the Lord) so
all goodness is in remembering; all goodness (which is the image of the holy
Ghost) is in bringing our understanding and our assenting into action.
Certainly (beloved) if a man were like the King but in countenance, and in
proportion, he himself would think somewhat better of himself, and others would
be the less apt to put scorns or injuries upon him, then if he had a vulgar
and course aspect: with those who have the image of the Kings power (the
Magistrate) the image of his wisdom (the Council) the image of his goodness
(the Clergy) it should be so too; there is a respect due to the image of the
King in all that have it. Now in all these respects, man, the mere natural
man, has the image of the King of kings; and therefore respect that image in
thy self, and exalt thy natural faculties, emulate those men, and be ashamed
to be outgone by those men who had no light but nature. Make thine
understanding, and thy will, and thy memory (though but natural faculties)
serviceable to thy God, and auxiliarie and subsidiarie for thy salvation: for
though they be not naturally instruments of grace, yet naturally they are
susceptible of grace, and have so much in their nature, as that by grace they
may be made instruments of grace, which no faculty in any creature but man can
be. And do not think that because a natural man cannot do all, he has nothing
to do for himself.

This then is the image of God in man, the first way, in Nature; and most
literally this is the intention of the text. Man was this image thus; and the
room furnished with this image, was paradise: but there is a better room then
that paradise for the second image (the image of God in man by Grace) that is,
the Christian Church: for though for the most part this text be understood de
naturalibus, of our natural faculties; yet Origin, and not only such
allegorical expositours, but Saint Basil, and Nissen, and Ambrose, and others,
who are literal enough, assign this image of God to consist in the gifts of
Gods grace, exhibited to us here in the Church. A Christian then in that second
capacity, as a Christian, and not only as a Man, has this image of God, of
God first considered entirely. And those expressions of this impression, those
representations of this image of God in a Christian by grace, which the
Apostles have exhibited to us, that we are the sons of God, the seed of God,
the offspring of God, and partakers of the divine nature, (which are high and
glorious exaltations) are enlarged and exalted by Damascen to a further height,
when he says, Sicut Dens homo, ita ego Deus; As God is man, so I am God, says
Damascen; I, taking in the whole mankind (for so Damascen takes it out of
Nazianzen; and he says, Sicut verbum caro, ita caro verbum; As God was made
man, man may become God) but especially I; I, as I am wrought upon by grace in
Christ Jesus. So a Christian is made the image of God entirely. To which
expression S. Cyril also comes near, when he calls a Christian Deiformem
hominem, man in the form of God; which is a mysterious and a blessed
metamorphosis and transfiguration: that, whereas it was the greatest trespass
of the greatest trespasser in the world, Isa. 14.14.
the devil, to say, Similis ero Altissimis, I will be like the Highest; it
would be as great a trespass in me not to be like the Highest, not to conform
my self to God, by the use of his grace in the Christian Church. And whereas
the humiliation of my Savior is in all things to be imitated by me, yet herein
I am bound to depart from his humiliation; Phil. 2.6, 7.
that, whereas he being in the form of God, took the form of a servant; I,
being in the form of a servant, may (nay, must) take upon me the form of God,
in being Deiformis homo, a man made in Christ, the image of God. So have I the
image of God entirely in his unity, because I profess that faith which is but
one faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
and under the seal of that Baptism which is but one Baptism. And then, as of
this one God, so I have also the image of the several persons of the Trinity,
in this capacity as I am a Christian, more then in my natural faculties.

The attribute of the first person, the Father, is Power: and none but a
Christian has power over those great tyrants of the world, Sin, Satan,
Death, and Hell. For thus my power accrues and grows unto me: first, Possum
judicare, 1. Cor. 6.5.
I have a power to judge; a judiciarie, a discretive power, a power to discern
between a natural accident and a judgment of God, and will never call a
judgment an accident; and between an ordinary occasion of conversion, and a
temptation of Satan: Possum judicare. And then, Possum resistere, Ephesians. 6.13.
which is another act of power: when I find it to be a temptation, I am able
to resist it. And Possum stare (which is another) I am able not only to
withstand, but to stand out this battle of temptations to the end. And then,
Possum capere; that which Christ proposes for a trial of his disciples, He
that is able to receive it, Matt. 19.12.
let him receive it: I shall have power to receive the gift of continency
against all temptations of that kind. Bring it to the highest act of power,
that with which Christ tried his strongest Apostles; Possum bibere calicem,
Matt. 20.22.
I shall be able to drink of Christ's cup, even to drink his blood, and be the
more innocent for that; and to pour out my blood, and be the stronger for
that. Phil. 4.13.
In Christo omnia possum; there is the fullness of power: In Christ I can do
all things; I can want, or I can abound; I can live, or I can die. And yet
there is an extension of power beyond all this, in this, Non possum peccare; 1
John 3.9.
being born of God in Christ, I cannot sin. This that seems to have a name of
impotence, Non possum, I cannot, is the fullest omnipotence of all: I cannot
sin; not sin to death, not sin with a desire to sin, not sin with a
delight in sin; but that temptation that overthrows another, I can resist; or
that sin which being done, casts another into desperation, I can repent. And
so I have the image of the first person, the Father, in Power.

The image of the second person, whose attribute is Wisdom, I have in this,
that wisdom being the knowledge of this world and the next, I embrace nothing
in this world, but as it leads me to the next: for thus my wisdom, my
knowledge grows: first, 2. Tim. 1.12.
Scio cui credidi, I know whom I have believed; I have not mislayed my
foundation; my foundation is Christ: and then, Scio non moriturum; my
foundation cannot sink: Romans 6.9.
I know that Christ being raised from the dead, Romans 8.27.
dies no more: again, Scio quod desideret spiritus; I know what my spirit,
enlightened by the Spirit of God, desires: I am not transported with illusions
and singularities of private spirits. And as in the attribute of Power we found
an Omnipotence in a Christian; so in this there is an Omniscience. 1. Cor. 8.1.
Scimus quia omnem scientiam habemus; there is all together: We know that we
have all knowledge; for all S. Paul's universal knowledge was but this, 1. Cor.
2.2.
Jesum crucisixum: I determined not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and
him crucisied. And then the way by which he would proceed and take degrees in
this wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.21.
was, stultitia praedicandi, the way that God had ordained: When the world by
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe. These then are the steps of Christian wisdom: my foundation
is Christ; of Christ I enquire no more but fundamental doctrines, him
crucified; and this I apply to my self by his ordinance of preaching. And in
this wisdom I have the image of the second person.

And then of the third also in this, that, his attribute being goodness, I, as
a true Christian, call nothing good, that conduces not to the glory of God in
Christ Jesus; nor any thing ill, that draws me not from him. Thus I have an
express image of his goodness, that Omnia cooperantur in bonum; Romans 8.28.
all things work together for my good, if I love God. I shall thank my fever,
bless my poverty, praise my oppressor; nay, thank, and bless, and praise
even some sin of mine, which by the consequences of that sin, which may be
shame, or loss, or weakness, may bring me to a happy sense of all my former
sins; and shall find it to have been a good fever, a good poverty, a good
oppression, yea, a good sin. Vertit in bonum, says Joseph to his brethren;
You thought evil, Genesis 50.20
but God meant it unto good: and I shall have the benefit of my sin,
according to his transmutation; that is, though I meant ill in that sin, I
shall have the good that God meant in it. Amos 3.6.
There is no evil in the city, but the Lord does it: but if the Lord do it, it
cannot be evil to me. I believe that I shall see bona Dei, the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living; Psalm. 27.13.
that is, in heaven: but David speaks also of signum in bonum; Show me a token
of good: and God will show me a present token of future good, an inward
infallibility, that this very calamity shall be beneficial and advantageous
unto me: and so as in nature I have the image of God in my whole soul, and of
all the three persons in the three faculties thereof; the understanding, the
will, and the memory: so in grace, in the Christian Church, I have the same
images of the power of the Father, of the wisdom of the Son, of the
goodness of the holy Ghost, in my Christian profession. And all this we shall
have in a better place then paradise (where we considered it in nature) and a
better place then the Church, as it is militant (where we considered it in
grace) that is, in the kingdom of heaven (where we considered this image in
glory) which is our last word.

There we shall have this image of God in perfection: for if Origin could lodge
such a conceit, that in heaven at last all things should ebb back into God, as
all things flowed from him at first; and so there should be no other essence
but God, all should be God, even the devil himself: how much more may we
conceive an unexpressible association (that is too far off) an assimilation
(that is not near enough) an identification (the School would venture to say
so) with God in that state of glory! Whereas the sun by shining upon the
moon, makes the moon a planet, a star as well as it self, which otherwise
would be but the thickest and darkest part of that sphere: so those beams of
glory which shall issue from my God, and fall upon me, shall make me
(otherwise a clod of earth, and worse, a dark soul, a spirit of darkness) an
angel of light, a star of glory, a something that I cannot name now, not
imagine now, nor to morrow, nor next year; but even in that particular, I
shall be like God: that as he that asked a day to give a definition of God, the
next day asked a week, and then a month, and then a year; so undeterminable
would my imaginations be, if I should go about to think now, what I shall be
there: I shall be so like God, as that the devil himself shall not know me from
God, so far as to find any more place to fasten a temptation upon me, then
upon God; nor to conceive any more hope of my falling from that kingdom, then
of Gods being driven out of it: for though I shall not be immortal as God, yet
I shall be as immortal as God. And there is my image of God, of God considered
all together, and in his unity in the state of grace.

I shall have also then the image of all the three persons of the Trinity.
Power is the Fathers; and a greater power then he exercises here, I shall have
there: here he overcomes enemies, but yet here he has enemies; there, there
are none: here they cannot prevail; there they shall not be. So Wisdom is the
image of the Son; and there I shall have better wisdom: the spiritual
wisdom it self is here: for here our best wisdom is, but to go toward our
end; there it is to rest in our end: here it is to seek to be glorified by God;
there it is that God may be everlastingly glorified by me. The image of the
holy Ghost is Goodness. Here our goodness is mixed with some ill; faith mixed
with scruples, and good works mixed with a love of praise, and hope of better
mixed with fear of worse: there I shall have sincere goodness, goodness
impermixt, intemerate and indeterminate goodness; so good a place, as no ill
accident shall annoy it; so good company as no impertinent, no importune
person shall disorder it; so full a goodness, as no evil of sin, no evil of
punishment for former sins can enter; so good a God, as shall no more keep us
in fear of his anger, nor in need of his mercy; but shall fill us first, and
establish us in that fullness in the same instant, and give us a satietie that
we can wish no more, and an infallibility that we can lose none of that, and
both at once. Whereas the Cabalists express our nearenesse to God in that
state, in that note, that the name of man and the name of God, ADAM and
JEHOVAH, in their numerall letters are equal: so I would have leave to
express that inexpressible state, so far as to say, that if there can be
other worlds imagined besides this that is under our moon, and if there could
be other Gods imagined of those worlds, besides this God to whose image we are
made, in Nature, in Grace, in Glory; I had rather be one of these Saints in
this heaven, then one of those Gods in those other worlds. I shall be like the
angels in a glorified soul, and the angels shall not be like me in a glorified
body.

The holy nobleness and religious ambition that I would imprint in you for
attaining of this glory, makes me dismiss you with this note, for the fear of
missing that glory; that, as we have taken just occasion to magnify the
goodness of God toward us, in that he speaks plurally, Faciamus, Let Us, all
Us do this; and so poures out the blessings of the whole Trinity upon us, in
this image of himself, in every person of the three, and in all these three
ways which we have considered: so when the anger of God is justly kindled
against us, God collects himself, summons himself, assembles himself, musters
himself, and threatens plurally too: for of those four places in Scripture, in
which only (as we noted before) God speaks of himself in a royal plural, God
speaks in anger, and in a preparation to destruction, in one of those four
entirely, as entirely he speaks of mercy but in one of them, in this text;
here he says merely out of mercy, Faciamus, Let Us, Us, all Us, make man: and
in the same plurality, the same universalitie, he says after, Descendamus and
confundamus, Genesis 11.7.
Let Us, Us, all Us, go down to them and confound them, as merely out of
indignation and anger, as here out of mercy. And in the other two places,
where God speaks plurally, he speaks not merely in mercy, nor merely in
justice in neither; but in both he mingles both: so that God carries himself so
equally herein, as that no soul, no Church, no State may any more promise it
self patience in God if it provoke him, then suspect anger in God if we conform
our selves to him. For from them that set themselves against him, God shall
withdraw his image in all the persons and all the attributes: the Father shall
withdraw his power, and we shall be enfeebled in our forces; the Son his
wisdom, and we shall be enfatuated in our counsels; the holy Ghost his
goodness, and we shall be corrupted in our manners, and corrupted in our
religion, and be a prey to temporal and spiritual enemies, and change the
image of God into the image of the beast. And as God loves nothing more then
the image of himself in his Son, and then the image of his Son Christ Jesus
in us; so he hates nothing more then the image of Antichrist in them in whom he
had imprinted his Sons image; that is, declinations toward Antichrist, or
concurrences with Antichrist, in them who were born, and baptized, and
catechized, and blessed in the profession of his truth.

That God, who has hitherto delivered us from all cause or color of
jealousies or suspicions thereof in them whom he has placed over us, so
conform us to his image in a holy life, that sins continued and multiplied by
us against him, do not so provoke him against us, that those two great helps,
the assiduitie of preaching, and the personal and exemplarie piety and
constancy in our Princes, be not by our sins made unprofitable unto us: for
that is the height of Gods malediction upon a nation, when the assiduitie of
preaching and the example of a religious Prince does them no good, but
aggravates their fault.

FINIS.
A SERMON Upon the xix verse of the ii Chapter of HOSEA.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. MDCXXXIIII.

Hosea 2.19. And I will marry thee unto me for ever.


THe word which is the hinge upon which all this text turns, is Erash: and
Erash signifies not only a betrothing, as our later translation has it, but a
marrying; and so it is used by David, Deliver me my wife Michael, 2. Sam. 3.14
whom I married: and so our former translation had it, and so we accept it, and
so shall handle it. I will marry thee unto me for ever.

The first marriage that was made, God made; and he made it in Paradise: and of
that marriage, I have had the like occasion as this, to speak before, in the
presence of many honorable persons in this company. The last marriage which
shall be made, God shall make too, and in Paradise too, in the kingdom of
heaven: and at that marriage, I hope in him that shall make it, to meet, not
some, but all this company. The marriage in this text has relation to both
those marriages. It is it self the spiritual and mystical marriage of Christ
Jesus to the Church, and to every marriageable soul in the Church: and it has
a retrospect, it looks back to the first marriage; for to that the first word
carries us, because from thence God takes his metaphor and comparison,
Sponsabo, I will marry: and then it has a prospect to the last marriage; for
to that we are carried in the last word, In aeternum, I will marry thee unto
me for ever. Be pleased therefore to give me leave in this exercise, to shift
the Scene thrice, and to present to your religious considerations three
objects, three subjects: first, a secular marriage, in Paradise; secondly, a
spiritual marriage, in the Church; and thirdly, an eternal marriage, in
Heaven: And in each of these three, we shall present three circumstances;
first, the persons, Me and Tibi, I will marry thee; and then the action,
Sponsabo, I will marry thee; and lastly, the term, In aeternum, I will marry
thee to me for ever.

In the first acceptance then, 1 Part.
in the first, the secular marriage in Paradise, the persons were Adam and Eve:
ever since, they are He and She, man and woman: at first, by reason of
necessity, without any such limitation as now; and now without any other
limitations, then such as are expressed in the law of God. As the Apostles say,
in the first general Council, Act. 15.28.
We lay nothing upon you but things necessary; so we call nothing necessary,
but that which is commanded by God. If in heaven I may have the place of a man
that has performed the commandments of God, I will not change with him, that
thinks he has done more then the commandments of God enjoined him. The rule of
marriage for degrees and distance in blood, is the law of God; but for
conditions of men, there is no rule at all given. When God had made Adam and
Eve in Paradise, though there were four rivers in Paradise, God did not place
Adam in a Monastery on one side, and Eve in a Nunnerie on the other, and so a
river between them. They that build walls and cloisters to frustrate Gods
institution of marriage, advance the doctrine of devils, in forbidding of
marriage. The devil has advantages enough against us, in bringing men and women
together: it was a strange and superdevilish invention, to give him a new
advantage against us, by keeping men and women asunder, by forbidding marriage.
Between the heresy of the Nicolaitans, that induced a community of women (any
might take any) and the heresy of the Tatians, that forbad all (none might
take any) was a fair latitude. Between the opinion of the Manichaean heretics,
that thought women to be made by the devil; and the Colliridian heretics, that
sacrificed to a woman, as to God, there is a fair distance. Between the denying
of them souls, which S. Ambrose is charged to have done; and giving them such
souls, as that they may be priests, as the Peputian heretics did, is a fair
way for a moderate man to walk in. To make them gods, is ungodly; and to make
them devils, is devilish: to make them mistresses, is unmanly; and to make them
servants, is unnoble: to make them, as God made them, wives, is godly, and
manly too. When in the Roman church they dissolve marriages in natural
kindred, in degrees where God forbids it not; when they dissolve marriage upon
spiritual kindred, because my grandfather christened that woman's father; when
they dissolve marriage upon legal kindred, because my grandfather adopted that
woman's father, they separate those whom God has joined so far, as to give
them leave to join in lawful marriage. When men have made vows to abstain from
marriage, I would they would be content to try a little longer then they do,
whether they could keep that vow or no: And when men have consecrated
themselves to the service of God in his Church, I would they would be content
to try a little further then they do, whether they could abstain or no: But to
dissolve marriages made after such a vow, or after orders, is still to separate
those whom God has not separated. The persons are He and She, man and woman:
they must be so much; he must be a man, she must be a woman: and they must be
no more; not a brother and a sister, not an uncle and a niece. Adduxit ad eum,
was the case between Adam and Eve; God brought them together: God will not
bring me a precontracted person; he will not have me defraud another: God will
not bring me a misbeleeving, a superstitious person; he will not have me drawn
from himself: But let them be persons that God has made, man and woman; and
persons that God has brought together, that is, not put asunder by any law of
his; and all such are persons capable of this first, this secular marriage.

In which our second consideration is the action, Sponsabo; where the active is
a kind of passive: I will marry thee, is, I will be married to thee; for we
marry not our selves. They are somewhat hard driven in the Roman church,
when, making marriage a sacrament, and being pressed by us with this question,
If it be a sacrament, who administers it? who is the Priest? they are fain to
answer, The Bridegroom and the Bride, he and she are the Priest in that
sacrament. As marriage is a civil contract, it must be done so in public, as
that it may have the testimony of men: as marriage is a religious contract, it
must be so done, as that it may have the benediction of the Priest. In a
marriage without testimony of men, they cannot claim any benefit by the Law;
in a marriage without the benediction of the Priest, they cannot claim any
benefit of the Church: for how matrimonially soever, such persons as have
married themselves, may pretend to love and live together; yet all that love
and all that life is but a regulated adultery, it is not marriage.

Now this Institution of marriage had 3 objects: First, In ustionem, it was
given for a remedy against burning; and then, In prolem, for propagation, for
children; and lastly, In adjutorium, for mutual help. As we consider it the
first way, In ustionem, every heating is not a burning; every natural
concupiscence does not require a marriage: nay, every flaming is not a burning;
though a man continue under the flame of carnal temptation, as long as S. Paul
did, yet it needs not come presently to a Sponsabo, I will marry. God gave S.
Paul other physic, Gratia mea sufficit, grace to stand under that temptation:
and S. Paul gave himself other physic, Contundo corpus, convenient disciplines
to tame his body. These will keep a man from burning; for, Vri, est desideriis
vinci; desideria pati, illustris est and perfecti: To be overcome by our
concupiscencies, that is to burn; but to quench that fire by religious ways,
that is a noble, that is a perfect work. When God, at the first institution of
marriage, had this first use of marriage in his contemplation, that it should
be a remedy against burning, God gave man the remedy, before he had the
disease: for marriage was instituted in the state of innocence, when there was
no inordinatenesse in the affections of man, and so no burning. But as God
created Rheubarb in the world, whose quality is to purge choler, before there
was any choler to purge: so God, according to his abundant forwardness to do
us good, created a remedy before the disease, which he foresaw coming, was
come upon us. Let him then, that takes his wife in this first and lowest sense,
In medicinam, but as his physic, yet make her his cordial physic, take her
to his heart, and fill his heart with her; let her dwell there, and dwell there
alone: and so they will be mutual antidotes and preservatives to one another,
against all foreign temptations. And with this blessing bless thou, O Lord,
these whom thou have brought hither for this blessing: make all the days of
their life, like this day unto them: and as thy mercies are new every morning,
make them so to one another: and if they may not die together, sustain thou the
surviver of them in that sad hour, with this comfort, that he that died for
them both, will bring them together again in his everlastingnesse.

The second use of marriage was, In prolificationem, For children: And
therefore (as S. Augustine puts the case) to contract before, that they will
have no children, makes it no marriage, but an adultery. To deny themselves to
one another, is as much against marriage, as to give themselves to another. To
hinder that by physic, or any other practice; nay, to hinder that so far, as
by a deliberate wish or prayer against children, consists not well with this
second use of marriage. And yet in this second use we do not so much consider
generation, as regeneration; not so much procreation, as education; nor
propagation, as transplantation of children: for this world might be filled
full enough of children, though there were no marriage; but heaven could not be
filled, nor the places of the fallen angels supplied, without that care of
childrens religious education, which from parents in lawful marriage they are
likeliest to receive. How infinite and how miserable a circle of sin do we
make, if, as we sinned in our parents loins before we were born, so we sin in
our childrens actions when we are dead, by having given them either example or
liberty of sinning! We have a fearful commination from God, upon a good man,
upon Eli, for his not restraining the licentiousness of his sons: 1. Sam.
3.11
I will do a thing in Israel, says God there, at which both the ears of every
one that hears it shall tingle: and it was executed; Eli fell down, 1. Sam.
4.18
and broke his neck. We have also a promise of consolation to women, for
children: She shall be saved in childe-bearing, 1. Tim. 2.15
says the Apostle: but, as Chrysostom and others of the ancients observe and
interpret that place (which interpretation arises out of the very letter) it
is, Si permanserint; not, If she, but, If they, if the children continue in
faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety. The salvation of the
parents has so much relation to the childrens goodness, as that, if they be
ill by the parents example or indulgence, the parents are as guilty as the
children. Art thou afraid thy child should be stung with a snake, and will thou let him play with the old serpent, in opening himself to all temptations?
Art thou afraid to let him walk in an ill air, and art thou content to let him
stand in that pestilent air, that is made of nothing but oaths and
execrations of blasphemous mouths round about him? It is S. Chrysostomes
complaint, Perditionem magno pretio emunt, salutem nec dono accipere volunt: we
pay dear for our childrens damnation, by paying at first for all their
childish vanities, and then for their sinful insolences at any rate; and we
might have them saved, and our selves to the bargain (which were a frugall way,
and a debt well hedged in) for much less then ours and their damnation stands
us in. If you have a desire, says that blessed Father, to leave them certainly
rich, Deum iis relinque debitorem; Do some such thing for Gods service, as you
may leave God in their debt. He cannot break; his estate is inexhaustible: He
will not break promise, nor break day; He will show mercy unto thousands, in
them that love him, and keep his commandments. And here also may another shower
of his benedictions fall upon them, whom he has prepared and presented here;
Ps. 128.3.
Let the wife be as a fruitful vine, and their children like olive-plants. To
thy glory, let the parents express the love of parents, and the children, to
thy glory, the obedience of children, till they both lose that secular name of
parents and children, and meet all alike, in one new name, all saints in thy
kingdom, and fellow servants there.

The third and last use in this institution of secular marriage, was, In
adjutorium, For mutual help. There is no state, no man in any state, that
needs not the help of others. Subjects need Kings; and if Kings do not need
their subjects, they need alliances abroad, and they need counsel at home. Even
in paradise, where the earth produced all things for life, without labor, and
the beasts submitted themselves to man, so that he had no outward enemy; and
in the state of innocence in paradise, where, in man, all the affections
submitted themselves to reason, so that he had no inward enemy; yet God, in
this abundant paradise, and in this secure innocence of paradise, even in the
survey of his own works, saw, that though all that he had made, was good, yet
he had not made all good; he found thus much defect in his own work, that man
lacked an helper. Every body needs the help of others; and every good body
does give some kind of help to others. Even into the ark it self, where God
blessed them all with a powerful and an immediate protection, God admitted
only such, as were fitted to help one another, couples. In the ark, which was
the type of our best condition in this life, there was not a single person.
Christ said once one thief at the last gasp, to show that there may be late
repentances: but in the ark he saved none but married persons, to show, that he
eases himself in making them helpers to one another. And therefore when we come
to the Posui Deum adjutorium meum, to rely upon God primarily for our helper;
God comes to the Faciam tibi adjutorium, I will make thee a help like thy self:
not always like in complexion, nor like in years, nor like in fortune, nor
like in birth; but like in mind, like in disposition, like in the love of God
and of one another, or else there is no helper. It was no kind of help, that
David's wife gave him, when she spoke by way of counsel, but in truth in scorn
and derision, to draw him from a religious act, as the dancing before the ark
at that time was. It is no help, for any respect, to slacken the husband in his
religion. It was but a poor help that Nabals wife was fain to give him, by
telling David, Alas, my husband is but a fool, like his name; and what will you
look for at a fools hand? It is the worst help of all, to raise a husband by
dejecting her self; to help her husband forward in this world, by forfeiting
sinfully and dishonourably her own interest in the next. The husband is the
helper in the nature of a foundation, to sustain and uphold all; the wife in
the nature of the roof, to cover imperfections and weaknesses: the husband in
the nature of the head, from whence all the sinews flow; the wife in the nature
of the hands, into which those sinews flow, and enable them to do their
offices: the husband helps as legs to her; she moves by his motion: the wife
helps as a staff to him; he moves the better by her assistance. And let this
mutual help be a part of our present benediction too: In all the ways of
fortune, let his industry help her; and in all the crosses of fortune, let her
patience help him; and in all emergent occasions and dangers, spiritual or
temporal, O God, make speed to save them; O Lord, make haste to help them.

We have spoken of the persons, Man and Woman, Him and Her; and of the action,
first, as it is physic, but cordial physic; and then for children, but
children to be made the children of God; and lastly for help, but true help,
and mutual help: there remains yet in this secular marriage, the term how
long, for ever; I will marry thee for ever. Now though there be properly no
eternity in this secular marriage, nor in any thing in this world, (for
eternity is only that which never had beginning, nor ever shall have end) yet
we may consider a kind of eternity, a kind of circle, without beginning,
without end, even in this secular marriage: for first, marriage should have no
beginning before marriage; no half marriages, no lending away of the mind in
conditional precontracts before, no lending away of the body in unchaste
wantonness before. The body is the temple of the holy Ghost; and when two
bodies by marriage are to be made one temple, the wife is not as the chancell,
reserved and shut up, and the man as the walks below, indifferent and at
liberty for every passenger. God in his temple looks for first fruits from
both; that so, on both sides, marriage should have such a degree of eternity,
as to have had no beginning of marriage before marriage. It should have this
degree of eternity too, this quality of a circle, to have no interruption, no
breaking in the way, by unjust suspicions and jealousies. Where there is
spiritus immunditiei, as S. Paul calls it, A spirit of uncleanness, there will
necessarily be spiritus zelotypiae, as Moses calls it, A spirit of jealousy.
But to raise the devil in the power of the devil, to call up one spirit by
another spirit, by the spirit of jealousy and suspicion, to induce the spirit
of uncleanness where it was not, if a man conjure up a devil so, God knows who
shall conjure it down again. As jealousy is a care, and not a suspicion, God
is not ashamed to protest of himself, that he is a jealous God. God commands
that no idolatry be committed, Thou shall not bow down to a graven image;
Exodus 20.5
and before he accuses any man to have bowed down to a graven image, before any
idolatry was committed, he tells them that he is a jealous God; God is jealous
before there be any harm done. And God presents it as a curse, when he says,
My jealousy shall depart from thee, Eze. 16.42.
and I will be quiet, and no more angry; that is, I will leave thee to thy
self, and take no more care of thee. Jealousy that implies care, and honor,
and counsel, and tenderness, is rooted in God; for God is a jealous God, and
his servants are jealous servants, as S. Paul professes of himself, 2. Cor. 11.2
I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy. But jealousy that implies
diffidence, and suspicion, and accusation, is rooted in the devil; for he is
The accuser of the brethren.

So then this secular marriage should be In aeternum, eternal, for ever, as to
have no beginning before, and so too, as to have no jealous interruption by the
way; for it is so eternal, as that it can have no end in this life. Those whom
God has joined, no man, no devil can separate so, as that it shall not remain
a marriage so far, as that, if those separated persons will live together
again, yet they shall not be new married; so far, certainly, the band of
marriage continues still. The devil makes no marriages: he may have a hand in
drawing conveyances; in the temporal conditions there may be practice; but the
marriage is made by God in heaven. The devil can break no marriages neither,
though he can by sin break off all the good uses, and take away all the
comforts of marriage. I pronounce not now, whether adultery dissolve marriage
or no: It is S. Augustines wisdom to say, When the Scripture is silent, let me
be silent too: and I may go lower then he, and say, Where the Church is silent,
let me be silent too; and our Church is so far silent in this, as that it
has not said, that adultery dissolves marriage. Perchance then it is not the
death of marriage; but surely it is a deadly wound. We have authors in the
Roman church, that think Fornicationem non vagam, that such an incontinent
life, as is limited to one certain person, is no deadly sin: but there are
none, even amongst them, that diminish the crime of adultery. Habere quasi non
haberes, is Christ's counsel; to have a wife, as though thou had none, that
is, for continency and temperance, and forbearance, and abstinence upon some
occasions. But, Non habere quasi haberes, is not so: not to have a wife, and
yet have her; to have her that is another, this is the devils counsel. Of that
salutation of the Angel to the blessed Virgin Mary, Blessed art thou amongst
women, we may make ever this interpretation, not only that she was blessed
amongst women, that is, above women; but that she was Benedicta, Blessed
amongst women, that all women blessed her, that no woman had occasion to curse
her. And this is the eternity of this secular marriage, as far as this world
admits any eternity, that it should have no beginning before, no interruption
of jealousy in the way, no such approach toward dissolution, as that
incontinencie, in all opinions, and in all Churches, is agreed to be. And here
also, without any scruple of fear, or of suspicion of the contrary, there is
place for this benediction upon this couple: Build, O Lord, upon thine own
foundations, in these two, and establish thy former graces with future; that no
person ever complain of either of them, nor either of them of one another; and
so he and she are married in aeternum, for ever.

We are come now, II Part.
in our order proposed at first, to our second part; for all is said that I
intended of the secular marriage. And of this second, the spiritual marriage,
much needs not to be said: there is another priest that contracts that, another
preacher that celebrates that, the Spirit of God, to our spirit. And for the
third marriage, the eternal marriage, it is a boldness to offer to say any
thing of a thing so inexpressible as the joys of heaven; it is a diminution of
them, to go about to heighten them; it is a shadowing of them, to go about to
lay any colors or lights upon on them. But yet your patience may perchance
last to a word of each of these three circumstances, the persons, the action,
the term, both in this spiritual and in the eternal marriage.

First then, as in the former part, the secular marriage, for the persons
there, we considered first Adam and Eve; and after, every man and woman, and
this couple in particular: so in this spiritual marriage, we consider first
Christ and his Church, for the persons; but more particularly, Christ and my
soul. And can these persons meet? In such a distance, and in such a
disparagement, can persons meet? The Son of God, and the son of man? When I
consider Christ to be Germen Jehovae, the bud and blossom, the fruit and
offspring of Jehovah, Jehovah himself; and my self, before he took me in hand,
to be, not a potters vessel of earth, but that earth of which the potter might
make a vessel if he would, and break it if he would, when he had made it: when
I consider Christ to have been from before all beginnings, and to be still the
image of the Father, the same stamp upon the same metal; and my self a piece
of rusty copper, in which those lines of the image of God, which were imprinted
in me, in my creation, are defaced, and worn, and washed, and burnt, and ground
away by my many, and many, and many sins: when I consider Christ in his
circle, in glory with his Father, before he came into this world, establishing
a glorious Church when he was in this world, and glorifying that Church, with
that glory which himself had before, when he went out of this world; and then
consider my self in my circle, I came into this world washed in mine own tears,
and either out of compunction for my self, or compassion for others, I pass
through this world, as through a valley of tears, where tears settle and swell;
and when I pass out of this world, I have their eyes, whose hands close mine,
full of tears too: Can these persons, this image of God, this God himself, this
glorious God, and this vessel of earth, this earth it self, this inglorious
worm of the earth, meet without disparagement?

They do meet, and make a marriage: because I am not a body only, but a body
and soul; there is a marriage, and Christ marries me. Deuteronomy. 21.12
As by the Law a man might marry a captive woman in the wars, if he shaved
her head, and pared her nails, and changed her clothes: so my Savior having
fought for my soul, fought to blood, to death, to the death of the cross for
her; having studied my soul so much, as to write all those epistles, which are
in the New Testament, to my soul; having presented my soul with his own
picture, that I can see his face in all his temporal blessings; having shaved
her head, in abating her pride; and pared her nails, in contracting her greedy
desires; and changed her clothes, not to fashion her self after this world; my
soul being thus fitted by himself, Christ Jesus has married my soul; married
her to all the three intendments mentioned in the secular marriage: First, In
ustionem, Against burning; that, whether I burn my self in the fire of
temptation, by exposing my self to occasions of temptation; or be reserved to
be burnt by others in the fires of persecution and martyrdom; whether the
fires of ambition, or envy, or lust, or the everlasting fires of hell offer at
me, in an apprehension of the judgments of God; yet, as the Spirit of God
shall wipe all tears from mine eyes, so the tears of Christ Jesus shall
extinguish all fires in my heart: and so it is a marriage, In ustionem, a
remedy against burning. It is so too, In prolificationem, For children. First,
Vae soli, Woe unto that single soul that is not married to Christ, that is not
come into the way of having issue by him, that is not incorporated in the
Christian Church, and in the true Church; but is yet either in the wilderness
of idolatry amongst the Gentiles, or in the labyrinth of superstition amongst
the Papists. Vae soli, Woe unto that single man, that is not married to Christ
in the sacraments of the Church; and, Vae sterili, Woe unto them that are barren
after this spiritual marriage: for that is a great curse in the Prophet
Jeremie, Jer. 22.30.
Scribe virum istum sterilem, Write this man childlesse; that implied all
calamities upon him. And as soon as Christ had laid that curse upon the
fig tree, Matt. 21.19
Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever, presently the whole tree
withered: if no fruit, no leaves neither, nor body left. To be incorporated in
the body of Christ Jesus, and bring forth no fruits worthy of that profession,
is a woeful state too. Vae soli: First, Woe unto the Gentiles not married to
Christ: and, Vae sterili, Woe unto inconsiderate Christians, that think not upon
their calling, that conceive not by Christ: but there is a Vae pregnanti too,
Matt. 24.19
Woe unto them that are with child, and are never delivered; that have
sometimes good conceptions, religious dispositions, holy desires to the
advancement of Gods truth; but, for some collateral respects, dare not utter
them, nor bring them to their birth, to any effect. The purpose of his marriage
to us, is, to have children by us: and this is his abundant and his present
fecunditie, that working now by me in you, in one instant he has children in
me, and grandchildren by me. He has married me In ustionem, and In prolem;
Against burning, and for children: but can he have any use of me, In
adjutorium, For a helper? Surely, if I be able to feed him, and clothe him, and
harbor him (and Christ would not condemn men at the last day for not doing
these, if man could not do them) I am able to help him too. Great persons can
help him over sea, convey the name of Christ, where it has not been preached
yet: and they can help him home again, restore his name and his truth, where
superstition with violence has disseized him: and they can help him at home,
defend his truth there, against all machinations to displant and dispossess
him. Great men can help him thus: and every man can help him to a better place
in his own heart, and his own actions, then he has had there; and to be so
helped in me, and helped by me, to have his glory thereby advanced, Christ
has married my soul. And he has married it In aeternum, For ever, which is
the third and last circumstance in this spiritual, as it was in the secular
marriage. And here the Aeternum is enlarged. In the secular marriage it was an
eternity considered only in this life; but this eternity is not begun in
this world, but from all eternity, in the book of life, in Gods eternal
decree for my election; there Christ was married to my soul. Christ was never
in minority, never under years; there was never any time, when he was not as
ancient as the Ancient of days, as old as his Father. But when my soul was in
a strange minority, infinite millions of millions of generations before my
soul was a soul, did Christ marry my soul in his eternal decree: so it was
eternal, it had no beginning. Neither does he interrupt this, by giving me any
occasion of jealousy by the way, but loves my soul as though there were no
other soul, and would have done and suffered all that he did for me alone, if
there had been no name but mine in the book of life. And as he has married me
to him In aeternum, For ever, before all beginning; and In aeternum, For ever,
without any interruptions: so I know, that whom he loves, he loves to the end;
and that he has given me, not a presumptuous impossibility, but a modest
infallibility, that no sin of mine shall divorce or separate me from him:
for that which ends the secular marriage, does not end the spiritual; not
death: for my death does not take me from that husband; but that husband being
by his Father preferred to higher titles and greater glory in another state, I
do but go by death, where he is become a King, to have my part in that glory,
and in those additions, which he has received there. And this has led us to
our third and last marriage, our eternal marriage, in the triumphant Church.

And in this third marriage, III Part. Apoc. 19.7, 9.
the persons are the Lamb and my Soul. The marriage of the Lamb is come, and
blessed are they that are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb, says S.
John, speaking of our state in the general resurrection. That Lamb who was
brought to the slaughter, Isa. 53.7.
and opened not his mouth, and I, who have opened my mouth, and poured out
imprecations and curses upon men, and execrations and blasphemies against God,
upon every occasion; that Lamb which was slain from the beginning, and I, who
was slain by him who was a murderer from the beginning; that Lamb which took
away the sins of the world, and I, who brought more sins into the world,
then any sacrifice but the blood of this Lamb could take away; this Lamb and
I (these are the persons) shall meet and marry, there is the action.

This is not a clandestine marriage, not the private seal of Christ in the
obsignation of his Spirit; and yet such a clandestine marriage is a good
marriage: nor is it such a parish-marriage, as when Christ married me to
himself at my baptism, in a Church here; and yet that marriage of a Christian
soul to Christ in that sacrament, is a blessed marriage: But this is a marriage
in that great and glorious congregation, where all my sins shall be laid open
to the eyes of all the world; where all the blessed Virgins shall see all my
uncleanness, and all the Martyrs see all my tergiversations, and all the
Confessors see all my double dealings in Gods cause; where Abraham shall see
my faithlesnesse in Gods promises, and Job my impatience in Gods corrections,
and Lazarus my hardness of heart in distributing Gods blessings to the poor:
and those Virgins, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and Abraham, and Job, and
Lazarus, and all that congregation, shall look upon the Lamb, and upon me, and
upon one another, as though they would all forbid those banes, and say to one
another, Will this Lamb have any thing to do with this soul? And yet there and
then this Lamb shall marry me, and marry me In aeternum, For ever; which is
our last circumstance.

It is not well done to call it a circumstance; for the eternity is a great
part of the essence of that marriage. Consider then how poor and needy a
thing all the riches of this world, how flat and tastlesse a thing all the
pleasures of this world, how pallid, and faint, and dilute a thing all the
honors of this world are, when the very treasure, and joy, and glory of
heaven it self were unperfect, if it were not eternal: and my marriage shall
be so, In aeternum, For ever. The Angels were not married so; they incurred an
irreparable divorce from God, and are separated for ever; and I shall be
married to him In aeternum, For ever. The Angels fell in love, when there was
no object presented, before any thing was created; when there was nothing but
God and themselves, they fell in love with themselves, and neglected God, and
so fell In aeternum, For ever. I shall see all the beauty and all the glory
of all the Saints of God, and love them all, and know that the Lamb loves them
too, without jealousy on his part, or theirs, or mine; and so be married In
aeternum, For ever, without interruption, or diminution, Reve. 6.12, 13, 14.
or change of affections. I shall see the sun black as sackcloth of hair, and
the moon become as blood, and the stars fall, as a fig tree casts her
untimely figs, and the heavens rolled up together as a scrowl: I shall see a
divorce between princes and their prerogatives, between nature and all her
elements, between the spheres and all their intelligences, between matter it
self and all her forms, and my marriage shall be In aeternum, For ever. I shall
see an end of faith, nothing to be believed that I do not know; and an end of
hope, nothing to be wished that I do not enjoy; but no end of that love, in
which I am married to that Lamb for ever: yea, I shall see an end of some of
the offices of the Lamb himself: Christ himself shall be no longer a
Mediator, an Intercessour, an Advocate, and yet shall continue a Husband to my
soul for ever: where I shall be rich enough without jointure, for my Husband
cannot die; and wise enough without experience; for no new thing can happen
there; and healthy enough without physic, for no sickness can enter; and
(which is by much the highest of all) safe enough without grace, for no
temptation that needs particular grace can attempt me. There, where the Angels,
which cannot die, could not live, this very body, which cannot choose but die,
shall live, and live as long as that God of life that made it. Lighten our
darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, that in thy light we may see light:
illustrate our understandings, kindle our affections, pour oil to our zeal,
that we may come to the marriage of this Lamb, and that this Lamb may come
quickly to this marriage: and in the mean time bless these thy servants, with
making this secular marriage a type of the spiritual, and the spiritual an
earnest of that eternal, which they and we by thy mercy shall have in that
kingdom, which thy Son our Savior has purchased with the inestimable price
of his incorruptible blood. To whom, etc.

FINIS.

