THE SECOND MANIFESTO OF MARCUS ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS, Archbishop of Spalatto:
wherein for his better satisfaction, and the satisfaction of others, he
publicly repents, and recanteth his former errors, and sets down the
cause of his leaving ENGLAND, and all Protestant Countries, to return unto the
Catholic Roman Church: Written by himself in Latin, and translated into
English by M. G. K.

LVKE 22. 26. Egressus for as fleuit amare.

LIEGE. By Guilliaume Houius, with permission of Superiors.

1623.

Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatto, declares the cause why he
left England.
MOst excellently, as he does all other things, has the holy Ghost by the
mouth of St. Paul, numbered up amongst the works of the flesh, contentions,
emulations, anger, quarrels, discentions, and Gal. 5. 20.
sects; for I have had too much trial in my self of the unhappy fruit of this
unlucky tree; And now having received a potion of Divine grace for my
recovery, must vomit out that filthiness, which before through the sickness
of my mind, and corruption of my taste, I had greedily devoured: which that I
might the more safely and speedily perform, and correct my self in public
before all the world, and condemn to the pit of hell my infinite errors
sprung from the wicked intention of my first going into England; I have taken
that good counsel, first to leave the School of errors, lies, and heresies:
and then of mine own free will to return to the holy Roman Church, the one,
and only pillar and excellent ground of Catholic truth, and the Mother of
all Catholics, from whom I had most wickedly departed. First, therefore I
will prosecute this my correction, condemnation, and detestation of my errors,
and afterward I will declare the other causes why I left England, and all
other heretical Countries whatsoever, and returned to the holy Catholic
Roman Church.

2 It is the most ancient disease of our corrupt humane nature descended from
our first Father unto all his posterity, that when we fall into any error, or
slide into any vice, we do either find out filthy excuses (as the woman which
thou gave me to be my fellow Deu 3. 2.
companion, gave me of the tree, and I did eat) or else we defend our faults,
and endeavor to cover them with a counterfeit cloak of Justice, and honesty:
and I confess that this was my case, for which I am very sorry. The disease
of my mind (in which before my departure from the Roman Church I languished)
was, that contrary to the wholesome counsel of the wise man, I trusted too
much to mine own prudence, and Pro. 3. 5.
out of the confidence of my own wit being no body, I would give very rash
judgment in matters of faith, unto which also was joined a certain frenzy of
anger. Not that, which some weak Scholars at my going out of England imputed
unto me, because I was denied vain pretended dignities; but it proceeded
altogether out of mine own unreasonable impatience, by taking in evil part to
be made subject to others of whom I did undeservedly complain in my book of
the cause of my departing. These things drove me upon the quick sands and
shallowes; these cast me upon the Rocks; these sharpened my wit to invent
pestiferous cogitations; these made me vainly to pity the errors of the
Roman Church, thereby to excuse my departure from it; these made me to
transcend all limits. And that I might seem to have done well in leaving the
Church of Rome; and avoid by some means the brand of impudency, rashness,
and heresy; in defense of my departure, I set forth first an exposition of
mine intent, and afterward certain volumes, and little books, into which I
thrust what the Art of counterfaiting, and dissimulation had invented, and
advice of the flesh suggested. And so as long as the inward disease increased,
and the spurs of anger pricked my exulcerated mind; the itching of my tongue
and pen, brake forth into madness: and now my understanding being darkened,
many things which the Enemies of the Apostolical sea (transported with
heresy) did believe, affirm, and profess; seemed unto me credible and
some-things also true, as long as I did not try the Doctrine in controversy by
the touchstone of true Divinity, nor perfectly discuss them: for at that time
I had neither finished, nor yet begun some of the parts of the Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth, in which I had purposed to treat of the decrees, and rules of
faith, howsoever in the book of my intent of leaving the Roman Church, I
affirmed that I had them all ready for the Press; and being thus blinded, and
relying rashly more upon the false accusations of the heretics, then upon the
truth of the Catholic faith; I wrote the little books of the intent of my
depaerture, from the Roman Church, and the Rocks of Christian shipwreck, and
a certain Sermon stuffed with errors and heresy; and out of my then
conceived hatred, which for the most part I bare to the holy Roman Church, the
Apostolical sea, and the Pope; I affirmed these things, and many more to be
true, which before I writ them, I knew to be false, and heretical; and
afterward in some part corrected them, and with my whole heart detested them,
even when I writ them; and now also I abhor and detest these little books,
because they contain manifest heresies against Catholic truths, and are
repugnant to sound Doctrine; that is to say, to the Doctrine which the holy
Catholic Roman Church does, and has always maintained; against which
Doctrine whatsoever I have spoken, or written, that I do wholly condemn, and
detest; and by the grace of God I will more amply, and largely condemn, and
detest it, in the confutation of my books of the Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth, and of the other books, which I have written: for I do wholly
submit my self, and all my books to the most holy judgment, and censure of
the holy Roman, and Apostolic sea, the chief of all Churches whatsoever.

3 In the mean space, it is necessary in this my second and truly sound
determination, to detest that intention of my unhappy departing from the Roman
Church, and the infamous Rocks, shipwracks chiefly to my self and heretics,
and not of Catholics, and also that Sermon. Neither will I be ashamed by
pulling off my garments, which I had forged to my self, to lay open my
nakedness, because I have not been ashamed against all right and honesty, to
break forth into vain lies, manifest slanders, and silthy heresies. The
stinging and venom of the Scorpion is cured by the bruising of the same
Scorpion which pricked: and if the voluntary contrition, and bruising of my
self, Diascor. lib. cap. 44.
may heal the venomous wounds of others (if any be wounded by me) I will
esteem this my bruising, humiliation, and mortification most happy. Let the
glory of the Catholic Church, and of the Apostolical sea, remain
immovable, although it be with the loss of whatsoever I have in this life,
seeing I have sought to diminish it: for at last, that loss must needs before
God be glorious to me also: Wherefore I do first confess, and truly and
sincerely out of my own conscience, do give testimony, that I did not write
the intent of my departing from the Roman Church, and the Rocks and the
Sermon out of sincerity of heart, or out of a good conscience, or faith not
fained: but that I might cover with some excuse my shameful departure, and be
more grateful and acceptable to heretics, to whom (wretch that I was) I ran
in have, and with whom I familiarly conuersed. The ten years labor which in
the book of the intent of my departing I boasted of, were not spent in mature
deliberations, grave and advised Counsels, or other discreet discussions of
the truth: but contrariwise misspent, in vain, unprofitable, and malicious
purposes, and preparations, how I might boldly vent and put in practice my
heretical lies and inventions, thereby to satisfy my malicious anger:
insomuch, as my vocation to do it, was not a Divine vocation, but a deuillish
suggestion, stirred up in me not by the holy Ghost, but by a wicked spirit, a
spirit of giddines worse then was that of Saules. And I do not doubt to
attribute my return back again, to a true Divine vocation; the holy Ghost
calling me to return unto my Mother, the Catholic Roman Church.

4 I said that the manners of the Court of Rome, did cause me always to
abhor it. This I acknowledge to have bin wickedly spoken, for neither then,
nor yet is wanting in Rome very many notable examples of piety, and all
Christian virtues, which may both delight, and incite religious minds to
further devotion. I said that by forbidding the reading of books written
against the Doctrine of Rome, there arise some evil suspicions, which gave
credit to the writing of heretics, and made men believe that there is some
thing in them secretly, which Catholics are not able to answer. This I
confess to have been injuriously spoken of me against the Catholic faith,
who found in the books of heretics, false, heretical, scandalous, and
pestiferous Doctrine; from the reading whereof the faithful are to be kept,
least it infect their souls. Neither is it a thing befitting private men to
read such books, but the judgment in matters of such always did, and now
does belong unto the Shepherds, who finding venomous Pastures, should remove
their sheep as far from them as they can: Moreover, the arguments of
heretics are deceitful, Sophistical, and easy to be answered. I said that
the Doctrine of those who opposed themselves against the Roman Church, did
either nothing, or little differ from the Doctrine of the ancient Church: and
this is false: for the opinions wherein they differ from Catholics, are wholly
differing from the Doctrine of the ancient Church; and nothing can more
connince them, then the authority of the ancient Church, from which they by
their novelties have so far departed, that worthily for this respect they are
condemned for heretics, by the Church of Rome. It is therefore detestable, and
I detest that which I said, that their Doctrines were therefore condemned only
by the Church of Rome, because these things they said, were repugnant unto the
sensuality, and corrupt manners of the Court of Rome. I said also, that at Rome
they coined new articles of faith by maine force. And this I said truly against
my conscience, for I never observed it at any time, and I certainly know, that
it cannot be observed by any man. For the declarations and explications made by
holy Church touching articles and mysteries of faith (collected out of Divine
Scriptures, and traditions of the Fathers, and out of the very rules of faith)
cannot any ways be termed new coining of articles. Moreover, I endeavored to
take away the title of Catholic and vntuersall, from the Church of Rome, in
which I erred very much; for by the Catholic Roman Church, is understood not
only that special and particular Church which is at Rome, but also the whole
multitude and company of all the Churches adhearing unto the Church of Rome in
the unity of faith, and in obedience to the Pope in what place soever they be,
yea in the utmost confines of the earth. And it is most true, and was approved
by me both by word of mouth (as England it self may witness) and by writing
(in my Treatises of the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, in that part which I
hear is lately set forth in Germany) that no Church is Catholic but the
Roman, and such as are united unto her. For all other congregations of
Christians being stained with heresies, and divided and separated by Schism
from the Roman Church are, and be excluded from the Catholic, universal and
true Church of Christ: and being as it were blinded, together with their blind
Guides do rush, and run headlong into the bottomless pit of perdition,
which I wickedly affirmed of the Romans to their great wrong: For from the
Church of Rome at all times, a most glorious light of pure and incorrupted
faith came forth, and does at this present lighten all other Churches of Christ
whatsoever. But I remember that in the preface of the books of the Christian
Commonwealth, among other things I used some words, in which I seem to put
and place in the Catholic Church, all them who have received Baptism in the
name of the Blessed Trinity, and in so saying, althought the words sound evil,
and make the heretical Churches true and sound members of the true Catholic
Church, which is most false and heretical; yet my meaning was, utterly to
exclude the Arrian, Nestorian, and Eutichian heresies, and all heretical
Churches condemned in former times, and to retain them only that were
Orthodoxall: But herein I was deceived in that I esteemed, that there were many
more Orthodoxall Churches then are, for I erroniously believed, that many
Churches which are infected with the heresies of these later Times, and divided
by Schism, did appertain unto the Catholic Church, which although it be
called Catholic, for that it is universal; yet universality does not
comprehend any but those that be Orthodoxall, and true believing, and dilated
over all the world, and continuing in the Catholic unity with the Roman. For
the universality of the Roman Church, consists not only in the perpetual,
and never interrupted or to be interrupted continuance and firmness of faith,
but is also universal; because her Identicall, or self same faith and
sovereign government, has been dilated and spread over all places, and into
Nations after the coming of Christ; for which respect even in these later
times and ages, it is to be called Catholic, no less then it was in the
times of the ancient Fathers; seeing that the faith of the Roman Church is
dilated in these our times into the farthest, and most vast or remote Regions
of the East, and West, and even to the uttermost confines of the earth. So that
her children traveling too and fro, from the rising of the Sun unto the
setting thereof, professing the faith of Christ, and offering clean
sacrifices, do especially at this time fulfill, that which our Lord spoke by
the mouth of Malachie, saying, chap. 1. ver. 11. From the rising of the Sun
unto the goinng down thereof, great is my name amongst the Gentiles, and in
every place it is sanctified, and a pure oblation is offered unto my name.
Neither was it a less injury and slander, when I said, that I clearly saw
innumerable novelties and errors in the Court of Rome, which novelties and
errors I do neither see, nor yet did ever see: and I acknowledge and confess
that it was most false, that at Rome there was then, or now are any errors, by
which any destruction of souls may follow, or the peace of the Church be
disturbed, or public scandalls committed: For in truth all the peace and all
the tranquillity of the Catholic Church, and the eternal salvation of Souls,
after God is to be attributed to the care and travel of the Church of Rome. I
said that the mightier Bishops under the Pope were Bishops only in name, and
this saying contains in it both falsehood and wrong, and therefore I do
condemn it, as evil spoken, for they be true and lawful Bishops, made by
lawful ordination. I said that the others who were not great men and Princes
in temporal things, had lost the proper dignity, and power of Bishops; and
this truly is a slander, for the Hierarchicall subordination, was always
necessary in the Church: much more I condemn as an heresy those words where
I said, that under the Pope was no more a true Church; for as I said and
seriously affirmed before, only the Church of Rome with her adherents, is the
true Church of Christ; and the others are not Churches. And in few words, to
comprehend much, I perceived that in my former intention I chiefly indeauoured
to weaken the supremacy of the Pope, and in so doing, I confess that I have
spoken against the faith of the whole Catholic Church, and have erred
grievously. For it is evident both by the very institution in the Gospel, and
by the Apostolic tradition, and the dcfinitions of holy Synods, and general
Councels, and very many decrees of the Pope, and also the common testimony of
the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Histories, that the Bishop of Rome was
instituted chief head of the whole Church immediately by Christ our Lord as a
singular Oracle, unto whom both the East and West Churches in all doubts of
Faith, should have recourse for instructions, definitions, and other sound
doctrine in matters of Faith, as unto a Master given them from heaven, who by
his office should teach the Church. And any one that is but meanly read, may
easily find out very many examples, where the Popes of Rome established,
removed, corrected, taught, condemned, absolved, deposed, restored, and
reprehended, according to there office, even the Patriarchs and Prymats of the
East; And thus reprehended, they humbly heard, and simply obayed the Popes
without resistance, or repugnance. And to be short, it is manifest by the
confession of the whole Church, that all the spirit of Christ (for so much as
does belong unto the decision of matters of faith) does rest upon one Supreme
visible head of the Church, which is only the Pope and chief Bishop, St.
Peter's successor.

5 I do ingenuously confess, that the book which I called The Rocks of
Christian shipwreck, did much displease me, presently after it was set forth;
for I wrote it in have without either study, or examining what I did. The
intent which I had in writing of it, was only to flatter and allure the
English by all means possible to conceive a good opinion of me at my first
coming, and so I had no regard whither that I writ and printed were true or
no: But my desire was to say that which might please the Enemies of the
Catholic Church, and especially the ignorant common people. And when the
doctrine contained in this little book, was by the King and some of the
Nobility objected against me (at my preparing to depart from England) I did
even then in express words detest it; and afterward prepared my self with
all my force to resist the greater part of the heresies which were in it: All
which heresies I do now again reject, detest, and abhor; and they are
these: That the Pope of Rome is not the Vicar of Christ upon earth, nor visible
head of the whole visible Church of Christ; That he has no power in temporal
things; That an implicit faith profits nothing, but much hurts the
faithful: That the Excommunications of the Law are vain threats: That the
precepts of the Church bind not upon pain of mortal sin: That the unity of
the Church is not to be sought for from one only visible head: That the Pope
is a deadly Enemy of universal Church: That the Mass is not a true sacrifice:
That the Ceremonies of the Mass are Apish toys: That there is no
Transubstantiation: That Auricular confession with absolution is not a true
Sacrament: That there is no Purgatory: That Satisfaction after the fault
forgiven, is not necessary for the remission of the punishment: That there be
no Indulgences but of things enjoined for penance. That Saints are not to be
prayed unto: That the worship of Images and Relics are not lawful: That
there is no merit of eternal life by works. These and the like errors and
manifest heresies, not so much mine, or newly invented by me, as by the old
and new heretics, whose fancies and madness have been from time to time by
the Church in general Counsels condemned: for they are miserable Rocks, unto
which if any approach, they are assured to suffer a lamentable shipwreck of
faith and eternal salvation: And therefore I departed from them as far as I
might, and least I should be utterly destroyed by them in England, it was
necessary for me to depart from thence, and to return to the Church of Rome
the true port of Catholics, with the which Church I reject, detest, and
accurse all the before said errors, and all others opinions whatsoever (if
there be any more in those books) which do not agree with the faith expressed
in the Church of Rome, and in the sacred Counsels, especially in the Counsel
of Trent: and I do constantly affirm and embrace the contrary verities, viz.
That the Pope is by the institution of Christ his Vicar upon earth, and the
visible head of the whole militant Church (which has always been visible)
with full power received from God; to rule and govern her: That he has also
indirect power in temporal matters, for the better advancement of spiritual.
That an implicit faith is profitable, and many times necessary, viz. when the
explicit faith of some articles is not required under penalty: That the
excommunications according to the Law, or de facto pronounced, are of force,
and ought to be feared, as brought into the Church with great reason, and by
lawful authority: that the Pope may excommunicate the faithful wheresoever
they are: That the precepts of the Church bind under pain of mortal sin:
That the unity of the Church depends chiefly of one only visible head of
the same Church: That the Pope is the true and lawful Pastor of the whole
Church, and according unto his obligation is zealous of the good of Christ's
flock, by daily thirsting after, and most carefully procuring their eternal
salvation: That in the Mass is offered, a true, proper, and propitiatory
sacrifice unto God: That the ceremonies of the Mass instituted by the holy
Fathers, and Pastors of the Church (by the inspiration of the holy Ghost) are
holy, mystical, profitable, and ought to be observed and kept: That in the
Sacrament of the Alter, there is transnbstantiation, that is to say, a
conversion of all the substance of bread into the body, and of wine into the
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: That in the sacramental absolution which the
Priest uses in absoluting from sins, is exercised the true and proper power of
binding, and loosing sins, which our Lord has delivered or given to the
Ministers of his Sacraments in the Church: That there is a Purgatory after that
manner and sort which the holy Roman and Apostolic Church does affirm it to
be: That satisfaction is of great power, after the fault remitted for the
remission of the punishment also: That the use of Indulgences in the Catholic
Church (unto whom Christ has given authority to bestow them) is very
ancient, very profitable, and approved by the authority of holy Councels: That
we may not only lawfully pray unto Saints, but also that it is a good and
profitable thing to fly for help unto their prayers, and aid: That the
worship of Images and Relics, is good, lawful, and profitable, and cannot be
rejected without the blot of heresy: That the merit of eternal life
depends upon good works; Also I often times loathed and despised the later
general Councels (which be of high authority in the Church) especially the
Councels of Florence and Trent, and sometimes that of Constance. And by my
means it came to pass, that a certain History of the Council of Trent was
published, whereof I could have no certain knowledge, for that it was justly
suspected of forgerie; and in these things also I confess that I have
maliciously erred, and now affirm that all the most wholesome decrees of these
Councels are worthy of credit, and ought to be embraced.

6 In a certain Sermon of mine on the first Sunday of Aduent, made at London
in the Italian tongue, and printed, I published almost the same errors, which
I repeated after in the book of the Rocks, all which I do now deeply
detest. In that Sermon I feigned a certain dark night of Popish errors, and
of the Church of Rome, when in very deed in the only Church of Rome, and in
the Churches connexed unto her, is a true and clear Sunne-shining day, and out
of her (especially in England) there is a perpetual night, and most obscure
darkness. The light of truth, and the true and right understanding of the
Scriptures, which is in the Church of Rome, drives far from her the mistes
of all these errors, wherewith wretched England being ouer-clowded, walks,
as a blind man groping for the wall at midday. I said in the same Sermon, and
I repeated the same in the little book of the Rocks, that Peter was never at
Rome, yet notwithstanding I know that this is a gross and an ignorantlye, and
therefore I do ingenuously confess, that it ought to be rejected of all men.
I made the Apostles equal in founding and ruling the Church; when yet even out
of the very Gospels, and Apostolical tradition, the Supremacy of Peter (above
them) is apparent. I said that the Bishops succeeded the Apostles with equal
power, and that they were Bishops of the universal Church in gross, when as
they are but Pastors of particular Churches, in their sole particular cares or
charges: the general Primacie belonging unto him who succeeded Peter, which is
the Pope. I said that holy water, graynes, crosses, holy Images, the Popes or
Bishops benediction, Stations, habites, girdles, belts, the visitations of
Churches Altars, Beads, Processions, and the like, were mere toys; when yet
it is certain, that the use of almost all these things is well approved, and
very ancient in the Catholic Church, and ought to be preserved together with
the use of other things of later times added, as prouokements to piety aad
devotion. I affirmed that there were only two Sacraments, Baptism and the
Supper, when yet the Catholic Church illuminated by the holy Ghost plainly
teaches and defines, that there are seven true Sacraments: All which, and
whatsoever other heresies condemned by the Catholic Roman Church, I also
condemn, and the things contrary to them being defined by the same, I also
with a firm faith believe, hold, and profess. For most certain it is, that
in the decrees of the holy Roman Church, reason is not separated from
authority, and that the Doctrine of the Schoolmen is altogether consonant unto
the sense of the holy Fathers, especially in articles of faith. I also confess
that I did undeservedly in these little Pamphlets complain of the Court of
Rome, as if she had usurped other men's rights; for except she preserve by her
lawful authority over them, the Bishops, and Archbishops in their duties,
there would presently follow a general violation of her laws by them: And the
Church is then very happy, when all her particular Pastors under the most
vigilant and highest Pastor, do readily receive and execute both reformation
in manners, and the custody of sound and sincere Doctrine, from him who has
the sovereign authority. And verily, except the benign and paternall care of
the holy Inquisition, had watched seriously over our Lords flock, the scabbed
cattle should not receive any cure, but the filthy Canker would daily
increase. The ordinary Armor of that Tribunal, is found Doctrine, and
charitable instructions, and not those instruments which (out of a mind
corrupted with malice) in my Pamphlets I have exagerated by lies and slanders,
and yet sometimes when rotten ulcers cannot be cured with gentle medicines, it
is both fit and necessary that the Physicians should use more forceable
remedies.

7 But when the inward burning of the infirmities of my mind was alayed almost
by a miracle about the beginning of the Popedom of the most holy Gregory the
15. (whose rare piety, singular prudence, and continual holiness of life was
such, as that I do not doubt but that it was cause of his advancement to that
high dignity) the holy Ghost illuminating me with a certain divine light, my
mind began to think upon wholesome courses, And then the dangers into which I
had cast my soul, began also every day more clearly to muster themselves in
troops before me, and I did wonder how I had fallen into so great madness and
error, as to join my self unto them who were heretics, and absolute and
manifest Schismatics. In old time so great was the crast of a few Arians in
the Council of Arminium, that by a cunning slight they almost drew all the
Catholics to seem Arians: And then says our St. Hierome against the
Luciferians) all the world lamented, and wondered how it became infected with
Aranisme: But (with grief I speak it) so it happened unto me, and much worse;
and I would wonder and mourn to see my self an heretic among heretics, and
a Schismatic with Schismatics. But herein let not the English complain that
I wrong them: but rather let them plainly know, that I have done well, and as
I ought to do, in departing from them, and returning unto my mother the holy
woman-Church. And as for the laying open of their heresy and Schism, I am
compelled to do it, for that it is not fit for me to be poisoned any longer
therewith.

8 Concerning Religion, there are in England sundry Sects: There are Puritanes
that is the rigid Caluinists; There are some milder, who call themselves only
Protestants, and reformed: There are Anabaptists who are also divided into
diverse Sects: There wants not Arians, nor Photinians, and such a like
mish-mash of wicked people, who though they be not permitted to profess their
errors publicly, yet are they not cast forth of their Church nor punished,
but tolerated whilst they publish their poison. Moreover, that the
Anabaptists swarm with heresies, none but the Annabaptist himself will deny
it, yet they have their free meetings in England, and the Kings Matestie one
day told me, that lately at London a woman did in an assembly of Anabaptists
both make a public Sermon, and also administer their supposed Sacraments. The
heresies of the Puritanes are well known, which are these: That there is no
free will: That God is the Author of sin: That God for his pleafure
condemns many without cause: That Christ did not dye for all men: That Christ
did sustain the pains of the damned: That Infants dying after Baptism, may
be damned, etc. The milder Protestants, although they endeavor by all means
to free themselves (for as much as concerns their opinions) from heresy, for
that they seem neither wholly to follow Luther nor Calvin: but the pure
Doctrine of the English Church which they call reformed; yet can they not be
free from the heresy both of the Puritanes, and Anabaptists; for that they
communicate with them without scruple; and if any Puritan or Anabaptist come
to their Ecclesiastical assemblies, they neither avoid, nor exclude him. And
the Puritan Ministers (who are almost all wholly infected with all heresies,
or at least with the heresies of Calvin) do administer the very Sacraments of
this false English Church. And if that Acatius of Constantinople, because he
communicated with Petrus Moggus an heretic of Alexandria, if all the East
because it persisted in the communion of Acatius, was separated by a long
enduring curse from the West, how much more are all the English Protestants to
be accounted heretics, for that they do communicate continually with
heretics, and do neither condemn them, nor separate themselves from them,
but admit them even when they communicate with them in divine things? Does not
the deformed English Church publicly and openly profess a communion and
Ecclesiastical league with Geneua the mother of the Puritanes, and other
outlandish Sects infected with Caluinian poison? In the Royal City of London
by public leave of the King, are not the Churches of the French, Dutch, and
Italian Caluinists open, and esteemed most loving Sisters of the English
Synagogue, although they detest the English doctrine, profession, and rites,
and be the chiefest favorers, and promoters of Puritanisme in England: And
also the English Synagogue as much (as in her lies) is most ready to
communicate with the Lutherans, being polluted with the filthy dregs of many
heresies, and earnestly labors that these Monsters may grow up together
with her into one Hydra, that there may be made an union of all the reformed
Churches as they call them; and yet have no care, nor take any pains to purge
their faith, and doctrine, and pull up their heresies; although the Lutherans
hate the Sacramentaries worse then the dog does the Snake. Of the other
English heresies about Faith, and Works, and Justification, about the blessed
Sacrament, and private Masses, about Merits, and invocation of Saints, the
veneration of holy Images, holy Ceremonies, the souls of the departed, and the
like, which these heretics condemn in their heretical spirit, and which I
also in their companies with the same spirit of heresy in former time have in
some part condemned, it is not now my intent to speak much, by and by I will
give them a touch according to the nature of this place: at some other time I
will speak more largely of them, now I come to speak of their Schism.

I have no doubt at all, but that the English Sect, which the stained English
call the reformed Church, is much more divided and separated from the true
Catholic Church: then Brittany it self is divided from the rest of the
world. They themselves will willingly confess, and it is a thing of it self
most manifest, that they are wholly divided and separated from the Church of
Rome, and from all the Churches which are subject unto her, and live in
community with her. And seeing that the Roman Church with those which adheare
unto her, is according to Catholic faith, truly and properly the Catholic
Church of Christ: Does it not then necessarily follow, that the English
congregation which they call a Church, is altogether separated from the true
Catholic Church? and consequently neither to be the body of Christ, nor the
house of God, nor absolutely a Church? which thing as soon as I plainly
understood, I could not stay any longer in it. But they will say it appears
now unto thee so: who yet in thy books of Ecclesiastical Commonwealth have
called Rome Babylon, who have denied that there was any Church in Rome, and
also have taught us that it was properly a Schismatic Church: But that which
thou fayest of our Church is not manifest unto us: Wherefore I will endeavor
that it may be also manifest unto the English. They know very well that I am
not Pythagoras, whose only authority amongst his Scholars was accepted for
proof, wherefore they should not have been moved at these things I spoke,
seeing they were but have astertions, and for this cause my words even yet are
vain; for when I bring forth the proofs and examples they are without force
and ground. The reason whereupon sgrounded my position of Rome to be Babtlon
was, because the Prophecy in the 18. of the Apocalips could not be interpreted
of Rome, before it received the Christian faith, and whilst it was the
habitation of the Gentiles: But this reason is of no force; for suppose that it
were true, yet it does not follow that Rome being now Christian should be that
Babtlon spoken of in the Apocalips; for it is the opinon of many Catholic
Interpreters, that in the persecution of Antichrist, the Ethnic Idolaters, and
the Enemies of the Christian name shall (perhaps) subdue it, and of such that
prophecy (not yet fulfilled) may be fitly verified, yet in such sort, as the
faith of the Catholic Church may continue safe and found: Whereby now you see
that my applying it to Christian Rome, is but a mere calumniation; for I know
that Christian Rome is not Babylon, neither can it be so called without great
injury, and God forbid that by this Prohesie, we should understand the same
Roman Church, which is the Mother, and the head of all, either to have been,
or hereafter to become Babylon; for those things which are spoken of the City,
are not to be transferred unto the Church. I denied that there is a Church at
Rome, but I did not prove it; therefore that negation must be laid up amongst
my evil speeches, reproaches, and heresies, and conuincing my self within my
self being overcome by reason even in the same Treatises, I constantly
affirmed, that the Roman Church with her adherents was the only Church of
Christ, and now I do most earnestly profess and affirm it. I said it made a
Schism, when I had not yet exact consideration what a Schism was; and in this
I erred grossly, this being a manifest falsehood, and the proof which I brought
in confirmation is of no force: For he who is lawfully appointed head of a
Body, and calls and publishes himself for head of the same body, does not
separate himself from the body, neither casts away the body from him, but
joins himself unto the body, which has no coherence with a Schism: yet I
will handle this matter more at large in the correction of that work. Now I
proceed to declare how it is evident to me, that the English Sectaries, and
much more all the other Sectaries of our age, are truly and properly
Schismatics, because they have separated themselves without any lawful cause
from the true Church of Christ, which is the Catholic Roman Church, and her
adherents.

10 There can be only two causes of a lawful separation, why one, or more
Churches of Christ (and yet not commit Schism) should abandon one or more
other Churches from their communion: The one is heresy, and the other is
Schism it self. This is well known unto all the faithful, that the
heretical Churches which are incorrigible, are to be avoided by Catholics,
and that with such, they ought not to have any Ecclesiastical communion. I
enquired often times of the English, why they separated themselves from the
church of Rome and her adherents, whither for any heresy? And truly not none
of them could either by words or writing, show me that the Roman Catholics
either of our time, or in the time of our ancestors in their general publi ke
profession were at any time stained with any heresy. The Kings Majesty
himself of great Eritanie, granted to me publicly, and plainly, and so did
the wiser sort of their Ministers of all sorts, and not a few of their learned
men, that the Church of Rome did not err in fundamental points of Faith;
wherefore the Church of Rome is not heretical, if we will take but that which
they grant. Perhaps they will say the Church of Rome does not err in
fundamental points of faith (which thing I also seemed to teach, especially in
the causes of my departing, and in the Sermon I preached at London) yet they
err, and are fallen into heresy in other articles of faith, which be not
fundamental: But first, I know not what article it may be of true faith, which
is not fundamental; for neither could I understand, nor they explicate unto
me, how there may be such a distinction made or admitted, that some be
fundamental and some not: I have always thought, that all and the sole
articles which are truly articles of faith were fundamental, yet I errred when
I excluded many true articles from the fundamental; which being true, were
also fundamental articles, and without heresy, could not be denied: although
they be not of those principal articles of the Trinity, incarnation, necessity
of grace, Baptism in the name of the Trinity, etc. such as are the Sacraments,
justification, necessity of works, merrits, indulgences, and the rest, which I
have before rehearsed, as already limited in the Church, because those things
rely no less upon the revelation of God then the former, and for that cause
appertain no less unto faith then those. For he that thinks God to be a
deceiuer in any one article whatsoever it be must of necessity also acknowledge
him to be a deceiuer in all the rest. Then I enquired often times of them who
dealt seriously in the business, to show some article of faith, in which the
Church of Rome thought, and taught erroniously. They use to bring the article
of Transubstantion of the bread into the body of Christ, from which they gather
(as they think) some heresies, viz. That Christ has not a true body, but a
fantastical, if that in the least crum of the bread we put that whole body,
so that a body should not be a body. Item, that Christ is not in heaven, if he
be upon the Altar on earth, which is contrary to the article of the ascension
of our Lord. Ite^, that Christ is not borne of the virgin Mary, if that we do
make him of bread. In these men it is most true, that which St. Hierome says
upon the Epistle unto Titus, cap. 3. There is no Schism that does not invent
some heresy unto it self, that it may seem to have departed from the Church
upon a just cause. But transubstantiation which the Catholics profess, is
very far distant from those heresies; for all the properties of a body in
themselves are safe, although they be put in a crum of bread; but the same
proprieties in order unto the place which is external to the body, be
seperable from it by the divine omnipotency, which our Schoolmen explicate
sufficiently. But what heresy can they find in us, if we all do constantly
confess, that we believe as an article of faith that Christ had, and has a
true body, with all his natural proprieties in himself, which we believe, and
confess, may be kept by the same omnipotency even when the body is brought
into the least external place: neither can any impugn this Theologically; and
humane Philosophy neither can, nor ought to measure the divine power. Let
natural Philosophy judge what may be done by nature; but let her reverence,
and not judge those things that be above nature. Neither does it follow that
the body of Christ is not in heaven if it be upon the Altar, we all confess
that we believe by a divine faith, that Christ ascended into heaven, and there
sits continually at the right hand of the Father: But yet we say, that by
dinine power, one and the same body may be in sundry places at one time, at
least sacramentally: neither can that be impugned but out of humane
philosophy, and apparently only. And to conclude, we do not say that bread is
made a body which was not before, but we say that the bread is
transubstantiated into the body of Christ, which body was before the
consecration of the bread: so likewise the body of Christ borne of the Virgin
Mary was before this transubstantiation, and by conlecration the Bread is
transubstantiated into it. Truly they devise out of their own heads, these
heresies something grossly; for he is an heretic who maintains heresy
directly; But if they ask of us what we think of the verity of the body of
Christ, of his ascension; of his Incarnation; they shall receive from us a true
belief in all these things; although we affirm some things whereon they
think errors may follow, which we truly deny, and they will never be able to
prove Theologically the contrary. Wherefore as for heresy, they cannot make,
or allege any pretext from hence, why they have justly and rightfully
separated themselves from our Church.

11. The milder sort of English Protestants, who are not infected with
Puritanisme, do not much charge the Roman Church with heresy; and yet thereby
they do not free themselves from the crime of Schism, but they talk much of
Idolatry, and the pressing of new articles of faith upon them, wherein they
contend that the Roman Church and her adherents (that is to say, the very
Catholic Church) has revolted from the true faith; And by this they do
principally defend the equity of their separation. They esteem that it is
manifest Idolatry to worship, and pray unto Saints, and to reverence Relics,
and Images, but most of all to adore the blessed Sacrament; They say likewise
there is a secret Idolatry in the confidence we put in the salt, water, and
oil, and other things exercised, and blessed. They complain that the
Catholics thrust upon them new articles in so many definitions made in the
council of Trent about Justification, works, merits, purgatory, Indulgences,
etc. But these are vain words: if we Catholics were truly Idolaters, we
should not only be heretics, but much worse also then many heretics; and then
we were worthily to be avoided, and to be cast out from the socyetie of all
faithful people, But I marvel how he that is well in his wits can impute
Idolatry unto them, who daily profess themselves to believe in one God, and
are ready to shed their blood for this foundation of faith, who continually
preach that Gods worship is not to be given to any pure ereature? So this is
but a vain Calumniation. If for the invocation of Saints, the worship of
Images, the adoring of the blessed Sacrament, they suspect us to become guilty
of Idolatry, let them but seek, search, and know what we think of the unity
of the true God, and what of the not giving divine honor unto creatures, and
then they shall easily find themselves to be notorious fools, who think that
we be Idolaters, that is adorers of creatures with divine worship, neither
should they break out into schism until they first find in us true Idolatry.

12. None of us at any time said, that holy men already dead, or Angels were to
be worshipped with divine worship, we are not yet become such, fools.
Vigilantius objected this against the Catholics in old time but slanderously,
as S. Hierome writing against him does declare. As in other things, so in this
we have approved masters ( viz.) the old Fathers: we do not dissent, we donot
depart, we do not disagree from them; we willingly embrace, and diligently put
in practice whatsoever wholesome catholic precepts the Fathers have left
conferning the Saints, as Origin. lib. 8. contra Celsum. Epiphanias, here is. 79.
Augustm epist. 44. Et lib. de quantitate auimae, ca. 34. Et lib. de vera relig.
ca. 55. Et contra faustum lib. 20. ca. 21. C^rit^ Alex. lib. 6. contra Julian.
Theodoret in hist. Sanctorum Patrum ca. 24. whose words I cice not at large,
because this little book does not bear it. From whence therefore have these
blind masters received new eyes, seeing that long before they were; the holy
Catholic Church was perfectly adorned with most bright and glorious lights.

13 Unto the honor of Saints belong the Feasts which are celebrated in memory
of them, praising God, and giving him thanks that he has preferted mortal
men to that high degree of Sanctity: neither is it a new thing in the
Catholic Church to celebrate festival days yearly in the honor of Saints.
It is an ancient thing which may worthily be referred unto an Apostolic
tradition, besides the Lords day to celebrate the birth-dayes of the Saints
with festival solemnities; for I see it is approved by the ancient custom of
the Catholic Church: I find Cyprian lib. 3. cpist. 6. to have used
diligence, that the days on which the Martyrs lost their lives for the faith
should be carefully set down, that on such days (says he) we may make
oblations, and sacrifices for their commemorations. S. Iohanes Chrysostom,
sermon. in Martyrem Pelagiam. and S. August. psalm 88. part 2. in the end do
exhort the people to celebrate devoutly the solemnities of the Saints:
wherefore I cannot but much wonder at the new scruples of the Protestants, who
will seem to know more then is true, whilst they esteem that the feasts of
all the Saints, and also of the blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God, and of the
Apostles, and most famous Martyrs ought to be abrogated, although in England
they have left somewhat in this kind, yet very little.

14 They say it is all one to pray unto Saints that be dead, and to have many
Gods, and that the invocation of Saints, and worshipping of Images does not
differ from the customs of the heathen, for which cause they hate us very
much. But it were easy for us if this place would bear a longer disputation
(about the invocation of Saints) to refell all the slanders of these
heretics, for first they are compelled, if they will give credit unto the holy
Scriptures to grant, that the souls of the Saints do make intercession unto
God for us mortal men even in particular: and it is very well known that the
faithful in this life, do find help before God by the prayers of the just
men here upon earth: for Moses many times auerted the anger of God from the
people of Israel, and God persuades the friends of Job ca. 42. 18. to procure
Job to pray for them, that they might obtain remission of their folly. Paul
many times commends himself to the prayers of the faithful Ephesians. 6. 19.
Colos. 4. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Heb. 13. 18. etc. and they may
learn if they will, that the Saints deceased whose souls live before God, and
reign with Christ make intercession for the living of the millitant Church,
Hierom. 15. 1. Ezechiol 14. 14. Apoc. 5. 8. and 8. 3. And it is likewise
recorded in holy Scriptures that God does grant many things in lauour of his
Saints deceased, Genesis 26. 45. 24. Exodus 32. 13. 3. Reg. 18. 36. 1. Paral. 29.
18. 3 Reg. 11. 12. 32. 34. 15. 4. and 4. Reg. 8. 19. and 19. 34. and 20. 6. and
Isa. 37. 35. Look upon the Comentaries which are called Chrisostomes hom. 2.
psalm. 50. Christ admonishes us to make friends of the Mammon of iniquity,
Luc. 16. 9. That when you shall fasle, they may receive you into the eternal
tabernacles, and by virtue of this place S. Augustine de cuutate dei lib. 21.
ca. 27. does attribute much unto the intercession of Saints.

15 This intercession of Saints the Fathers acknowledge, admit, and confirm:
and of Angels, the Ladder of Jacob is known. Genesis 28. 12. other mysteries of
Angels are known, Heb. 1. 14. See Origin against Celsus lib. 8. of the Angels
attending on us, and Augustine cpist. 122. and of the Angell-keeper the
Scriptures speak very plainly, Genesis 48. 16. Exodus 23. 20. Psalm. 33. 8. Math.
18. 10. Act. 12. 15. and the Fathers most manifestly, Greg. Wissen. de vita
Moysis. Basil upon the psalm. 33. Hierom in Math. ca. 18. etc. And if every one
have by him the Angel of our Lord, why should he not call upon him for help. I
my self heard in England with great pleasure, one of my Chanons of Windsor
preaching before the King, and expressly affirming, that there was no cause
why every faithful man should not turn himself unto his Angel-keeper, and
say, O holy Angel-keeper pray for me. Of the intercession and Ministeries of
Angels for our benefit, you may also see other Fathers, as Anthony the father
of Monckes, epist 2. ad Arsenoitas, Anastatius of Synay in Herem. lib. 5.
Antiorhus the Abbot hom. 61. Chrysostom de incomprehons: des Not. hom. 3. and
hom. in Martyrs agiptios. Hierom epist. 1. Cirill Alex. apud Anastasium
Nicenum. quest. 91. Theodoret in the same place, Damoscen lib. 1. Parallel. ca.
7. etc.

16 But of the intercession of the other Saints, we have the common consent of
the Fathers. See Cyprian lib. de mortalitate. Hierom against Vigilantius Aug.
de baptismo. lib. 5. ca. 17. lib. 7. ca. 1. and de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 47.
and Sermon. 46. of the Saints, and lib. 9. of his confessions cap. 3. lib. de
cura pro mortuis cap. 16. and against Fanstus lib, 20. ca. 21. and in his
Meditations, cap. 20-Leo the great Sermon. of St. Laurence. Gandentius Brix.
sermon. 17. Greg. the great lib. 7. indict. 2. epist. 53. Bernard upon Cant.
Cantic. sermon. 77. I omit innumerable others that be later. Seeing the
Scriptures, the Fathers, and the universal consent of the Church do certainly
affirm that the Angels, and souls of holy men deceased, do pray for the
living, and in particular; why then should not every faithful man be
encouraged to pray unto them, whom he knows for certain to pray for us in
heaven?

17 Wherefore it is most certain that this invocation of Angels, and Saints
(desiting them to pray for us, and to join prayer with us as St. Chrysostom.
speaks, Sermon. in Sanctum Meletium) cannot be denied. And we have very notable
examples for us to pray unto the blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, that she
would make intercession for us unto her Son; Ireneum lib. 5. 19. Athan. in
Euang. de Deipara. Nazaanzen: orat. in Cyprian: Basil: Selenciae, Orat. 1. de
verbo incarnat. Aug. sermon. 1. de Anunciat: Cosmam Hierosolymi: Sophronium item
Hyerofalymi: orat, 6. de Angelom, excellencia.

18 And likewise the most ancient practice of the Church does confirm the
imsocation of other Saints. besides the blessed Virgin: so that the invocation
of Saints may be derined from an Apostolical Tradition: for the invocation of
Saints was always in use, and never reprehended of any one, who was not
accounted an heretic. It would be too long here to rehearse the Fathers who
prayed unto Saints, or them that affirm they are to be prayed unto: I have
performed it at large in another place, and this perpetual custom of calling
upon the Saints to pray for us, and to help us with their prayers, was never
reprehended; but rather the contrary error was condemned by St. Hierome
against Vigilantius, which condemnation the whole Church approved: Therefore by
the judgment of all the holy Church, our new Vigilantians are to be condemned,
whose rashness is very great, whilst they imagine a crime of Idolatry in our
invocation of Saints. Neither have these Vigilantians any sollid argument, or
objection to make against this invocation. All their objections I have answered
fully in another place; as also I think that I have sufficiently defended the
veneration of holy Relics in another place, which Relics God has confirmed
to be grateful unto him by manifest miracles.

19 But our adversaries do constantly affirm, that in the worship of holy
Images we commit Idolatry, and for this cause they pretend that their departure
from us is just: but this their pretext is most vain; neither can they by this
free themselves from the foul brand of filthy Schism; for if we reverence
holy Images with any proper honor, besides the honor and worship which is due
to the first pattern; that is not the honor and worship of Latria, nor that
true adoration which is due to God alone. Therefore when we most clearly
profess that godly honor and the worship of Latria is due, neither to Saints,
nor to their Relics, or Images, why do they object unto us Idolatry? the use
of Images does belong unto Ecclesiastical ceremonies; but as much as
concerns these things, the safe, certain, and infallible rule to know
whither they be lawful or no, is the practice and use of the primitive Church;
so that all those rites be lawful, and good, which either the Apostles
themselves, or Apostolical men have instiuted, or else have allowed with
silence, or express leave. But it is most certain that the Christian Church,
yea the most ancient, and universal, with a full consent without any
opposition, or any contradiction has worshipped, and reverenced pictures and
holy Images. John Damascenus has collected great store of testimonies in the
three Orations which he wrote for Images, and so did the Fathers of the
seventh general Synod, and after-them many learned Catholics of later times.
Therefore what vpstart Nouice dare condemn that, which the most holy and
learned Fathers have commended, taught, and practiced, that which the Catholic
Church it self taught by the Apostles, and has kept in all times, that which
God himself has also diverse times confirmed with miracles. Are not they then
(according to the saying of St. Augustine) most insolent and mad, who do not
Epist. 118.
retain and keep devoutly: but cast away, and reject the use of Images
together with their due honor, when neither the worship of Latria, which is due
to God, nor of Dulia, which is due unto the Saints themselves, is given unto
them.

20 Our adversaries chiefly urge two arguments against this our worshipping of
holy Images, which they think so strong, as that they imagine we can by no
means avoid them, and free our selves from the crime of Idolatry; and by
these they confirm their Schism to be lawful. The one is the commandment of
God, forbidding Images to be made: The other, that they who do adore the true
God in any external sign which is a pure creature, cannot be excused from
extreme Idolatry: for, they say with Calvin, that the Calfe was made by the
children of Israel, Exodus 32. 4. to represent the true God. And in this point,
especially Raynolds the English man, an earnest Puritan, strengthens and
foundeth his Treatise of the Idolatry of the Roman Church: But I do not
doubt, neither can the learned Adversaries doubt, that the most ancient holy
Fathers, and the Catholic Church it self did know the commandments, and the
History of the Calfe, and nevertheless without all difficulty, or any scruple,
they used holy Images in every place with worship and honor. But this
disputation becomes not this little book, and I hope I shall have opportunity
hereafter to confute at large Raynolds book of the Idolatry of the Church of
Rome: by the authority of which book, England does now chiefly defend her
Schism. In the mean space, let me change a few words with them. I desire
them to remember the works of Solomon, who endued with heavenly wisdom,
beautified the Temple which he built not only with those Images, and
artificial works which God himself had commanded to be made, such as were
the Cherubims, etc. but also of his own devise added many Images, and engraven
trees and beasts, as brazen Bulls, Palms, and Pomegranets; and adorned also
his throne with Lions, and Lions whelps of gold. 3. Reg. 10. 19. 20, etc.
Therefore Solomon understood and expounded unto us sufficiently, that the
precept of the Decalog forbidding graven Images, was neither perpetual, nor
yet forbidden by the diuiue natural law (which prohibiteth the adoration of
Latria toward Images) but only of the law of God positive, for a time and
conditional to be kept then, and so long, as there was present danger of
committing Idolatry by having Images. Now because there is no danger of
committing Idolatry in Images by us, who are well instructed: Therefore that
prohibition of the Decalog which forbids similitudes to be made, has no
place amongst us: and for this cause the Iconomochi abollishing the use of holy
Images, and breaking them, and abusing them vnreuerendly, were in all times
accounted by the Catholic Church for pestilent wicked heretics, and reckoned
amongst the Enemies of Christian religion.

21 It is most certain that the children of Israel committed Idolatry in the
adoration of the Calfe; but I will never grant that the Calfe did only
represent unto them the true God; And it is most false, and against the true
sense of the holy Scripture, to affirm that the Israelites did adore the true
God in that Calfe. They adored the golden Calfe it self, and erring most
wickedly, they thought that it had the Divinity of the true God: And I do not
doubt but that I shall easily demonstrate this out of most plain places of the
holy Scripture in his time and place, and then I will dissolve the subtle
reasons of Calvin and Reynolds, and show that the true God may even in
corporal signs be adored with complete Latria* without all danger of
committing Idolatry, to the end that it may more manifestly appear, that the
English are grossly deceived while they dream by the fopperies of Reynalds, to
triumph over the Catholic Roman Church, as fallen into Idolatry, and
therefore justly forsaken by them. Seeing there is neither evil circumstance,
nor scandal in our use of holy Images; because we live not amongst Idolaters,
and are, or may be sufficiently instructed about their lawful worship, how
far it is different from true Latria, therefore we may lawfully fall down
before an Image, and so adore with true Latria the primative pattern, if it be
to be adored with true Latria; As the children of Israel did, when they adored
God in the cloud, at the door of the Tabernacle, and did not adore the cloud,
Exodus 33. 10. and when they adored him in the fire. 2. Paralip. 7. 3. and yet
herein they did not commit any Idolatry, though they adored God in corporal
signs. They therefore who condemn such like adoration as truly and properly
Idolatricall, are ignorant of all true and sollid Divinity: Therefore in vain
do the Protestants cavil at this Idolatry, to defend their Schism and
separation from the Romane-Church, and hereby first they pollute themselves
with manifest heresy, and remain true Schismatics for that herein there was
no lawful cause of separation.

22 They do object unto us a most open Idolatry in adoring the B. Sacrament,
for that we adore it with true Latria, and by this also our Adversaries do
excuse themselves from Schisms: But they are much deceived; for we are most
certain, that the real and corporal presence of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in the holy mysteries of the Eucharist is present: we adore
the very body of Christ, which is to be adored with true Latria of it self, by
reason of the hypostaticall union lying hid under the forms of bread and wine:
but this question does not belong unto this place. We suppose this real and
corporal presence, which supposition is assured unto us by faith, for that we
take it from the Gospel, Christ saying, when he held the Bread in his hands,
This is my body, according to the promise he had made, saying, Joan. 6. 51. The
bread which I will give is my flesh. Wherefore our adversaries cannot so much
as imagine that we in this adoration are guilty of Idolatry, and therefore they
cannot aleage it in any excuse of their schism. But they are not only truly
and properly Schismatics but also heretics: and therefore I was bound of
necessity to forsake them, unless I would have consented unto their errors.

23 They impute unto us secret Idolatry, for that we place a spiritual
confidence in salt, water, oil, and the like after exorcismes and
benedictions; But these things they heap together, to the intent that they may
disgrace, and defame us, and excuse their schism by what means soever; for
they know well, that we do not put any certain confidence in these things, as
if we thought that these creatures received any certain, and infallible force,
or power by our exorcismes, and benedictions: and we do not call these things
Sacraments, but holy things which we use for the increase of our devotion, and
put all our confidence in God alone, who hearing the prayers of his Church does
distribute his gifts by these creatures through the virtue of the same prayers
and benedictions of his Church; And the greatest part of these and such like
rites we have received from Apostolical Tradition, and succession from the
most ancient Church, which who so follows cannot err, and he who contemns
and rejects such things, is to be cast out as an haire-brained enemy of the
Church, Tertullian lib. de Baptismo sets down the use of hallowed oil,
August. epist. 119. numbereth also oil amongst holy things. The consecration
of water for baptism, has been kept time out of mind in the Church; for
Cyprian lib. 1. epist. vlt. makes mention of the water, and oil of
consecration, and anointing. We have in Optatus Miliuitanus. That the holy Lib.
2. c^^e: Par ent.
Temples if they were polluted, by any means were wont to be hallowed again
with exorcismes, and washing of the walls, St. Basil deduceth from tradition
Lib. de Spirita Sanct. ca. 27.
the usual rite of anointing the baptized with oil. Antiquity teaches that
the sign of the cross was wont to be used in the hallowings, and
consecrations of all things. Justin quest. 118. Nazianzen, Orat. 1. against
Julian, and in the Orat. at the Funeral of his Father Chrysostom. 55. in
Matheum. August. tract. 118. in Joan. and sermon. 3. of the Annunciation, and
sermon. de tempore 181. cap. 3. Areopagita and others. There are perhaps amongst
us some Rytes not so ancient, in which we use hallowed, and consecrated things:
but seeing the Primative Church instructed by the Apostles feared no danger of
secret Idolatry, when she used consecrated oil, and the like, why should we
now fear, who attribute no more unto these consecrated things, then the old
Antiquity did unto theirs? Therefore to run into schism for these things is
great impiety. These rites are good, seeing most of them are instituted by the
Apostles, and others sprung forth from the devotion of Catholic Churches, and
all are in no part contrary to faith; but rather consonant unto faith. There
was in old time diversity of rytes, and ceremonies in diverse Churches, and yet
they did not therefore depart from a mutual Communion. For as Sozominus says,
They esteemed it to be frivolous, and that worthily, that they who agree
together in the principal heads, or points of Religion, should be separated
one from another, for the difference of a Ceremony. Therefore the separation of
the English (by which they have divided themselves from the true Catholic
Church, and broken out into a manifest schism) is frivolous, rash, and
impious; And to communicate with them in divine matters, is to consent unto
their most wicked, and pestiferous schism.

24 I will not here (for fear of being too long) dispute of the supposed new
articles, whereupon they ground their complaints, and endeavor to excuse their
schism: But will reserve this matter to be handled in another place. Now I
ask them this question. Whither they think that those which they call new
articles be contrary to faith or no? if they should be contrary to faith, then
they should be heresies, and should make us heretics worthily to be avoided,
and to be separated from the Communion of the catholic Church. But I have
proved already that there is no heresy in the Catholic Roman Church, and the
Kings Majesty of great Britain, and many learned men in that kingdom have
confessed, that the Church of Rome does not fail, or err in fundamental
points of faith; and I have already proved before, that there is no true
article which is not fundamental, and to be firmly believed; therefore it
maintains no articles which are contrary to the Catholic faith; and since
they be not contrary to the true faith: but contain the true faith, they
cannot minister a just cause to begin a schism. But Protestants say the Church
of Rome does separate, and divide us from her, because we respect those
articles. But I am sorry, and lament, that they had made a most foul, and
gross schism before any thing was spoken of concerning these articles which
they call new; Therefore it is great folly in them to allege these new
articles, as a cloak for their schism; for the effect cannot go before his
cause. I defend that they have made a schism without cause, and by this I knew
that they were manifest schismatickes, and therefore have departed from them.
And those same articles which Protestants affirm to be new, may be evidently
demonstrated out of Scriptures, Traditions, and Fathers to be true; and the
contrary articles which they set down may be convinced out of them to contain
manifest heresies, If the sense of the first Authors be retained: for some
milder Protestants now of late in matters of Controversy (as I have heard) do
use favorable explications, not much dissonant from Catholic doctrine, by
which they seem to tend to a pious Reconciliation.

Who without a pernicious error, or rather plain heresy, can put all his
salvation in faith only, and exclude the necessity of good works, and
absolutely deny our merits; and affirm that grace once had cannot be lost,
and that the just cannot sin? They who hold with tooth, and nail, that
these, and the like are articles of faith; and that the contrary are heresies,
do without question err in matters of faith, and declare themselves to be
heretics, and by consequence are worthily numbered amongst heretics by
Catholics in their definitions: Therefore not any heresy of the Church of
Rome, or her manifest, or secret Idolatry could give an occasion unto the
Protestants schism. Neither can they object schism unto the Roman Church, for
she made not the schism, but they made it, and she endured it: for, from her
Luther and Calvin, and the rest separated themselves first, and not she from
them. When they obstinatly rejected the Judgment of the Church, then they made
a schism. Then they divided the Coat of Christ, then they errected one Altar
against another, then they forsook the true Church.

25 Besides the causes before rehearsed, and examined, they also pretended for
their schism, a necessity of Reformation in the Church; But I could never yet
see any reformation amongst them: but to say the truth I observed many
deformations: for the care of conscience is utterly neglected, and cast away
amongst them; some few accepted, the rest have no scruple of conscience to
commit adultery; violent extertion, treachery against their neighbors,
cosenage, usury; as people who have impiously abollished auricular confession,
fastings, penance, and such like holy exercises. And suppose that they had
found amongst us any thing to be reprehended either in our manners, or in our
actions, or in our government, that should not be imputed to the defects of the
Church, but unto particular men, whose actions are not allowed; but reproved by
Catholics, neither ought they to have raised a filthy schism for those
smaller matters, when the foundation of faith remained firm, stable, and
vnshaden in the Church of Rome: And suppose that we had builded upon it, Wood,
stubble, or Hay, as it is said in 1. Cor. 3. 12. Yet we should not be excluded
from salvation. But the Protestants have left the foundation, they have
forsaken the foundation it self: and the gold, and silver, and precious stones
which they vainly brag of, and vaunt to be theirs, are more base then the
filth and mire in the streets, unless they be built upon the true foundation
which is Christ. There is one foundation; not two foundations; one Church, not
two; one Christ not two. If Christ be our foundation which they cannot deny,
then he is not theirs; They have made another Church divided and separated from
ours, and that cannot be the Church, for that the Church is one and not two; He
that will be a member of that Church, must needs be without the true Church of
Christ.

26 I confess that the English Protestants deceived me, before that I had
exactly considered the nature of a schism; for when I objected schism unto
them, some answered that it was not their fault, that they did not communicate
with the Church of Rome, they were ready to be in union, but the Pope would not
receive them into his communion, but rejected them with an anathema. This
excuse seemed to me for a time to be just, and reasonable, but after I begun
out of this ground in my private arguments, and public Sermons to urge an
union, which upon their words seemed to me somewhat easily to be concluded; and
so thrust my finger further into the wound; then I perceived that in England
they did not use the English confession (or authorized articles) for a rule of
their faith, (which as they affirmed were very modest.) But the Confession of
Calvin, and many gross errors of Luther. And this I perceived more evidently,
when I looked into the counterfeit Sinod of the Protestants at Dort, in which
the puritanicall articles of Calvin by consent of the English Agents were
confirmed, with the good liking of the English sect. And if the English
confession which is divided into certain articles does not include in them
those puritanicall articles of Dort, why did they give their consent, and
voices unto the Caluinian excesses in the name of the English sect? Moreover,
how can they, which profess themselves mortal Enemies to the Church of Rome
be thought to desire an union with the Church of Rome; and that the defect of
agreement is not on their parts? How can they cast the causes of schism upon
the curses of Rome, and Council of Trident, when before the said curses they
had divided themselves by schism, from the Catholic Church: and by such a
schism as in some respect was far worse, and more foul, then was the
schism which was first raised by Luther, and increased by Calvin? For that
England at the beginning abstained from the opinions of Luther and Calvin,
neither did they charge the Church of Rome either with heresy, or Idolatry
(which the Lutherans and Caluinists made the pretext of their schism) and yet
nevertheless, without any apparent cause, long after, they yealded unto the
common schism of these heretics: And now at this time, the Englishmen (for
the most part) do not only commend, and defend the division, and separation
made, but strive by all force to maintain it: for they fly back from union,
cast away charity, and do all they can to hinder peace, and brotherly Love, in
such sort, as that many of them say, they will sooner, and more willingly enter
into alliance or league with the Turks, then with the Papists. Call you this a
mind ready to agree or to make an atonement? is it likely to be true that the
fault is not theirs why they do not communicate with the Roman Church? No, it
cannot possibly be, that the union whereof I had some hope should take effect,
except they do first detest all heresies, and heretics, and believe aright
with the Catholic Roman Church, and be conjoined unto it in perfect Charity.

27 Henry the 8. made little difference but with the Pope only, whose primacie
he denied, with an heretical spirit, and moved with some distempered humors,
violently took unto himself only the Ecclesiastical supremacy, and carried
himself more modegatly in other things which belonged unto the faith, and
divine service, and ceremonies of the Catholic Religion. Under Edward his
son a child, and much more under Elizabeth they departed not only from the
Pope, the Vicar of Christ, and supreme Pastor of the whole Christian slocke,
but also the divine service, and worship of God, was taken away from the
Catholics by maine force and injury, and forbidden by the public secular
laws. What, was there any lawful Synod first called? were the objections
against the Catholics examined and discussed? were their answers heard? were
they convicted of any error, or impiety in Religion? was the judgment given
by any competent Judge? No such matter. Does not the same violence, the same
injury, the same impiety continue? for what labor and pains do they (who
have the chief charge of their Religion in England such as it is) daily take,
least that the divine, anncient, pious, and prescript service, should be
restored unto Catholics? And are not they then in the fault, that the Schism
is not taken away? They urge Reformation; yet Reformation although it be just,
and necessary, if it be done with Schism, is a most foul, and hateful
deformation. That is reformed, which continuch the same in substance: Therefore
the Catholic Religion, and her substantial exercises, ought to have remained
in England: and if any thing therein had been to be reformed, it should have
been put under a lawful reformation ( seruatis seru^^ndes) without taking
away necessaries: And they should not have brought in another Religion, and
suppressed the former, or thrust it into a corner, thereby to make two
contrary, and repugnant Religions: so as the first is not reformed, but as much
as in them lies lestroyed, and a new forged. Moreover, there cannot be two
Religions of Christ, but one only which is ours, as I have showed, because
there is but one Church, one foundation, and one Christ.

28. Therefore when amongst other evils, I saw my self environed on every side
with an inuetterate Schism, and that there was no hope of union: an Altar
being erected against an Altar, and disioyned from the charity of the Church; I
neither ought, nor could stay with them any longer with a safe conscience:
Wherefore the remorse of conscience compelled me to return unto the Catholic
Church; My Agar hearing the voice of the Angel reproving her, and saying:
Return unto thy Mistress, and humble thy self under Genesis 16. 9
her hand: was forced of necessity to return unto the most holy Church her
Mistress. Moreover, my slight could bring me nothing, but shame, and
destruction. God commanded me to be humble under the hand of my Mistress, and
in this thing especially it behooued me to follow God. I wish to God that they
unto whom I foolishly fled, would acknowledge their most miserable spiritual
estate, not only for their heresies, but also for their lamentable Schism,
from which as I have showed them they cannot be excused, because they have
separated themselves unjustly, and without cause from the true Church of
Christ, which is our Catholic Roman Church; And this thing terrisieth me:
for Schismatics exclude themselves from being the sons. of God, as Cyprian
affirms, saying; They have not God Ioh. 11. 52. De^^ ^. ^^ (...).
to their Father, who will not have the (true) Church for their mother. Christ
died to gather into one the sons of God which were dispersed. Therefore the
death of Christ did not only work, and does work the redemption of men, but
also the union of the Church. Before the death of Christ the children of God
were divided and scattered, some under the law of Moses, others under the law
of nature; all were divided one from another into several congregations. But
now since the coming of Christ, the divine wisdom would that all his
faithful believer, and true children by faith, should make one only society
throughout the whole world, under their Captain, and Emperor Jesus Christ,
and serve him in his wars under the standard of the holy Cross, with the
same colors and Ensigns of the Sacraments. And this society and unity is a
notable effect of the death of Christ, which death has brought to pass, that
disagreeing Sects, and innumerable forms of Rites, and Religions amongst
themselves opposite, should join together into a Christian unity by him, Who
is our peace, and has made both one, and this by the Ephe. 2. 14. Lib. 3.
Hexem.
Cross, whereupon Anastasius of Mount Sinay says, that these words, Let
waters be gathered into one place, are to be understood of the Church,
assembled together of diverse people, and Nations, and Sects, under the unity of
faith: For which cause Christ also said of his Cross, If I be exalted from the
earth, I will draw all Ioh. 12. 32.
things unto my self. Athanasius in his Treatise of the Incarnation of the
word of God, says, Our Lord exalted in the Cross, stretches forth both his
arms to invite unto himself only, both the Nations of the Jews and
Gentiles, that by embracing them, he might gather them both into his bosom:
but there is but one only bosom between the arms of our Savior.

29 And Athanasius in the same place thinks, that it is not without mystery,
that Christ did choose the death of the Cross, and not the cutting off his
head, by which his precursor St. John Baptist lost his life, nor the dividing
of his body into parts, which I say suffered: that in his death he might
without dismembring keep his body whole and entire, and take away all excuses
from Schismatics, who desire to divide the Church into parts. And Christ our
Lord was so pleased with this unity, that with a most seruent prayer in the
very last night of his life, he required of his Father, that he would not
suffer his Disciples, and the other believers to depart from this unity: and
said twice, that the cause why he Joan. 17. 11. 20. 21.
prayed for the preservation of this unity was: That the world may believe that
thou have sent me. But our Adversaries nothing considering these things, as
much as lies in them, would have the death and cross of Christ, to be without
this most excellent fruit of unity; and by deuisions and schisms give unto the
Jews and Pagans occasion to speak ill of, and to blaspheme Christ, by saying
that he was not the son of God, nor sent by God, seeing the union which he
ordained did not continue, but now and then was broken into parts. The Church
of Christ is one house, and one family; he who shall withdraw himself from
this family, or goes out of this house, does not appertain unto the family of
Christ, but is excluded from salvation, even as they who were without the Arc,
perished in the flood. Genesis 8
The Protestants have cut off themselves from the body of Christ, which is the
sole Catholic Roman Church, with her inseparable adherents: Therefore there
be not members of Christ, nor is Christ their head; neither are they partakers
of his holy spirit, or gifts. They are rotten members, and already cut off, for
that they have by their own free will impiously cut off themselves from the
body. They are branches cut off from the Vine, good for nothing but for the
fire: Neither can he (says St. Augustine) be partaker of Divine charity, who
is an enemy of unity.

30 By Schism they have inenrred the loss of all spiritual goods, if they
think they possess any; If I speak (says St. Paul) with the tongues of men
and Angels, 1 Cor. 13. 1.
and have not charity, I am nothing: it does profit me nothing, etc. According
to these words of St. Paul St. Augustine says, that Schismatickes do not
profit (...) 1. de Bapt. ^^. (...). 4. (...) 2.
by doing good works. Cyprian affirms the same many times, saying, Although
a man be slain for the name of Christ after he is out of his Church, and
divided from unity, and charity, he cannot be crowned in his death, and
repeateth the same lib. 1. epist. 1. and unto Iuba^^num, and in his books de
Simplicitate Praelethrum, or, de vnitate Ecclesiae, and de oratione dommica,
Chrisostom in epist. ad Ephesians. hom. 11. follows him, and says the same.

31 I wish they would consider what a horrible sin they have committed, by
making this damnable separation. For that Schism is the destruction of holy
Church according to the words of Christ, saying, Every Kingdom euided against
it self be made desolate. Luke 11. 17. Galat. 5. 15.
And S. Paul says, Take heed, how you bite one another, least you be consumed
one with another, and St. Lib. depoenit. ^^ 4.
Ambrose proves, that this wickedness of destroying the Church, may be that
sin against the holy Ghost, which Christ said is not remitted, neither in
this Mat. 12. 31. 3 (...) 6.
world, nor in the world to come. So that wicked harlot had rather to have the
child destroyed, then to be restored into the bosom of the own mother, and
therefore cried against her, be it neither mine nor thine, (...) 10. ^.
but let it be divided. So Schismatickes, least the faith should be conscrued
alive, and whole in the bosom of the true mother the Church, do what they can
to divide it, that it may be dead to them both. But they labor in vain, to
the verifying upon themselves this saying, He that breaks the hedge, a
Serpent shall byte him. And it is no wonder that in these days the English are
fallen into many heresies, and that Puritanisme does so much reign amongst
them, although at the first separation, they were not polluted with the
Lutheran or Caluinian heresies: For Ireneus does excellently Lib. ^. cap. 40.
and li. 4. ca. 43.
teach, that they who are cut off from the Church, do not drink of the
Fountain of the spirit of God: but dig unto themselves old Cisterns, and
fall into most filthy errors against the true faith. And so Gyprian makes the
Catholic Church a Root, a Lib. de s^^p. Pralater. ^.
Fountain, a Sun, so that as the branch has life from the root, the
Brook has water from the Fountain, the rays light from the Sun, even so
the sincerity of faith cannot be had, but by conjunction to the Catholic
Church. They therefore who have separated themselves from it, cannot receive
the verity of faith, but of necessity they must fall into errors; for they be
trees without a root, they be Brooks without a Fountain, and Rays without a
Sun. Whereupon the Fathers in many places by these, and the like reasons do
manifestly prove, that Schism does at length break out into heresy: For he
who does refuse to have communion with the Catholic Church: he also will
refuse to learn of it the verities of Faith, of which she only is the keeper
and conseuer. Therefore very well did Augustine conclude, That an inuetterate
Cont. Cr^scon. lib. 2. cap. 7. Lib. 1. epist. 6.
Schism is even heresy it self. And rightly did Cyprian find in every
Schism this heresy at least, that by it are taken away these two articles out
of the Creed: I believe the holy Catholic Church, and the remission of sins.
For they that believe the holy Catholic Church to be the true Church of
Christ, cannot depart from the same, if they so believe: But if they do
depart, certainly they do not believe, that the Catholic Church is the true
Church of Christ. So Augustine says, that the Donatists had turned the^ (...).
Schism into an heresy. And Ambrose approving his fact, who had fled from the
Churches of the Luciferites. a^^ have now done from the English, said: He
thought there was no faith in the Schism, for though they kept the faith to
God, yet they did not keep it to the Church, whose limbs they suffered (as it
were) to be divided, and members to be rent in pieces* for seeing Christ d^^
sufer for the Church, and the Church is Christ's body, they seem not to believe
Christ, who make his passion void, and tear his body in pieces.

33. Should I therefore have stayed among Schismatickes, and heretics with
such danger unto my soul? God forbid. I repent me with all my heart, that I
have remained so long amongst them, and have taken up and used wicked Arms
against my Mother, the Catholic truth, and have written books of the
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth full of heresies, which I sincerely hete, and
detest, and was a Soldier in that graceless Camp to the perpetual infamy of
mine own name; And now it does both grieve, and vex me, that I have been the
Author of so great wickedness. Therefore with all humility and reverence, I
ask and crave pardon and forgiveness for my wicked offense of God Almighty,
of Christ our Savior, and of the Pope his Sovereign, and chief Viccar upon
earth; and do wholly submit my self; and faults unto the great clemency of the
same Pope, who sits supreme Judge of us all, and not to be judged of any
upon Earth, for that he represents the person of Christ in his Church. And
even as our Lord himself does open willingly his bosom of mercy unto him that
is penitent, so am I in good hope that I shall be received into the arms of
the Clemency of his holiness. The example of St. Cyprian against Stephen the
Pope (much reproved and condemned in the Catholic Church) some times
confirmed me in my wickedness, of striving, and resisting against the supreme
Pastor; But now my foul fall has taught me to my loss, that those Bishops
wander, and go astray from the right path of Faith, who do refuse to be
guided by the only Pole-starre which is the Pope of Rome, to follow wandering
fiery Meteors to their destruction. Would to God even as the divine Cyprian by
the effusion of his own blood for Christ, did wash away the stain of his
former Audacity, so I heartily desire that there might be given unto me (who in
the multitude and heinousness of my faults have surpassed incomparably his
fall) the opportunity and grace, to deface and blot out my foul stains and
filthiness, and bear witness of the truth of the Catholic faith with the
shedding of my very blood: which stains and filthiness I am most ready (...)
the help of God when Ink should fail, to sign with my proper blood, to the
praise and glory of God, the Exaltation of the holy Catholic Church, and to
the honor, and dignity of the Apostolic Sea, which God grant.

At Rome. 24. Nouembris. Anno. 1622.
FINIS.

