DEATHS DVELL, OR, A Consolation to the Soul, against the dying Life, and
living Death of the Body.

Delivered in a Sermon at White Hall, before the KINGS MAJESTY, in the
beginning of Lent, 1630.

By that late learned and Reverend Divine, JOHN DONE, Dr. in Divinity, and
Deane of S. Paul's, London.

Being his last Sermon, and called by his Majesty's household THE DOCTORS OWN
FUNERAL SERMON.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for Richard Redmer and Benjamin Fisher, and
are to be sold at the sign of the Talbot in Alders-gate street. M.DC.XXXII.

To his dearest sister Mrs. Elizabeth Francis of Brumsted in Norff.
DEarest Sister, for any so mean as my self to prefixe a Dedication to so
worthy a man's work as this is, is a boldness little inferior to presumption
it self. But the Copy being bestowed upon me by a worthy Friend of mine
(far more able) who would not himself take that office upon him; Principally
to let you know, how feign I would show my gratitude to you, whose debtor I
have ever bin; and well knowing your well known zeal to devotions of this
strain, To you I dedicate (before all others) this sacred Tractate; Of your
acceptance of it, I doubt not; But my desire is that you would accept also the
love of him that can no ways else (as yet) give your deseruings better
satisfaction, then by remaining.

Your ever truly loving and devoted Brother, RICH. REDMER.

To the READER.
THIS Sermon was, by Sacred Authority, styled the Authors own funeral Sermon.
Most fitly: whether we respect the time, or the matter. It was preached not
many days before his death; as if, having done this, there remained nothing
for him to do, but to die: And the matter is, of Death; the occasion and
subject of all funeral Sermons. It has been observed of this Reverend Man,
That his Faculty in Preaching continually increased: and, That as he exceeded
others at first; so, at last he exceeded himself. This is his last Sermon; I
will not say, it is therefore his best; because, all his were excellent. Yet
thus much: A dying Man's words, if they concern our selves; do usually make
the deepest impression, as being spoken most feelingly, and with least
affectation. Now, whom does it not concern to learn, both the danger, and
benefit of death? Death is every man's enemy, and intends hurt to all; though to
many, he be occasion of greatest goods. This enemy we must all combat dying;
whom he living did almost conquer; having discovered the utmost of his power,
the utmost of his cruelty. May we make such use of this and other the like
preparatiues, That neither death, whenever it shall come, may seem terrible;
nor life tedious; how long soever it shall last.

R.
PSALM 68. verse. 20. In fine.
And unto God the (LORD) belong the issues of death. i. e. From death.
BVILDINGS stand by the benefit of their foundations that sustain and support
them, and of their butteresses that comprehend and embrace them, and of their
contignations that knit and unite them: The foundations suffer them not to
sink, the butteresses suffer them not to swerue, and the contignation and
knitting suffers them not to cleave; The body of our building is in the former
part of this verse: It is this, he that is our God is the God of salvation and
salutes; of salvation in the plural, so it is in the original; the God that
gives us spiritual and temporal salvation too. But of this building, the
foundation, the butteresses, the contignations are in this part of the verse,
which constitutes our text, and in the three diverse acceptations of the words
amongst our expositors. Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death, Of
for first the foundation of this building, that our God is the God of all
saluations) is laid in this; That unto this God the Lord belong the issues of
death, that is, it is in his power to give us an issue and deliverance, even
then when we are brought to the jaws and teeth of death, and to the lips of
that whirlepoole, the grave. And so in this acceptance, this exitus mortis*
this issue of death is liberatio a morte, a deliueran^e from death, and this is
the most obuious and most ordinary acceptance of these words, and that upon
which our translation lays hold, the issues from death. And then secondly the
butteresses that comprehend and settle this building, That he that is our God,
is the God of all salvation, are thus raised; unto God the Lord belong the
issues of death, that is, the disposition and manner of our death: what kind
of issue and transmigration we shall have out of this world, whether prepared
or sudden, whether violent or natural, whether in our perfect senses or shaken
and disordered by sickness, there is no condemnation to be argued out of that,
no Judgment to be made upon that, for how soever they dye, precious in his
sight is the death of his saints, and with him are the issues of death, the
ways of our departing out of this life are in his hands. And so in this sense
of the words, this exitus mortis, the issues of death, is liberatio in morte, A
deliverance in death; Not that God will deliver us from dying, but that he
will have a care of us in the hour of death, of what kind soever our passage
be. And in this sense and acceptance of the words, the natural frame and
contexture does well and pregnantly administer unto us; And then lastly the
contignation and knitting of this building, that he that is our God is the God
of all saluations, consists in this, unto this God the Lord belong the issues
of death, that is, that this God the Lord having united and knit both natures
in one, and being God, having also come into this world, in our flesh, he could
have no other means to save us, he could have no other issue out of this
world, nor return to his former glory, but by death; And so in this sense,
this exitus mortis, this issue of death, is liberatio per mortem, a deliverance
by death, by the death of this God our Lord Christ Jesus. And this is Saint
Augustines acceptance of the words, and those many and great persons that have
adhered to him. In all these three lines then, we shall look upon these words;
First, as the God of power, the Almighty Father rescues his servants from the
jaws of death: And then as the God of mercy, the glorious Son rescued us, by
taking upon him self this issue of death: And then between these two, as the
God of Comfort, the holy Ghost rescues us from all discomfort by his blessed
impressions before hand, that what manner of death soever be ordained for us,
yet this exitus mortis shall be introitus in vitam, our issue in death (shall
be an entrance into everlasting life.) And these three considerations? our
deliverance a morte, A morte, in morte, per mortem.
in morte, per mortem, from death, in death, and by death, will abundantly do
all the offices of the foundations, Foundation, butteresses and contignation.
of the butteresses, of the contignation of this our building; That he that is
our God, is the God of all salvation, because unto this God the Lord belong the
issues of death.

First, then, I. Part.
we consider this exitus mortis, to be liberatio a morte, that with God the
Lord are the issues of death, and therefore in all our death, and deadly
calamities of this life, we may justly hope of a good issue from him. In all
our periods and transitions in this life, are so many passages from death to
death; our very birth and entrance into this life, Exitus a morte vteri.
is exitus a morte, an issue from death, for in our mothers womb we are dead
so, as that we do not know we live, not so much as we do in our sleep,
neither is there any grave so close, or so putrid a prison, as the womb would
be unto us, if we stayed in it beyond our time, or dyed there before our time.
In the grave the worms do not kill us, we breed and feed, and then kill
those worms which we our selves produced. In the womb the dead child kills
the Mother that conceived it, and is a murderer, nay a parricide, even after
it is dead. And if we be not dead so in the womb, so as that being dead we
kill her that gave us our first life, our life of vegetation, yet we are dead
so, as David's Idols are dead. Psalm. 115. verse. 6.
In the womb we have eyes and see not, ears and hear not; There in the
womb we are fitted for works of darkness, all the while deprived of light:
And there in the womb we are taught cruelty, by being fed with blood, and may
be damned, though we be never borne. Of our very making in the womb, David
says, I am wonderfully and fearfully made, Psalm. 139. 6.
and such knowledge is too excellent for me, Ps* 118. 23.
for even that is the Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes; Ipse fecit
nos, 100. 3.
it is he that has made us, and not we our selves, nor our parents neither;
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me round about, says Job, and (as the
original word is) thou have taken pains about me, and yet, says he, thou
do destroy me. Though I be the Master piece of the greatest Master (man is
so,) yet if thou do no more for me, if thou leave me where thou made me,
destruction will follow. The womb which should be the house of life, becomes
death it self, if God leave us there. That which God threatens so often, the
shutting of the womb, is not so heavy, nor so discomfortable a curse in the
first, as in the latter shutting, nor in the shutting of barrennes, as in the
shutting of weakness, when children are come to the birth, and no strength to
bring forth.

It is the exaltation of misery, Esaias 37.
to fall from a near hope of happiness. And in that vehement imprecation, the
Prophet expresses the highest of Gods anger give them o Lord, what wilt
thougiue them? give them a miscarying womb. Therefore as soon as we are men,
(that is, inanimated) quickened in the womb) though we cannot our selves, our
parents have to say in our behalf, wretched man that he is, who shall deliver
him from this body of death? Romans 7. 24.
for even the womb is a body of death, if there be no deliverer. It must be
he that said to Jeremy, Before I formed thee I knew thee, and befored thou
came out of the womb I sanctified thee. We are not sure that there was no
kind of ship nor boat to fish in, nor to pass by, till God prescribed Noah
that absolute form of the Arc. Exo. 23.
That word which the holy Ghost by Moses uses for the Arc, is common to all
kind of boats, Theball, and is the same word that Moses uses for the boat
that he was exposed in, That his mother laid him in an arc of bulrushes. But
we are sure that Eve had no Midwife when she was delivered of Cain, therefore
she might well say, Genesis 4. 1.
possedi virum a Domino, I have gotten a man from the Lord, wholly, entirely
from the Lord; It is the Lord that enabled me to conceive, The Lord that
infused a quickening soul into that conception, the Lord that brought into the
world that which himself had quickened, without all this might Eve say, My
body had been but the house of death, and Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis,
Exitus a mortibus mundi.
to God the Lord belong the issues of death. But then this exitus a morte, is
but introitus in mortem, this issue, this deliverance from that death, the
death of the womb, is an entrance, a delivering over to another death, the
manifold deaths of this world, we have a winding sheet in our Mothers womb,
which grows with us from our conception, and we come into the world, wound up
in that winding sheet, for we come to seek a grave; And as prisoners
discharged of actions may lie for fees; so when the womb has discharged us,
yet we are bound to it by cords of hestae by such a string, as that we cannot
go thence, nor stay there; we celebrate our own funerals with cries, even
at our birth; as though our threescore and ten years life were spent in our
mothers labor, and our circle made up in the first point thereof; we beg our
Baptism, with another Sacrament, with tears; And we come into a world that
lasts many ages, but we last not; Ioh. 14. 2.
in domo Patris, says our Savior, speaking of heaven, multae mansiones, there
are many mansions, diverse and durable, so that if a man cannot possess a
martyrs house, (he has shed no blood for Christ, yet he may have a
Confessors, he has been ready to glorify God in the shedding of his blood.
And if a woman cannot possess a virgins house (she has embraced the holy
state of marriage) yet she may have a matrons house, she has brought forth and
brought up children in the fear of God. In domo patris, in my fathers house,
in heaven there are many mansions; but here upon earth the son of man has
not where to lay his head, Mat. 8. 20.
says he himself. Nonne terram dedit filijs hominum? how then has God given
this earth to the sons of men? he has given them earth for their materials
to be made of earth, and he has given them earth for their grave and
sepulture, to return and resolve to earth, but not for their possession: Here
we have no continuing city, Heb. 13. 14
nay no cottage that continues, nay no persons no bodies that continue.
Whatsoever moved Saint Jerome to call the iournies of the Israelites, in the
wilderness, mansions; Exo. 17. 1.
The word (the word is Nasang) signifies but a journey, but a peregrination.
Even the Israel of God has no mansions; but iournies, pilgrimages in this
life. By what measure did Jacob measure his life to Pharaoh; the days of the
years of my pilgrimage. And though the Apostle would not say morimur, Genesis 47.
9.
that, whilst we are in the body we are dead, yet he says, Peregrinamur,
whilst we are in the body, we are but in a pilgrimage, and we are absent
from the Lord; he might have said dead, 2 Cor. 5. 6.
for this whole world is but an universal churchyard, but our common grave,
and the life and motion that the greatest persons have in it, is but as the
shaking of buried bodies in their grave, by an earthquake. That which we call
life, is but Hebdomada mortium, a week of death, seven days, seven periods
of our life spent in dying, a dying seven times over; and there is an end. Our
birth dies in infancy, and our infancy dies in youth, and youth and the rest
dye in age, and age also dies, and determines all. Nor do all these, youth out
of infancy, or age out of youth arise so, as a Phoenix out of the ashes of
another Phoenix formerly dead, but as a waspe or a serpent out of a caryon, or
as a Snake out of dung. Our youth is worse then our infancy, and our age worse
then our youth. Our youth is hungry and thirsty, after those sins, which our
infancy knew not; And our age is sorry and angry, that it cannot pursue those
sins which our youth did; and besides, all the way, so many deaths, that is,
so many deadly calamities accompany every condition, and every period of this
life, as that death it self would be an ease to them that suffer them: Upon
this sense does Job wish that God had not given him an issue from the first
death, from the womb, Wherefore have thou brought me forth out of the womb?
Io. 18.
O that I had given up the Ghost, and no eye seen me? I should have been as
though I had not been. And not only the impatient Israelites in their
murmuring ( would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the land of
Egypt) but Eliah himself, Exo* 16^ 3.
when he fled from Iesabell, and went for his life, as that text says, under
the Iunipertree, requested that he might dye, and said, it is enough now, O
Lord, take away my life. Rev. 19. 4. 4. 3.
So Jonah iustifies his impatience, nay his anger toward God himself. Now o
Lord take, I beseech thee, my life from me, for it is better to dye then to
live. And when God asked him, do thou well to be angry for this, he replies,
I do well to be angry, even unto death, how much worse a death then death, is
this life, which so good men would so often change for death? But if my case
be as Saint Paul's case, quotidie morior, that I dye daily, that something
heavier then death fall upon me every day; If my case be David's case, tota die
mortificamur; all the day long we are killed, that not only every day, but
every hour of the day some thing heavier then death fall upon me, though that
be true of me, Conceptus in peccatis, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me, (there I dyed one death,) though that be true of me
(Natus filius irae) I was borne not only the child of sin, but the child of
wrath, of the wrath of God for sin, which is a heavier death; Yet Domini
Domini sunt exitus mortis, with God the Lord are the issues of death, and after
a Job, and a Joseph, and a Jeremy, and a Daniel, I cannot doubt of a
deliverance. And if no other deliverance conduce more to his glory and my good,
Apoc. 1. 18.
yet he has the keys of death, and he can let me out at that door, that is,
deliver me from the manifold deaths of this world, theomni die and the tota
die, the every days death and every hours death, by that one death, the
final dissolution of body and soul, the end of all. But then is that the end
of all? Is that dissolution of body and soul, the last death that the body
shall suffer? (for of spiritual death we speak not now) It is not, though
this be exitus a morte; It is introitus in mortem: though it be an issue from
manifold deaths of this world, Exitus a morte Incinerationis.
yet it is an entrance into the death of corruption and putrefaction and
vermiculation and incineration, and dispersion in and from the grave, in which
every dead man dies over again. It was a prerogative peculiar to Christ, not
to die this death, not to see corruption: what gave him this privilege? Not
Joseph's great proportion of gummes and spices, that might have preserved his
body from corruption and incineration longer then he needed it, longer then
three days, but it would not have done it for ever: what preserved him then?
did his exemption and freedom from original sin preserve him from this
corruption and incineration? it is true that original sin has induced this
corruption and incineration upon us; If we had not sinned in Adam, mortality
had not put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 33.
(as the Apostle speaks) no, corruption had not put on incorruption, but we
had had our transmigration from this to the other world, without any mortality,
any corruption at all. But yet since Christ took sin upon him, so far as
made him mortal, he had it so far too, as might have made him see this
corruption and incineration, though he had no original sin in himself; what
preserved him then? Did the hypostaticall union of both natures? God and Man,
preserve him from this corruption and incineration? it is true that this was a
most powerful embalming, to be embalmd with the divine nature it self, to be
embalmd with eternity, was able to preserve him from corruption and
incineration for ever. And he was embalmd, so embalmd with the divine nature it
self, even in his body as well as in his soul; for the Godhead, the divine
nature did not depart, but remained still united to his dead body in the grave;
But yet for all this powerful embalming, his hypostaticall union of both
natures, we see Christ did dye; and for all his union which made him God and
Man, he became no man (for the union of the body and soul makes the man, and
he whose soul and body are separated by death as long as that state lasts is
properly no man.) And therefore as in him the dissolution of body and soul was
no dissolution of the hypostaticall union; so is there nothing that constraines
us to say, that though the flesh of Christ had seen corruption and
incineration in the grave, this had been any dissolution of the hypostaticall
union, for the divine nature, the Godhead might have remained with all the
Elements and principles of Christ's body, as well as it did with the two
constitutiue parts of his person, his body and his soul. This incorruption then
was not in Joseph's gummes and spices, nor was it in Christ's innocence, and
exemption from original sin, nor was it (that is, it is not necessary to say
it was) in the hypostaticall union. But this incorruptiblenes of his flesh is
most conveniently placed in that; Non dabis, thou will not suffer thy holy one
to see corruption, Psalm. 16. 10.
we look no further for causes or reasons in the mysteries of religion, but
to the will and pleasure of God: Mat. 11. 26.
Christ himself limited his inquisition in that ita est, even so Father, for
so it seems good in thy sight. Christ's body did not see corruption,
therefore, because God had decreed it should not. The humble soul (and only
the humble soul is the religious soul) rests himself upon Gods purposes and
the decrees of God, which he has declared and manifested not such as are
conceived and imagined in our selves, though upon some probability, some
veresimilitude, Acts 2. 31. 13. 35.
so in our present case Peter proceeds in his Sermon at Jerusalem, and so Paul
in his at Antioch. They preached Christ to have been risen without seeing
corruption, not only because God had decreed it, but because he had manifested
that decree in his Prophet, therefore does Saint Paul cite by special number
the second psalm for that decree; And therefore both Saint Peter and S. Paul
cite for it that place in the 16. psalm, Verse. 10.
for when God declares his decree and purpose in the express words of his
Prophet, or when he declares it in the real execution of the decree, then he
makes it ours, then he manifests it to us. And therefore as the Mysteries of our
Religion, are not the objects of our reason, but by faith we rest on Gods
decree and purpose. (It is so o God, because it is thy will, it should be so)
so Gods decrees are ever to be considered in the manifestation thereof. All
manifestation is either in the word of God, or in the execution of the decree;
And when these two concur and meet, it is the strongest demonstration that can
be: when therefore I find those marks of adoption and spiritual filiation,
which are delivered in the word of God to be upon me, when I find that real
execution of his good purpose upon me, as that actually I do live under the
obedience, and under the conditions which are evidences of adoption and
spiritual filiation; Then so long as I see these marks and live so; I may
safely comfort my self in a holy certitude and a modest infallibility of my
adoption. Christ determines himself in that, the purpose of God was manifest to
him: S. Peter and S. Paul determine themselves in those two ways of knowing
the purpose of God, the word of God before the execution of the decree in the
fulness of time. It was prophesied before, say they, and it is performed now,
Christ is risen without seeing corruption. Now this which is so singularly
peculiar to him, that his flesh should not see corruption, at his second
coming, his coming to Judgment, shall extend to all that are then a live,
their Hestae shall not see corruption, because as the Apostle says, and says
as a secret, as a mystery; Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all
sleep, (that is, not continue in the state of the dead in the grave,) but we
shall all be changed in an instant, we shall have a dissolution, and in the
same instant a redintgeration, a recompacting of body and soul, and that shall
be truly a death and truly a resurrection, but no sleeping in corruption; But
for us that dye now and sleep in the state of the dead, we must al pass this
posthume death, this death after death, nay this death after burial, this
dissolution after dissolution, this death of corruption and putrefaction, of
vermiculation and incineration, of dissolution and dispersion in and from the
grave, when these bodies that have been the children of royal parents, and
the parents of royal children, must say with Job, Corruption thou art my
father, and to the Worm thou art my mother and my sister. Miserable riddle,
when the same worm must be my mother, and my sister, and myself. Miserable
incest, when I must be married to my mother and my sister, and be both father
and mother to my own mother and sister, beget and bear that worm which is
all that miserable penury; when my mouth shall be filled with dust, and the
worm shall feed, and feed sweetly upon me, when the ambitious man shall have
no satisfaction, Verse. 24 20
if the poorest alive tread upon him, nor the poorest receive any contentment
in being made equal to Princes, for they shall be equal but in dust. Job.
23. 24.
One dies at his full strength, being wholly at ease and in quiet, and another
dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure, but they lie
down alike in the dust, and the worm covers them; In Job and in Esaias, Verse.
14. 11.
it couers them and is spread under them, the worm is spread under thee, and the
worm couers thee, There Is the Mats and the Carpets that lie under, and there is
the State and the Canapye, that hangs over the greatest of the sons of men;
Even those bodies that were the temples of the holy Ghost, come to this
dilapidation, to ruin, to rubbidge, to dust, even the Israel of the Lord, and
Jacob himself has no other specification, no other denomination, but that
vermis Jacob, thou worm of Jacob. Truly the consideration of this posthume
death, this death after burial, that after God, (with whom are the issues of
death) has delivered me from the death of the womb, by bringing me into the
world, and from the manifold deaths of the world, by laying me in the grave, I
must dye again in an Incineration of this flesh, and in a dispersion of that
dust. That that Monarch, who spread over many nations alive, must in his dust
lie in a corner of that sheet of lead, and there, but so long as that lead
will last, and that private and retired man, that thought himself his own for
ever, and never came forth, must in his dust of the grave be published, and
(such are the reuolutions of the graves) be mingled with the dust of every
high way, and of every dunghill, and swallowed in every puddle and pond: This
is the most inglorious and contemptible vilification, the most deadly and
peremptory nullification of man, that we can consider; God seems to have
carried the declaration of his power to a great height, when he sets the
Prophet Ezechiel in the valley of dry bones, and says, Son of man can these
bones live? as though it had been impossible, and yet they did; The Lord laid
Sinews upon them, and flesh, and breath into them, and they did live: But in
that case there were bones to be seen, something visible, of which it might
be said, can this thing live? But in this death of incineration, and dispersion
of dust, we see nothing that we call that man's; If we say, can this dust
live? perchance it cannot, it may be the mere dust of the earth, which never
did live, never shall. It may be the dust of that man's worm, which did live,
but shall no more. It may be the dust of another man, that concerns not him
of whom it is asked. This death of incineration and dispersion, is, to natural
reason, the most irrecouerable death of all, and yet Domini Domini sunt exitus
mortis, unto God the Lord belong the issues of death, and by recompacting this
dust into the same body, and reanimating the same body with the same soul, he
shall in a blessed and glorious resurrection give me such an issue from this
death, as shall never pass into any other death, but establish me into a life
that shall last as long as the Lord of life himself.

And so have you that that belongs to the first acceptance of these words,
(unto God the Lord belong the issues of death) That though from the womb to
the grave and in the grave it self we pass from death to death, yet, as
Daniel speaks, the Lord our God is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us.

And so we pass unto our second accommodation of these words (unto God the
Lord belong the issues of death) That it belongs to God, and not to man to
pass a judgment upon us at our death, or to conclude a dereliction on Gods
part upon the manner thereof.

Those indications which the Physicians receive, 2. Part. Liberatio in morte.
and those presagitions which they give for death or recovery in the patient,
they receive and they give out of the grounds and the rules of their art. But
we have no such rule or art to give a presagition of spiritual death and
damnation upon any such iudication as we see in any dying man; we see often
enough to be sorry, but not to despair; we may be deceived both ways, we
use to comfort our self in the death of a friend, if it be testified that he
went away like a Lamb, that is, without any reluctation. But, God knows, that
may be accompanied with a dangerous damp and stupefaction, and insensibility
of his present state. Our blessed Savior suffered coluctations with death, and
a sadness even in his soul to death, and an agony even to a bloody sweat in
his body, and expostulations with God, and exclamations upon the cross. He was
a devout man, who said upon his death bed, or dead turfe (for he was an
Heremit) septuaginta annos Domino seruiuisti, and mori times? have thou served
a good Master threescore and ten yeaes, and now art thou loath to go into his
presence? yet Hilarion was loath, Bartaam was a devout man (an Heremit too)
that said that day he dyed. Cogita te hodie coepisse seruire Domino, and hodie
finiturum. Consider this to be the first days service that ever thou did thy
Master, to glorify him in a Christianly and a constant death, and if thy first
day be thy last day too, how soon do thou come to receive thy wages? yet
Bartaam could have been content to have stayed longer forth: Make no ill
conclusions upon any man's loathnes to dye, for the mercies of God work
momentarily in minutes, and many times insensibly to bystanders or any other
then the party departing. And then upon violent deaths inflicted, as upon
malefactors. Christ himself has forbidden us by his own death to make any
ill conclusion; for his own death had those impressions in it; He was reputed,
he was executed as a malefactor, and no doubt many of them who concurred to his
death, did believe him to be so; Of sudden death there are scarce examples to
be found in the scriptures upon good men, for death in battle cannot be
called suden death; But God gouernes not by examples, but by rules, and
therefore make no ill conclusion upon sudden death nor upon distempers, neither
though perchance accompanied with some words of diffidence and distrust in the
mercies of God: The treelyes as it falls its true, but it is not the last
stroke that fells the tree, nor the last word nor gasp that qualifies the
soul. Still pray we for a peaceable life against violent death, and for time
of repentance against sudden death, and for sober and modest assurance against
distemperd and diffident death, but never make ill conclusions upon persons
overtaken with such deaths; Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis, to God the Lord
belong the issues of death. And he received Sampson, who went out of this world
in such a manner (consider it actiuely, consider it passiuely in his own
death, and in those whom he slew with himself) as was subject to
interpretation hard enough. Yet the holy Ghost has moved S. Paul to celebrate
Sampson in his great Catalogue, Heb. 11.
and so does all the Church: Our critical day is not the very day of our
death: but the whole course of our life. I thank him that prays for me when
(...) (...) Quid apertius diceretur? says he there, what can be more
obuious, more manifest then this sense of these words. In the former part of
this verse, it is said; He that is our God, is the God of salvation, Deus
salvos fariendi, so he reads it, the God that must save us. Who can that be,
says he, but lesus? for therefore that name was given him, because he was to
save us. And to this lesus, says he, this Savior, belongs the issues of
death; Mat. I. 21:
Nec oportuit eum de hac vita alios exitus habere quam mortis. Being come into
this life in our mortal nature; He could not go out of it any other way but by
death? Ideo dictum, says he, therefore it is said. To God the Lord belong the
issues of death; vt ostenderetur moriendo nos saluos facturum, to show that his
way to save us was to dye. And from this text does Saint Isodore prove; that
Christ was truly Man, (which as many sects of heretics denied, as that he
was truly God) because to him, though he were Dominus Dominus (as the text
doubles it) God the Lord, yet to him, to God the Lord belonged the issues of
death, oportuit eum pati more can not be said, then Christ himself says of
himself; Luke 24. 26
These things Christ ought to suffer, he had no other way but by death: So
then this part of our Sermon must needs be a passion Sermon; since all his
life was a continual passion, all our Lent may well be a continual good
Friday. Christ's painful life took off none of the pains of his death, he
felt not the less then for having felt so much before. Nor will any thing that
shall be said before, lessen, but rather in large the devotion, to that which
shall be said of his passion at the time of due solemnization thereof. Christ
bled nor a drop the less at the last, for having bled at his Circumcision
before, nor will you a tear the less then, if you shed some now. And therefore
be now content to consider with me how to this God the Lord belonged the
issues of death. That God, this Lord, the Lord of life could dye, is a strange
contemplation; That the red Sea could be dry, That the Sun could stand still,
that an Oven could be seven times heat and not burn, That Lions could be
hungry and not bite, is strange, miraculously strange, but supermiraculous that
God could dye* but that God would dye is an exaltation of that. But even of
that also it is a superexaltation, that God should dye, must dye, and no^ exitus
(said S. Augustine God, the Lord had no issue but by death, and oportuit pati
(says Christ himself all this Christ ought to suffer, was bound to suffer; Deus
vltionum Deus says David, Psalm: 91
God is the God of reuenges, he would not pass over the son of man
unrevenged, unpunished. But then Deus vltionum libere egit (says that place)
The God of reuenges works freely, he punishes, he spares whom he will. And
would he not spare himself? he would not: Dilectio fortis vt mors, Cant. 36.
love is strong as death, stronger, it drew in death that naturally is not
welcome, Si possibile, says Christ, If it be possible, let this Cup pass, when
his love expressed in a former decree with his Father, Verse. ^
had made it impossible. Many waters quench not love, Christ tried many; He was
Baptized our of his love, and his love determined not there. He mingled blood
with water in his agony and that determined not his love; he wept pure blood,
all his blood at all his eyes, at all his pores, in his flagellation and
thorns (to the Lord our God belonged the issues of blood) and these expressed,
but these did not quench his love. He would not spare, nay he could not spare
himself. There was nothing more free, more voluntary, more spontaneous then
the death of Christ. It Is true, libere egit, he dyed voluntarily, but yet when
we consider the contract act that had passed between his Father and him, there
was an oportuit, a kind of necessity upon him. All this Christ ought to suffer.
And when shall we date this obligation, this oportuit, this necessity? when
shall we say that begun. Certainly this decree by which Christ was to suffer
all this, was an eternal decree, and was there any thing before that, that was
eternal? Infinite love, eternal love, be pleased to follow this home, and to
consider it seriously, that what liberty soever we can conceive in Christ, to
dye or not to dye; this necessity of dying, this decree is as eternal as that
liberty; and yet how small a matter made he of this necessity and this dying?
His Father calls it but a bruise, Genesis 3. 15.
and but a bruising of his heel (the serpent shall bruise his heel) and yet
that was that, the serpent should practice and compass his death. Himself
calls it but a Baptism, as though he were to be the better for it. Luke 12 40.
I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and he was in pain till it was
accomplished, and yet this Baptism was his death. The holy Ghost calls it Joy
(for the Joy which was set before him he endured the Cross) which was not a
joy of his reward after his passion, Heb. 12. 2.
but a joy that filled him even in the midst of those torments, and arose
from him; when Christ calls his Calicem, a Cup, and we worse (can ye drink
of my Cup) he speaks not odiously, Mat. 22. 22.
not with detestation of it: Indeed it was a Cup, salus mundo, a health to all
the world. And quid retribuam, says David, what shall I render to the Lord? Ps.
116. 12.
answer you with David, accipiam Calicem, I will take the Cup of salvation,
take it, that Cup is salvation, his passion, if not into your present
imitation, yet into your present contemplation. And behold how that Lord that
was God, yet could dye, would dye, must dye, for your salvation. That Moses and
Elias talked with Christ in the transfiguration, Mat. 17. 3.
both Saint Matthew and Saint Mark tells us, Mar. 9. 4.
but what they talked of only S. Luke, Dicebant excessum eius, says he, Luke 9.
31.
they talked of his decease, of his death which was to be accomplished at
Jerusalem, The word is of his Exodus, the very word of our text exitus, his
issue by death. Moses who in his Exodus had prefigured this issue of our Lord,
and in passing Israel out of Egypt through the red Sea, had foretold in that
actual prophecy, Christ passing of mankind through the sea of his blood. And
Elias, whose Exodus and issue out of this world was a figure of Christ's
ascension, had no doubt a great satisfaction in talking with our blessed Lord
de excessueius, of the full consummation of all this in his death, which was to
be accomplished at Jerusalem. Our meditation of his death should be more
viscerall and affect us more because it is of a thing already done. The ancient
Romans had a certain terdernesse and detestation of the name of death, they
cold not name death, no, not in their wills. There they could not say Si mori
contigerit, but si quid humanitus contingat, nor if, or when I dye, but when
the course of nature is accomplished upon me. To us that speak daily of the
death of Christ, (he was crucified, dead and buried) can the memory or the
mention of our own death be yrkesome or bitter? There are in these latter
times amongst us, that name death freely enogh, and the death of God, but in
blasphemous oaths and execrations. Miserable men, who shall therefore be said
never to have named Jesus, because they have named him too often. And therefore
hear Jesus say, Ne sciui vos, I never knew you, because they made themselves
too familiar with him. Moses and Elias talked with Christ of his death, only, in
a holy and joyful sense of the benefit which they and all the world were to
receive by that. Discourses of Religion should not be out of curiosity, but to
edification. And the^ they talked with Christ of his death at that time, when he
was in the greatest height of glory that ever he admitted in this world, that
is, his transfiguration. And we are afraid to speak to the great men of this
world of their death, but nourish in them a vain imagination of immortality,
and immutability. But bonum est nobis esse hic (as Saint Peter said there) It
is good to dwell here, in this consider ation of his death, and therefore
transfer we our tabernacle (our devotions) through some of those steps which
God the Lord made to his issue of death that day. Conformitas,
Take in the whole day from the hour that Christ received the passover upon
Thursday, unto the hour in which he dyed the next day. Make this present day
that day in thy devotion, and consider what he did, and remember what you have
done. Before he instituted and celebrated the Sacrament, (which was after the
eating of the passover) he proceeded to that act of humility, to wash his
disciples feet, even Peter's, who for a while resisted him; In thy preparation
to the holy and blessed Sacrament, have thou with a sincere humility sought a
reconciliation with all the world, even with those that have been auerse from
it, and refused that reconciliation from thee? If so and not else thou have
spent that first part of his last day, in a conformity with him. After the
Sacrament he spent the time till night in prayer, in preaching, in Psalms;
Have thou considered that a worthy receaving of the Sacrament confists in a
continuation of holiness after, as well as in a preparation before. If so, thou
have therein also conformed thy self to him, so Christ spent his time till
night; At night he went into the garden to pray, and he prayed prolixious he
spent much time in prayer, how much? Because it is literally expressed, that he
prayed there three several times, Luke 22. 24.
and that returning to his Disciples after his first prayer, and finding them a
sleep said, could ye not watch with me one hour, Mat. 26 40.
it is collected that he spent three hours in prayer. I dare scarce ask thee
whither thou wentest, or how thou disposedst of thy self, when it grew dark
and after last night: If that time were spent in a holy recommendation of thy
self to God, and a submission of thy will to his, It was spent in a conformity
to him. In that time and in those prayers was his agony and bloody sweat. I
will hope that thou did pray; but not every ordinary and customary prayer,
but prayer actually accompanied with shedding of tears, and dispositiuely in a
readiness to shed blood for his glory in necessary cases, puts thee into a
conformity with him; About midnight he was taken and bound with a kiss, art
thou not too conformable to him in that? Is not that too literally, too exactly
thy case? at midnight to have been taken and bound with a kiss? from thence he
was carried back to Jerusalem, first to Annas, then to Caiphas, and (as late as
it was) then he was examined and buffeted, and delivered over to the custody
of those officers, from whom he received all those irrisions, and violences,
the covering of his face, the spitting upon his face, the blasphemies of words,
and the smartnes of blows which that Gospel mentions. In which copasse fell
that Gallicinium, that crowing of the Cock which called up Peter to his
repentance, how thou passedst all that time thou know. If thou did any
thing that needed Peter's tears, and have not shed them, let me be thy Cock,
do it now, Now thy Master (in the unworthiest of his servants) looks back
upon thee, do it now; Betimes, in the morning, so soon as it was day, the
Jews held a counsel in the high Priests hall, and agreed upon their evidence
against him, and then carried him to Pilate, who was to be his Judge; did
thou accuse thy self when thou wakedst this morning, and wast thou content
even with false accusations (that is) rather to suspect actions to have been
sin, which were not, then to smother and justify such as were truly sins? then
thou spentst that hour in conformity to him: Pilate found no evidence against
him, and therefore to ease himself, and to pass a complement upon Herod,
Tetrarch of Galilee, who was at that time at Jerusalem (because Christ being a
Galilean was of Herod's jurisdiction) Pilat sent him to Herod, and rather as a
madman then a malefactor, Herod remaunded him ( with scorns) to Pilat to
proceed against him; And this was about eight of the clock. Have thou been
content to come to this Inquisition, this examination, this agitation, this
cribration, this pursuit ofthy conscience, to sift it to follow it from the
sins of thy youth to thy present sins, from the sins of thy bed, to the
sins of thy boorde, and from the substance to the circumstance of thy sins?
That Is time spent like thy Saviors. Pilat would have saved Christ, by using the
privilege of the day in his behalf, because that day one prisoner was to be
delivered, but they choose Barrabas, he would have saved him from death; by
satisfying their fury, with inflicting other torments upon him, scourging and
crowning with thorns, and loading him with many scornful and ignominous
contumlies; But they regarded him not, they pressed a crucifying. Have thou
gone about to redeem thy sin, by fasting, by Alms, by disciplines and
mortifications? in way of satisfaction to the Justice of God? that will not
serve, that's not the right way, we press an utter Crucifying of that sin
that gouernes thee; and that conformes thee to Christ. Toward noone Pilat gave
judgment, and they made such have to execution, as that by noone he was upon
the Cross. There now hangs that ^acred Body upon the Cross, rebaptized in his
own tears and sweat, and embalmed in his own blood alive. There are those
bowels of compassion, which are so conspi^^ous, so manifested, as that you may
see them through his wounds. There those glorious eyes grew faint in their
sight: so as the ^un ashamed to survive them, departed with his light too. And
then that Son of God, who was never from us, and yet had now come a new way
unto us in assuming our nature delivers that soul (which was neu^r out of his
Fathers hands) by a new way, a voluntary emission of it into his Fathers hands;
For though to this God our Lord, belonged these issues of death, so that
considered in his own contract 'he must necessarily dye, yet at no breach or
batt^ry, which they had made upon his sacred Body, issued his soul, but
emisit, he gave up the Ghost, and as God breathed a soul into the first Adam,
so this second Adam breathed his soul into God, into the hands of God. There
we leave you in that blessed dependancy, to hang upon him that hangs upon the
Cross, there bath in his tears, there suck at his wounds and lie down in
peace in his grave, till he vouchsafe you a resurrection, and an ascension
into that Kingdom, which he has prepared for you, with the inestimable price
of his incorruptible blood.

AMEN.
AN ELEGY, On Dr. Done, Deane of Paul's.
TO have lived eminent in a degree
Beyond our loftiest flights, that is, like thee;
Ort'haue had too much merit is not safe;
For such excesses find no Epitaph,
At common graves we have poetic eyes
Can melt them selves in easy Elegies;
Each quill can drop his tributary verse,
And pin it, like the Hatchments, to the hearse.
But at thine, poem or inscription
(Rich soul of wit and language) we have none.
Indeed a silence does that tomb befit,
Where is no Herald left to blazon it.
Widdow'd invention justly does forbear
To come abroad knowing thou art not there,
Late her great Patron, whose prerogative
Maintained and clothed her so, as none alive
Must now presume to keep her at thy rate,
Though he the Indies for her dower estate.
Or else that awful fire, which once did burn
In thy clear brain, now fal'ne into thy vrne,
Lives there to fright rude Empericks from thence,
Which might profane thee by their ignorance.
Whoeuer writes of thee and in a style
Unworthy such a theme, does but revile
Thy precious dust, and wake a learned spirit,
Which might revenge his rapes upon thy merit.
For all a low pitched fancy can devise,
Will prove at best but hallowed injuries.
Thou (like the dying Swan) did lately sing
Thy mournful dirge in audience of the King:
When pale looks, and weak accents of thy breath
Presented so to life that piece of death,
That it was feared and prophesied by all,
Thou thither camist to preach thy Funeral.
OF had thou in an Elegiak knell
Pung out unto the world thine own farewell;
And in thy high victorious numbers beat
The solemn measure of thy griewd retreat:
Thou might the Poets service now have mist
As Well, as then thou did prevent the Priest,
And never to the world beholding be
So much as for an Epitaph for thee.
I do not like the office, nor is it fit,
Thou who did lend our age such sums of wit,
Should now reborrow from her bankrupt mine
That ore to bury thee, which once was thine:
Rather still leave us in thy debt, and know
(Exalted soul) more glory'tis to owe
Vntothy hearse, what we can never pay,
Then with embased coin those rights defray.
Commit we then thee to thy self; nor blame
Our drooping loves, which thus to thy own fame
Leave thee executor. since but thy own
No pen could doe'thee Justice, nor bays crown
Thy vast d^sert, save that we nothing can
Depute to be thy ashes Guardian.
So Iewellers no art nor metal trust,
To form the Diamond, but the Diamonds dust.
An Epitaph on Dr. DONE.
I Cannot blame those men, that knew thee well,
Yet dare not help the world to ring thy knell
In tunefull Elegies. There Is not language known
Fit for thy mention, but was first thine own.
The Epitaphs thou writt'st, have so ber^ft
Our pens of wit, there is not one fancy left
Enough to weep thee, what hence forth we seo
Of art and nature, must result from thee.
There may perchance some busy gathering friend
Ste^le from thine own works, and that varied lend
(Which thou bestowd'st on others) to thy hearse;
And so thou shall live still in thine own verse.
He that will venture further, may commit
A pitied error, show his Zeal, not wit.
Fate has done mank^nd wrong; virtue may aim
Reward of consciense, never can of fame,
Since her great trumpet's broke, could only give
Faith to the world, command it to believe.
He then must write, that would define thy parts
Here lies the best Divinity, all the Arts.

