AN ANATOMY of the World.

WHEREIN, BY OCCASION OF the untimely death of Mistress ELIZABETH DRVRY the
frailty and the decay of this whole world is represented.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Macham. and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bul-head.

AN. DOM. 1611.



TO THE PRAISE of the Dead, and the ANATOMY.
Well died the world, that we might live to see
This world of wit, in his Anatomee:
No evil wants his good: so wilder heirs
Bedew their fathers Toombs with forced tears,
Who^e state requites their los: whils thus we gain
Well may we walk in blacks, but not complain.
Yet, how can I consent the world is dead
While this Muse lives? which in his spirits stead
Seems to inform a world: and bids it be,
In spite of loss, or frail mortalitee?
And thou the subject of this wel-borne thought,
Thrice noble maid; could not have found nor sought
A fitter time to yield to thy sad Fate,
Then whiles this spirit lives; that can relate
Thy worth so well to our last nephews eyne,
That they shall wonder both at his, and thine:
Admired match! where strives in mutual grace
The cunning Pencill, and the comely face:
A task, which thy fair goodness made too much
For the bold pride of vulgar pens to tuch;
Enough is us to praise them that praise thee,
And say that but enough those praises be,
Which had thou lived, had hid their fearful head
From the angry checkings of thy modest red:
Death bars reward and shame: when enuy's gone,
And gain; it is safe to give the dead their own.
As then the wise Egyptians wont to lay
More on their Tombs, then houses: these of clay,
But those of brass, or marble were; so we
Give more unto thy Ghost, then unto thee.
Yet what we give to thee, thou gave to us,
And may but thank thy self, for being thus:
Yet what thou gave, and were, O happy maid,
Thy grace professed all due, where it is repayd.
So these high songs that to thee suited bine,
Serve but to sound thy makers praise, in thine,
Which thy dear soul as sweetly sings to him
Amid the Quire of Saints and Seraphim,
As any Angels tongue can sing of thee;
The subjects differ, tho the skill agree:
For as by infant-yeares men judge of age,
Thy early love, thy virtues, did presage
What an hi^ part thou bear in those best songs
VVhereto no burden, nor no end belongs.
Sing on, thou Virgin soul, whose lossefull gain
Thy loue-sicke Parents have bewayl'd in vain;
Never may thy name be in our songs forgot
Till we shall sing thy ditty, and thy note.
AN ANATOMY OF THE WORLD.
When that rich soul w ch to her Heaven is gone,
Whom all they celebrate, who know they have one,
(For who is sure he has a soul, unless
It see, and Judge, and follow worthiness,
And by Deeds praise it? He who does not this,
May lodge an in-mate soul, but it is not his.)
When that Queen ended here her progress time,
And, as t'her standing house, to heaven did clymbe,
Where, loath to make the Saints attend her long,
She Is now a part both of the Quire, and Song,
This world, in that great earthquake languished;
For in a common Bath of tears it bled,
Which drew the strongest vital spirits out:
But succored then with a perplexed doubt,
Whether the world did loose or gain in this,
(Because since now no other way there is
But goodness, to see her, whom all would see,
All must endeavor to be good as she,)
This great consumption to a fever turned,
And so the world had fits; it joyed, it mournd.
And, as men think, that Agues physic are,
And the Ague being spent, give over care,
So thou, sick world, mistak'st thy self to be
Well, when alas, you are in a Letargee.
Her death did wound, and tame thee than, and than
Thou might have better spared the Sun, or Man;
That wound was deep, but it is more misery,
That thou have lost thy sense and memory.
It Was heavy then to hear thy voice of moan,
But this is worse, that thou art speechless grown.
Thou have forgot thy name, thou had; thou wast
Nothing but she, and her thou have o'repast.
For as a child kept from the Font, until
A Prince, expected long, come to fulfill
The Ceremonies, thou unnamed had laid,
Had not her coming, thee her Palace made:
Her name defined thee, gave thee form and frame,
And thou forgetst to celebrate thy name.
Some months she has been dead (but being dead,
Measures of times are all determined)
But long shee'ath been away, long, long, yet none
Offers to tell us who it is that is gone.
But as in states doubtful of future heirs,
When sickness without remedy, empayres
The present Prince, they are loath it should be said,
The Prince does languish, or the Prince is dead:
So mankind feeling now a general thaw,
A strong example gone equal to law,
The Cyment which did faithfully compact
And glue all virtues, now resolved, and slack'd,
Thought it some blasphemy to say sh'was dead;
Or that our weakness was discovered
In that confession; therefore spoke no more
Then tongues, the soul being gone, the loss deplore.
But though it be too late to succor thee,
Sick world, yea dead, yea putrified, since she
Thy'ntrinsique Balm, and thy preservative,
Can never be renewed, thou never live,
I (since no man can make thee live) will try,
What we may gain by thy Anatomy.
Her death has taught us dearly, that thou art
Corrupt and mortal in thy purest part.
Let no man say, the world it self being dead,
It Is labor lost to have discovered
The worlds infirmities, since there is none
Alive to study this dissectione;
For there is a kind of world remaining still,
Though she which did inanimate and fill
The world, be gone, yet in this last long night,
Her Ghost does walk; that is, a glimmering light,
A faint weak love of virtue and of good
Refl^cts from her, on them which understood
Her worth; And though she have shut in all day,
The twilight of her memory does stay;
Which, from the carcass of the old world, free,
Creates a new world; and new creatures be
Produced: The matter and the stuff of this,
Her virtue, and the form our practice is.
And though to be thus Elemented, arm
These Creatures, from hom-borne intrinsique harm,
(For all assumed unto this Dignitee,
So many weedlesse Paradises be,
Which of themselves produce no venomous sin,
Except some foreign Serpent bring it in)
Yet, because outward storms the strongest break,
And strength it self by confidence grows weak,
This new world may be safer, being told
The dangers and diseases of the old:
For with due temper men do then forgo,
Or covet things, when they their true worth know.
There is no health; Physicians say that we
At best, enjoy, but a neutralitee.
And can there be worse sickness, then to know
That we are never well, nor can be so?
We are borne ruinous: poor mothers cry,
That children come not right, nor orderly,
Except they headlong come, and fall upon
An ominous precipitation.
How witty's ruin? how importunate
Upon mankind? It labored to frustrate
Even Gods purpose; and made woman, sent
For man's relief, cause of his languishment.
They were to good ends, and they are so still,
But accessory, and principal in ill.
For that first marriage was our funeral:
One woman at one blow, then killed us all,
And singly, one by one, they kill us now.
We do delightfully our selves allow
To that consumption; and profusely blind,
We kill our selves, to propagate our kind.
And yet we do not that; we are not men:
There is not now that mankind, which was then
When as the Sun, and man, did seem to strive,
(^^y^t tenants of the world) who should survive.
When Stag, and Raven, and the long-liu'd tree,
Compared with man d^de in minoritee.
When, if a s^o^ pac^^ star had stolen away
From the obseruers marking, he might stay
Two or three hundred years to see it again,
And then make up his observation plain;
When, as the age was long, the sise was great:
Man's grouth confessed, and recompensed the meat:
So spacious and large, that every soul
Did a fair Kingdom, and large Realm control:
And when the very stature thus erect,
Did that soul a good way toward Heaven direct.
Where is this mankind now? who lives to age,
Fit to be made Methusalem his page?
Alas, we scarce live long enough to try;
Whether a new made clock run right, or lie.
Old Grandsires talk of yesterday with sorrow,
And for our children we reserve to morrow.
So short is life, that every peasant strives,
In a torn house, or field, to have three lives.
And as in lasting, so in length is man
Contracted to an inch, who was a span.
For had a man at first, in Forests strayed,
Or shipwrack'd in the Sea, one would have laid
A wager that an Elephant, or Whale
That met him, would not hastily assail
A thing so equal to him: now alas,
The Fayries, and the Pigmies well may pass
As credible; mankind decays so soon,
We Are scarce our Fathers shadows cast at noone.
Only death adds to our length: nor are we grown
In stature to be men, till we are none.
But this were light, did our less volume hold
All the old Text; or had we changed to gold
Their silver; or disposed into less glass,
Spirits of virtue, which then scattred was.
But it is not so: we are not retired, but dampt;
And as our bodies, so our minds are cramp't:
It Is shrinking, not close-weaning, that has thus,
In mind and body both bedwarfed us.
We seem ambitious, Gods whole work t'vndoe;
Of nothing he made us, and we strive too,
To bring our selves to nothing back; and we
Do what we can, to do it so soon as he.
With new diseases on our selves we war,
And with new physic, a worse Engine far.
Thus man, this worlds Vice-Emperor, in whom
All faculties, all graces are at home;
And if in other Creatures they appear,
They Are but man's ministers, and Legates there,
To work on their rebellions, and reduce
Them to Ciuility, and to man's use.
This man, whom God did woo, and loath to attend
Till man came up, did down to man descend,
This man, so great, that all that is, is his,
Oh what a trifle, and poor thing he is!
If man were any thing, he is nothing now:
Help, or at least some time to wast, allow
To His other wants, yet when he did depart
With her whom we lament he lost his heart.
She, of whom the Ancients seemed to proph^sie,
When they called virtues by the (...) of she,
She in whom virtue (...) so much ^efi^^d,
That for Allay unto so pure a mind
She took the weaker Sex, ^h that co^ld d^^ue
The poisonous tincture, and the stayne of Eve,
Out of her thoughts, and deeds; and purify
All, by a true religious Alchimy;
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how poor a trifling thing man is.
And learn'st thus much by our Anatomee,
The heart being perished, no part can be free.
And that except thou seed (not banquet) on
The supernatural food, Religion,
Thy better Grouth grows withered, and scant;
Be more then man, or you are less then an Ant.
Then, as mankind^, so is the worlds whole frame
Quite out of joint, almost created lame:
For, before God had made up all the rest,
Corruption entered, and deprau'd the best:
It seized Angels, and then first of all
The world did in her Cradle take a fall,
And turned her brains, and took a general maime
Wronging each joint of th'vniversall frame.
The noblest part, man, felt it first; and than
Both beasts and plants, cursed in the curse of man.
So did the world from the first hour decay,
That evening was beginning of the day,
And now the Springs and Summers which we see,
Like sons of women after fifty be.
And new Philosophy calls all in doubt,
The Element of fire is quite put out;
The Sun is lost, and the earth, and no man's wit
Can well direct him, where to look for it.
And freely men confess, that this world's spent,
When in the Planets, and the Firmament
They seek so many new; they see that this
Is crumbled out again to his Atomis.
It Is all in pieces, all cohaerence gone;
All just supply, and all Relation:
Prince, Subject, Father, Son, are things forgot,
For every man alone thinks he has got
To be a Phoenix, and that then can be
None of that kind, of which he is, but he.
This is the worlds condition now, and now
She that should all parts to reunion bow,
She that had all Magnetique force alone,
To draw, and fasten sundred parts in one;
She whom wise nature had invented then
When she observed that every sort of men
Did in their voyage in this worlds Sea stray,
And needed a new compass for their way;
She that was best, and first original
Of all fair copies; and the general
Steward to Fate; she whose rich eyes, and breast,
Guilt the West Indies, and perfumed the East;
Whose having breathed in this world, did bestow
Spice on those Isles, and bad them still smell so,
And that rich Indie which does gold interre,
Is but (...) single money, coined from her:
She to whom this world must it self refer,
As Suburbs, or the Microcosme of her,
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how lame a cripple this world is.
And learnst thus much by our Anatomy,
That this worlds general sickness does not lie
In any humor, or one certain part;
But, as thou saw it rotten at the heart,
Thou see a Hectique fever has got hold
Of the whole substance, not to be contrould.
And that thou have but one way, not t'admit
The worlds infection, to be none of it.
For the worlds subtilst immateriall parts
Feel this consuming wound, and ages darts.
For the worlds beauty is decayed, or gone,
Beauty, that is color, and proportion.
We think the heavens enjoy their Sphericall
Their round proportion embracing all.
But yet their various and perplexed course,
Observed in diverse ages does enforce
Men to find out so many Eccentrique parts,
Such diverse downright lines, such ouerthwarts,
As disproportion that pure form. It tears
The Firmament in eight and forty sheeres,
And in those constellations then arise
New stars, and old do vanish from our eyes:
As though heaven suffered earthquakes, peace or war,
When new Towers rise, and old demolished are.
They have empayld within a Zodiake
The freeborn Sun, and keep twelve signs awake
To watch his steps; the Goat and Crabbe control,
And fright him back, who else to either Pole,
(Did not these Tropiques fetter him) might run:
For his course is not round; nor can the Sun
Perfect a Circle, or maintain his way
One inche direct; but where he rose to day
He comes no more, but with a cousening line,
Steals by that point, and so is Serpentine:
And seeming weary with his recling thus,
He means to sleep, being now fallen nearer us.
So, of the stares which boast that they do run
In Circle still, none ends where he begun.
All their proportion's lame, it sinks, it swells.
For of Meridians, and Parallels,
Man has weau'd out a net, and this net thrown
Upon the Heavens, and now they are his own.
Loath to go up the hill, or labor thus
To go to heaven, we make heaven come to us.
We spur, we rain the stars, and in their race
They Are diversely content to obey our pace.
But keeps the earth her round proportion still?
Does not a Tenarif, or higher Hill
Rise so high like a Rock, that one might think
The floating Moon would shipwreck there, and sink?
Seas are so deep, that Whales being struck to day,
Perchance to morrow, scarce at middle way
Of their wished iourneys end, the bottom, dye.
And men, to sound depths, so much line untie,
As one might justly think, that there would rise
At end thereof, one of th'Antipodies:
If under all, a Vault infernal be,
(Which sure is spacious, except that we
Invent another torment, that there must
Millions into a strait hot room be thrust)
Then solidnes, and roundnes have no place.
Are these but warts, and pock-holes in the face
Of the earth? Think so. But yet confess, in this
The worlds proportion disfigured is,
That those two legs whereon it does rely,
Reward and punishment are bent awrie.
And, Oh, it can no more be questioned,
That beauties best, proportion, is dead,
Since even grief it self, which now alone
Is left us, is without proportion.
She by whose lines proportion should be
Examined, measure of all Symmetree,
Whom had that Ancient seen, who thought souls made
Of Harmony, he would at next have said
That Harmony was she, and thence infer,
That souls were but Resultances from her,
And did from her into our bodies go,
As to our eyes, the forms from objects flow:
She, who if those great Doctors truly said
That th'Arke to man's proportions was made,
Had been a type for that, as that might be
A type of her in this, that contrary
Both Elements, and Passions lived at peace
In her, who caused all Civil war to cease.
She, after whom, what form soever we see,
Is discord, and rude incongruitee,
She, she is dead, she is dead; when thou know this,
Thou know how ugly a monster this world is:
And learnst thus much by our Anatomy,
That here is nothing to enamor thee:
And that, not only faults in inward parts,
Corruptions in our brains, or in our hearts,
Poisoning the fountains, whence our actions spring,
Endanger us: but that if every thing
Be not done fitly'nd in proportion,
To satisfy wise, and good lookers on,
(Since most men be such as most think they be)
They Are loathsome too, by this Deformitee.
For good, and well, must in our actions meet:
Wicked is not much worse then indiscreet.
But beauties other second Element,
Color, and luster now, is as near spent.
And had the world his just proportion,
Were it a ring still, yet the stone is gone.
As a compassionate Turcoyse which does tell
By looking pale, the wearer is not well,
As gold falls sick being ^lung with Mercury,
All the worlds parts of such complexion be.
When nature was most busy, the first week,
Swaddling the newborn earth, God seemd to like,
That she should sport herself sometimes, and play,
To mingle, and vary colors every day.
And then, as though she could not make i now,
Himself his various Rainbow did allow.
Sight is the noblest sense of any one,
Yet sight has only color to feed on,
And color is decayed: summers robe grows
Duskie, and like an often dyed garment shows.
Our blushing read, which used in cheeks to spread,
Is inward sunk, and only our souls are read.
Perchance the world might have recovered,
If she whom we lament had not been dead:
But she, in whom all white, and read, and blue
(Beauties ingredients) voluntary grew,
As in an vnuext Paradise; from whom
Did all things verdure, and their luster come,
Whose composition was miraculous,
Being all color, all Diaphanous,
(For Air, and Fire but thick gross bodies were,
And liueliest stones but drowsy, and pale to her,)
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how wan a Ghost this our world is:
And learnst thus much by our Anatomee,
That it should more affright, then pleasure thee.
And that, since all fair color then did sink,
It Is now but wicked vanity to think,
To color vicious deeds with good pretense,
Or with bought colors to illude men's sense.
Nor in ought more this worlds decay appears,
Then that her influence the heaven forbeares,
Or that the Elements do not feel this,
The father, or the mother barren is.
The clouds conceive not rain, or do not power
In the due birth-time, down the balmy shower.
The Air does not motherly sit on the earth,
To hatch her seasons, and give all things birth.
Spring-times were common cradles, but are toombes
And false-conceptions fill the general wombs.
The Air shows such Meteors, as none can see,
Not only what they mean, but what they be.
Earth such new worms, as would have troubled me
The Egyptian Mages to have made more such.
What Artist now dares boast that he can bring
Heaven hither, or constellate any thing,
So as the influence of those stars may be
Imprisond in an Herb, or Charm, or Tree,
And do by touch, all which those stars could do?
The art is lost, and correspondence too.
For heaven gives little, and the earth takes less,
And man least knows their trade, and purposes.
If this commerce twixt heaven and earth were not
Embarr'd, and all this trafique quite forgot,
She, for whose loss we have lamented thus,
Would work more fully' and pow'rfully on us.
Since herbs, and roots by dying, lose not all,
But they, yea Ashes too, are medicinal,
Death could not quench her virtue so, but that
It would be (if not followed) wondered at:
And all the world would be one dying Swan,
To sing her funeral praise, and vanish than.
But as some Serpents poison hurts not,
Except it be from the live Serpent shot,
So does her virtue need her here, to fit
That unto us; she working more then it.
But she, in whom, to such maturity,
Virtue was grown, past growth, that it must die,
She from whose influence all Impressions came,
But, by Receivers impotencies, lame,
Who, though she could not transubstantiate
All states to gold, yet gilded every state,
So that some Princes have some temperance;
Some Counsaylors some purpose to advance
The common profit; and some people have
Some stay, no more then Kings should give, to crave;
Some women have some taciturnity;
Some Nunneries, some grains of chastity.
She that did thus much, and much more could do,
But that our age was Iron, and rusty too,
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how dry a Cinder this world is.
And learnst thus much by our Anatomy,
That it is in vain to dew, or mollify
It with thy Tears, or Sweat, or Blood: no thing
Is worth our travail, grief, or perishing,
But those rich joys, which did possess her heart,
Of which she is now partaker, and a part.
But as in cutting up a man that is dead,
The body will not last out to have read
On every part, and therefore men direct
Their speech to parts, that are of most effect;
So the worlds carcass would not last, if I
Were punctual in this Anatomy.
Nor smells it well to hearers, if one tell
Them their disease, who feign would think they are well.
Here therefore be the end: And, blessed maid,
Of whom is meant what ever has been said,
Or shall be spoken well by any tongue,
Whose name refines course lines, and makes prose song,
Accept this tribute, and his first years rent,
Who till his dark short tapers end be spent,
As often as thy feast sees this widowed earth,
Will yearly celebrate thy second birth,
That is, thy death. For though the soul of man
Be got when man is made, it is borne but than
When man does die. Our body's as the womb,
And as a midwife death directs it home.
And you her creatures, whom she works upon
And have your last, and best concoction
From her example, and her virtue, if you
In reverence to her, do think it due,
That no one should her praises thus rehearse,
As matter fit for Chronicle, not verse,
Vouchsafe to call to mind, that God did make
A last, and lastingst piece, a song. He spoke
To Moses, to deliver unto all,
That song: because he knew they would let fall,
The Law, the Prophets, and the History,
But keep the song still in their memory.
Such an opinion (in due measure) made
Me this great Office boldly to in^ade.
Nor could incomprehensiblenesse deter
Me, from thus trying to emprison her.
Which when I saw that a strict grave could do,
I saw not why verse might not do so too.
Verse has a middle nature: heaven keeps souls,
The grave keeps bodies, verse the same enroules.
A FUNERAL ELEGY.
It Is lost, to trust a Tomb with such a ghest,
Or to confine her in a Marble chest.
Alas, what is Marble, Ieat, or Porphiry,
Prized with the Chrysolite of either eye,
Or with those Pearls, and Rubies which she was?
Join the two Indies in one Tomb, it is glass;
And so is all to her materials,
Though every inche were ten escurials.
Yet she is demolished: Can we keep her then
In works of hands, or of the wits of men?
Can these memorials, rags of paper, give
Life to that name, by which name they must live?
Sickly, alas, short-liu'd, aborted be
Those Carkas verses, whose soul is not she.
And can she, who no longer would be she,
Being such a Tabernacle, stoop to be
In paper wrapped; Or, when she would not lie
In such a house, dwell in an Elegy?
But it is no matter; we may well allow
Verse to live so long as the world will now.
For her death wounded it. The world contains
Princes for arms, and Counsailors for brains,
Lawyers for tongues, Divines for hearts, and more,
The Rich for stomachs, and for backs the Pore;
The Officers for hands, Merchants for feet
By which remote and distant Countries meet.
But those fine spirits, which do tune and set
This Organ, are those pieces which beget
Wonder and love; And these were shee^; and she
Being spent, the world must needs decrepit be.
For since death will proceed to triumph still,
He can find nothing, after her, to kill,
Except the world it self, so great as she.
Thus brave and confident may Nature be,
Death cannot give her such another blow,
Because she cannot such another show.
But must we say she is dead? May't not be said
That as a sundred Clock is peece-meale laid,
Not to be lost, but by the makers hand
Repolish'd, without error then to stand,
Or as the Affrique Niger stream enwombs
It self into the earth, and after comes,
(Having first made a natural bridge, to pass
For many leagues,) far greater then it was,
May't not be said, that her grave shall restore
Her, greater, purer, firmer, then before?
Heaven may say this, and joy in it; but can we
Who live, and lack her, here this vantage see?
What is it to us, alas, if there have been
An Angel made a Throne, or Cherubin?
We lose by it: And as aged men are glad
Being tastlesse grown, to joy in joys they had,
So now the sick starved world must feed vpone
This joy, that we had her, who now is gone.
Rejoice then nature, and this world, that you
Fearing the last fires hastening to subdue
Your force and vigor, ere it were near gone,
Wisely bestowed, and laid it all on one.
One, whose clear body was so pure, and thin,
Because it need disguise no thought within.
It Was but a through-light scarf, her mind t'enroule,
Or exhalation breathed out from her soul.
One, whom all men who durst no more, admired;
And whom, who ere had worth enough, desired;
As when a Temple's built, Saints emulate
To which of them, it shall be consecrate.
But as when Heaven looks on us with new eyes,
Those new stars every Artist exercise,
What place they should assign to them they doubt,
Argue, and agree not, till those stars go out:
So the world studied whose this piece should be.
Till she can be no bodies else, nor she:
But like a Lamp of Balsamum, desired
Rather t'adorne, then last, she soon expired;
Clothed in her Virgin white integrity;
For marriage, though it do not stain, does dye.
To escape th'infirmities which wait vpone
Woman, she went away, before sh'was one.
And the worlds busy noise to overcome,
Took so much death, as served for opium.
For though she could not, nor could choose to die,
Shee'ath yielded to too long an Ecstasy.
He which not knowing her sad History,
Should come to read the book of destiny,
How fair and chaste, humble and high shee'ad been,
Much promised, much performed, at not fifteen,
And measuring future things, by things before,
Should turn the leaf to read, and read no more,
Would think that either destiny mistook,
Or that some leafes were torn out of the book.
But it is not so: Fate did but usher her
To years of Reasons use, and then infer
Her destiny to her self; which liberty
She took but for thus much, thus much to die.
Her modesty not suffering her to be
Fellow-Commissioner with destinee,
She did no more but die; if after her
Any shall live, which dare true good prefer,
Every such person is her delegate,
T'accomplish that which should have been her fate.
They shall make up that book, and shall have thanks
Of fate and her, for filling up their blanks.
For future virtuous deeds are Legacies,
Which from the gift of her example rise.
And it is in heaven part of spiritual mirth,
To see how well, the good play her, on earth.
FINIS.

