A SERMON PREACHED IN ITALIAN, By the most Reverend father, MARC ANTONY DE
DOMINIS, Archb. of SPALATO, the first Sunday in Aduent, ANNO 1617.

In the Mercers Chapel in London, to the Italians in that City, and many other
Honorable auditors then assembled.

Upon the 12. Verse of the 13. Chapter to the Romans, being part of the
Epistle for that day.

First published in ITALIAN by the Author, and thereout Translated into English.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XVII.

ROMANS 13.12. The night is passed, the day is at hand: Let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.


IF in this present drooping, and dead time of the year it delights a man,
after the longsome night, to behold the day, though most-what cloudie, and at
the shortest, much more delightful must the same be in the most pleasurable
seasons of the year, when the Sun being in his greatest strength, affoordeth
us long, and fair days, fit for many worthy employments. But if, immediately
upon one of these chill and tedious nights, there should shine forth an
unexpected Summersday, which were never to be intercepted by any night, or
winter, or irkesomnesse at all, how would we be taken with delight, and
admiration. The blessed Apostle Saint Paul, after a very long and many ways
darksome night, observing, that now there had approached both to himself, and
to his dear brethren in Christ, a day in many respects most happy, which was
to expect no night at all, with this congratulatory speech addresseth himself
to them, and gives this watchword, saying, Nox praecessit; dies autem
appropinquauit. The night is past, and the day is at hand.

With the same sentence may I fitly now furnish my self, in this my first
speech, for an affectionate congratulation with you, my beloved brethren of
Italy, and you my other auditors here assembled to hear me. Forasmuch as I
have at this time set my self no other task, then to present in common mine
own joys, together with yours: my coming into these parts being, not to
teach others, but to be taught my self, not to be an instructor, but to be
instructed, and set aright. Now therefore having undertaken, for satisfying the
desire, and pious request of many, to speak unto you this day, and happily
again hereafter in the like manner, I intend to hold my self to my wonted
simplicity of preaching, and plainness of style, and to keep aloof from all
choice phrases, and affected streines of Italian elegancies, contenting my
self rather to work upon the affections, then to satisfy the understanding.

I resume therefore my Text, and say, Nox praecessit etc. The night is past,
the day comes on. Let us cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light. These four brief propositions shall be the four points of
this present Exercise.

1 The first of the diverse mystical, and spiritual nights, which are said to
be passed. 2 The second of the diverse days opposite to those nights. 3 The
third of putting off darkness. 4 The fourth of putting on light.
But before we undertake the handling of these particulars, we are to present
our selves in hearty prayers before the throne of the divine Majesty, humbly
requesting our heavenly Father, first to cast the tender eyes of his mercy upon
his universal holy Church, and that it would please him by his spirit to unite
all Christian Churches in the only, true, pure, and holy faith, to combine
them in perfect charity, to extinguish all disunions, to make up all rents and
schisms, to mollify all hardened hearts, that they may cast off their
obstinacy, and lay aside all humane respects, and deseignes; that so all
obstacles, hindering this so important union, may be removed. Let us pray for
all Christian Princes, that God would kindle in their hearts a fervent zeal to
procure the general reformation of the Church, and to set forward this holy
union. In special let us pray for his most excellent Majesty of Great
Britain, the true Defender of the true ancient, pure, and holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic faith: that God would in his own hands hold his Majesty's
heart, and continue still turning, and plying it to his holy service, and to
the accomplishing of whatsoever tends to the spiritual, and temporal good
of this most flourishing kingdom: that he would give him a long and a
prosperous life, and finally put Satan, and all his other enemies under his
feet. He bless with all prosperity the Queens Majesty: He with his grace
assist the most noble Prince Charles, especially in these his tender years,
which usually hold fast the first good impressions; Infuse, O Lord, into him
fear of thy holy name, zeal of piety, and religion, and the imitation of the
solid and true Regal virtues of his Father. Pray we likewise for the most
Illustrious, the Elector Frederick, Count Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth,
that God will make them fruitful parents of a blessed offpring. Pray we also
for the most renowned State of Venice, that God would deliver them from all
their enemies, and preserve them in their full liberty. God enlighten the
minds of those wise and grave Senators, and give them understanding to know,
and courage to execute whatsoever shall make for the advancement of his glory,
service, and religion. Pray we for the most honorable Counselors,
Governors, and Magistrates whatsoever of these kingdoms, that God would power
down of his spirit plentifully upon them, for the good guidance and government
of this people. Let us pray for all Prelates, Priests, and Ministers of the
holy Universal Church: In special for those that manage the spiritual
affairs in these kingdoms, that they may perform their service to God, and
to his holy Church with true zeal, and an upright heart. Let us pray for all
the Nobility of these kingdoms, that God would keep and maintain them in
their due fealty toward God, and toward their King, and always incline their
hearts to good, and holy deseignes. Pray we for all the people, that God would
bless them with all abundance of spiritual, and temporal blessings. Lastly
let us pray, that God would grant me such grace, that, in publishing his sacred
word, I may both my self reap inwardly true spiritual fruit, and reach
forth the like to this honorable audience. For all these things let us
devoutly say that Prayer, which our Lord JESUS CHRIST has taught us. Our
Father, etc.

THE no less enlightened, then beloved Disciple of our Savior, Saint John the
Apostle, Evangelist, and Prophet, intending to comprise in a very small
abridgement, the whole doctrine of the Gospel, and to show what was the aim,
and scope, whereto all Evangelical preaching must tend, insisted upon two
brief propositions combined together, but by relation of contrariety; the one
affirmative, the other negative, both concerning God. And before he sets them
forth, in his first Epistle he premiseth a fair troop to make way for them.
Quod fuit ab initio etc. John 1.1.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of life. For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and
was manifested unto us. And yet, not content with this great preparation, he
repeateth again, and says, That, which we have seen, and heard, declare we
unto you, that ye also may have fellowshippe with us; and our fellowshippe is
with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ. Now therefore having awakened
us with touching upon the exceeding benefit of being received into fellowshippe
with the holy Apostles, by receiving that, which he thus propounds to us;
let him say at the last, what this is of so great importance, which was from
the beginning, that is, from beyond all eternity: which the holy Apostles had
heard, and handled with their hands, which should bring us eternal life, and
which they were to preach, and teach thorowout the world: Let him say, and
declare it in a word, we will hear it. Ethaec est annunciatio etc. This is the
message, which we have heard, and declare unto you. Well: Blessed Saint John,
we are ready, and prepared to hear this your admirable and mysterious message:
unfold at length that, which you have heard, and learnt, and received to report
unto us. Behold, here it follows in few words: Quoniam Deus lux est; and in
eo tenebrae non sunt vllae; That God is light, and in him there is no darkness
at all. Behold this is the abstract, and sum of our faith, That God is light
without darkness. Therefore our eternal salvation confisteth in receiving
this light, and in casting out darkness. Deus lux est etc. God is light.

If God himself be light, what marvel then, that he so delights to employ
himself about light. The first inward Word, which God from all eternity
brought forth within himself, what was it but his substantial, eternal word,
his only begotten son, whom we know to be Lumen de lumine, light of light.
Lux vera, quae illuminat etc. John 1.
The true light, which enlightneth every man that comes into the world.
Likewise the first external word of God, which he uttered out of himself
after an eternity of silence, was this, Fiat lux, Let there be light. Light, a
creature so beloved of the Creator, that he thought good to bestow this one and
only quality as a sufficient dowry on the heavenly bodies, which are the most
noble and exalted creatures in all the rank of sensible substances. But will
ye yet further observe, how great a friend God is to light, and enemy to
darkness? Behold he would not suffer his new framed material world to
remain without light so much as the three first days of the Creation. Genes.
1.1.
The Sun and Moon the two great lights, together with the other lesser
lights of the stars, were to be made the fourth day: and yet, because in
this mean while darkness was upon the face of the deep, in the first
distinguishing of things out of the confused lump, God, as enemy of this
darkness, said, Let there be light; and there was light. Light the first borne
of all the visible creatures: light, which has no positive contrary in nature:
light, which displayeth it self to all, and makes all things else manifest:
light, which pierces every transparent body though most solid: light, the joy
of the eyes, and comfort of every afflicted heart. Quale gaudium est mihi, qui
in tenebris sedeo, and lumen coeli nen video? What joy can I take, that sit in
darkness, and behold not the light of heaven? said good old Tobia, when he was
blind: Light, which transfuseth it self in a moment: light, which cannot be
defiled by the touch of things impure: light, which gives life to all colors,
and actuateth them: light, the mother of all beauties, and ornaments of this
sensible world. The Rainebow makes a goodly show being guarded, and striped
with so many, and so amiable colors, which in truth are nothing else, but the
light of the Sun reflected from dewie clouds, and by diverse composures of
more, or less opacity reduced to such variety of colors. And generally al
colors, which cloth with such beauty the best visible bodies, and represent
them to the eye with delight, what are they else, but mixtures of the lightsome
elements with the obscure. To conclude, light may by way of resemblance, and
participation be accounted a divine thing, inasmuch as God is light, and in him
there is no darkness. And therefore as soon, as God had created the light, the
pen of the Holy Ghost testifies, that God saw the light that it was good, and
divided the light from the darkness. Upon the atchieuement of every other
days work, the Scripture closes up with this, Et vidit Deus, quod esset
bonum; And God saw that it was good. But upon the work of the first day,
wholly employed in creating light only, the addition is more special; Et vidit
Deus lucem, quod esset bona; And God saw the light that it was good. But as for
darkness, that being interchangeablie to accompany the light for the bringing
in of night, indeed there follows Gods both separation, and nomination of
them both; Diuisit Deus, and vocauit Deus: God separated the light from the
darkness, and God calls the light Day, and the darkness Night. But upon
this the Scripture does not add, that God saw that it was good; because (it is
S. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 17.
Augustines argute collection) God, as a special lover of the light and hater
of darkness, gave to the light only this approbation, and praise, Quod erat
bona, that it was good. But of the day and night coupled together, he would
afford no such commendation, lest he should give to night and darkness the
advancement of goodness. The reason is clear; for that Deus lux est, God is
light, and in him there is no darkness, and he it is, that dwells in that
light, which no man can approach unto.

Well therefore might S. Paul frame this his congratulation with the faithful
under the metaphore of light, and darkness, day, and night; Nox praecessit,
dies autem appropinquauit; telling this, as most comfortable news, that a very
longsome, and irksome night was ouerblowne, and that a goodly fair day then
had overtaken them. Procopius writes, that near to the Pole, where the nights
endure diverse months long, the inhabitants in the end of such a night, at such
time as the Sun uses to render himself to their view, get up their highest
mountains, striving to have the first view of that most desired creature: and
no sooner do they epsy it, but they adorn themselves in their best attire,
and with mutual joy and embraces congratulate, saying, Behold the Sun, the
Sun appears; and so they inuit and feast one another. And all this upon the
view of the material Sun only. Another manner of feast, and joy it is, to
which the Apostle here does incite, and inuit. Whilst in a mystical, and
spiritual sense he proclaymeth to us, that, The night is passed, and the day
come. Where he points at the miseries of the continual, dreadful, and
hideous nights then ouerpassed, and of the long and happy days brought unto
us by that Sun, which knows no going down.

Nox praecessit. Three kinds of nights are here understood by Saint Paul,
whereof he ioyed that they were ouerpassed. The first the night of ignorance,
the second of sin, the third of negligence. To these, in regard of our
selves, and these times, I will add a fourth, the night of errors. So that of
these the two first go before the receiving of the faith, namely the night of
blinding ignorance, and tyrannizing sin; the other two follow the faith
received, namely stupifying negligence, and infecting error.

Ye have often read, and many of you considered the strange manner of speech
used in the holy Scriptures, in the distinction of the six days of the
Creation. And the evening, and the morning, were the first day: Every day has
its night, the day goes before, and the night follows after, the morning
makes way for the evening. Surely nature requires that the habit should
precede the privation: Whereupon I conceive not to what purpose Aristotle
pusled himself, and troubled natural Philosophy, by shouldring in after
Matter and Form, Privation for a third principle of natural bodies, unless
he meant hereby, that whatsoever is generated, makes a passage from not
being unto being. But if so, yet this not being might well be termed
negation rather then privation: Or rather by privation; perhaps the Philosopher
would signify unto us the natural inclination of matter to receive a new
form, which appetite is very improperly called privation. Now, as for the text
Factum est vespere, and mane etc. It is enough for us, that it, being a phrase
merely extraordinary, imports a mystery. Too tedious should I be, if I
should here propound all the diverse opinions of the holy Fathers upon those
words. But for as much as serves my purpose, I doubt not, but that God in his
intention was willing to make man wholly diurnall, and no whit participating of
the night: For he created him right and just, and endued him with such gifts,
whereby he might, if he would, have made to himself, and to all his
posterity, a perpetual spiritual day, which should never have seen any night
at all. But God (inasmuch as he foresaw, that wretched man would within a few
hours after his creation abandon the light, and cast himself headlong into
darkness) moved with compassion of him, in his determination provided a
remedy, by destinating for man's sake his own son, the true light, and sun
of righteousness to bring them from darkness to light, from night to day.
And therefore it joys my heart to think how God ordained that (besides other
mysterious interpretations) even for the shadowing out this then hidden
mystery, the Scripture describing the beginning of the world should speak in
this wise, Factum est vespere, and mane, intimating first the evening or night
of man's misery, and then the morning or day of his redemption following. For as
for his first estate of integrity and light, it was so short, that it is not to
be accounted for a day in this kind. And so S. Paul here not varying from
this our contemplation, rejoices that that night is passed, and this day
arrived; saying, Nox praecessit, dies autem appropinquauit. The night is past,
the day is at hand.

By the first of these nights I mean ignorance, or small knowledge of things
concerning God. But here it may be objected if S. Paul had written this
Epistle to the converted Gentiles only, well might he understand by this night
ignorance; but writing also to the Jews then in Rome converted to
Christianity, it seems that they could not then be taken to live in
darkness, and in the night of ignorance. Psalm. 76.1.
For Notus in Iudaea Deus. In Jury is God known, his name is great in Israel.
Judah was his Sanctuary, Psalm. 114.2.
and Israel his dominion. Which also was signified in Egypt, Exodus 10.
when there was palpable darkness thorowout all that land, but in the land of
Goshen, where the children of Israel dwelt, there was clear light. Isai 9.2.
The Prophet Isay spoke only of the Gentiles, when he said, The people that
walked in darkness, have seen a great light, and they that dwelt in the land
of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined. The Jews had the Law,
Cap. 3.
and the Prophets. To them (as Saint Paul witnesses in this epistle) were
committed the oracles of God. Yet notwithstanding, seeing that S. Paul has
made no such separation, nor distinction between Jew and Gentile, but has
expressly proclaimed, that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to
every believer, Rom 1.
to the Jew first, and then to the Greek. For by it the righteousness of God is
reuecled from faith to faith; He intends therefore, that as well the Jew, as
Gentile by the means of the Gospel only has attained the true and perfect
knowledge of God. So then the Gospel being this light, and day, for certain,
Nox praecessit, The night is passed, not to the Gentiles only, but also to the
Jews. For if we consider the knowledge, which was to be found either in
Jury, or among the Gentiles before the coming of Christ, that, in respect of
the knowledge of God and of heavenly things, was very small and shallow,
whereupon it might worthily be called night in comparison of the clear day of
the Gospel. As for the Law, who knows not that it was Vmbra futurorum, Heb.
10.1.
The shadow of things to come, as S. Paul calls it? And if it were a shadow,
it did partake of the nature of night. In the Old Testament the mystery of the
Trinity is very obscurely alluded unto. And as for that of the Incarnation, if
it had been ordinarily understood of the Jews, they would not have made such
resistance against Christ. Now therefore because both Jew, and Gentile before
the coming of Christ were very weak, and wanted the perfect knowledge of God,
S. Paul here says to them both, Nox praecessit, The night is gone. The
Prophet Isai foretells it, and the Evangelist S. Matthew confirms it, what
was the measure of the true knowledge of God as well among the Jews, as
Gentiles, at the time when the Redeemer came into the world. Matthew. 12.20.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
quench. Our Savior Christ did find Iudaea to be a broken reed, whereby is
insinuated, (according to the exposition of my countryman Saint Hierome) that
the Jew was not at that time so loudly sounding in setting forth the glory of
God, as formerly they were. And in truth that people then (as also at this day
far more miserably) was more guided by the superstitious traditions of their
vain Rabbines, then by the holy Scriptures. Wherewith our Savior also
vpbraided them, saying, Why do ye by your traditions transgress Gods
Commandment? And the very same now adays is to be found under the Papacy;
where much more account is made of the Popes commandments, then of Gods; The
committing of adultery being reputed galantery, but the eating of flesh upon a
Friday, a sacrilege worthy of faggot and fire. As for the Gentiles, Christ
found them to be linum fumigans, smothering flax, not altogether put out, but
somewhat smoking, by reason of that small and weak knowledge of God, which the
glimpse of the Law of Nature affoorded them. And therefore in conclusion, an
universal and common night did ouerspread all, both Jew, and Gentile. And if
Zachary the father of the great Baptist had not acknowledged the nightly
darkness, wherein both himself, and the rest of that people remained, he
would not hauesung, that Christ was the day spring from on High, To give light
to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our
feet into the way of peace. Surely that, Job 36.32.
which we read in the book of Job may be truly understood as well of
Iudaisme, as of Gentilisme; And this it is, In manibus abscondit lucem, and
praecepit ei, vt rursus adueniat; He bideth the light in his hands, and
commands it to come again. Whereby is given us to understand, that God,
before that he sent the Light of his own Son into the world, did hold the
light of the knowledge of God clasped up in his hand, so that, howsoeuersome
glimmering beams darted forth through the clifts from between the fingers,
yet he did reserve the wide opening of his hand till the fullness of time; and
therefore then he commanded this light vtrursus adueniat, to come again at
that time when S. Paul should shortly after proclaim, Nox praecessit.

But if by this night we will understand the true and total darkness of
Infidelity, then are we to say, that the Apostle does not here mean the
ancient bypast times before the coming of Christ, but rather the very time
wherein our Savior lived in his flesh upon the earth, and when the Gospel was
first published by the Apostles. In a word here is especially to be
understood that estate, wherein the new Christians of Rome (as well Jews, as
Gentiles) were immediately before their conversion to the Gospel, which was
indeed an utter darkness of night. What else were the Gentiles of that time in
Rome, and throughout the whole world, but Idolaters? And as for the Jews, had
not they then crucified our Lord and Savior? Had not they then rejected their
Messiah? Did not they the^ remain with the veil over their hearts? 2. Cor. 3.
And what greater infidelity, then not to receive Christ? Nay, to persecute
him in his members? Even in this night S. Paul accounted himself to have bin:
And worthily; For he testifies of himself, that he was formerly a blasphemer,
2. Tim. 1. Galat. 1.
and a persecuter, and iniunious; and that he persecuted the Church of God
beyond measure, and wasted it. Out of the lump of these hardened, and blinded
Jews, came the remnant of these, which embraced the Christian religion. And
therefore with good reason of these, as so of himself, S. Paul said, Nox
praecessit, To us, and in special to me, the night is passed.

The second night, whereof S. Paul would here be understood, is the night of
reigning sin; and this was most common both among the Jews, and Gentiles.
How heinous and filthy the enormities of the Gentiles were, especially in Rome,
may appear by the particular, and even loathsome catalogue recorded by S. Paul
in this Epistle. Wherefore God gave them up to their hearts lusts, Romans 1.
unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves: who turned
the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped, and served the creature.
Wherefore God gave them up to vile affections of most abominable sins. And
delivered them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient. Being filled with all unrighteousness, formcation, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousnes, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity,
whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despitefull, proud, boasters, inuenters
of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant
breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful. Surely either S.
Paul prophetically describes the enormous sins, and most corrupt manners of
Rome, as it stands in our times: Or else Rome, as now it is, and has been for
some ages past, has undertaken to be in all points like to heathenish Rome, as
it was in S. Paul's time. The manifold wickednesses of the now Rome could not
be more exactly pencelled, and drawn out to life, then by that, which the
Apostle here particularizeth. O dreadful night! o palpable darkness! o
intolerable blindness! Verily such impieties, and impurities conclude, that
as yet the first night of the want of the knowledge of God remains there,
Inasmuch as so hidious sins are proper to the Heathen, as the same Apostle
witnesses, Sicut and Gentes; As the Gentiles, 2 Thessalonians. 4.5. Ephesians. 4.17.
which know not God. Non ambuletis sicut and Gentes etc. That ye walk not as
the Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their minds, having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the blindness of their heart: Who being past feeling, have
given themselves over unto lassciuiousnesse, to work all uncleanness with
greedines. Certainly such life and manners, which are very ordinary and common
in the Court of Rome (yet I except whatsoever good men are there) do infer,
that according to the Apostles intimation, the knowledge of God, and hope of
everlasting life is not to be found among them. Edamus, bibamus, cras moriemur.
Let us eat and drink to day, for we shall die to morrow. And yet they most of
all should open their eyes, and mend their manners. Thus therefore to the
Gentiles made Christians, Nox praecessit, The night of grievous offenses is
past. Neither yet were the Jews out of the shade of this night; Qui alios
doces, teipsum non doces? Romans 2.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest
a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a man should not
commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, do
thou commit sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking
the Law, dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you.

There is no difference, Romans 3.
for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. All therefore were
over clouded with this night of most grievous sins. We have proved both
Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin, as it is written, They are all gone
out of the way, they are all become unprofitable, there is none that does good
no not one.

Now what is the night? Nothing else, but the absence of the Sun. And what
else, but sin, Wisd. 1.
drives the Sun of righteousness Christ Jesus from our souls. In maleuolam
animam non intrabit Sapientiae, nec habitabit in corpore subdito peccatis:
Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subjected
to sin. What is the night? It is the shadow of the earth interposing it self
between us and the Sun. And what else is sin, but a dark, and gross
obstacle intercepting the beams of the invisible Sun, so that they cannot
pierce down to us? Isay 59.2.
Your trangressions have made a separation between God and you, and your
sins have hid his face from you. What is the night? It is a season unfit for
trauailers other then those, that are willing to loose their way, and to
adventure their necks in headlong downefals. And what else is sin, but a
wandering from the way that leads to heaven, and a downeright gallop into the
pit of hell? Psalm. 81.23.
Dimisi eos secundum desideria cordis ipsorum; ibunt in adinuentionibus suis. I
gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they will walk in their own
inventions. Prou. 18.3.
Improbus cum in profundum venerit peccatorum contemnit: sed sequitur eum
ignominia and opprobrium. When the wicked man comes into the depth of sin,
he grows to contempt, but shame and reproach follow him. Of this night also
S. Paul here said, The night is passed: For they were now washed and cleansed
from their sins, and had their members also mortified; as I shall touch in
considering the day opposite to this night.

The third night, which S. Paul here had an eye unto, was the night of
negligence, and dullness. Nay it may seem, that he had principal respect
heereunto: For being that he spoke to the Romans already converted to Christ,
whose faith also he said to have been spoken of thorowout the whole world;
Romans 1.
they therefore were out of the night of infidelity. delity. Of whom also he
had said, that they were freely instified by Gods grace, Romans 3.24.
through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ. -- by faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins past. And therefore now
they being justified, and out of the night of sin, yet the Apostle in this
chapter says to them, It is now high time for us to awake from sleep. They
were therefore yet asleep, and so remained in a certain kind of night,
though they had ouerpassed the two former nights, whereof I have spoken. And of
this third night the Apostles meaning is, that it is not entirely passed over:
but he exhorts them to endeavor, and strive to shake off this sleep, and to
drive away this night also, as formerly by Gods grace they had worn out the
other two nights of ignorance, and of sin, He therefore urges them to rouse
up themselves from spiritual sloth, and drowsinesse, and to become watchful
in things perteining to their salvation. This night will be more evident by
our mention of the day opposite heereunto.

I pass therefore to the fourth night, from which God out of his infinite
bounty has freed us in these times. Concerning which, I may say with S. Paul,
on mine own behalf, and yours (my brethren of Italy, whom God has blessed
with the clear light of the truth) Nox praecessit, The night is past. And for
this I make such congratulation as may serve, not to insult upon others, or
proudly to glory in our selves, but to render due thanks to the Almighty, and
to stir up our affections to compassionate our brethren, who yet remain in
no small danger, lying in the deep darksome night of many errors, though
professing the Christian faith. Surely a night so much the more dangerous, in
that those poor souls deem themselves only to enjoy the Light, and dream
that all others, who adhere not to their part, remain in darkness, Isa. 5.
Et dicunt bonum malum etc. And call good evil, and evil good, accounting
light to be darkness, and darkness light.

The Church of God is said to be Castrorum acies ordinata; An army set in
array. Cant. 6.3. Job 7.
And in truth the whole life of man is a warfare upon earth. But this warfare
of the Church, and this mighty Army in my opinion may be more fitly resembled
to an Armada on the Sea, then to a march on the land. In which regard the
Church is called, A Merchants ship bringing food from a far. Prou. 31.14.
And our Savior Christ being in a ship did then most lively represent his
Church, Luke 5.3.
as is very elegantly declared by the holy Fathers. Christ has his Navy of
many ships of war, that is, a collection of many particular Churches, whereof
he is the Head, and General. Against this Navy there are in the sea of this
world openly set out many other ships of war under the conduct of the Devil,
which are the troops of diabolical sects, and superstitious Infidels, the
enemies of Christ. And in this warfare I, to my great grief, behold the ships
that are under the same Captain, and Commander our Savior Christ, to pursue
one another with no less, nay perhaps with more hatred, then if they were
indeed the ships of the enemy. The Church of Rome, and those that follow the
conduct of it, hate to the death the Reformed Churches. And the Reformed hate
them. I would feign set you right, my Auditors, in a great, and very common
mistake, if so be that ye think the Reformed Religion to be another
Religion wholly differing from the Roman. The Religion of both is in the maine
essentials and fundamentals the very same. Both have the same Christ for their
Lord and Master; both the same baptism; both are founded by the same Apostles;
both have and profess the same Gospel. But to the end we may understand the
estate of both the Roman, and Reformed Churches, I mean to hold my self to
my similitude of ships, and Navigations. The voyage of the Militant Church is a
continual sailing in the Ocean of this world, amids a thousand shelfes, and
rocks, gulfes, and quicksands, where no shore, nor land at all is to be
seen. For our pilgrimage here is in faith, and tends to the attaining of
things invisible. We walk by faith, 2. Cor. 5.7.
and not by sight. We see now through a glass darkly, 1. Cor. 13.12.
but then we shall behold face to face. 2. Cor. 4.18.
We look not on the things, that are seen, but on the things, that are not
seen. For the things, which are seen, are temporal: but the things, which
are not seen, are eternal. And the Navigations, wherein the Church Militant is
employed, tends to Spiritual things, which are not seen. And surely in Sea
voyages amidst the maine, where no land mark can be seen for the direction
of the ship, the only certain means of guidance for Navigations consists
in the using of a good Compass, having a Needle well touched with the
Loadstone, as also in having a Ship man's Card, or Sea map justly quartered,
and coasted. He that without these, or with a false Compass, or Map,
saileth out of all sight of shore, may be said to wander in utter
darkness, and midnight, though it be at noone-tide; And contrary wise, he
that is furnished with a true Compass, though he sail in the deep of Sea,
and of night, yet he enjoys the day, and cleareeth his passage at all
occasions. Now for the difference of the Reformed Ships, and the Roman, it
is not in the bottom, nor in the tackeling, but only in the Compass. The
Roman ship is a good Vessel, well built, not rotten, nor fallen in pieces;
it is well furnished with Masts, with Yards, with Cordage, with Cables, with
Anchors; it has an excellent Sea-mappe: the passengers, and common soldiers
in it are all under the colors of one and the same General, our Savior
Christ. And in these there is no difference between this Ship, and the
reformed. But I find one maine difference between them, whence also arise an
innumerable other disparities, and it is, that the Pilot, who sits at the
stern of the Roman ship, having thrown aside the ordinary Compass, and
leaving the use of the approved Sea-mappe, has out of his own capricious
conceit devised a new Card, and contrived a newfound Compass of his own,
whose needle has no aspect toward the Pole, or touch at all of the Lodestone.
Suitable also hereto has he out of his own head framed certain Cardinal
winds, which serve only for his Card. Nay (which is worse then this) he has
intruded into the possession of governing the helmes of all the ships, that
road in his company, and from every of them he has taken away the use of the
ordinary Compass, and beating the Mariners, and over awing them by tyranny
(who otherwise would do well, and perform their office aright) will have no
nay, but all those ships must dance attendance after his. And so, for that
he uses no true Compass, nor Card, he ringleads them all to wrack, and
they follow him fast enough without light through the thickest darkness.

For the unfolding of this Metaphore, I say in a word, that the Bishop of
Rome at this present, and for many ages past, leaving the trauailers true
Sea-card, the holy Scriptures, and the immovable North Pole, the aim at
Heaven and heavenly things; and propounding to himself one only Port, his
own greatness, and temporal pomp, has in his devised Compass quartered
out his own counterfeit winds, which must blow for that haven; they are
dominion over all other Churches, mastery over the Keys, infallibility of his
judgment, and authority in things Temporal, even over Princes. And as for
the poor passengers, and common soldiers, who are transported, and blindly
clapped up under the hatches in these wandering ships, he has, to amuse them,
added in his false Card many bastard winds, painted out in gilded, and
flourished lines; namely, our own, and others merits, Invocation of Saints,
religious worship of Images, the treasure of Indulgences, efficacy of Masses,
and of Priestly absolutions, Agnus Dei's, hallowed Beads, holy Water. By these,
and other such winds never found in the ancient true Compasses, and whereof
the ancient Pilots of the holy Church never heard any news; by these blasts
will he have his followers to sail, whereby they are carried headlong into
many most important errors. The only cause of all this mischief is that
Archpilot. For if he were removed, or could be persuaded to leave his own
monstrous Chimericall Compass, and to betake himself to the usual and
ancient guide, presently defacing all those false winds, verily the goodly
fleet of the Catholic Church would easily be set right, and holding the
safe and sure way (as the Reformed Companies have done) would approach to the
true haven of eternal bliss. True it is, that these Reformed Churches, being
misledde by this wandering guide, did sometime follow that vain and deceitful
Compass. But at length they have better bethought themselves and casting out
that strange intruding Pilot, they have yielded up their ship to be governed
by their own true Steersemen, such as God himself has ordained. And so using
the infallible Card of the holy Scriptures, and the true Compass quartered out
into the four ancient Cardinal winds of the four first generull Councels,
and seconded with the vnder-windes of the holy Fathers, they make an happy
voyage, and without wandering arrive at the appointed haven of salvation. And
this is the miserable night of manifold errors, wherein so many poor souls
suffer themselves to be hoodwinked, and lulled asleep: from which yet we are
rescued by the Almighty hand of God. And therefore let us yield him all
possible thanks, that This night is passed.

If I should here enlarge my self, and insist upon the consideration of these
forged misguiding blasts, to display all the particular errors, which make this
cloudie night, I might encomber my self in a confused Chaos, out of which I
could not get in many days, much less in the little portion of time allotted
to this Exercise. Yet I can do no less now, then touch some of the most
principal, and universal of them, out of which, as from a root, all the
particular errors do spring.

It is very much behoouefull to the Pope for the mainteining himself in the
forged greatness of his universal Vicarship of Christ, to hold the people in
the deepest darkness of ignorance, and blindness, that possibly may be. To
this purpose one maine article, which he causes to be taught in all the
Churches subject to him, stands him in great stead; namely, that, for the
saving of men's souls, an implicit faith suffices: whereby a man believes
all to be truth, whatsoever the holy Catholic Roman Church believes, and
mainteineth. And by this mean the Pope lays open a way for himself to
persuade the silly people, already blinded with this credence, to believe, and
receive whatsoever he imposes on them for his own advantage, and to make
them admit for an article of faith, that he is the only vicar of Christ: that
he cannot err in cathedra, judging out of his chair: that he is the Lord
paramount of the whole Church: that the keys, and treasure of holy Church are
in his hands only: that he has power to depose Kings from their Thrones, and
to discharge their subjects of their oath of fealty; and infinite other such
fopperies: for the maintenance whereof, many wretches cast away their souls.
And by degrees it will come to that pass one day, that he will make himself
to be adored for a God upon earth. By this engine of implicit faith, he
barreth up the way to the people, so that they cannot come to descry his
inventions, as long as they make it a scruple of conscience to examine, or
consider what truth may be in such determinations, which are made by him for
his own advantage only, and not for their souls health. In this mean while
the poor vulgar think, that they have as much faith, as will serve for their
salvation; and yet in fine they will be found to have none at all. I believe
that, which the Church believes. If I come not to particular articles, I yet
believe nothing, but only am in a disposition to believe that, which the
Church of Rome shall prescribe me, whether true, or false. Verily for any man
to say, I believe that, which another man believes, is as much, as if he said,
I see that, which another man sees, though my own eyes be shut. And as no man
can be said to see, but only when the faculty of his own sight exercises its
operation upon a particular object; so there is no actual believing, but when
the understanding, and will do actually apprehend, and embrace the object of
faith. There are under the Papacy, there are among the people many men endued
by God with sufficient judgment and capacity to receive good instruction in
many mysteries of our faith, if they had convenient means and opportunity to
learn them: but by reason of this implied faith, they are not only kept from
learning those things which they ought to know, but also a great number of
them, and they not of the dullards, when they under a confused notion apprehend
such articles, frame to themselves false, and erroneous conceits of them. How
many being enwrapped in this implicit faith, and being otherwise able
distinctly to understand, that there are in Christ two distinct natures, and
but one only person, and that divine, yet think that Christ is man by an
humane person, and so are Nestorians? How many are there, that believe Christ
to be a mere man, and so are Arians? How many believe that in Christ the
divine and humane natures are confounded into one nature? Innumerable such
monsters of all heresies may be found under this Chimaera of inuolued faith.
Besides this, the more to cherish these monstrous errors, the Popes bar
Christian people from all means of learning the verities of the Christian
faith, forbidding them the use of the holy Scriptures in such language, as they
may understand. For they are well assured, that the very vulgar would, by
reading the Scriptures, discover the manifold devises, and tricks, wherewith
the Popes, the Bishops, the Preachers, the Priests, and Friars delude the
simple people, to draw money out of their purses, and to make themselves be
thought so many Gods. If the people might be suffered to read the Scriptures
in the mother tongue, they would find, that all the twelve Apostles had the
same charge, in all respects, equal with S. Peter, of planting, and governing
the Church. They would see, that in all the Bible there is nothing to be found
for S. Peter's being at Rome, nor that he has left any special charge with
the Bishop of Rome. They would be advertised, that all Bishops succeed the
Apostles in equal power among themselves, without subjection of one to
another: And that the union of holy Church consists in the unity of faith,
and in charity, whereby all Churches are combined, and embrace one the other,
and not in being under any one visible head, but under Christ, the true, and
only head of the Church. They would well know, that the Mass has no other
use, nor brings any other spiritual benefit, then to consecrate the holy
Sacrament for Communion, and that only, when there are some, more, or less to
communicate, that the pronouncing of some part aloud, and whispering the rest,
so that the people hears it not, is but a mockery. Likewise that those
mimicall gestures with the hands, legs, and eyes serve for nothing, but to set
the people on gazing in a wonderment. They would learn, that in the bread of
the Eucharist there is the true body of Christ Sacramentally, and after a
wonderful manner, which to us is inexplicable; but not in flesh and bones, with
eyes, hands, and feet. Neither should they ever find, that that consecrated
bread is to be adored for God, even as we adore not the water which
represents the blood of Christ in baptism, although, by the power of Gods
grace, this water, and that bread in him that receives it worthily, work
marvelous spiritual effects in the soul. They would understand, that
Purgatory, being not once named, nor implied in the Scriptures, is an invention
of the Priests, and Friars, to make men call for Masses, and to draw on
paiments, and oblations for the rescuing of souls out of Purgatory. Which
device rayseth an income, whereby such a swarm of idlesbies (not only
unprofitable to the Church, but also scandalous) are maintained, living in
iollity, and wallowing in all uncleanness. These, and many other like trueths
would the people descrie, if they might read the holy Scriptures, nor would
they suffer themselves to be any longer deceived, and fuddled up in that dark
cloud, and night of infolded faith. Much the easier also would they understand
these things, if together with the Scriptures, diverse godly, and holy Books
might be suffered to come to their view, which discover the impostures of the
Papacy, and sincerely lay down the true way to salvation; yet these Books are
most falsely by the Pope, for his own behoof, declared to be heretical, and
prohibited, as pestilent in that kind, without ever showing particularly wherein
these pretended heresies consist: Which are notwithstanding taught by the holy
Fathers of the Church. But this is his refuge for security, lest his errors
should be discovered. And, as for so many souls running this way headlong
into hell, that troubles him not, may he the while hold up his wordly pomp.
And so much of the first general error.

Another general error, wherewith the captiuated Churches in Italy, and many
other elsewhere are seduced, is the persuading of the simple people, that they
obtain infallible remission of all their sins committed after baptism, by
virtue of certain external, sensible, and material actions, which are called
Sacraments, and Sacramentals. Indeed the common people being by nature prone,
and hasty to superstition, and more willing, and ready to undergo external
easy performances, then inward duties difficult, and distastful to flesh and
blood, put too much confidence in these outward superstitions, being in the
mean time destitute of the true inward effect of desired remission of their
sins, and so the blind being led by the blind, both fall into the pit.

The true Sacraments instituted by our Savior for remission of sins, are
holy Baptism, and the sacred Communion. And the only true and real remedy,
whereby remission of sins, done after Baptism, is obtained, is Repentance,
which consists in true sorrowing for sin, together with resolution to leave
sin by the assistance of Gods grace. But see how extrauagant the Papal
doctrine is in this point: Namely, that it is necessary to confess to a Priest
all and every of our sins, one by one, together with the circumstances of
them; and that thereupon presently comes absolution, which ex opere operato by
virtue of the deed done, that is, infalliblie, by a Sacramental operation,
releaseth the sin quantum ad culpam, as much as concerns the guiltiness of
it: and as for an after-reckoning quantum ad poenam, concerning the punishment,
that is remitted by satisfaction enioined, or by Indulgences. This so mighty
efficacy they attribute to Priestly absolution, by virtue whereof they will
that a sinner presently becomes ex attrito contritus, that is to say, though
he do not truly and soundly repent him of his sins, but conceive a certain
slight and light sorrow, out of fear only of Gods punishments, and not out
of hatred of sin, yet upon the act of absolution, he enjoys the benefit of
remission, as fully, as if he had true and entire repentance, together with
hatred of sin. In this manner they breed up a sinner, and make him in his
affection to cleave fast to his sins, whilst he flattereth himself, that
Confession turns his attrition into contrition. And thus poor souls, being
beguiled with this blinding and benighting Doctrine, trust so far upon this
their external Confession, and external Absolution, that they neglect inward
repentance, and so stick fast in their sins, thinking that they have done
their part, when they have gone over the beadroule of their sins, and so
received Absolution. But those good souls, that put not this superstitious
confidence in any such power of Absolution (which in truth cannot derive from
the Gospel any Sacramental operation) and certainly persuade themselves, that
they have no other means of remedy, then true hearty repentante, they rely
upon that only, and make request to God for it by humble and fervent prayers,
using also other helps, whereto the Scriptures direct us, fastings, giving of
alms, and other works of charity: Not that these do satisfy for the
punishment, as the Romanists vainly teach, (For God, when he pardons the
sin, remitteth also the punishment, as is most clear in Scripture) but,
because these are fruits of inward Repentance, and parts of outward; and so
make way for remission of sins. But the Romish preposterous course
(mistaking, and mis-doing in the dark night of this error) works clean
contrary, and sets the cart before the horse, first granting remission, and
afterward imposing works of repentance, which indeed should go before
repentance, and much more before remission. And by this reckoning the unhappy
souls, when they think themselves most free, then remain most bound, and
unpardoned before the throne of God. This devise therefore of Sacramental
Confession, and Sacramental Absolution, as they term it, as it is pernicious,
so it has the brand of nouelty, being first imposed by Pope Innocent the
third: After the entrance whereof, the form of true repentance is very hardly
to be found in the Churches subject to the Papacy. O how much better were it
for a sinner not to go to Confession, but only when he finds himself in
his own conscience rightly disposed, and to be in the state of true
repentance? For the often frequenting of Confession, as it is used, and
receiving of Absolution, such as it is, makes a sinful wretch feed himself
with shadows, and seem to himself to give his conscience sufficient
satisfaction. Whereupon he, not seeing the miserable estate, wherein he remains,
never thinks seriously of true repentance. Whereas, if he had not that vain
employment, which serves him but to cloak his sins, he would find himself
to be yet in the estate of sin, and would earnestly bethink himself of the
true remedy, namely inward sincere repentance, which, without any other
confession, or absolution, cancelleth our sins, as fully appears out of the
holy Scriptures, and Fathers. It is therefore an error very grievous, and
hurtful to the soul, to believe that these external performances confer
remission of sins, and that they are necessary thereunto. What shall we say of
so many other mere external trifles, whereto the people is most
superstitiously inclined, as holy water, beads, crosses, consecrated Images,
Papal and Episcopal benedictions, Stations, Pardons, the new found hoode of
the Carmelites, called the Habitell, the whipcoards of Saint Francis, the
girdles of the Cordeliers, the visiting of such a Church in such days, or of
these and these altars, and relics, nay the very hearing of Masses, and
anealing him, that lies a dying? These, and such like other outward shows, do
fill, and puff up the soul with a very surfeit of an imaginary, and false
devotion. Whereupon men think not of purging their consciences, of consummating
their faith, of inflaming their charity toward God, and toward their neighbor;
they busy not themselves about repenting of their sins, and performing those
internal actions, wherein the essential part of our reconciliation with God,
and eternal salvation does consist. And when a man has once in a day signed
himself with the sign of the Cross, and said over his Pater Noster, (which
he understands never a whit) together with his Aue Maria, and has heard Mass,
why then forsooth he is a Saint, and has learned enough in religion: and so
fastening upon these outsides, he sets up his rest on them for his salvation.
And, if at any time they can ensnare an ungrounded Protestant, and win him
over to their party, they think him very well furnished, if he can believe in
the Pope, and will hear Mass; upon this presently, without any more ado,
they declare him to bea most perfect Catholic. Let them not here tell me,
that the inwards of the soul are stirred up, and whetted by these outward
actions. For experience shows the contrary, that the people, when they have
tired themselves with visiting so many altars, with hearing so many Masses,
with chewing over so many halfe-scores of Aue Mary's, in running over all the
Rosary, when they have so and so many times kissed the Cross, and have bin in
Processions, they look no further, but deem themselves to be all holy, and
that they need nothing else; and yet they go on in their sins: nay, such as
these, for the most part, become in their inward, worse every day then other;
and for all this, mend not their lives, nor settle themselves to true
repentance. Lament. 4.4.
Of these poor starued souls we may say, Paruuli petierunt panem, and non est
qui frangat eis. The children called for bread, and there is none to break it
to them. And if they afford them any scraps of bread, it must not be the true
bread of life, but in stead of wholesome and nourishing bread made of wheat,
they give them bread made of bran, or acornes: and, to keep them from sense of
hunger, they stuff them up with swines meat, the husks, and shales of these
superfluous, and superstitious devotions. What now adays carries away the
noise in their pulpits? what, but the Papacy, Purgatory, and Indulgences, and
other the like superstitions? Here one extolls a certain Image of the blessed
Virgin to be seen in his Church, which makes miracles Gods plenty: but these
feats are either imagined, or dreamed of, or else contrived by imposture.
There another stands upon the commendation of a certain wodden wonder-working
Crucifixe, making a moster of it with a troop of lighted Torches about it:
and, the more to endeare it, he withdraws the Curtains but seldom, and
opens the Shrine at a few set times in the year. Otherwhere others do the
like, and all for the same end; namely to allure the simple people to flock to
them, and so to work upon their purses. O misery of corruption! O night of
darkness!

I pass now to the third general error, and it is this: That the thunderbolt
of excommunication darted out by the Pope is evermore very terrible, and that
it strikes deep, wounding the soul, and tumbling it downright into hell, if
the Popes commands be not obeyed. True it is, that every Bishop within his own
Bishopric (no less then the Pope within the Bishopric of Rome) has power
to excommunicate grievous, and scandalous offenders, either debarring them of
Ecclesiastical communion with other Christian people, until they amend; or,
if the case be desperate, casting them out of the Church, and cutting them off
from the body of Christ, as dead and rotten members. But whenever such
Excommunications are sent out without just, yea and most weighty cause, they
more hurt him that thundereth them out, then them, against whom they are bent.
It must needs therefore be a great folly, to stand in fear of the Popes
Excommunication whenever he threatens in this sort, Either believe
whatsoever I say, or I will excommunicate you: Either admit me to be supreme
Lord of all the world both in spiritual, and temporal matters, or you shall
be excommunicated: Either acknowledge, and worship me for a god upon earth, or
you shall be held for Excommunicate. To bring his own ends to pass, he
works in this sort: he compels men both to believe, and also to perform
whatsoever he please: he forelayeth means to keep simple ouerfearefull men
in awe, so that they shall not dare to stand out in their own defense against
his Tyranny. By these vain terrors he takes away the use of many excellent
books, therefore prohibited, because they lay open his collusions.
Nevertheless this rule is certain, and infallible, whosouer, walking
uprightly in the sight of God, with sincerity of heart, and honest intention,
reads books, not out of carnal curiosity, but out of desire to learn, and
to discern between truth and falsehood, and to the end that he may not
always remain blind, let him not fear a whit, nor make any account of such
Excommunication, which can never separate any man from God, unless he has in
his own heart first separated himself from him. Without doubt, the Pope
makes great use of this scarcrow fear of his Excommunications, as a fit
engine to enforce many a falsehood, and to hide out of the way many truths, for
the upholding of his own most undue, and usurped greatness. This indeed has
been his weapon, wherewith he long since has laid about him; but it has
been retorted back upon him by many holy men, who have not spared to laugh at
his false thunderclaps, bolted out by great abuse without necessity, or just
cause at all, and have made him to give over with shame enough. Let us now
therefore render our thanks to God, who has rescued us de ore Leonis, out of
the mouth of the Lion, and de nube erroris out of the cloud of error, so that
the enemy cannot lead us into such deep darkness, as he yet does many
souls miserably captiuated to him. And therefore to us, Nox praecessit, The
night is past.

Dies autem appropinquauit; But the day has approached. To these four nights
there are as many days correspondent. The first is of the knowledge of God,
and of the holy Christian faith, the shadows being discharged, and the veiles
taken away by the coming of Christ, when that which lay hid under types, and
dark resemblances, was manifested by the light of the Gospel. Neither was it
without mysterious signification, that at the very passion of Christ the veil
of the Temple was rent from the top down to the bottom. For the sacred
mysteries of God were not now to remain any longer curtayned up, inasmuch as
at the appearing of the Sun of righteousness all those clouds and darkness
vanished away; clear revelation being then made to us of the unity in Nature,
and trinity in Persons in God, and of the Redeemer, the true and natural Son
of God, in whom are two Natures, the one divine, the other humane, subsisting
in the divine Person of the Word. He is in substance, and clear signification
the foreshadowed spotless Lamb of God: He is the true Sacrifice, which was
hidden, and veyled in the sacrifices of the old Law, the most precious
sacrifice offered up upon the altar of the Cross for our sins; whereto no
other sacrifice is now to succeed, Romans 12.
besides the reasonable service of our souls, and bodies, and perpetual
thanksgiving, and adoration of his most holy name.

The second day is the day of Grace, with full remission of all our sins in
holy Baptism, the Church being sanctified, and cleansed by the Lauer of water
in the Word. Of those, that received Christ by the preaching of the Apostles,
Saint Paul said; Ephesians. 5.
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord, who
commanded light to shine out of darkness. To the Gentiles the light of
Nature, and to the Jews the Law did point at what ought to be done; but
neither the one, nor the other gave grace, and strength to work well, Romans 8.
as Saint Paul proves: Hebr. 10.
For that Nature being corrupted was over nimble to run headlong into sin.
But the grace of Christ helps our natural weakness, and helps us to be
set free, and preserved from sin, and therefore, Hic dies appropinquauit, The
day has approached.

The third day is the day of watchfulness, diligence, and care. The wild, and
savage beasts watch most of all in the night time, forraging then for their
prey. On the contrary, man r^^oseth himself in the night, and goes about his
business in the day time. Psalm. 104.20.
Posuisti tenebras, and facta est nox, in ipsa pertransibunt omnes bestiae
Syluae, etc. Thou made darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of
the Forest creep forth. The young Lions roar after their prey, and seek their
meat of God. When the Sun rises, they retire, and couch in their dens. It
is not so with man: For when the Sun is up, then Exibit homo ad opus suum,
etc. Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor till the Evening. It is
the property of beasts, and those the most harmefull, to make the day their
time of sleep, and the night their time of labor: so of men, those that
employ themselves about evil, John 3.19.
shun the light. Men loved darkness more then the light: For their works
were evil. Every man that does evil, hates the light, and comes not to
the light, least his deeds should be reproved. But those men, that take not
after such wild beasts, employ themselves in good works, as much as they can,
whilst they have the opportunity of the light, and spend not the day in
sleep, but make their advantage of the time. John 3.21.
He, that does the truth, comes to the light, that his deeds might be made
manifest; that they are wrought in God. Christ our instructor, and ensample,
said of himself, I must work the works of him, that sent me, whilst it is
day. The night comes, when no man can work. How much more ought we every
of us to say the same of our selves, to whom S. Paul says, Hora est iam nos
de somno surgere. Now it is time for us to arise from sleep. Whilst the day
of this life lasts we are to busy our selves in good works, and to show
that we have a lively faith. Venit nox; The night comes, wherein no man can
work. It is a mere folly to expect (as the Romanists do) that others should
work for us, and apply their works to us when we are dead and gone; that
others should fast for us, purchase S. Gregory's Masses, and seek out
privileged altars, and procure Indulgences for us, Per modum intercession,
they seek out privileged altars: But the night ouertakes them, wherein no man
can work; surely neither himself in person, nor others to his use. Our
journey is ended: we by death arrive at our long home, either of eternal
Salvation, or of endless damnation; there is no mean estate between these
two. Eccles. 11.3.
If the tree fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place where the
treefalleth, there it shall be. Therefore whilst the day holds, do that,
which thou have to do. Psalm. 115.17, 18.
The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into the place of
silence; that is, into the grave. But we (that live) let us praise the Lord.
Isa. 38.18, 19.
The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall
praise thee. The fourth kind of day, is the day of pure and mere truth. The
night is passed of so many errors, which with the Papacy have crept into the
Papal Churches: and to us, by the grace of the Almighty, the day is arrived.
He that lived under the Papacy might, and ought then to say in his prayers to
God, Emitte lucem tuam, and veritatem tuam. Send forth thy light, and thy
truth. Psalm. 43.3.
But he, that is freed thence, must insist upon that, which follows, Ipsa me
deduxerunt, and adduxerunt in montem sanctu^ tuum, and in tabernaculatua. They
have led me, and brought me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles. Here
(beloved brethren) here in this Kingdom we have the hill of God, which is
raised up toward heaven, and stands discoasted far enough from the sink,
and mire of the Papal corruptions. Here are the tabernacles, and tents of the
armies of the Lord of hosts pitched in goodly array, and furnished for the
confronting all opposite forces. Here the light of the truth is freely, and
openly let in. Here the holy Scriptures are most exactly studied. Here are
great multitudes of learned men, and above all, the most learned the Anointed
of the Lord, a King, who is the wonder of the Kings of the earth, a matchless
pattern to all the Kings and Princes of Christendom, of great zeal in
purging, advancing, and mainteining Christ's holy Religion. Here the sincere
word of God is taught plentifully. Here the Bishops are very learned,
religious, and vigilant over their flocks. Here the Priests are every way
sufficient, and very skillful in the cure of souls. Here the people are very
zealous, and fervently addicted to holy and spiritual duties. Thanks
therefore be to God, who after the night of so many errors, has sent forth
his light and truth, which have led me, and brought me into his holy hill, and
to his tabernacles. And so rejoicing in the Lord, I say again to my self, and
to you, my brethren, The night is passed, and the day is at hand.

Here perhaps some man may demand of me, why S. Paul says, that the day is
at hand, and not rather that it is already come: which doubt seems the
greater upon the words, which go before, Nunc propior est nostrasalus, quam
cum credidimus; Now is our salvation nearer, then when we believed. Here
therefore the approach of the day is the approach of salvation; and the day,
and salvation are to be taken to signify one, and the same, and by
consequence besides that day, and salvation, which is Christ, and his Gospel,
and besides that day and salvation, which signifies grace, and the remission
of sins, S. Paul understands yet another day, and another salvation, which
he declares to be come nearer at the time of his writing this Epistle to
them, then it was when they first received the Faith, and holy Baptism, with
remission of sins. By this salvation, which is said to have come nearer, Lyra
understands the Salvation brought in by the coming of Christ, as being
nearer, then it was before his coming. But neither S. Paul, nor these
Christians, to whom he wrote it, were believers before the coming of Christ.
And yet S. Paul says plainly, quam cum credidimus, that is, then when we
began to believe in Christ. Saint Chysostome by this Salvation understands
the general resurrection, which shall be at the second coming of Christ, at
Doomesday: wherewith S. Paul awaketh the faithful, to make them watchful, and
ready for that general Judgment, which in the very Apostles times was by many
deemed to be very nigh at hand. But it is better for us to interpret this
admonition of the Apostle concerning Death, and the particular judgment of
every man; and every of us to say to our selves, and to one another, Noster
dies appropinquauit, and propior est Salus nostra; Our day is at hand, and our
Salvation is nearer, because the day of our death comes on every moment nearer,
and nearer. Let us therefore, my brethren, provide that at the coming of that
last day, Christ may find us prepared: Matthew. 24.
For ye know not at what hour your Master will come. Matthew. 25.
Be ready, as the five wise Virgins were ready, and entered in with the Spouse
to the wedding. And let us take heed, that befalles us not, which the five
foolish virgins found, who were for ever shut out of doors from the wedding,
with that terrible answer, Nescio vos, I know you not. And therefore horaest
nos de somno surgere. It is high time for us to awake from sleep, forasmuch as
Dies appropinquauit; The day is nigh at hand.

Abijciamus ergo operatenebrarum; Gene. 1.
Let us put off this black suite. The first work of darkness, or rather that
darkness, which God in the first Creation of the world did divide from the
light, De ciuitat. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 19.
is by S. Augustine expounded to be the evil Angels; who are also styled by S.
Paul, The Princes of the darkness of this world. Ephesians. 6.12.
These we have openly renounced in our Baptism; and yet they cease not to set
upon us. Resist the Devil and he will fly from you. James. 4.
He that trauaileth in the night easily falls into the hands of thieves, and
cutthroats, and is most commonly robbed of that he has, and sometime of his
life also. John 11.9.
If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of
this world. But if a man walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no
light in him. The Devils are these night-theeues, and sometime also day-roauers,
Meridiani, even in the noone day. Their snares are temptations, and sin their
prison. If therefore we would not fall into their hands, and become slaves to
the kingdom of darkness, let us cast away the works of darkness, let us
walk in the day in our Savior Christ's company, and we shall not need to
stand in fear of them. Scuto circundabit te veritas eius, Psalm. 91.4.
non timebis a timore nocturno. A sagitta volante in die, a negotio
perambulante in tenebris, ab incursu and daemonio meridiano. Cadent a latere
tuo mill, and december milliad dextris tuis, ad te autem non appropinquabit. His
truth shall shield thee as a buckler. Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of
the night, nor of the arrow that flies by day, of the work that walks in
the dark, of invasion, nor of the devil of the midday. A thousand shall fall
at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh
thee. The works of darkness are sleep, dreams, and idleness. Let us shake
off these also. Matthew. 13.25.
For whilst men are asleep the enemy sows the Tares. And the vain dreams
of worldly proiects do so intoxicate the brain, that we forget our own
souls, and things eternal. That miserable worldling was in a dream, when he
said, I will pull down my barnes, Luke 12.19.
and build up greater. I will say unto my soul, Soul thou have much goods
laid up for many years. Live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. But
this dream was very short; for presently he heard that voice from God, O
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. Let us therefore
shake off such dreams as these, together with all idleness, and sluggishnesse
in things concerning God, and his heavenly truth. It must be accounted among
the works of darkness, if we be possessed with a nightly, drowsy silence in
Gods business, during this clear day of truth. Let us therefore cast away
this stupidity, let us break this silence. Isai 58.
Clama, necesses. Cry out aloud, and spare not, says the Prophet. So did S.
Paul as he testifies of himself, Mundus sum a sanguine etc. I am pure from
the blood of all men. Acts 20.26.
For I have not shunned to declare unto you, all the counsel of GOD. Therefore
if we also do not thus, we shall not be guiltless of the blood of those
souls, which perish through our silence. Let us praise God with our voice, let
us publish abroad his truth. Colos. 3.16.
Teaching and admonishing our selves in Psalms, and Hymmes, and spiritual
songs singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord. Let us therefore cast away
these, and all other works of darkness.

Et induamur arma lucis. As soon as we have quitte our selves of our black,
and doleful apparel, it remains, that we do not any while remain naked,
but forthwith put on our clear and lightsome array. Let us put on the armor
of light. It is not hard to find what this armor of light is. Our Savior
Christ, speaking of himself, said, John. 8.12. and 8.46. and 9 5.
I am the light of the world. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of
the world. I am come a light into the world. And our Apostle here declares
expresselie, that he meant Christ to be this our lightsome clothing, when he
adds afterward Put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Before that Christ came, God, as
I told you, held the light hidden in his hand. But, after his coming, his
beloved disciple describes the holy Church in these words; A Woman clad with
the Sun, and the Moon under her feet. Revel. 12.1.
And the same accords with St. Paul's exhorting every Christian to Put on
Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.
The treading of the Moon under ourfeete, is the contemning of the fleshly
vanity of things temporal and transitory, which is the proper duty of a
Christian. And even this, which Saint Paul here says to the Romans The night
is past, let us put on the armor of light; he says in other words to the
Ephesians, Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and Christ shall give thee light.

Some curious brains have coniectured, that Noah, Genesis 7.
when he was shut up in the Arc, and could not have light by the little
window thereof, (which also was continually kept shut) used a Carbuncle, or
some other more radiant precious Stone, to give light in the Arc. And what
stone can be so bright to enlighten our darkness, whilst we float to save us
from the deluge of sin, as Christ? Petra autem erat Christ^s. 1. Cor. 10.4.
Ioh. 1.9.
And that stone is Christ, who also is the true light, that enlighteneth every
man that comes into the world. He is the most resplendent, and precious
Gemme: Let us fell all to purchase it. He that has not Christ before him, let
him not look for the light. Psalm. 127.3.
Vanum est vobis ante lucem surgere. It is but lost labor for you to rise
before the daylight. He that thinks himself able to rise out of darkness,
and obscure night of sin and infidelity, before that Christ s end forth the
dayspring of grace into his heart, surely he is in an idle conceit, and
dreameth in the night of a great error. If thou of thy self wilt needs get
up before the light, thou shall find thy self notwithstanding to remain in
the dark. He that would walk in safety, and in the light, let him rise
indeed, but he must rise with Christ, and follow Christ whithersoeuer he
leads: Romans 13.14.
and this is to put on the Lord Jesus.

Adam was sometime clothed with the goodly white Roabe of innocence, and
original justice. But (alas) being misseled by the counsel given him by the
Serpent the Prince of darkness, he fell into the hands of thieves, Luke 10.30.
which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. But behold, the good Samaritane does not only cure his wounds, but
also covers his nakedness, vouchsafing himself to become a garment unto
him. Therefore put ye on the Lord Jesus. This is that wedding Garment, without
which whosoever presents himself to the Table of the Lord, shall be thrust
out of doors in tenebras exteriores, Matthew. 22.13.
into utter darkness. The Prophet Isay forespoke this fair Roabe, this
nuptial Garment, which was then at making for us. Esai. 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God. For
he has clothed me with the garments of salvation: he has covered me with
the Roabe of righteousenesse, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments,
and as a bride adorneth her self with her jewels.

Induamur arma lucis. Let us put on the armor of light. He says not let us
put on the garments of light, but the armor of light. For Christ arrayeth us,
non ad pompam, sed ad pugnam, not to set us out in an empty and vain show, but
to furnish, and secure us for combat, the whole life of a Christian being a
warfare. Of the most accomplished Army of Antiochus it is related in the
history of the Machabees, that, Machab.
when the Sun shone upon the shields of gold, and brass, the mountains
glistred therewith, and shined like lamps of fire. It is another manner of
luster, and beauty, which this armor of light, worn by a Christian, does dart
forth on every side upon the eyes of God himself, and of the holy Angels, and
blessed souls. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.4.
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ. And so Christ is our Armor, our strength, our defense, our courage,
our conqueror, and in the end our both rewarder, and reward. Behold the armor
of light. Ephesians. 6.12.
Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places. Put on the brestplate of
righteousenesse, -- take the shield of faith, -- the helmet of salvation, the
sword of the spirit which is the word of God. I hope in God, by the help also
of your godly prayers, dear brethren, that his heavenly Majesty will reach
forth to me, and direct in my hand this sword of his word, wherewith, as I
have begun, so I may be enabled to hold on the combat against the Rulers of
darkness, for the setting free so many poor deceived souls from a many of
errors, and that I may also put this sword into their own hands, with which
they of themselves may work their own freedom from that yoke of Tyranny,
which lies so heavy upon them.

Let us all put on the armor of light, and in special, you my brethren of
Italy. For if we would all with joint endeavor furnish our selves with this
armor, we might the better hope for a glorious victory. We shall indeed put
on the armor of light, if, upon the reforming of Religion, and detestation of
errors in doctrine, we shall lead an exemplary life, full of good edification,
keeping our selves a far off from sin, and being devout in prayers, frequent
in hearing, and reading the word of God, and in performance of other spiritual
exercises, especially in receiving the holy Communion, and also shall show our
selves fruitful in good works. So let your light shine before men, Matthew. 5.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. What shall it avail us to have reformed Religion, and not to reform
our lives withal? To believe aright, and to do that which is wrong will stand
us in little steed, nay it will sink us the deeper, into Hell. Luke 12.
He that knows the will of God, and does it not, shall be beaten with the more
stripes. The Devils also believe, Iam. 2.19.
and tremble. It is a current speech among the Papists, that whosoever leaves
their party, and joins himself to the Reformed Churches, does it for the
love of carnal liberty, and that he may lead a licentious life. It lies upon
us for our part to give them no occasion of such reproachful slanders; and to
array our selves with such lightsome, and glittering armor, as may dazzle their
eyes, and confound them: so that they may be forced to confess, that in the
Reformed Churches, there is an unfeigned and fruitful profession of the
reformation of life also; and that there men live in the true fear of God, in
true godliness, and true devotion, free from scandal. Put ye on therefore,
as the elect of God, Col. 3.12.
holy and beloved, the bowels of mercy kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,
if any man have a quarrel against any. And above all these things put on
charity, which is the bond of perfectness. If we put on the armor of light,
we shall become the children of light, and enjoy also the fruit of light.
Ephesians. 5.9.
For the fruit Alias of the Spirit.
of the light is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth.

Which of us knows not that the children of God are styled, The children of
the light? The reason is, because God himself is light. Whereupon our Savior
Christ uses this reprehensio^, that the children of this world, that is, the
children of darkness are wiser then the children of light: And admonishes us
in this manner: While ye have light, John. 12.36. Ephesians. 5.
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. In like manner S.
Paul: Walk as the children of light. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Because ye are the children of light, and the sons of God. And therefore
here he exhorts us: Let us put on the armor of light. A Christian shows
quickly by his life, whether he be the son of God, or no. The Eagle with his
strong and clear eyes is able, and accustomed to look directly upon the
Sun, and by this essay she is wont to prove her young ones: namely if they
be both able, and willing to fix their sight upon the flaming circle of the
Sun, then she takes them for her own: but if they will nor gaze upon the
Sun, but turn their eyes away from the beams thereof, then she casts
them out of her nest, as a bastard degenerating, and changeling brood. So our
heavenly Father, who as an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth oner her
young, Deuteronomy. 32.11.
spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings, does
prove us, whether we delight to look up on him being our light, and, if he
find, that we seek those things which are about, Coloss. 3.2.
and make our conversation to shine with the clear white of innocence, of due
obedience to him, and of holy imiration of him, then he holds us for his
own undoubted offpring, and for true children of the light. But if he find us
Lucifugas to shrink back from the light, and to turn away from beholding our
Sun of righteousness, composing our selves to behold only those things that
are upon the earth, then he casts us off, for so many Owls and Battes, that
love the dark, and cannot abide the light.

That light, from whence we are to expect these good effects must be Christ
only. By no Planet, or Star, other then the Sun, can true and pure gold be
begotten in the bowels of the earth; or fine Orient Pearl in the shells of
fishes. Let the Alchymists sweat, and spend themselves in laboring to make
gold by artificial means, and heat, diverse from the heat of the Sun: They
shall bring forth nothing, but false Alchymicall gold, of no worth. Whosoever
seeks for sanctity, and grace (which is the true and precious gold, and the
riches of all our spiritual good) from any other Planet, then from the true
Sun Christ, he troubles himself in vain. When we are clad with this light,
even with Christ, we shall be a most acceptable sight to the eyes of our
heavenly King, and have cause to presume of victory over the Prince of
darkness. Esther. 5.
So Hester being arrayed in royal robes did win the heart of Assuerus.
Judith 10.3.
So Judith, being clad with garments of gladness, obtained that notable
victory upon Holophernes.

If S. Paul here bids all the faithful, Put on the armor of light; surely
(that which much affects me) he speaks the same in more special and
effectual manner to us Priests and Ministers of Christ. For even long before
this, God did sufficiently declare, that his Ministers were to be clothed with
light and whiteness. Ezech. 44.17.
When they enter in at the gates of the inner Court, they shall be clothed with
linen garments, and no woollen shall come upon them. He that is to minister in
the Sanctuary, must not have wool about him, being a superfluity pertaining to
a beast (that is, he must not carry affectus animales, carnal, and beastly
affections) but white, and pure linen, which is the symbol of the brightness
of all virtues, good example, and perfect righteousness. Psalm. 132.16.
Sacerdotes tui induantur iustitiam. Let thy Priests be clothed with
righteousness. Et numdamini, qui fertis vasa Domini: Isai. 52.
Be ye clean that carry the vessels of the Lord. And what else is signified to
us by the white linen garment, wherewith (according to the most ancient rites,
and laudable custom of the pure and yet, yet-uncorrupted Church) we are
clothed, whilst we exercise our sacred function, but that it is our duty to
put on the light, and to shine in all purity of life? This white habit puts
us in mind, that chiefly of us that is spoken by our Savior; Matthew. 5.15.
No man lights a candle, and puttteh it under a bushel, but sets it up in
a candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. They that are
in the holy Ministry, ought now to serve for a Pillar of a cloud by day, and a
Pillar of fire by night, to guide the Army of the Lord into the land of
promise: They are the eyes of the Church. I may therefore apply to the Church
that speech uttered by our Savior; Mar. 6.2.
Lucerna corporis estoculus. The eye is the light of the body. And (as Gregory
Nazianzen a most worthy Bishop hereupon infers,) Epist. 30. apud Basilium.
Lucerna autem Ecclesiae est Episcopus. A Bishop is the Light or lamp, of his
Church. Therefore O Church, If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full
of light: But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If
therefore the light, that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that darkness?
The Papal Churches (alas) know too well by woeful experience, that from dark
and evil eyes comes that palpable darkness, wherein they are held. Their
Prelates, especially he that makes himself Prelate of Prelates, are naughty
pour-blind eyes, (nor do I except my self, as I was heretofore, being blind
with them for company) eyes full of earthly dust, which are bent only to poare
downward upon the earth. And so the distressed Churches under them remain
clouded up in darkness. But let us thank GOD, that here the eyes are all
pure, and simple: and thereupon Totum corpus, the whole body of this happy
Church lucidum est, is clear, and bright.

Thus have I spoken of light, and of darkness, of day, and of night. In this
life, in this valley of tears we are much subject to darkness. Let us
therefore pray the Author and Fountain of all light, that after this darkesome
life, he would conduct us up to that holy, and heavenly Jerusalem, Revel.
21.23.
which has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: For the
glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. To whom be
praise, and glory for evermore.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 13.14.
and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all.
Amen.

