A SERMON, PREACHED TO THE KINGS Mtie. AT WHITEHALL, 24. Febr. 1625.

By JOHN DONE Deane of Saint Paul's, London.

And now by his Maiestes commandment Published.

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS JONES, dwelling at the Black Raven in the Strand.
1626.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY.
MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN
AMongst the many comforts of my Ministry, to the embracing whereof, Almighty
God was pleased, to move the heart of your Majesty's blessed Father, of holy
memory, to move mine, this is a great one, That your Majesty is pleased some
times, not only to receive into your self, but to return, unto others, my
poor Meditations, and so by your gracious commandment of publishing them, to
make your self as a Glass, (when the Sun it self is the Gospel of Christ
Jesus) to reflect, and cast them upon your Subjects. It was a Metaphor in
which, your Majesty's Blessed Father seemd to delight; for in the name of a
Mirroir, a Looking Glass, he sometimes presented Himself, in his public
declarations and speeches to his People; and a continued Metaphor is an
Allegory, and holds in more. So your Majesty does more of the offices of such
a Glass; You do that office which Moses his Glasses did, at the Brazen Sea in
the Temple, (for you show others their spots, and in a Pious and unspotted life
of your own, you show your Subjects their deficiences) And you do the other
office of such Glasses, by this communicating to all, the beams which your
Majesty receiud in your self. We are in Times when the way to Peace is
War, but my Profession leads not me to those Wars; And we are in Times
when the Peace of the Church, may seem to implore a kind of War, of
Debatements and Conferences in some points; but my disposition leads me not
to that War neither. For in this Sermon, my only purpose was, that no
By-stander, should be hurt, whilst the Fray lasted, with either Opinion. And
that your Majesty accepts it so your self, and so reflects it upon others, I
humbly beseech your Majesty to accept also this Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, for
that, From

Your Sacred Majesty's humblest Subject, and Deuotedst Servant and Chapleine.
JOHN DONE.

ESAI. 50.1. Thus says the Lord: Where is the Bill of your Mothers Diuorcement
whom I have put away? Or which of my Creditors is it, to whom I have sold you?
Behold, for your iniquities have you sold your selves, and for your
transgressions, is your Mother put away.
ALL Lent is Easter Eve; And though the Eve be a Fasting day, yet the Eve is
halfe-holiday too. God, by our Ministry, would so exercise you in a spiritual
Fast, in a sober consideration of sin, and the sad Consequences thereof, as
that in the Eve you might see the holy day; in the Lent, your Easter; in the
sight of your sins, the cheerfulness of his good will toward you. Nay, in
this Text, he gives you your Easter before Lent, your Holyday before the Eve;
For first he rayses you to the sense of his goodness, Thus says the Lord,
where is the bill of your mothers Diuorcement, whom I have put away, Or which
of my Creditors is it to whom I have sold you? And then, and not till then, he
sinkes you, to the sense of your sins, and the dangers of them, Behold, for
your iniquities you are sold, and for your transgressions, your Mother is put
away. And this Raising, and this Sinking, are his Corks, and his Leads, by
which God enables us, whom he has made Fishers of Men, to cast out his nets,
and draw in your souls.

Haec dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord, says our Prophet here; And, Semel
locutus Deus, duo haec audini, Psalm. 62.12
says the Prophet David, Once spoke the Lord, and twice have I heard him; In
one speech of the Lords, two instructions, in one piece of his Word, two
directions. Thus says the Lord, where is the Bill, etc. And in these words,
some hear him once, some hear him say, That how desperate soever our case be,
how irremediable soever our state, we our selfs, and not God, are the cause of
that desperate irremediablenesse; some hear him twice, some hear him say,
There is no such matter, there is no such peremptory Divorce, there is no such
absolute sale, there is no such desperate irremediablenes declard to any
particular conscience, as is imagind, but you, any, may return to me, when you
will, and I will receive you. Some Expositors think they have gone far
enough, when they have raised that sense, God is no cause of our perishing,
though we must perish, Others, (and fairly) carry it thus much farther, There
is no necessity that any Man, any this or that Man should perish. Some
determine it in this, It is true, your Damnation is unavoidable, but you must
blame your selfs, Some extend it to this, There is no such avoidablenes in
your damnation, and therefore you may comfort your selves, Once has the Lord
spoken, and twice do we hear him; we hear him once speaking for his own
honor, He does not damn us, if we be damned, And we hear him again
speaking for our comfort, we need not be damnd at all. And therefore, as God
has opened himself to us, both ways, let us open both ears to him, and from
one Text receive both Doctrines.

Diuisio.
You may apprehend the parts easily, and as easily comprehend them; They are
few, and plain, and of things agreed by all; But two; Those, these; Gods
dischardge, and Man's Dischardge; Gods dischardge from all imputation of
tyranny, Behold, for your sins you are sold, and for your transgressions your
Mother is put away. And then Man's dischardge from the necessity of perishing,
Vbi iste libellus, Where is the Bill of your mothers diuorcement, whom I have
put away, Or which of my Creditors is it, to whom I have sold you? I might
justly have done both, and left you without just cause of complaint, but yet I
have not done it; look to your Bill of Divorce, and look to your bill of
sale, and you will find the case to be otherwise. In each of these two parts,
there will be some particular branches; In the first, which is Gods discharge,
first the Ecce, Behold, Behold this and this will fall upon you; first there is
a light showd, there is a warning afforded, of those calamities, that will
follow, God begins not at Judgment, but at Mercy. That Mercy being despisd,
It will come to a selling away, venditi estis, you are sold, And it will come
to a putting away, Dimissa est, your Mother is put away; For God may sell us to
punishments for sin, that when the measure of our sin is full, he shall
empty the measure of this Judgments upon us, And God may sell us to sins
for punishments, God may make future sins, the punishments of former. And
here may be a Divorce, a putting away, out of Gods sight and service, in any
particular soul, and there may be a putting away of your Mother, a withdrawing
of Gods spirit from that Church, to whose breasts he has applied you. But if
all this be done, it is not done out of any tyrannical wantonness in God,
for, For your iniquities you are sold, and for your transgressions is your
Mother put away: So God is fully dischargd in the first part; But, least in the
second it should lie heavy upon Man, (for, howsoever God be dischargd, He does
not kill me, though I die, it is but poor comfort to me, if I must dye, to be
told that I have killd my self) God tells me here, there is no such
necessity, I need not dye; show the bill of Divorce, says he, which makes
your case so desperate, and see if I have not left you ways of returning to
me, show the bill of Sale, which makes your state so irrecouerable, and see if
I have not left my self ways of redeeming you. And in these few branches, of
these two parts, I shall exercise your Devotion, and holy patience, at this
time.

Part. 1.
First then, for the first branch of the first part, the Ecce, Ecce.
Behold this will fall upon you, Upon those words of David, Ecce intenderunt,
Ecce parauerunt, Behold the wicked have bent there bow, Psalm. 11.2.
and Behold they have made ready their arrow, Origin says, Origin.
Ecce antequam vulneremur, monemur, Before our Enemies hit us, God gives us
warning, that they mean to do so. When God himself is so far incensd against
us, That he is turned to be our enemy, and to fight against us, (It was come to
that, Esaias 63, 10
in this Prophet) when he has bent his how against us, as an Enemy, (It was
come to that in the Prophet Jeremy) Lam. 2.4.
yet still he gives us warning before hand, and still there comes a lightning
before his thunder: God comes seldom to that dispatch, a word and a blow, but
to a blow without a word, to an execution without a warning, never. Cain took
offense at his brother Abel; The quarrel was Gods, because he had accepted
Abels Sacrifice; Therefore God ioynes himself to Abels party; and so the
party being too strong for Cain to subsist, GOD would not surprise Cain, but he
tells him his danger, Why is thy Countenance cast down; Gen 4.10.
If thou do not well, sin lies at thy door: you may proceed if you will,
but if you will needs, you will loose by it at last. Saul persecutes Christ in
the Christians; Christ meets him upon the way, speaks to him, strikes him to
the ground, tells him vocally, and tells him actually, That he has undertaken
too hard a work, in opposing him: This which GOD did to Saul reduces him; that
which God did to Cain, wrought not upon him; but still GOD went his own way in
both, to speak before he strikes, to lighten before he thunders, to warn
before he wounds. In Dathan and Abirams case, Numb. 16.
God may seem to proceed apace toward Execution, but yet it had all these
pauses in arrest of judgment, and these reprieues before Execution. First,
when Moses had information and evidence of their factious Proceeding, verse. 4.
he falls not upon them, but he falls upon his face before GOD, and laments,
and deprecates in their behalf. He calls them to a fair trial, verse 5.
and examination, the next day, To morrow the Lord will show, who are his, and
are holy; And they said, verse 12.
we will not come; And again, verse 14.
(which implies that Moses cited them again) we will not come. Then GOD, upon
their contumacy, when they would stand mute, and not plead, takes a resolution,
verse 21
to consume them, in a Moment; And then, Moses and Aaron return to petition
for the^, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, verse 25
shall one Man sin, and will thou be wroth with the whole Congregation; And
Moses went up to them again, And the Elders of Israel followed, and all
preuaild not: And then Moses comes to pronounce Judgment, verse 29.
These men shall not dye a common death, and after, and yet not presently after
that he gave judgment, Execution followd, The earth opened and swallowd them:
verse 31
but God begun not there; God opened his Mouth, and Moses his, and Aaron his,
and the Elders theirs, before the Earth opened hers. It is our case in the
Text; For, whether this Judgment wrapped up in the text, This selling away, and
this putting away, have relation to the Captivity of the Jews in Babylon,
before Christ, or to the Dispertion of the Jews since Christ, (some Expositors
take it one, some the other way) still it is of a future thing: The Prophecy
came before the Calamity, whersoeuer you pitch it; wheresoever you pitch it,
still there was a lightning before the thunder, a word before the blow, a
warning before the wound. In which, as we see, that God always leaves a
latitude, between his Sentence, and the Execution, (for that Interim, is
Sphaera actiuitatis, the Sphere, in which our Repentance and his Mercy move,
and direct themselves in a benign aspect, toward one another, so where this
repentance is deferd, and this Mercy neglected, the execution is so certain,
so infallible, as that, though this in the Text, be intended for a future
Judgment, a future Captivity, a future Dispersion, yet in the Text it is
presented as present, nay, more then so, as past, and executed already; it is
venditi estis, you are sold, sold already, and Dimissa Matter, your Mother is
put away, put away already. All gathers and con-centers it self in this, Gods
Judgments and executions are not sudden, there is always room for
Repentance, and Mercy, but his judgments and Executions are certain, there
is no room for Presumption nor Collusion.

Venditi ab Adam.
To pursue then the Holy Ghosts two Metaphors, of selling away, and putting
away, First, venditi estis, says our Prophet to the Jews, and to all, Behold,
you are sold; And so they were; sold thrice over; sold by Adam first; sold by
themselves every day; and at last, sold by God. For the first general sale by
Adam, we complain now, that Land will not sell; that 20. is come to 15.
years purchase; but do we not take too late a Medium, too low a time to
reckon by? How cheap was Land at first, how cheap were we? what was Paradise
sold for? What was Heaven, what was Mankind sold for? Immortality was sold
and what years Purchase was that worth? Immortality is our Eternity; God
has another manner of eternity in him; He has a whole eternal day; an
eternal afternoon, and an eternal forenoone too; for as he shall have no
end, so he never had beginning; we have an eternal afternoon in our
immortality; we shall no more see an end, then God has seen a beginning; and
Millions of years, multiplied by Millions, make not up a Minute to this
Eternity, this Immortality. When Dives values a drop of water at so high a
price, what would he give for a River? How poor a Clod of of Earth is a
Manor? how poor an inch, a Shire? how poor a spanne, a Kingdom? how poor a
pace, the whole World? and yet how prodigally we sell Paradise, Heaven, Souls,
Consciences, Immortality, Eternity, for a few Grains of this Dust? What had
Eve for Heaven; so little, as that the Holy Ghost will not let us know, what she
had, not what kind of Fruit; yet something Eve had. What had Adam for Heaven?
but a satisfaction that he had pleased an Ill wife, as St. Hierome states his
fault, that he eat that Fruit, Ne contristaretur Delicias suas, least he
should cast her, whom he loved so much, into an inordinate deiection; but if he
satisfied her, and his own Vxoriousnesse, any satisfaction is not nothing. But
what had I for Heaven? Adam sinnd, and I suffer; I forfeited before I had any
Possession, or could claim any Interest; I had a Punishment, before I had a
being, And God was displeased with me before I was I; I was built up scarce 50.
years ago, in my Mothers womb, and I was cast down, almost 6000. years ago, in
Adams loins; I was borne in the last Age of the world, and dyed in the first.
How and how justly do we cry out against a Man, that has sold a Town, or sold
an Army. And Adam sold the World. He sold Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all
the Patriarchs, and all the Prophets. He sold Peter, and Paul, and both their
Regiments, both the glorious Hemispheres of the World, The Jews, and the
Gentiles. He sold Evangelists, and Apostles, and Disciples, and the Disciple
whom the Lord loved, and the beloved Mother of the Lord, her self, say what
they will to the contrary. And if Christ had not provided for himfelfe, by a
miraculous Generation, Adam had sold him: If Christ had been conceiud in
Original sin, he must have dyed for himself, nay, he could not have dyed
for himself, but must have needed another Savior. It is in that
Contemplation, as he was descended from Adam, Romans 7.14.
that St. Paul says of himself, Venundatus, I am caruall, sold under sin.
For though St. Augustine, and some others of the Fathers, do sometimes take
the Apostle, in that place, to speak of himself, as in the person of a
natural Man, (that every Man considerd in nature, is sold under sin, but the
Supernatural, the Sanctified Man is not so) yet St. Augustine himself, in his
latest, and grauest Books, and particularly in his Retractions, returns to
this sense of these words, That no man, in what measure soever Sanctified, can
so emancipate himself from that Captivity, to which Adam has enthralld him,
but that, as he is enwrapped in Original sin, he is sold under sin. And
both S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose, (both which, seem in other places, to go an
other way, That only they are sold under sin, which have abandond, and
prostituted themselves to particular sins,) do yet return to this sense,
That because the Embers, the Spaune, the leaven of Origiginall sin, remains,
by Adams sale, in the best, the best are sold under sin.

A Nobis.
So the Jews were, and so were we sold by Adam, to Original sin, very
cheap; but in the second sale, as we are sold to actual, and habitual
sins, by our selves, cheaper; 42.19.
for so, says this Prophet, You have sold your selves for nothing: Our selves,
that is all our selves; or bodies to intemperance, and riot, and licenciousnes,
and our souls to a greedines of sin; and all this for nothing, for sin it
self, for which we sell our selves, is but a privation, and priuations are
nothing. Romans 6 21.
What fruit had you of those things, whereof you are now ashamed, says the
Apostle; here is Barrenness and shame; Barrenness is a privation of fruit,
shame is a privation of that confidence, which a good Conscience administers,
and when the Apostle tells them, they sold themselves for barrenness and
shame, it was for priuations, for nothing. Job. 24.15.
The Adulterer waits for the twy-light, says Job. The Twy-light comes, and
serves his turn; and sin, to night looks like a Purchase, like a Treasure; but
ask this sinner to morrow, and he has sold himself for nothing; for debility
in his limnes, for darkness in his understanding, for emptiness in his
purse, for absence of grace in his Soul; and Debilitie, and Darkness, and
emptiness, and Absence, are priuations, and priuations are nothing. All the
name of Substance or Treasure that sin takes, is that in the Apostle, The
saurizastis Iram Dei, You have treasurd up the wrath of God, against the day of
wrath: And this is a fearful privation, of the grace of God here, and of the
Face of God hereafter; a privation so much worse then nothing, as that they
upon whom it falls, would feign be nothing, and cannot.

A Deo.
So then we were sold, so cheap by Adam, to Original, and cheaper by our
selves, to Actual Sin, but cheapest of all, when we come to be sold by God;
For he gives us away, casts us away, delivers us over, to punishments for
sin, and to sin for punishment; God makes Sin it self his executioner in
us, and future sins, are the punishments of former. Vendit paenis.
As some Schoolemasters have vsd that Discipline, to correct the Children of
great Persons, whose personal correction they find reason to forbear, by
correcting other Children in their names, and in their sight, and have wrought
upon good Natures, that way, So did Almighty God correct the Jews in the
Egyptians; for the ten plagues of Egypt, were as Moses December Verba, as the
ten Commandments to Israel, that they should not provoke GOD. Every Judgment
that falls upon another, should be a Catechism to me. But when this Discipline
preuaild not upon them, God sold them away, gave them away, cast them away, in
the tempest, in the whirlewinde, in the inundation of his indignation, and
scatterd them as so much dust in a windy day, as so many broken strawes upon a
wrought Sea. With one word, One Fiat, (Let there be a world,) nay with one
thought of God cast toward it, (for Gods speaking in the Creation, was but a
thinking,) God made all of Nothing. And is any one rational Ant, (The wisest
Philosopher is no more) Is any roaring Lion, (the most ambitious and devouring
Prince is no more) Is any hiue of Bees, (The wisest Councels, and Parliaments
are no more) Is any of these so estabishd, as that, that God who by a word, by
a thought, made them of nothing, cannot by recalling that word, and withdrawing
that thought, in sequestring his Providence, reduce them to nothing again?
That Man, that Prince, that State thinks Past-board Canon-proofe, that thinks
Power, or Policy a Rampart, when the Ordinance of God is planted against it.
Nauyes will not keep off Nauies, if God be not the Pilot, Nor Walls keep out
Men, if God be not the Sentinel. If they could, if we were walld with a Sea
of fire and brimstone without, and walld with Brass within, yet we cannot ciel
the Heavens with a roof of Brass, but that God can come down in Thunder that
way, Nor paue the Earth with a floare of Brass, but that God can come up in
Earthquakes that way. God can call up Damps, and Vapors from below, and power
down putride defluxions from above, and bid them meet and condense into a
plague, a plague that shall not be only incurable, uncontrollable,
vnexorable, but vndisputable, vnexaminable, unquestionable; A plague that shall
not only not admit a remedy, when it is come, but not give a reason how it did
come. If God had not set a mark upon Cain, every Man, any Man, any thing might
have killd him. He apprehended that of himself, and was afraid, when we know
of none, by name, in the world, but his Father, and Mother: But, as Saint
Heirome exalts this consideration, Cains own Conscie^nce tells him, Catharma
sum, Anathema sum, I am the plague of the world, and I must dye, to deliver it
Catharma sum. I am a separated Vagabond, not an Anachorit shut up between two
walls, but shut out from all, Anathema sum. As long as the Cherubim, and the
fiery Sword is at the Gate, Adam cannot return to Paradise; as long as the
Testimonies of GODS anger lie at the door of the Conscience, no man can return
to peace there. If God sell away a Man, give him away, give way to him, by
withdrawing his Providence, he shall but need (as the Prophet says) Sibilare
Muscam, to hiss, to whisper for the Fly, for the Be, for the Hornet, for
Foreign Encumbrances; nay, he shall not need to hiss, to whisper for them;
for at home, Locusts shall swarm in his Gardens, and Frogs in his bedchamber,
and hailstones, as big as talents, (as they are measured in the Revelation)
shall break, as well the couerd, and the armd, as the bare, and naked head; as
well the Mytred, and the Turband, and the crowned head, that lifts it self up
against GOD, lies open to him, as his that must not put on his Hat, as his that
has no Hat to put on; when as that head, which being exalted here, submits
itself to that GOD, that exalted it, GOD shall crown, with multiplied crowns
here, and having so crowned that head with Crowns here, he shall crown those
crowns, with the Head of all, Christ Jesus, and all that is his, hereafter.

Vendit peccato.
If God sell us away to punishments for sin, it is thus, but if God sell us to
sin for punishment, it is worse. For, when God, by the Prophet, offered
David, his choice of three Executioners, war, famine, and pestilence, if all
these three had taken hold of him, it had not been so heavy, as when God, had
sold him over, given him away, into the hands of an Executioner in his own
bosom, The studying and the plotting of the prosecution of his sin. When God
made Murder, in the death of Vriah, his Bayliffe, to attach David for his
Adultery, And made Blasphemy, in the triumphant Army of the Gentiles, his
Bayliffe, to attache David for his Murder, And then made impenitence, and a
long sencelesnes in his sin, his Bayliffe to attach David, for that
blasphemy, then was David sold, under a dangerous sub-hastation, then lay David
under a heavy Execution. Let me fall into the hands of God, and not of Man,
says David; Between God and Man, in this case, there may be some kind of
comparison, But would any sinner say, Let me fall into the hands of the Devil,
and not of Man, rather into more sins, then some punishments. David himself
could not conceive a more vehement prayer and imprecation, upon his, and his
Gods Enemies, Psa. 69.27.
then that, Add Iniquity to their Iniquity; Nor has the Holy Ghost any where
expressed a more vehement commination, then that upon Jerusalem, (as the vulgat
reads that place) Iniquitatem, Ezech 21.26.
Iniquitatem, Iniquitatem ponam eam; Which is not Gods multiplying of
punishments for sin, but his multiplying of sin it self upon them, till he had
made them all Iniquity, all sin. For this is, (in a great part) that which the
Apostle calls, Gods giving over to a reprobate sense; to mistake false, and
miserable comforts for true comforts; to mollify and assuage the anguish of
one sin, by doing another; to maintain prodigality, by Usury, or Extortion;
to overcome the inordinate deiections of spirit, with a false cheerfulness
and encantation from strong drink: In one word, Sap. 14.2^.
(as the wise man expresses it) to call great plagues peace; To smother sin
from the eye of the world, or to slumber the eye of our own conscience from
the sight of sin, by interposing more sins. And farther, we carry not this
first Metaphor of the Holy Ghost, Venditi estis, You are sold, for, for the
deeper impression, he presses it with another, Dimissa est, for your
transgressions, your Mother is put away.

And here in the way, we consider first Dimissam animam, Dimissa anima.
Gods putting away of the Daughter, of any particular soul. And his putting
away of such a soul, is his leaving of that soul to it self; when God will
not come so near loving it, as to hate it, nor give it so much peace, as to
trouble it. For, as long as God punishes me, he gives me Physic; if he draw
his knife, it is but to prune his Vine, and if he draw blood, it is but to
rectify a distemper: If God break my bones, it is but to set them strayter,
And if he bruise me in a Mortar, it is but that I might exhale, and breath up a
sweet savor, in his nosethrils: I am his handy-worke, and if one hand be under
me, let the other lie as heavy, as he shall be pleased to lay it, upon me; let
God handle me how he will, so he cast me not out of his hands: I had rather
God frownd upon me, then not look upon me; and I had rather God pursued me,
then left me to my self. It is the height of his indignation, Esa. 1.5.
O people laden with iniquity, why should ye be smitten any more? Why should I
study your recovery any longer? Basil.
Vox est animi non habentis in promptu, quid statuat, et desperantis salutem;
When God says so, says S. Basil, he is as a Father who had tried all ways to
reduce his son, and fayld in all, and then leaves him to his own desperate
ways; This is the worst that God does say, (we may say, that God can say)
which he says in Ezech. Auferam zelum, 16.42.
My jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will he quiet, and be no more
angry: God is most angry, when he lets not us know, that he is so. And then,
Refuse silver shall men call thee, Ier. 6.^0.
because the Lord has rejected thee, says the Prophet; Though thou may
have some tincture of a precious metal, fortune, power, valor, wisdom, yet
Refuse silver shall thou be, and more, Refuse metal shall men call thee, (for
Men are often worse, then men dare call them) because the Lord has rejected
thee. Cain cries our, that his punishment is greater then he can bear; and
what is the weight? This; From thy Face shall I be hid; It is not that GOD would
not look graciously upon him, but that GOD would not look at all upon him.
Infinite, and infinitely desperate are the effects of Gods putting away a
soul; but we wait upon the Holy Ghosts farther enlargement of this
consideration, Dimissa Matter, for the Childrens transgressions, the Mother is
put away.

Dimissa Matter.
This Mother, is the Church; that Church, to whose breasts GOD has applied that
Soul; and Gods putting away of this Mother, is (as it was in the Daughter) his
leaving her to her self. So these imaginary Churches, that will receive no
light from Antiquity, nor Primitive forms, GOD leaves to themselves, and they
crumble into Conuenticles: And that Church, which will needs be the Form to
all Churches, God leaves to her self, to her own Traditions, and She swells
into tumors, and ulcers, and blisters. And when any Church is thus left to her
self, deuested of the Spirit of GOD, then follow heavy Symptoms, and
Accidents; That which is forbidden in the Law, Leuit. 21. 16.
That Men that have blemishes, offer the Bread of our God; Men blemished in
their Opinions, in their Doctrine, blemishd in their Life's, in their
Conversation, are admitted to Sacrifice at Gods Altar. Then follows that which
is complaind of in Ieroboams time, 1 King. 22.^3.
The lowest of the People, and whosoever will, shall be made Priests;
Contemptible men shall be made Priests; and so the Priesthood shall be made
Contemptible. Then follows that which the Prophet Ose says, 9.7.
The Prophet shall be a Fool, and the Spiritual Man mad; Mad, as Saint
Hierome translates that word, Arreptitius, possessed; possessed with an aerie spirit
of ambition, and an Earthly Spirit of Seruilitie, And a watrie Spirit of
Irresolution, and dispossessed of the true Spirit of Holy fire, the Zeal of the
exaltation of Gods glory. There is a Curse in remoouing but the Can^lesticke;
Apoc. 2.5.
That the Light shall not be in that eminency, and evidence, that becomes it,
but that some faint shadows, some Corner Disguises, some Temporizings, some
Modifications must be admitted. There is a heavier Curse, in weakening the Eye
of the beholder, when (as this Prophet says) God shall make hearts fatt, and
ears deaf, and eyes blind; There shall be Light, but you shall not see by
it, there shall be good Preaching, but you shall not profit by it. But the
greatest Curse of all, is in putting out the Light, when GOD blinds the
Teachers themselves: Math. 6.23.
For, If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? Luke 22 ^3.
This is that Potestas tenebrarum, when power is put into their hands, who are
possessed with this darkness. And this is that Procella tenebrarum, Jude 13.
The storm of darkness, The blackenesse of Darkness, (as we Translate it)
when darkness, and power, and passion meet in one Man. And to these fearful
heights may the sins of the Children bring the Mother, That that Church,
which now enioyes so abundantly Truth and Unity, may be poisoned with
Heresy, and wounded with Schism, and yet GOD be free from all imputation of
Tyranny. And so we have done with all those pieces which constitute our First
Part, Gods Dischardge; His Mercy in his Ecce, that he warnes us of his
Judgments before they fall; And his Justice, in his Proceeding, though after
we be sold cheap by Adam, to Original sin, (So Saint Paul says, He was
sold under sin,) And Cheaper by our selves, to actual sins, for Nothing,
for Priuations, (So the Prophet told Ahab that he was sold to sin,) God also
Sell us away, Cast us away, To Punishments for sins, (So he did the
Israelites,) and then to sins for punishments, (So he did David, and so he
did Jerusalem,) and though he come to a Divorce, of Daughter and Mother, of
our Souls in particular, and the Church it self in general.

Part. 2.
We are descended to our second part, Man's discharge; That, not disputing what
God, of his absolute power might do, nor what by his vnreueald Decree he has
done, God has not allowd me, nor thee, nor any to conclude against our selves,
a necessity of perishing. May this seem an impertinent part in a Court? To
suspect that any here, are too much afraid of God; or too much dejected with
the sense of their sins, or his judgments? Are sins of presumption rather
to be feared here, then sins of desperation? It has a fair probability.
But, all the Lent, we prepare Men for the Sacrament. And, as Casuists, we say,
Sacramentum, and articulus Mortis aequiparantur, We consider a Man, at the
Sacrament, as at his deathbed: and, upon our Deathbeds, we are likelyer to
be attempted with sins of Deiection, then of presumption. And so, (though in
a Court,) if you will be content to think of a deathbed in a Court, (and God
has taken ways, to awaken those thoughts in you) it may be pertinent, and
seasonable, to establish you now, against those deiections, and diffidences,
which may offer at you then. It Is true then, there may be a selling, there may
be a putting away, but has not God reserved to himself a power of reuocation
in both, in all cases? Audisti repudium, Creed coniugium, Is sweetly, and
safely said by St. Ambrose: As often as thy thoughts fall upon a fearfulness
of a Divorce from thy God, establish thy self with that comfort, of a Marriage
to thy God; for the words of his Contracts, are, Sponsabo te mihi in aeternum.
There can be no Divorce imagined, if there were not a marriage; and if there be
a marriage With God, there can be no Divorce, for sponsat in aeternum, he
marries for ever. Can God do so, forsake for ever? The Crow went out of the
Arc, and came no more; The Dove went, and came again, and came with an Olive
branch. God may absent himself, that he may be sought; but he comes again,
and with the Olive of peace. Zion said, Esaias 49.14.
The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Why will Zion say
so? says God. Can Zion say, My Lord, my Lord, has forgotten me? Can she
remember that GOD is hers, and not think that she is his? Can she remember
him, and think that he has forgotten her? Can Zion retain her bowels of
piety, and think that GOD is disembowelled of his? GOD calls her not to
National examples; to how low conditions he came, in the behalf of Sodom;
what he did for Nineue; what he did for Zion her self in Aegipt, but he
carries her home to her own breast, and her own Cradle, and only asks her
that question, Can a Mother forget her sucking Child? And he stays not her
answer, nor assures himself of a good answer from her, but adds himself,
Yes, a Mother may forget her sucking Child, yet I will not forget thee. Can
GOD do it? Did GOD ever do it? Did he ever put away without possibility of
reassuming? when? where? whom? Israel? the ten Tribes? Yet even to them, says
Jeremy, After they had done all this, GOD said, turn unto me, and they would
not turn: And then, God put her away, and sent her a bill of Divorce, and
never re-assumd her, never brought back the ten Tribes from their dispersion.
It Is true, in a whole and entire body, GOD never brought them back, but in many
fair and Noble Pieces, they came when Judah came; for, from that place of
Ezra, where there is an entire number in gross exhibited of all that returned
from Babylon, and then the particular Numbers also exhibited, of the Tribes and
families that returned, because those particular Numbers do not make up the
general Number, by many thousands, the Hebrew Rabbis argue fairly; and
conclude probably, that those Supernumerary thousands, which are inuolued in
the general Number, and are not comprised in the particulars, were such, as
from the other ten Tribes, in the return of Judah, adhered to Judah; who are
so often said never to have returned, because in a body, and Magistracy of
their own, otherwise then as they incorporated them selves in Judah, they never
returned: but God never put them away so, but that he offered them return, and
in a great part effected it. I know how frivolous a tale that is, That Saint
Gregory drew Tratans soul out of Hell, after it was there; and I know, how
groundless an opinion it is, that is ascribed to Origin, that at last, the
Devil shall be saved; but if they could persuade me one half, that Traian,
or that the Devil came to Repentance in hell, I should not be hard, in
believing the other half, that they might be delivered out of hell. What mean
you, says God Almighty, that ye, use this Proverb, The Fathers have eat
sour herbs, Ezeck. 18.2.
and the childrens teeth are set on edge? Do ye mean, that because your
Fathers have sinned, you must perish? Why neither his parents have sinned, nor
he, says Christ, of the Man borne blind, John 9.2.
but all is, that the work of God might he made manifest; Neither have thy
parents sinned, nor thou thy self sinned so, as that there should be a
necessity in thy perishing, but that thereby there might be the greater
manifestation of Gods mercy, that where sin has abounded, grace might
abound much more. If therefore thy tender Conscience, and thy startling Soul,
mis-imagine the hearing of that voice, Depart thou sinner, a voice of Divorce,
a voice that bidds thee, go, Say thou with Peter, to his and thy Savior,
Domine quo Ibimus? Lord whither shall I go? thou have the Word of Eternal
life, and we believe and are sure, that thou art that Christ, the Son of the
living God; And that Christ, the Son of the living GOD, will call thee back,
and call back his own Word, and find Error, holy Error, occasion of
repenting his own proceeding, in his Bill of Divorce; to which purpose he
calls upon thee here to produce that Bill, Vbi iste libellus, Where is the
Bill, etc.

First then, Vbi libellus, Libellus.
where is this Bill, upon what do ye ground this jealousy and suspicion in
God, that he should Divorce you? First, it is in the Original, Sepher; that
which is called a Bill, is a Book; It must be GODS whole Book, and not a
few misunderstood Sentences out of that Book, that must try thee. Thou must
not press heavily to thine own damnation every such Sentence, Stipendium
peccati Mors est That the reward of sin is death; Nor the Impossible est,
That it is impossible for him that falls after Grace to be renewd; That which
must try thee is the whole Book, the tenor and purpose, the Scope and
intention of GOD in his Scriptures. His Book is a Testament; and in the
Testament, the Testator is dead, and dead for thee; And would that GOD that
would dye for thee, Divorce thee? His Book is Euangelium, Gospel; and Gospel
is good tidings, a gracious Messadge; And would God pretend to send thee a
gracious Messadge, and send thee a Divorce? GOD is Love, and the Holy Ghost is
amorous in his Metaphors; every where his Scriptures abound with the notions
of Love, of Spouse, and Husband, and Marriadge Songs, and Marriadge Supper, and
Marriadge-Bedde. But for words of Separation, and Divorce, of Spiritual
Divorce for ever, of any soul formerly taken in Marriadge, this very word
Divorce, is but twice read in the Scriptures; once in this Text; and here God
dis-auowes it; For when he says, Where is the Bill, he means there is no
such Bill; And the other place is that which we mentioned before, when after
they had done all, Ier. 3.8.
GOD called Israel all together back, and effectually, in a fair part, and his
principal purpose in that Divorce of Israel, was to intimidate, and warn her
Sister Judah from the like prouocations. Surely a good Spirit moved our last
Translators of the Bible, to depart from all Translations which were before
them, in reading that place of Malachi thus, 2.16.
The Lord the God of Israel says, that he hates putting away. Whereas all
other Translations, both Vulgat, and Vulgar, And in Vulgar, and in Holy
Tongues, The Septuagint, the Chalde, all, read that place thus, If a man hate
her, let him put her away, (which induced a facility of divorces) our
Translators thought it more conformable to the Original, and to the ways of
God, to read it thus, The Lord the God of Israel says, that he hates putting
away. Every where in the Scriptures, we meet with Gods venites, in every
Prophets mouth, inuitations to come unto God; There is a venite de circuitu,
Come, though you come from compassing the Earth, Job 3. 11.
which is Satan's perambulation; though you have walkd in his ways, yet come
unto God. Esaias
There is a Venite non habentes, Come and buy, though you have no money; though
you have no Merits of your own, come, and dilate your measures, and fill them
according to that dilatation, with the merits of Christ Jesus. There is a
venite et reuertimini, Ose. 6.1.
Come, though your coming be but a returning; be not ashamed of coming,
though your returning be a confessing of a former running away; come in a
repentance, though you cannot come in an innocence; There is a Venite and
consolamini, Esaias.
How heavy so ever the fetters of your own sins, or the chains of Gods
judgments lie upon you, come and receive ease here, change your yoke, for an
easier, if you cannot deuest it. There is a venite and consulite, Esaias,
If you find it hard to come, or if you find an easiness to fall back,
though you do come, come to consult with God, how you may come, so, as you may
stay, when you are come. Nay, there is a venite and arguite, Esaias 1.18.
Come and reason with God, argne, plead, dispute, expostulate with God, come
upon any conditions: The venite is multiplied, infinite inuitations to come;
but the Ite maledicti, Depart ye accursed, is but once heard from Gods mouth,
and that not in this world neither; as long as we are in this world, God hates
putting away. And therefore God calls for the bill, and God calls the bill a
book, that thou might not vex thy soul, with mistaken sentences, but rely
upon the establishment of Gods purpose in the whole book, which is that he
hates putting away.

If the evidence pressed by thine own pressures, heighthned by thine own
deiections, exalted by thine own sinking, grow strong against thee, that thou
can not quench the jealousy, nor deuest the scruple of such a Divorce, do
but consider, who should occasion, who should enduce it; It must be God, or thy
self: Though the Jews put away their wives, not only for the wives fault,
but for the husbands frowardness, thou have had too good experience of Gods
patience, to charge him with that: If it be done, it is thy fault; and if thou
acknowledge that, it is not done; for it is never done so irreuocably, but the
confessing of the fault, cancels and auoydes it. Relieve thy self by
reflecting upon some of those circumstances, Essential circumstances, which
were required in their bills of Divorce, and without which, those bills were
void, and see if those be in thine; for though we have not these
circumstances, in that place of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 24.
where Divorce is permitted, yet in the ordinary practice of the Jews abroad,
and in the books of forms and precedents, which their Rabbis have collected,
we have them expressed. They are many, and many impertinent; we will but
name, and but a few, such as best admit application, and most conduce to the
trial of thy case. First, a man might not produce a bill written in private,
in the husbands bedchamber, but he must go to a Scribe, to a public Notary,
to an authorizd Officer. Vbi iste libellus? Where is this bill of thy Divorce?
Thou must not look for it, in Gods bedchamber, in his vnreueal'd Decrees in
heaven, but in his public Records, his Scriptures: If from thence thou
pretend to produce any thing that conuinces thy sad soul, go to them, to whom
God has committed the dispensation thereof, and there thou may receive
consolation, when thine own private misinterpretation might misleade thee.
Again, the wife, how guilty so ever in her own conscience, might not take her
self to be put away, except the husband had expressly given her a Bill of
Divorce; Has thy Husband; thy God done so; Vbi est libellus? Consider the
bill, that is, the book of God, and see if it be not full of such
protestations, Viuo ego, As I live, says the Lord, I would not the death of
any sinner, nor the departing of any soul. So also these bills must be well
testified, with vnreproachable witnesses; Vbi iste libellus? Has thy bill such
witnesses? who be they? Inordinate deiection of spirit, irreligious sadness;
Jealousy of the anger, distrustfulnesse of the mercy, diffidence in the
promises of the Gospel; Are these witnesses to be heard against God? God calls
heaven and earth to witness, that he has offered thee thy choice of life or
death; but that he has thrust death upon thee, there is no witness. Thy
conscience is a thousand witnesses? It is, that thou have committed a thousand
sins; and it is, that thou have received a thousand blessings; but of an
eternal decree of thy divorce, thy conscience, (thus misinformd can be no
witness, for thou wast not called to the making of those decrees. Those Bills
were also to be authentically sealed: Vbi iste Libellus? Has thy imaginary Bill
of Divorce, and everlasting separation from GOD, any Seal from him? GOD has
given thee Seals of his Mercy, in both his Sacraments; Seals in White, and
Seals in Red Wax; Seals in the participation of the candor and innocence
of his Son, in thy Baptism, and Seals in the participation of his Body and
Blood, in the other; But Seals of Reprobation at first, or of irreuocable
Separation now, there are none from GOD: No Calamity, not Temporal, no not
Spiritual; No Darkness in the Understanding, no Scruple in the Conscience,
no Perplexity in the resolution; Not a Sudden Death, not a Shameful Death,
not a stupide, not a raging Death, must be to thy self by the way, or may be
to us, who may see thine End, an Evidence, a Seal, of Eternal Reprobation,
or of final Separation. Almighty God bless us all, from all these in our
selves; but his blessed Spirit bless us to, from making any of these, when
he, in his unsearchable ways, to his unsearchable ends, shall suffer them to
fall upon any other, seals of such Separation in them. Though we may not
enlardge our selves to far, in these Circumstances, another was, That the Names
of the Parties must be set down, and of both the Parties Parents, and those
to the third Generation; The Son and Daughter of such, and such, and such.
Vbi iste Libellus? Findst thou in thy Bill, the three Descents, the three
Generations, (if we may so say) of thy God? A Holy Ghost proceeding from a
Son, And a Son begott^en by a Father? Find thou the God of thy
Consolation, the God of thy Redemption, the God of thy Creation, and can thou
produce a God of Divorce, of Separation, out of these? Find thou thine own
three Descents, as thou wast the Son of Dust, of Nothing, And the Son of
Adam, reduced to nothing, And then the Son of God in Christ, in whom thou art
all things; and can thou think that that GOD who married thee in the honse
of dust, and married thee in the house of infirmity, and Diuorcd thee not
then, (he made thee not no Creature, nor he made thee not no Man,) having now
married thee in the House of Power, and of Peace, in the body of his Son, the
Church, will now Divorce thee? Lastly, to end this consideration of Divorces,
If the Bill were interlinde, or blotted, or dropped, the Bill was void. Vbi
Libellus? What place of Scripture soever thou pretend, that place is
enterlinde; enterlinde by the Spirit of God himself, with Conditions, and
Limitations, and Provisions, If thou repent, If thou return; and that
enterlining destroies the Bill. Look also if this Bill be not dropped upon, and
blotted; The venim of the Serpent is dropped upon it, The Wormwood of thy
Desperation, is dropped upon it, The Gall of thy Melancholy is dropped upon it,
and that voydes the Bill. If thou can not discern these drops before, drop
upon it now; Drop the tears of true compunction, drop the blood of thy
Savior, and that voyds the Bill: And through that Spectacle, the blood of thy
Savior, look upon that Bill, and thou shall see, that that Bill was nayld to
the Cross when he was naylde, and torn when his body was torn, and that has
cancelld the bill. Oppress not thy self with what GOD may do, of his
absolute power, God has no where told thee, that he has done any such thing
as an ouertender Conscience may mis-imagine, from this Metaphore of Diuorcing,
nor from the other, (which beggs leave for one word, by way of Conclusion)
Selling away; Which of my Creditors is it, to whom I have sold you?

Quis Creditor?
As Christ in his Parable comprehends all excuses, and all backwardnesses in the
following of him, in those two, Marriage and Purchasing, Luke 14.18.
(for one had bought Land and stock, and another had married a Wife) So God
expresses his love to Man, in these two too, He has married us, he has
bought us; that so he might take in all dispositions, and work upon Vxorious
Men, men soupled and entendred with Matrimonial love, and upon worldly men,
men kneaded and plaistred with earthly love: He has Married us, he will not
Divorce, He has bought us, he will not sell; For who can give so much as he
paid? Deuteronomy 32.30.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish people? Is not he your Father
that has bought you? And will you suspect your Father? Yes, says this
Disconsolate Soul, Fathers might sell their Children; and my Father, my GOD
has sold me. It Is true, Fathers might sell their Children; Amongst the Gentiles
they might; for matter of Law, for matter of Fact, their Books are full of
Evidence. Amongst the Jews they might, till a Iubile redeemd them. Amongst the
Christians they might, and for ever. Saint Ambrose found the World in
possession of that unnatural Custom, and lamented it: Vidi miserabile
spectaculum, says he, liberos haeredes calamitatis, qui nec participes
successionis: The Children, says he, inherit the Calamity, but not the Lands
of their Fathers, when they were sold to maintain them, who had wastefully
sold, that which was to maintain them all: And Saint Ambrose induces the
Creditor making his Claim, Mea nutriti pecunia, This Child was nourced, and
brought up with my Money, and belongs to me. Constantine found this, and
amended it; enacted and constituted that it should be no more done; and can
thou imagine such a hard-heartednes in GOD, as Saint Ambrose should need to
lament, or Constantin need to correct? Quis Creditor, says GOD, Which of my
Creditors is it, to whom I have sold you?

As in the Bill of Divorce, so in this bill of sale, we ask who should
occasion it? A Father might sell, for his Sons fault, or for his own
necessity; but in no other case. If thou say it is done for thy fault, it is
not done; that implies a Confession, and a Repentance, and that auoydes all;
but if thou imagine a sale for thy Fathers necessity, Quis Creditor, says
he, Which of my Creditors, etc. Adam brought GOD in Debt, to Death, to Satan,
to Hell; in Justice, GOD ought all mankind to them; but then at one payment
he paid more, in the death of his Son Christ Jesus: And now, Quis Creditor?
The word indeed, is originally Nashah, and Nashah is an Usurer; and so Saint
Ambrose reads this place, Quis Faenerator, To what Usurer am I so indebted, as
that I need sell thee? Let it be so, That the principal debt was all
Mankind; pursue your Usurious Computations, that every seven years doubles,
and then redoubles your Debt, (and what a Debt might this be in almost 4000.
year from Adam to Christ, and 1000 from Christ to us?) yet when all this is
multiplied infinitely, it was infinitely ouerpayd, if but one drop of the blood
of the Son of God had been paid; and the Son of God bled out his Soul, and
then, Quis Creditor, may God well say, Which of those Usurers is it, to whom I
need sell thee? God may lend thee out, even to Satan; suffer thee to be his
Bayliffe, and his Instrument to the vexation of others: So he lent out Saint
Paul to the Scribes and Pharisees, to serve them in their Persecutions; So God
may lend thee out. God may Let thee out for a time, to them that shall plough
and harrow thee, fell and cleave thee, and reserve to himself but a little
Rent, a little glory, in thy Patience; So he Let out Job even to Satan
himself; so God may Let thee out. GOD may Mortgage thee to a six Months
Fever, or to a longer debility; So he Mortgaged Hezekias. God may lay thee
waste, and Pull up thy Fences, extinguish their Power, or withdraw their Love,
upon whom thou have establishd thy dependence; So he laid David wast, when he
withdrewe his Childrens obedience from him; so God may lay thee waste. God may
Let out all his time in thee in this World, and reserve to himself only a last
year, a last day, a last minute; suffer thee in unrepented sins, to the last
gasp, so God let out the good Thief. God is Lord of all that thou have and
art; and then, Dominium potestas est tum vtendi tum abutendi, He that is Lord,
Owner, Proprietary, may do with that which is his, what he will. But God will
not, cannot deuest his Dominion, nor fell thee so, as not to reserve, a Power,
and a Will to Redeem thee, if thou would be redeemed. For, howsoever he
seem to thee, to have sold thee to Sin, to Sadness, to Sickness, to
Superstition, (for these be the Ismaelits, these be the Midianite Merchants
Genesis 37.27.
that buy up our Joseph's, our souls) though he seem to sell his present
estate, he will not sell Reuersions; his future title to thee, by a future
Repentance, he will not fell; But whenever thou shall grow due to him, by a
new, and a true repentance, he shall reassume thee, into his bed, and his
bosom, no bill of Divorce, and re-enter thee into his Revenue, and his Audit,
No bill of sale, shall stand up to thy prejudice, but thy dejected spirit shall
be raised from thy consternation, to a holy cheerfulness, and a peaceful
alacrity, and no tentation shall offer a reply, to this question, which GOD
makes to establish thy Conscience, vbi libellus, Where is the Bill of thy
Mothers Diuorcement, etc.

FINIS.
Errat. Page 13. l. 24. for retractions, read retractations. pa. 32. l. 14, for
Herbs, read Grupes.


