OF THE VISIBLE SACRIFICE OF THE CHVRCH OF GOD.

THE FIRST PART.

Written by ANONYMVS EREMITA.

He that Sacrifices to Gods shall be put to death: but to our Lord only. Exodus
22. 20.

Engraving of women.

AT BRVXELLES, By HVBERT ANTONY Velpius, Printer to his Majesty. 1637.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES KING OF GREAT BRITAIN
France, and Ireland etc. Health and eternal felicity.
MOst dread Sovereign;
So many are the temporal blessings, which Alltie. God has bestowed upon your
Royal Majesty, that scarcely can they be paralelled in any other: A Monarke
of three Kingdoms, all fortefied with the Ocean sea; a Queen wise, virtuous,
beutifull, and fruitful; subjects without number, all in peace, and plenty,
stryuing how to express their loves and obedience to so worthy a sovereign;
health of Body, and disposition of mind fit for any heroical action: so that
not knowing what to wish, or how to add any more unto your present temporal
estate, and happiness, as much as in me lies I desire with all my heart, that
these your temporal blessings, may also be seconded with spiritual, and
eternal. And for this cause, and to this end having occasion to write of a
Medecin against mortality, of a Receipt against all diseases, corruption and
death; of a Sovereign Balm, which whosoever will use worthily, shall live
eternally: I could not but dedicate, these my labors unto your Majesty unto
whom above all men living I wish complete felicity; that protected by your
royal favor, this Cordial may work the effect I desire, which is
everlasting happiness to your self, and subjects. And so imploring your royal
clemency with most humble respects, and profound submission I cast my self
and labors under the shadow of your gracious protection, ever to remain,

Of your Sacred Majesty A most humble, and most faithful subject, ANONYMVS
EREMITA.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Dear Reader:
It may seem strange unto thee, that an Hermit, whose entertainment and
conversation, ought chiefly to be in solitude, meditation, and contemplation,
should trouble himself in his Cell, with the turbulent controversies of this
time, in matters of faith which in former ages, when innocence, and virtue
most flourished, every Christian received with his baptism, after most
constantly to hold and profess the same, all the days of his life. yet so it
fell out, that in conuersing with diverse Puritans, I found by experience, that
out of ignorance and want of knowledge what our visible sacrifice is, by whom
it was instituted or to what end, they hate it, more then they do Iudaisme,
Turcisme, or Paganism it self, in such sort, that they object our offering of
visible Sacrifice, as one of the chiefest causes of their alienation from us;
when in truth, and verity, exterior visible sacrifice, is the cheef exterior
visible honor, which is due to God, as he is God, and Creator of all things, as
will appear by examination, if we shall pass through all the exterior visible
worships, respects, and reuerences, which are used by men in this life: and it
is so due unto God alone, that it may not be given unto any Creature, or false
God, under penalty of high treason against his Divine Majesty, punishable by
death as witnesses his law, and everlasting decree saging. He that
sacrifices to Gods shall be put to death: But to our Lord only. So that the
first motive, which moved me to write of this subject, was the gross
ignorance, and blindness I found in many Puritans, who commonly would bitterly
inueigh against our visible sacrifice, not knowing what it was, nor wherefore it
was instituted; for otherwise I suppose they would not be so vehement against
the honor of God: and therefore thought with my self, for the honor of God,
and good of their souls, to write plainly and manifestly of this subject,
without any flourishing words, or loftiness of style, or far fetched
inventions, to make every well minded simple Protestant, or Puritan (who will
be delyghted with truth) capable to perceive and understand that the exterior
visible sacrifice, or Mass, which he so much hates is the cheef exterior
visible worshipp, which does belong unto God alone, that he may also defend the
honor of God and not oppose it.

Secondly the emminencie and excellency of the Sacrament of the Alter is so
great, that S. Augustine in the 24. chapter of his first book de peccatoru^
meritis, calls it The life of the world: S. Ignatius disciple to S. John the
Evangelist, The medecin of immortality and antidote against death; S.
Epiphanius, in his Epistle to John of Jerusalem, The chiefest salvation of
Christians, which before God is also so highly prysed, that when through
wickedness of men, and of Antechrist, it shall be quyte taken a way out of the
face of the earth, the world shall end, as witnesses our fauiour saying, The
bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world. John. 6. 51. for
eue^ as when life is taken from a man a man dies: so when the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, shall be taken out of the world, by the means of
wicked men, and of Antechrist, the world shall be consumed with fire, as
witness Daniel 9. 27. Mat. 24. 15. 1. Cor. 11. 26. Which considered and
fynding the passion of the Puritans of our nation so furious against this said
Sacrament of the Alter as to esteem the reverence and respect, which is due
unto it, Idolatry, and so to persecute it, that if it lay in their poners,
they would not only extirpate it out of this Island of great Britanie, but out
of the whole globe of the earth, to bring in their fancy of eating a piece of
bakers bread: The honor of my lord, the salvation of their souls, and the
life of my Country, moved me to abstract some hours from my ordinary
recollections, to defend with my pen the dignity of so emminent a Sacrament.
If this work of mine fall short of thine expectation, accept of my good will,
which is, if it were in my poner, te give all honor unto God unto whom all
honor and glory is due, and unto thee, Reader, life of eternal life: and so
Irest thy servant in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. I. What we understand by visible Sacrifice, and of the whole scope of
this book.
TO unfold unto thee dear Reader, the whole scope of this our book, and to
set plainly and manifestly before thine eyes, the whole state of this
controversy; Of the exterior visible Sacrifyce of the Church of God, where of I
intend by Gods grace to treat: It is necessary first to explicate unto thee,
what a sacrifice in general is; then to distinguish the different kinds of
Sacrifice one from an other; after to defyne or descrybe a proper exterior
visible sacrifice; and lastly to set down the differences between
Catholics, and English Protestants, and Puritans, concerning visible
sacrifice; that by this first Chapter, thou may clearly know what I treat of
and see the said differences, and the whole scope of this book, the more
easily afterward to judge of the truth, and to embrace it. First, a Sacrifice A
Sacrifice in general.
in general as it comprehends all kinds of Christian Sacrifices, is
described by S. Augustine in the 6. Chapter of his 10. book of the City of
God, to be any good work (visible or invisible) which is done to this end,
that we may cleave fast to God by holy society, as having relation to that
end of Goodness, by which we may become truly happy. So that every good
deed, whether visible, or invisible, which we do for the love of God, with an
intent to unity ourselves unto him, or to stick closer unto him, who is our
happy life, may be called Sacrifice in general terms, as holy thing, or
fact donn or disposed of to the right end of goods, which is God. Under this
general kind Four kinds of Sacrifices.
of Sacrifice, (for as much as makes for our purpose in this controversy) we
distinguish four particular kinds.

1. The first kind of Sacrifice, is only invisible, The first kind of
Sacrifice.
where of the Scripture speaking says: A Sacrifice to God is an afflicted
spirit. Psalm. 50. 19. and of this sort, are all those inward and invisible
operations of our hearts, who tend to the honor and love of God; as for
example, the inward mortification of our inordinate appetytes, and desires,
according to the words of S. Paul, saying: We are killed for thy sake, all
the day. Romans 8. 36. And these are called spiritual sacrifices: for that by
the spirit, we inuisibly mortify, and kill the inordinate desires of the
spirit, and flesh; where of S. Paul further speaking, says: If by the
spirit, you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you shall live. Romans 8. 13.

2. The second kind of sacrifices, are all those The second kind of Sacrifices.
outward pious actions, and good deeds, which represent unto us, the aforesaid
inward affections of men's minds, as flowers, and fruits do the root: of
which kind are, all the outward Sacrifices of Praise, justice, faith, etc. in
which sense, every pious outward good work, which is donn for the love of God,
is called a Sacrifice, as having his subordination unto the end of goodness;
whereupon S. Paul calls the giving of alms for the love of God, a
Sacrifice; Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16. In this sense to praise God, or pray, is
called a Sacrifice, Psalm. 49. 14. Heb. 13. 15. etc. But (as S. Augustine in the
6. Chapter of his 10. book, of the City of God affirms) The works of
mercy, if they be not done for the love of God, are not a Sacrifice: Because
they want the end unto which all Sacrifices are ordained; which is, that we
may Adhere and cleave unto God by holy society. These two kinds of
Sacrifices, are called general, because they may, and ought to be donn, or
performed by all men generally (who are come to the years of discretion, and
have ability) without any particular vocation, or election, more then the
obligations of all mankind.

3. The third kind of Sacrifice, is the death, The 3. kind of Sacrifice.
and passion of our Savior upon the cross, which is generally called, the
Sacrifice of our Redemption; for by it we were redeemed: and therefore, it is
called above all others, chiefly and principally, a Sacrifice; as upon which,
all other Sacrifices, do, or ought to depend, as commemorations, or
applications of it unto our selves: for though our Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ, by his Sacrifice upon the cross, redeemed all mankind from
everlasting pains; yet he did not so redeem man, as that he should have
nothing to do, or perform on his part, for the obteyning of his salvation,
but only to live idly: for so the sacred passion of our lord, should be a
cloak for idleness and sin; but he redeemed mankind conditionally; that man
should do these, and these things, thereby to apply the merit of the
Sacrifice upon the cross, unto him self, and so be saved; as witnesses our
Savior, saying: Not every one, that says lord, lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven,
he shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven; Matthew. 7. 21.

4. The fowth kind (proper to the faithful, The fovvrth kind of Sacrifice.
whereof we are to treat) is an oblation or gift given, or offered to God upon
an Altar by a priest the only lawful Minister, of a particular visible thing,
wherein there is made some alteration, or change, to express the death of our
Lord in Sacrifice; and also to signify the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts
to God, his Dominion over us, and our subjection unto him, and our unity in
Religion amongst our selves under one God, as wittnes the Sacrifices of Noe,
Genesis 8. 26. of Abraham, Genesis 15. 9. of Jacob, Genesis 31. 54. Genesis 33. 20. Genesis
14. of Job* Job. 1. 5. in the law of nature, and the Sacrifices perscrybed by
God unto the people of Israel, in the written law; which Sacrifices were
offered to God, by the antie^t fathers of the old law; as S. Augustine, (in the
5. Chapter of his 10. book of the City of God) affirms: To express or
signify, by them those things which are donn in us, to this end only, that we
may stick or cleave unto God, and give council unto our neighbor, that he may
tend unto the same end; And then discrybing, what such a visible sacrifice is,
immediately adds, saying: Therefore, a visible Sacrifice is a sacred sign of
the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts. So that a perfect visible Sacrifice,
consists in it self of three parts; the exterior visible oblation, and
actions which are called (as S. Augustine says in the same Chapter) The signs
of the true Sacrifice: the invisible operations, which are the Sacrifice of our
hearts, the memory of the Passion of our lord, the acknowledging of God for
our God, etc: and the good work, whereby God is honored with the worshipp of
Latria, and peace, and unity in Religion practices amongst our selves.
Wherefore, this fowrth kind of Sacrifice, whereof of I intend chiefly to
treat, includes the first, and second kind, as the whole does the parts, an
has relation unto the third, as a commemoration, or application of the virtue
of it unto our selves.

5. Whereas I say, that an exterior visible Sacrifice, is an oblation or gift
given, or offered to God upon an Altar, by a lawful Minister of a particular
visible thing, wherein there is made some real alteration, or change, to
express the death of our Lord in Sacrifice: this is so manifest in all the
Sacrifices which were offered in the law of nature, and written law, that it
needs no other proofe-then the reading, and observing what was donn in those
Sacrifices. And that this real allteration, The Sacrifices of the old law,
expressions of the death of our Lord to come.
and change which was made in their Sacrifices, either by killing of living
things, or brusing of solid things, or shedding of liquid, was to express or
show forth the death of our Lord in Sacrifice to come, S. Paul witnesses,
saying: These things happened to them in figure 1. Cor. 10. And S. John.
saying The Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world. Revel. 13. 8. not
in itself, but in his sign, figure, effect, and virtue. Where upon S.
Augustine in the 18. Chapter of his first book, against the Adversaries of the
law and the prophets, says: The Sacrifices of the old law, Were shadows of
the only Sacrifice of the Son of God; not dispraising it, but signifying it,
for as one thing may be signified by many words, and many tongues; so this
one true and singular Sacrifice was before signified by many figurative
Sacrifices. And the like he has in the 17. Chapter of his 10. book of the
City of God: whereby it appears, that Sacrifices of the old law, were used
to show forth the death of our Lord in Sacrifice to come.

6. Secondly we say, there is made some real alteration or change in the
thing offered, not only to express the death of our Lord; but also to signify
the invisible contrition or Sacrifice of our hearts to God, his dominion over
us, and our subjection unto him, which S. Augustine in the 5. Chapter of his
10. book of the City of God, not only signifies; but also in the 19.
Chapter of the same book further expresses, saying: Visible Visible
Sacrifice, signs of the invisible, as words of things.
Sacrifices are signs of the invisible, as sounding words are signs of
things; wherefore as when we pray or praise, we direct the signefying words
unto him, to whom we offer the thing signified in our hearts: So when we see
men offering (says he) we know that visible Sacrifice, ought not to be
offered unto any other, but unto him, whose invisible Sacrifice we our selves
ought to be in our hearts. Thus S. Augustine, whereby we see, that exterior
visible Sacrifice, is a sign of the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts to God,
and of his dominion over us, and our subjection unto him, as sounding or
articulate words, are signs of things. And therefore, as when men speak
words to God, they ought to have the same intention in their hearts, which
their articulate or sounding words do signify: so likewise, when men offer
exterior visible Sacrifice, they are obleged to have an inward and invisible
Sacrifice of their hearts to God, thereby to acknowledge him for their Lord
God, and to manifest his dominion over them, and their subjection unto him:
because visible Sacrifices are signs of the God acknowledged for God, by
visible Sacrifice.
invisible of our hearts, as words are of things, and ought not to be offered
unto any, but unto him, whose invisible sacrifyce we our selves ought to be in
our hearts. And to whom man offers the invisible Sacrifice of his heart, him
he acknowledges for his God, Creator, etc. And has no other Gods before him,
which God him self signifies, saying: Son give me thy heart. Proverb. 23.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that the offering of visible Sacrifyce, is
worshipp of Latria, or divine worshipp, which is due unto God only, as I shall
show more at large hereafter.

7. Though we ought chiefly to adore, and serve God, with our minds and
spirits; because, God is a spirit, and they that adore him must adore him in
spirit, and verity. Ioh. 4. 24. yet because, the inward acts, and operations
of the mind, may be neglected, without any notice taken, either by our
selves, or others; as we see by daily experience, in the many things, which we
do forgett, and the distraction in our prayers; and because man is composed of
body and soul; it therefore pleased his Divine Majesty for the benefitt The
cause why God ordained visible Sacrifice.
of man, to ordain, that these exterior corporal actions of visible
Sacrifyce, should be a sacred, public, and known sign, of the inward
operations, and affections of man's mind toward God; thereby to oblege man,
under the penalty of hypocrisy, to publish the inward desires, and
inclinatio^s of his heart, in the service of God, under visible solemn signs;
otherwise, as S. Chrysostom, (in his 83. homily upon S. Matthew.) says: If thou
had not had a body, God would have delivered Why visible things are
instituted, to represent invisible.
unto thee naked gifts, which should not have been bodies; but because thy
soul is joined to thy body, therefore he has delivered unto thee,
intelligible things, vnter visible forms.

8. Thirdly, we say, that exterior visible Sacrifice is not only offered for
the causes above Union in Religion, and charity preserved by Sacrifice.
said, but also to signify our union in Religion amongst our selves under one
God, according to that common actiome: Those things which are one to a third,
are one amongst themselves. All the faithful sacrificing their hearts to God,
have one heart with God, and amongst themselves, whereof proceeds the
Communion of Saints, united in Religion, and Charity amongst themselves; for
he who has one heart with God, is one with God, and one with all those who
truly, and really offer the invisible Sacrifice of their hearts to God.
Whereupon, it comes to pass, that there never was any sacred Communion
amongst men, but of meat offered in Sacrifice, as of meat offered to God, for
a sacred exterior sign of common union of men with God, and amongst them
selves, as I shall show more at large in the next chapter.

9. Now seeing that God created man, and that it was necessary for man to
acknowledge God Why visible Sacrifice was instituted a sign of the invisible.
for his Lord God, and to make a commemoration of the passion of our Lord, and
to have peace and unity with God and other men; and yet all men could not
speak all languages, nor understand what should have been said, if those
things should have been only acted in words: therefore out of the infinite
providence of God, for the benefitt of all nations, it was necessary that this
his honor, and unity, which he would have amongst all his servants, should be
performed in outward solemn visible signs, known unto them all, that all
might visibly see and know, unto what they were visibly, and inuisibly obliged.
And considering that for the good of man kind, it was necessary, there should
be some outward visible thing instituted, which might not only privately
preserve in every one, the honor and love of God and his neighbor; but also
maintain a public practice of the honor of God, memory of the passion of
our Lord, and unity amongst all his servants; in what sacred outward visible
sign could it better be expressed, then in a visible Sacrifice, representing
the memory of the passion of our Lord, and the invisible Sacrifice of our
hearts which were the acts, and sacred observations of our reconliacion, and
peace with God by the sufferings of our savior upon the Cross.

10. If any object, and say that the Scriptures, How God does desire
Sacrifice, and not desire it.
often affirm, that God does not desire Sacrifice: this objection, S.
Auguctine answers, in the aforesaid chapter, proving by many examples of
Scripture; that when it is said, God does not require Sacrifice; it is to be
understood, of the visible sign, (which is commonly called the sacrifice) when
it is without the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts; for so it is but a false
sign, and hypocrisy; such as was the sacrifice of Cain, who offered his
goods, as a visible sign, but not his heart, in an invisible Sacrifice; and
therefore his sacrifice, was rejected, and Abells accepted; as witnesses
Rupertus, (in his 4. book upon Genesis, and second chapter) saying: By faith,
says S. Paul, Abel offered a greater host then Cain; for in exterior worshipp,
and religion, they both offered alike. And therefore, both of them offered
rightly: but Cain did not rightly divide; for Cain whilst he offered his
goods to God, kept himself unto himself, having his heart fixed in earthly
desires. Such portions, or outward gifts, God does not accept of; but by
himself says (in the 23. of the Proverbs) Son give unto me thy heart.
Wherefore, Abel first offered unto God his heart, and then his goods; and so
offered by faith, a greater host then Cain: Who offered the outward Sacrifice,
which was the visible sign: but kept the inward, which God most esteemed, unto
himself.

11. The case stands before God, with Sacrifice, The case of Prayer, and
Sacrifice alike.
as it does with prayer; God commands prayer; (Mark 14. 38.) And yet says,
that some kind of prayer, is hypocrisy, (Math. 15. 7.) In like manner, God so
affects Sacrifice, that under penalty of death, he prohibiteth it to be
offered unto any, but unto himself; (Exodus 22. 20.) and yet says, that he
will not have Sacrifice offered unto him; (Isay 1. 12.) The reason is, for that
exterior prayer (which is commonly called prayer) is a sign of the interior
prayer of the heart, which when it wants, is hypocrisy, as a false sign: So
exterior visible Sacrifice, which is commonly called Sacrifice, is a sign of
the interior, and when it is without this, it is hipocrisye, as a false sign.
So God will prayer, and Sacrifice; and he will not prayer, nor Sacrifice: He
will have prayer, and Sacrifice, when they are conjoined with the prayer, and
Sacrifice of the heart: and he will not have prayer, nor Sacrifice, when they
are not accompanied with the heart: because they are hypocrisy, as making show
of that, which is not. Whereupon, after the Prophet in the 50. Psalm, had
said: A Sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit, a contryte and humble heart, o
God, thou will not dispyse, etc. He adds: Then shall thou accept Sacrifice
of justice, oblations and holocausts, then shall they lay calves upon thine
Altar. When with the exterior visible Sacrifice of the Church, men shall offer
the invisible Sacrifice of their hearts, by sorrow for the negligences of their
lives past, contrition for their sins, and humiliation before God unto whom
that Sacrifice is offered; the^ shall they offer a true and proper Sacrifice of
justice, oblations, and holocaustes acceptable to God, and not otherwise:
because the outward Sacrifices with out this inward, and invisible; is but
hipocrysie.

12. Visible Sacrifices (says Saint Augustine in the place a fore reoyted) Are
signs of the invisible, Visible Sacrifices are signs of the invisible, as
words are of things.
as words are signs of things. Wherefore, when without any just necessity
men speak words, and have other intentions in their hearts, then their words
sound or signify; it is but dissimulation, and contrary to the institution of
words, which were ordained, to express the intention of the heart. So when we
offer visible Sacrifice, without the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts, it is
hypocrisy, or dissembled sanctity, which is double iniquity: because visible
Sacrifices, were instituted unto this end, that they might be a public sacred
visible sign, of the invisible sacrifice of men's hearts unto God, as words
were ordained, to express the sincerity of men's minds; and because man
should always have an intention, and be ever ready to give his heart, and
soul to God, without dissimulation; therefore, he may never offer visible
Sacrifice, without the invisible Sacrifice of his heart.

13. S. Augustine, expressing the excellency of The excellency of visible
Sacrifice, conjoined to the invisible.
this visible sacrifice, when it is accompanied with the visible Sacrifice of
our hearts, and how acceptable it is unto God, and unto the Church triumphant
in heaven, adds in the same chapter, saying: When we offer visible
Sacrifice, together with the invisible of our hearts: Then all the Angels, and
the superior powers, and the more powerful spirits, through their goodness, and
piety, do favor us, and rejoice with us, and according to their power, do
help us to offer this visible Sacrifice. Thus S. Augustine of the excellency
of this visible Sacrifice, when it is united unto the invisible of our hearts;
and how acceptable it is unto God, and unto the whole triumphant church in
heaven.

14. The reason, why the triumphant Church in Why the Angels rejoice at the
offering of visible Sacrifice.
heaven, which as S. Paul says, does consist Of the assembly of many
thousand Angels, does so rejoice at the offering of visible sacrifice, when it
is accompanied with the invisible sacrifice of our hearts, is, for that they
are, as they themselves say; fellow servants, with those who serve God upon
earth: And seeing that men here upon earth, cannot continewally without
intermission think of God, and honor him with the honor, which is only due unto
him by a perpetual and continewall sacrifying of their hearts unto him, as
they in heaven do, who Day and night cry holy holy, Lord God omnipotent; and
so are eternally happy; therefore they do rejoice, that yet sometimes men upon
earth will actually think upon God and actually honor him with the honor of
Latria, worshipp due only unto him, and consecrate their hearts unto him alone,
who is their end, and chiefest good thereby to become partakers of a little
drop of their happiness; for as S. Augustine in the 22. chapter of his 10.
book of confessions says. This is happy life to rejoice in God; of God, and
for God this is it, and other is none.

Now the question is, whether Christians are bound to offer this 4. kind of
Sacrifice to God or no? The Puritans deny that in the Christian Church, there
ought to be any such kind of extenall Puritans deny external visible Sacrifice
in the Christian Church.
visible Sacrifice offered unto God. The moderate sort of Protestants, do
after a sort confess it in words, and doctrine, though not in practice, as his
late deceased Majesty in his answer to Cardinal Perron, related by Casaubon,
saying, The Kings Majesty having heard of the learned dispute, of the double
Sacrifice, that is to say of expiation, and commemoration or religion; affirmed
in the presence of many, that he approved of it. Doctor Andrews in his answer
to the 18. chapter, of Cardinal Perrons reply, Moderate Protestants after a
sort defend visible Sacrifice.
says: The Eucharist ever was, and by us is considered both as a Sacrament,
and a Sacrifice: A Sacrifice is proper, and only applyable to divine worshipp.
Again, The Eucharist being considered as a Sacrament, is nothing else, but a
distribution, and application of the Sacrifice to the several receivers, Mr.
Mountague in his appeal, chapter 29. confesses that S. Paul calls our Lords
table ((...)) a thing to offer sacrifice upon. Heb. 13. 10. And moreover
adds, that S. Ignatius S. John's disciple, uses this word in the same sense
more then thryce, and so does also, says he, Clement, the Apostles Canons and
Dionysius Areopagita; and that Ireneus, in the 20. chapter of his 4. book of
heresies affirms it to be the office of the Ministers of the new Testament.
To serve God and the Altar.

16. To these ancient Protestants I may add the confession of more modern
Protestants Writers, as of M.r Browninge Bachelor of divinity in his six
sermons published by aprobatio^ this year of 1636. page 132. where setting
down the offices of Priests out of S. Ciprian, says: S. Ciprian speaking of
the Clergy, we Priests every day celebrate and offer Sacrifice, also in his
66. Epistle Ex: all who are honored with Divine Priesthood, and are placed in
the ministry of the Clergy ought not to attend unto any thing but the Altar,
and the Sacrifices and apply themselves to prayers, and supplications. Moreover
page 134. affirms, that it was the universal practice, of all former ages,
to make supplications before the Altar: And out of Hugo de S. Victore, teaches
that not only the Clergy and domestical of the Church, but also the
Heardsmen, Hoggards, and In the Primative Church all sorts heard Mass every
day.
laborers heard Mass every day, and for this also cites the 30. chapter of
the Council of Agathensis, and of that which is more ancient then it, the 5.
Canon of the first Council Tolletan, saying: If a Priest or Deacon or Subdeacon
or any Clarck who is deputed to the Church, if he shall be within the City,
or in a place where there is a Church, or in a Castle Borough, or Village, and
shall not come to the Church, or to the daily Sacrifice, let him not be
accounted for a Clergy Man: and for the further confirmation hereof refers
the reader to the 30. Canon of the first Council of Orlians; to the 7. Canon
Tarraconensis to the 10 Cannon Gerundensis; to the 14. of the 2. Council of
Orlians and many others, and the common people for want of instructions,
failing herein, as he says, gave occasion Why Masses, afterward came so
frequently, as we see to be celebrated in private.

The tract called a Coal from the Altar, written in defense of the vicar of
Gr: printed with approbation Gr:
this year of 1636. page 17. says. We have a Sacrifice, and an Altar, and a
Sacrament of the Altar, on all sides acknowledged, neither the Prince nor
Prelates, the Priest or People dissenting from it, some of these terms being
further iustefied by the statute-lawes.

M:r Pocklington a Doctor of divinity, in his sermon of the Sunday no Sabbath,
of the second edition published with authority this year of 1636. page 14.
cites S. Augustine saying, My brethren, your holiness knows very well that to
day, we celebrate the feast of the celebration of the Altar, in which the
stone is anointed or blessed, upon which divine sacrifices are consecrated.
Again page 25. None were allowed to come and stand, within the listes of the
holy place, where the Altar was fixed: but the Priests whose office it was, not
to attend unto any thing but the Altar. page 27. he cites S. Ambrose saying.
S. Ambrose his practice shows a distinction of service: the Cathecumeni being
dismissed I began to say mass; (says S. Ambrose,) S. Ambrose begun not the
second service (as our Church calls it) at the Altar, before the first
service in the Body of the Church was finished, and the Cathecumenie sent out.
Again page 34. he says those are prophainers of the Lords day, who will not
come to Church until service be ended and the sermon begun: and such (as S.
Augustine says) they make the Priest to curtaile the mass, or sing or say it
after their fancy.

Of the real presence the same Author page 39. The real presence defended by
moderate Protestants.
says. In the Church reverence was to be given to the Angels which attend the
Lord our Savior at his table, in tremendis misterijs (as S. Chrysostom
speaks,) where he is truly and really present, not so in private houses. Mr.
Shelford in his five pious sermons, page 6. In this house (of the Church) God
will hear for the presence of his son for as Chrysostom says, where Christ
is in the Eucharist, there is no want of Angels: where such a king is, and
such Princes are, there is a heavenly place, nay heaven it self. Doctor White
a Doct. White a Protestant Bishope of the real presence.
Protestant Bishope; in his epistle to his treatise of the Sabbath day says.
The sense of the second commandment is thou shall worship no Idol etc. Leuit.
26. 1. but the son of God, and his blessed name are no Idols: The Son of God
in the blessed Eucharist giving his body and blood is no Idol: therefore
religious adoration of Christ in the holy Eucharist, and at the rehearsing of
the name of Jesus, is no superstitious act, prohibited in the second
commandment.

Thus these moderate Protestants. Whereby it does appear, that they after a
fort confess, both the real and substantial presence of the Son of God in
the Sacrament of the Altar, and also the visible Sacrifice in the Church of God.

Catholics affirm, that as in the beginning The opinion of Catholics
concerning visible Sacrifice.
of the Church of God upon earth, there were particular visible Sacrifices
offered unto God upon Altars, after the manner that is aforesaid; so there
shall be until the end: and that in the new law, our Savior at his last
supper, not only instituted an external visible Sacrifice, to be offered unto
God, upon an Altar; but that also he instituted this Sacrifice in his body and
blood; an ordained, that it should be a propitiatory Sacrifice, for the
remission of sins, not of it self, abstracting from te sacrifice of our
redemption upon the Cross: nor yet immediately, that who soever shall offer
the sacrifice of the body and blood of our Lord shall have his sins
immediately forgiven, without contrition, or any satisfaction for them, as our
adversaries many times do falsely report; but that this Sacrifice is an
application of the meritts of the sacrifice of our redemption unto us, as a
commemoration thereof, and a means to obtain justification and the gift of
contrition, and penance for our sins, as is set down, more at large in the
22. Session of the Council of Trent. And in prouinge of this will consist the
whole scope of this our book following.

CHAP. II. The necessity of visible Sacrificie, and the end, or cause why it
was instituted, and used.
1. TWo things, have always been much recommended The honor of God, and peace
much recommended to men by God. The honor of God, and peace mainteyned by
visible Sacrifice.
by God, and highly esteemed by men of all sects, and sorts, who firmly
beueled that there was a God who extended his providence over mankind; first
the honor of God, and peace with him; and secondly unity, peace, and society
amongst themselves. And these two, have always been, chiefly mainteyned
amongst men, by a particular, visible Sacrifice, first offered unto God upon an
Altar, as a sacred sign of the invisible Sacrifice of their hearts unto him;
and after eaten, or communicated amongst themselves. By offering visible
Sacrifice upon an Altar unto God, they solemnly protested the sacrifice of
their hearts unto him, publickely adored him with the honor of Latria, or
divine worshipp, which is due only unto him; and visibly made profession of
peace, unity, and society with him, and amongst themselves: The Communion
made of meat, offered to God, in sign of union.
and by eating of the same Sacrifice, which had been offered unto God, they
ratified and established the same peace, and unity, as partakers of that
meat, with they had offered unto God for a sacred sign of common union, as is
generally manifest by experience, in all sects, and sorts of people, of
former ages, who firmly believed, there was a God, and that his Providence was
not wanting in the government of mankind.

2. And to begin with the faithful, who lived in In the law of nature, the
faithful offered visible Sacrifice to honor God and mainteyne unity.
the law of nature, written law, and law of grace: In the law of nature; after
that Jacob, and Laban his father in law had agreed upon a peace, firm
freindshipp, and league, as before God there present, and beholding them; Jacob
(for a conclusion of the peace) Offered victimes in the Mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread, who when they had eaten, lodged there. Genesis 31. 54.
Where, in confirmation of the peace concluded, Jacob offered visible Sacrifice
unto God, as a sacred sign of the invisible Sacrifice of their hearts, adored
him with the honor of Latria, or divine worshipp, which is due only unto him,
etc. And after the sacrifice, called his Brethren to communicate, or eat of
the victimes, the more to ratify the unity, peace, and concord amongst
themselves, by eating of the meat, which was offered to God in sign of union.

3. At the coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, in their last
supper, they offered visible Sacrificie unto God in the Paschal Lamb,
Sacrifice in the Paschal Lamb.
thereby publicly to honor God, as their Sovereign Lord God, and to express
the invisible sacrifice of their hearts unto him: And when they had done, they
communicated of it, the more firmly to maintain peace, and unity with God,
and amongst themselves, by eating of meat which was offered unto God, as a
sacred sign of the union of their hearts in him. Exodus 12.

4. In like manner, after that Moses had told his father in law Iethro (a
Priest of the land of Madian) Iethro offered Sacrifice.
all things that our lord had done for Israel, Iethro rejoiced, and said. Now
I know, that the Lord is great, above all Gods. Iethro therefore offered
Holocausts, and hosts to God, (thereby to adore him, with divine honor, and to
express the Sacrifice of his heart unto him) And Aron and the Ancients of
Israel came to eat bread with him before God. Exodus 18. To confirm unity,
peace, and society amongst themselves: and this was done in the law of nature,
before the written law was given.

5. In the written law, God said unto the Children of Israel: To the place
which God has chosen In the written law, the faithful offered visible
Sacrifice to honor God, and maintain peace, and unity.
(which was Jerusalem) shall you come, and shall offer in that place
Holocausts and victimes, (thereby, as by a sacred sign, to express the
invisible Sacrifice of their hearts, and to adore God, with the honor of
Latria) and you shall eat there in the sight of the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. 12.
To ratify peace, unity, and concord amongst themselves. Again, in the same
chapter: Thither (to Jerusalem) shall you bring all the things, that God
commanded you, Holocausts, etc. There, shall you feast before the Lord your
God: Where upon it is said, that Elcana immolated, and gave to Phenenna his
wife, and to all her sonns and daughters, parts; and to Anna one part. 1.
Kings, 1. 4. In like manner; Solomon and all Israel with him, did immolate
victimes before our Lord; and Solomon killed peaceable hosts, which he
immolated to our Lord, of Oxen, 22000. and of Sheep, 120000. etc. and made in
that time a solemn Festiuitie, and all Israel with him, for 14. days. 3.
Kings, 8. 60. And this was done in the old law to establish and preserve the
unity, peace, and society of men with God, and amongst themselves, as further
witnesses S. Augustine in the 5. chapter of his 10. book of the City of
God, saying: What thing soever we read, to have been commanded by God, about
the diverse, and sundry Sacrifices in the ministry, either of the Tabernacle,
or of the Temple, are written to signify the love of God, and our Neighbor:
for upon these two commandments (as it is written) do depend the whole Law
and the Prophets. Thus S. Augstine. Whereby it does appear, that the diverse
and sundry sacrifices which were used in the old law, were al instituted by
God, to this end only, to maintain the love of God, and of men amongst
themselves, by the union of their hearts in God, which these Sacrifices did
represent.

6. In the beginning of the new law, our Lord Sacrifice instituted in the law
of grace.
and Savior Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, offered his body, for a gift
unto his eternal father, and then gave his said body, unto the Children of
his Church to eat, saying: Take eat, this is my body which is given for you.
Luk, 22. as a sacred sign, of the invisible Sacrifice of your hearts, and a
preservation of unity, peace, and society with God, and amongst yourselues, as
were the gifts, and Sacrifices of the written law, and law of Nature. And when
he had done, he established this manner of offering his body to God, for a
gift in commemoration of him, in lieu of all the Sacrifices of the old law,
saying: Do this (the same which he then did) For a commemoration of me. Luk
22. And so taught his followers to offer the invisible sacrifice of their
hearts, to God, with him, who is their head, Lord, and Master: that though, for
their own sakes, and multitude of sins formely committed, their invisible
sacrifice, might be less grateful: yet by him, and through him, who is their
head, it might be also most acceptable.

7. Our Savior, out of his infinite wisdom, has bestowed himself upon us,
for to be the only Why our Savior would be our Sacrifice.
public, sacred, solemn sign, of the invisible sacrifice of our hearts; not
only to oblige us, daily to offer sacrifice, and present God the Father, with
his son, In whom he is well pleased: but also to offer ourselves with him,
and by him; and not to offer him alone, who is our head, and reteyne ourselves,
who are, or should be his members, unto ourselves, as witnesses S. Augustine
in With the sacrifice, we are to offer also ourselves.
the sixth chapter of his 10. book of the City of God, saying: The Church
does frequent the Sacrifice of the Altar, which the faithful know, where it is
showed unto him, that in the oblation, which he does offer, he is also offered
himself. Again, in the 20. chapter of his said book, saying: Christ is the
Priest, he offered, and he is the oblation or thing offered; the Sacrament of
which thing, he would should be the daily Sacrifice of the Church: whith
Church, as body of him her head, has learned to offer herself by him. Thus
S. Augustine. With whom also agrees, Eusebius Caesariensis in the 10. chapter
of his first book of Evangelical demonstration saying: Christ laboring for
all our saluations, offered as it were, a certain victime, and a singular
Sacrifice unto his father: that we might offer ourselves to God himself for a
Sacrifice. So that amongst the other ends, why Christ our Lord instituted a
visible sacrifice in his body and blood at his last supper, this was one, that
we might together with him offer ourselves. Whereupon, S. Gregory the great,
in his 37. homily upon the Gospel; and in his 4. book of his Dialogues, and
59. chapter says: It is necessary, that when we offer Sacrifice; That we
immolate ourselves to God in contrition of heart, for that we who celebrate the
mysteries of the passion of our Lord, ought to imitate that which we do, for
then it shall be truly an host for us, to God, when we shall be made ourselves an
host. For whith cause, when Bishopps make Priests they say unto them, as is
set down in the Pontifical: Understand that which you do imitate, that
which you handle; to this end, that celebrating the mystery of the death of
our Lord, you procure to mortify your members from all vices, and
concupiscences: Thus these Fathers; Whereby it does appear, that our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, has instituted a Sacrifice for us in his body and
blood, that we might in offering it, also offer ourselves in Sacrifice to God,
by an invisible Sacrifice of our hearts.

8. In like manner our Lord also took the Chalice Sacrifice instituted in the
chalice.
after supper, saying: (even as Protestants translate) This chalice is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Luke 22. as a sacred sign of the
invisible Sacrifice of your hearts to God, as were the Sacrifices in the law of
Nature and written law, which were types and signs of this, and ended when
this new Sacrifice of the body and blood of our Lord was brought in, and
instituted by our Lord; as witnesses S. Augustine in the 20. chapter of his
10. book of the City of God, saying: The many and diverse sacrifices of the
Saints (in the old testament) were signs of this true Sacrifice. This one
Sacrifice was figuratively foretold by many Sacrifices, as if one thing
should be delivered with variety The Sacrifice of the body and blood of our
Lord, succeeded in place of all the Sacrifices of the old Testament.
of words, least in being much commended, it might grow iedious. To this
chief and true Sacrifice, all the false Sacrifices have given place. Whereupon
S. Chrisostom upon 26. the chapter of S. Matthew, says: As the old testament
had sheep and calves (in their Sacrifices and Sacraments,) see the new has
our Lords blood. For which cause, after that our Lord had offered Sacrifice;
and administrated communion in his blood, he presently commanded the Apostles,
that they should not drink of the Cup, without shedding it to God, or
offering it in Sacrifice, saying: This do ye (the same that he then did) as
offen as you shall drink, for the commemoration of me. 1. Cor. 11. 15. Wholly
forbidding them to drink of the Cup in commemoration of him, without
offering it first in sacrifice to God, as a sacred sign of the invisible
sacrifice of their hearts; least at any time they should drink in
commemoration of him, and not of drink which was offered to God, as a sacred
sign of the common union of their hearts with God.

9. That this visible Sacrifice of the new law, was not only instituted by our
Savior, for a public exercise of the Sacrificing of our hearts to God, and a
daily solemn adoration of him, with the worship of Latria, and commemoration
of the passion of our Savior; but also for the preservation of unity, peace,
and society amongst ourselves; S. Paul does witness, saying: The bread which
we break, (after the manner of offering sacrifice in bread) is it not the
participation of the body of our Lord? for being many we are one bread, one
body, all that participate of one bread. 1. Cor. 10. 16. Whereupon S.
Augustine in his 57. Epistle, alleging this text, says: The head of this
body (the Church) is Christ, and the unity of this body, is commended in our
Sacrifices, which the Apostle does briefly signify, saying: being many, we
are one bread, one body. Again, in his 59. Epistle, and 5. question, he
says: All things are vowed which are offered unto God, especially the oblation
of the holy Altar, by which Sacrament is preached and declared an other our
greatest vow, whereby we vow to remain in Christ, as in the conjunction or
closing together of the body of Christ.

10. Exterior visible sacrifice, being instituted as a sacred sign of the
invisible sacrifice of our hearts: all those who offer Sacrifice as they should
do, offer to God the invisible Sacrifice of their hearts: and thereby as S.
Augustine here says, do preach and declare agreat vow or promise, which is to
remain united members in the mystical body of Christ. Whereupon S.
Chrysostom in his 24. homily, upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, says; O my beloved, let us have care of the brethren, and let us
preserve that unity with them, which is in us (in our own bodies) for unto
this, that terrible and most fearful sacrifice (of the new law) does call us,
especially commanding, that we should come unto it, with concord and burning
Charity. Thus S. Chrysostom: Whereby it does appear, that the end, why
Christ our Lord instituted a visible sacrifice in the new law, was not only to
preserve in Christians, the worshipp of Latria toward God, and the
commemoration of his Passion, etc. but also to maintain a perfect union
amongst them.

11. Man on the one side being obliged (by the debt of his creation,
conservation, redemption, and other benefits,) to honor, and love God above all
things, and his neighbor for Gods sake, as himself, as the holy scriptures
do abundantly testify. And on the other side, as Sacrifice is the public
exercise of the vvorshipp of God.
the said Scriptures do witness, and experience does daily manifest unto us,
That the cogitations of man's heart, are bent unto evil at all times, and to
forgett these his obligations, and institute of life, unless he, by some
public act, or daily exercise, be put in mind, and kept to the practice
thereof: for this cause, God of his infinite mercies, has ordained that a
particular visible sacrifice, should be daily used in his Church, as a public
exercise, and practice of the invisible sacrifice of our hearts unto him; a
daily visible adoration of him, with the worshipp of Latria, a commemoration of
the Passion of our Lord and a continual renewing of our loves, peace, and
society with him, and amongst ourselves; thereby to preserve in us, the honor,
and obligation, which we owe unto God; and the love of our neighbors as
ourselves; so to live together in unity, peace, and charity, whilst An absurd
thing that there should be Schools of other things, and not of the worship
due unto God.
we remain upon earth; and after death, to ascend up into heaven, to enjoy
the Kingdom, Which was prepared for us from the foundation of the world.

12. And it were a thing very absurd, that in the Church of God which is his
Kingdom here upon earth there should be visible Schools, and public daily
exercises, of things of lesser moment; and that of the visible Sacrificing of
our hearts to God, public worshipp of Latria, solemn commemoration of the
Passion of our Lord for us, and the sacred union of our hearts with him, and
amongst our selves, (wherein consists our te^porall, and eternal welfare)
there should be no practice, more then in naked words only, which either men of
diverse nations, who speak different languages, or the unlearned, could not
understand. Neither would words only, without other visible actions, be
sufficient, to teach the The necessity of Sacrifice.
vulgar common people, the practice, dignity, excellency, and eminency of
these sacred things, as we find by experience. Whereby it does appear, how
necessary it is, that in the Church of God there should not only be instituted
public Schools, where all men, not in words only, but in deeds, might see,
the adoration due only to God; the Sacrifice of men's hearts, the commemoration
of the passion of our Lord, and union with God, and amongst ourselves, daily
practiced; such as are, or should be the sacred temples, and Churches; but also
that these exercises, should be set f^^th, with great solemnity, under
solemn visible known signs, common to all; that all in every City, town
and village might comply, with these their obligations toward God, and man:
which is the exterior visible Sacrifice I speak of; whose practice as we see
by experience, is so appropriated unto this use, that wheresoever, we shall
find, either amongst Christians or infidells, any company of men, seriously
attending, to the offering of Sacrifice upon an Altar, we presently know, that
they are adoring some God, true or false, with the honor due only unto God, and
colleagued in unity of Religion, and society amongst themselves, as is
manifest by experience.

13. And because, that the offering of a particular visible Sacrifice unto God,
upon an Altar, was instituted by God, unto those ends before rehearsed:
therefore to communicate (as Protestants To communicate, and not of things
offered in Sacrifice, a profane thing.
and Puritans now do) and not of hosts, or Victimes, first offered to God upon
an Altar, was, and is by the Scriptures, accounted a work of the Sons of
Belial. 1. Kings 2. 2. and an exceeding great sin. 1. Kings, 2. 17. Because
(say the Scriptures) they distracted men from the Sacrifice of our Lord; and so
hindered them, not only from the public practice, of the invisible Sacrifice
of their hearts unto God, and the visible adoration of him, with the worshipp
of Latria which is due only to him: but obliterated the memory of his passion
for us, who was slain from the beginning of the world, and infringed the
solemn practice of peace, and unity between men and God and of men amongst
themselves. For which cause S. Paul also commands visible Sacrifice, to be
used in the administration of the communion, saying, As often as you shall eat
this Bread, and drinck the Chalice, you shall show the death of our Lord until
he come, 1. Cor. 11. 26. who dyed offering up himself, in a visible Sacrifice,
as our adversaries confess.

To conclude, Prayer as affirms S. John Damascen in the 24. chapter of his 3.
book orthodoxae fidei, is an elevation of mind to God, which visible Sacrifice
does not only teach and express as words do things, as I have proved
hertofore: but also adds to the elevation of the mind to God, a gift given or
offered to God according to his command saying Thou shall not appear in my
sight empty Exodus 23. 15. and such a superexcellent gift, as the body and
blood of his only son, in whom he is well pleased; and withal an invisible
sacrifice of our selves to God, according to the earnest exhortation of S.
Paul saying, I beseech you Brethren, by the mercy of God, that you exhibit
your bodies a living host, holy, pleasing to God, your reasonable Sacrifice:
Romans 21. 1. whereby it comes to pass, that the due offering of visible
Sacrifice does The offering of visible Sacrifice is excellent prayer.
not only teach us to pray as we ought; but also is in it self the most
co^pleate prayer in the Church of God: and therefore called the public office
of the Church, as I shall further declare, in his place. In the mean space
this is not only sufficient to show the institution of visible Sacrifice; but
also the necessity and cause, why visible Sacrifices were instituted in the
Church often God and used amongst the faithful, in the Law of nature, written
law and law of grace, and the fruit or benefit we receive by them.

CHAP. III. All the Gentills and Heathen people (Atheists, and Epicures only
excepted) offered visible Sacrifice unto their supposed Gods.
1. THe offering up of external visible Sacrifices Offering of Sacrifice
necessary for the preservation of unity and peace.
unto God, and communicating of the same after they were offered, was esteemed
a thing so necessary to preserve in men, the honor of God, and unity and
concord amongst themselves, that not only the faithful in all ages, used it to
this effect, and purpose; but also all the Gentills and heathens, who were not
All the Gentills (the Atheists and Epicures excepted) offered Sacrifice.
Atheists, or Epicures, and denied not God, or Gods, or his, or their
providence over mankind; as we shall find by experience. For if we look into
the acts, deeds, books, histories, or relations of such Gentills, or Ancient
or modern heathen people, who are at this day, or have been in the world in
former Ages, we shall find, that all (Atheists and Epicures only excepted)
offered external visible Sacrifice unto some God, true, or false; as the
Babilonians, Assirians, Chaldeans, Cananits, Philistians, Egiptians,
Ethiopians, Greeks, Romans, Sarazens, Turcks, ancient, or modern heathen
people of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, who all universally, have and had
Priests, Altars, and external visible Sacrifice, as witness all the Authors,
who make any mention, of the Religion of these nations, whose testimonies in
this short Treatise, would be to long to set down: and therefore, I referr
the Reader unto their own wrytinges; as unto the books of the old and new
Testament; S. Augustine in his 18. book of the city of God; Athanasius in
his Oration against the gentilles, and Epiphanius in his first book of
heresies; unto Cicero of the nature of the Gods; Herodotus, Diodorus, Siculus,
etc.

2. And for later writers, I referr the Reader, unto Geraldus, of the Gods of
the gentilles; Christopher Richerius, in his book of the manners of the
Turckes; Septem Castrensis of the faith, and Religion of the Turks; Samuel
Purchase, in his relations of the Religions observed in all Ages; Lewis Godfry,
in his 12. tomes of the history of the East Indies, and others. Whereupon Plato
toward the end of his 10. Dialogue in his books of laws, says: The custom
of the gentilles to offer Sacrifice in their necessities.
It has allwaies been the custom of those, who were in danger, or wanted any
thing, or when their substance increased, to consecrate something to the Gods,
and vow Sacrifices. With whom agrees S. Thomas in his 2. 2. quest. 85. Art. 1.
saying: In every age, and amongst men of all nations, has allwaies been
offering up of Sacrifice. Insomuch, that amongst all the heathen people that
are at this day, or heretofore have been (Atheists and Epicures only excepted)
there is not, nor has there been found any so impious, and barbarous in the
whole Globe of the earth, who have not, or yet do not offer some kind of
external visible Sacrifice, thereby to acknowledge the sovereignty of some
God, true, or false over them: which is so true, that even at this day, we
may say unto the Atheists, Epicures, and Puritans of this Age, (who have no
external visible Sacrifice) as Plutark in his book against Coletes, said unto
the Epicure Coletes, toward the end of his book; If you travel throughout
the world, well you may find, Cities without No City without Sacrifice.
walls, without writings, without Kings, not peopled, or inhabited, without
howses, without money, or men or desirous of coin, who know not what Theaters,
or publik Halls of bodly exercise mean: but never was there, or ever shall
there be any one City seen, which uses no Sacrifice, either to obtain
good blessings, or to avoid heavy curses, or calamities. Moreover, the
offering up of Sacrifice unto some God, was by the light of nature, so highly
esteemed amongst the heathens, that if any man committed any wickedness, or
impiety in the Sacrifices, which were offered unto the Gods, he was to suffer
death, for his offense, as witnesses, Plato, in the aforesaid Dialogue,
saying. If any shall commit wicked impiety, or shall offend, either in his
private, or public Sacrificinge worship of the Gods, he shall be condemned to
death, as one, who sacrificed impurely.

3 This being the end, and use of external visible Sacrifice, to preserve in
men, the memory and honor of God, and unity, and society with him, and amongst
themselves; and all prudent laws, being chiefly instituted to the same end:
we never read of any prudent Lawgiuer, or All the prudent Lavvgiuers instituted
the offering of Sacrifice.
Prince, though an infidel, or heathen that gave laws unto any Commonwealth,
or founded a Monarchy; but he instituted external visible Sacrifices, to be
offered unto some supposed God. As Cham founder of the Monarchy of the
Egiptia^s, Chus founder of the Monarchy of the Ethiopians, Nemrod Belus founder
of the Monarchy of the Babilonians, Ninus founder of the Monarchy of the
Assirians, Ion, Cecrops, Deucalion, Licurgus Lawgiuers to the Grecians, Numa
Pompilius, the first, and principalst Statesman amongst the Romans. All which
noble, and renowned personages (to use Plutarcks words in his book against
Coletes,) made the people devout, affectionate, and zealous to the Gods, in
prayers, Oaths, Oracles, Prophecies, and Sacrifices, either to obtain good
blessings, or to auert heavy, curses and calamities. Insomuch as Plato in the
8. Dialogue of his book of Laws, (besides solemn Sacrifices, Plato ordained
that 365 Sacrifices should daily be offered in Athens.
used upon great festival days ordained, that in the city of Athens, there
should be 365. Sacrifices offered every day, in such sort, as that, some one, or
other of the Magistrates, should always be offering Sacrifices to some of the
Gods, for the prosperities of the City, of themselves and their goods.

4. Licurgus the Lawgiuer to the Lacedaemonians, The frugall Sacrifices of
Lycurgus.
ordeyning sparing, and frugall Sacrifices to be offered unto the Gods, made
answer (as Plutark affirms in his life) That the honor due unto the Gods,
might never fail amongst them: and this these heathen men, and infidells did
by the light of nature, which dictated unto them, that there would be no
constant unity, or civil society, or Religion amongst them, but by offering
visible Sacrifice, unto some true, or supposed God, or Gods, thereby to
express the inward Sacrifice of their hearts, and souls, and acknowledge
visibly an union in one supreme Sovereign, and amongst themselves. Moreover,
the Gentiles, and The Gentills communicated of their Sacrifices.
heathen people, not only offered Sacrifices, in honor of their Gods: but also
did eat, or communicate of their Sacrifices, to mantayn a more firm unity,
and society amongst themselves, and with their Gods, as the Scriptures witness
saying: The Isralits falling in to Idolatry, offered Holocausts, and pacifique
hosts (to the molcen calf) and the people sat down to eat, and drinck, Exodus
32. 6. afer the manner of the Egiptia^s, from whence they came, whose chief
God in their time, was a Calf, as witnesses S. Augustine, in the 18. Chapter
of his 5. Book of the City of God. Again: The people of Israel fornicated
with the Daughters of Moab, who called them to their Sacrifices, and they did
eat, and adore their God: Numb. 25.

5. And because the Gentills, and heathen people, did not only eat, of things
offered up in Sacrifice unto their Gods: but also estemeed, that The union
amongst the Gentiles by communicating of Sacrifices.
those who did eat of their Sacrifices, had union, peace, and society with
them, and their Gods, or Idols; therefore, both in the Old Law, and in the
New, the faithful were prohibited to eat of the meat, which was offered up to
Idols: Exodus 34. 25. Act. 15. 29. and 1. Cor. 10. 21. where S. Paul says to
the faithful: you cannott be partakers of the table of our Lord, and the table
of Devils. Whereupon Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, in his Oration Iulians
craft to bring the Christians to Idolatry.
which he made, in the beginning of Lent, relates, that Julian the Apostata,
desirous to compel the Catholics of Constantinople, to an exterior kind of
participation, with Idolators, and infidells; caused all the bread, and meat,
with was publicly to be sold in Constantinople, to be offered up in Sacrifice,
unto the Gods, that so (says he) they may all be compelled, to eat of meat
immolated to Idols; or else perish with hunger. Whereupon the Christians,
seeking by the means of Theodorus the Martyr, to know what they might do, to
save the faithful from perishing of hunger: Divine answer was made, that
instead of bread, they should use boiled wheat, for their meat, which the
richer sort, for a whole week together, bestowed upon the poorer. So Julian
being overcome by the continency, and constancy of the Christians, commanded
that pure meat, with out any spott, should be brought again to the market.

6. And not only the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical histories, make mention,
how the heatens honored their Gods with Sacrifice, and after did eat of the
said Sacrifice, to maintayn freindship, and society amongst themselves, and
with their Gods; but also heathen Authors themselves, as Homer, Virgil,
Plutark, Macrobius, and Valerius Maximus, who writes that in the feasts, which
the Roman Septemviri, made in the Capitol to Jupiter, which were after
sacrificed, Jupiter was invited to supper in a bed, and Juno, and Minerua
sitting in chayres; to signify, that eating the meat, with was offered in
Sacrifice, they communicated, and feasted with their Gods. And the same does
testify Plutark, in his Book entitled, That there is no pleasant life
according to Epicurus, saying; Kings, and Princes, keep great cheer in their
royal Courts, and make certain royal, and public feasts, for all comers:
but those which they hold in the sacred Temples, at Sacrifices, and solemnities
of the The solemn Sacrifice of the Gentiles.
Gods, performed with fragrant perfumes, and odoriferous incense where it
seems, that men approach near unto the Majesty of the Gods, and think they
even touch them, and be conversant with them in all honor, and reverence, such
feasts yield a more rare joy, and singular delight, then any other, by the
assured hope, and full persuasion, that God is there present, propitious,
favorable, and gracious, and that he accepts in good part, the honor and
service donn unto him. So Plutark: and Virgil in the 8. of his Eneides,
affirms the same of Eneas, and his Trojans, saying:

Then chosen striplings, and the Priest (who yet
Stands at the Altar) straight before them set,
Oxens broild entrails (f^ll with manchet fine
Baskets) and serve them of the purest wine,
Eneas, and his Trojans take for cheer,
The chine, and hallowed inwards of a steer.
Whereby we see, that it was the custom of infidels, and heathen people, to
take the flesh with was offered up in Sacrifice to their God, from the Altar of
their idols, and bring it to the table of men, that those who offered might
eat of it with their friends and such as were invited; after the manner of the
Isralits, who as is set down, more particularly in the 1. Book of Kings, and 1.
Chapter, offered Sacrifice unto God, and after communicated of the said
Sacrifice amongst themselves. And this is sufficient to show, that all
heathens, and Gentills, who were not Atheists, or Epicures, (and either denied
not God, or Gods, or his, or their providence over mankind) offered Sacrifice
unto some supposed God, and communicated of the same, thereby to give divine
honor unto their Gods, and maintaynvnitie, peace, and society amongst
themselves, and with their Gods.

CHAP. IV. Of all the visible outward actions of men, exterior visible
Sacrifice, is chiefly due unto God, as God and Creator of all things.
1. IN all the kingdoms, and co^mon-wealths, which are upon the earth, there
is some particular visible, and known sign of dignity honor, and worship,
belonging only unto the Kings, or supreme Governors, as they are kings, Some
visible known sign of honor due unto supreme Magistrates.
or supreme Governors, which may not be given unto any other, under penalty
of treason, and death, as Scepter, or Crown, or the like: and God not only
being King of Kings Revel. 9. 24. and Prince of the Kings of the Earth Revel.
1. 5. but also God, and Creator of all things: Revel. 3. 11. And having
dominion over all. 1. Chronic. 29. 12. in reason, he must needs have some one
particular external visible known sign of adoration, honor, and worship due
only unto him, as he is God, and supreamest Some visible honor due unto God
alone.
Soueraign, by all men which live upon the earth, thereby publicly to
acknowledge him for their God, and to practice together, their submission and
obedience unto him; and visibly to adore him with that divine worship, with is
due only unto him. Which honor, and worship, under penalty of treason against
his divine Majesty, and temporal, and eternal death, may not be given unto
any creature subject, or vassal of his; otherwise there should be less
providence used, in providing, for the preservation of the visible public
honor, worship and dignity of God, amongst men, then there is, for the meanest
king prince, or public governor, of any private city upon earth; which is
absurd. Whereupon we infer, that there is a particular, exterior visible known
sign, whereby men do, or ought publicly, and visibly to acknowleg God, for
their Lord God, and chiefest good, and publicly, and visibly preserve in them,
the honor, dignity, and respect, which is due only unto him, as their Lord God,
Creator conseruer, and happy life etc.

2. That this particular external, visible known sign, is the visible
Sacrifice I speak of (which S. Augustine discribeth to be a Sacrament, or
sacred Sacrifice is only due unto God.
visible sign, of the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts as is set down in our
first chapter) God himself does witness saying: He that Sacrifices to Gods,
shall be put to death: but to our Lord only. Exodus 22. 20. for which cause, S.
Paul reprehending the Gentiles, for their Idolatry says: They changed the glory
of the incorruptible God, Romans 1. 23. And how did they change it? by taking
away the exterior visible Sacrifice, which was only due unto God, as a sacred
visible sign, of the invisible Sacrifice of their hearts, and bestowed it upon
the Image of a corruptible man, or The beginning of Idolatry.
of fowls, or fou-r footed-beasts; and so Idolatry began, as witness the
Scriptures, saying: Idols neither were from the beginning, neither shall they
be forever, for by the vainglory of men they entered into the world, and
therefore shall they come shortly unto an end: for a father afflicted with
untimely mourning, when he had made a picture of his child soontaken away; now
honored him as a God which was then a dead man, and delivered unto those, who
were under him ceremonies, and sacrifices: Wisd. 14. 15.

3. Thus (as the Scriptures do witness,) began Idolatry, by occasion of the
passionate affection of a father, who sorrowing for the death of his child,
caused a picture to be made in his memory and ordained. Sacrifices, which are
due unto God, to be offered unto it, by his servants, and followers. So Ninus
erected the statua of his Father Belus Nembroth, Grandchild to Cham and first
king of Babylon, in the midst of Babylon, and caused Sacrifice (which under
penalty of death, was due only unto God) to be offered unto it, by the
Babilonians, as witnesses Berosus in his 4. Book; S. Cyrill. in his 3. Book
against Julian: S. Hierome upon the 2. Chapter of Osee, and S. Ambrose upon the
1. chapter to the Romans; which the Scriptures also signify, saying: Afterward
(that Idolatry was thus begun as is aforesaid, by the passionate affection of a
father toward his child deceased) in process of time, the wicked custom
preuayling, this error was kept By what means Idolatry increased.
as a law, and graven things were worshipped, by the commandments of kings
etc. And to the worshipping of these, the singular diligence of the Artificer,
helped them forward, that were ignorant: for he willing to please him, that
enterteyned him, used all his skill, to make the similitude of the best
fastion. And so the multitude, allured by the grace of the work, took him now
for a God, which a little before, was but honored as a man. And this was
occasion to deceive the world, for men serving either passionate affection or
Kings, did ascribe unto stones, and stocks the incommunicable name of God, Wis.
14. 16. Whereupon S. Cyprian in his book of the vanity of Idols, says: It is
manifest, that they are not Gods, which the common people worship, for in times
past, they were kings, who in memory of their Royalty, after death were
worshipped of their kindred and servants, and so had temples erected unto their
honor, and their statues were erected, to preserve the resemblance of the
countenance of the dead, unto which they immolated hosts, and appointed
festival days in their honor, afterward they were esteemed holy, which in
the beginning were only used for their consolation.

4. From the Idol Belus, or Bell of the Babilonians, arose by degrees, the
Idols of Baal, Baalim, Beelzebub, The original of the Idols Belus, Baal,
Baalim etc.
Belfegor, etc. which were diverse standing Images of the same Belus, their
names only changed, according to the diverse languages, of the Nations, as
witnesses S. Hierome upon the 2. of Osee) unto which they offered Sacrifice as
the Scripture witnesses, saying: They immolated to Baalim: Osee 11. 2. They
did Sacrifice to Baal, and offered drink offerings, to strange Gods, to provoke
me to wrath, Ierem. 32. 29. They Sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan, and the
Lord was wrath with fury, against his people: Psalm. 105. because they offered
visible Sacrifice unto Idols, which is due only unto the true God, as a sacred
sign of the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts unto him; which may not be given
unto any creature. Whereupon, when Manue the Father of Sampson, would have
offered Sacrifice unto an Angel; the Angel said: If thou will offer Holocaust,
offer it unto our Lord, for Manue knew not that it was the Angel of our Lord.
Judges, 13. 15.

5. In like manner S. Augustine in his 49. Epist. says: The holy Angels do not
approve of Sacrifice; but that Sacrifice, which according to the doctrine of
true wisdom, and true Religion is offered only unto that true God, whom they
serve in holy society. Whereupon in the 4. Chapter of his 10. Book of the
City of God, he affirms that many things either by to No man, as man ever
challenged Sacrifice.
much humility, or pestilent flattery, are usurped from divine worship, and
translated unto humain honor: yet so as that these men, unto whom such honor is
given, are notwithstanding, still esteemed men, although they be called
worshipful, venerable, and (if much) honorable: but who ever thought that
Sacrifice ought to be offered unto any, but unto him whom either he did know or
esteemed, or feined to be a God. And moreover in his 49. Epist: and 3. Quest:
he says: The true, and holy Scriptures do admonish us, that Sacrifice is to be
offered unto the only true God, and not unto any corporal, or spiritual
creature, who by how much the more pious they are and subject to God; by so
much the more they refuse, to have that kind of honor done unto them, which
they know to be only due unto God, Thus S. Augustine. Whereupon, S. Thomas in
his 2. 2. Quest. 81. art. 2. says: The Sacrifice which is Outvvard Sacrifice
does express the inward of the heart and mind.
exteriourly offered, does signify the inward spiritual Sacrifice, wherewith
the soul offers herself unto God, as unto the beginning of her creation, and
end of her happiness: and therefore, as we ought to offer spiritual Sacrifice
only unto God: so we ought to offer exterior Sacrifice only unto him. This
also, we see to be observed, in every commonwealth, that they honor their
Prince, with some particular sign, which if it should be given unto any other,
were treason.

6. For this cause, in the Catholic Church, they do not offer Sacrifice unto
any creature, whatsoever, as S. Augustine in the 27. Chapter of his 8. book of
the City of God witnesses saying: Who Sacrifice never offered to saints.
ever heard the Priest of the faithful, standing at the Altar, even built and
adorned to the honor of God over the body of a Martyr, saying in his prayers, I
offer unto thee Sacrifice o Peeter, or Paul, or Cyprian, when it is offered in
memory of these Martyrs unto God, who has Why Christ our Lord would not have
Sacrifice offered unto him upon Earth.
made them both men, and Martyrs. And the 20. Chapter of his 10. Book, he
adds: Although JESUS CHRIST, the mediator between God and man being in the
form of God, might have had Sacrifice offered unto him, as it was offered unto
his father with whom he is one God; yet living in the form of a servant, he
chose rather to be a Sacrifice, then to have Sacrifices offered unto him, least
that thereby, any one might take occasion to think, that it was lawful, to
offer Sacrifice to some creature. Which S. Paul also signifies, saying unto
those of Listria (who would have offered Sacrifice unto him, and Barnabe:) why
do you these things? we are mortal men like unto you. Act. 14. 11. neither
would those of Listria, though heathen men, have gonn about, to offer Sacrifice
to Paul and Barnabe, but that they esteemed them Gods, saying; Gods made like
men, are descended unto us, and they called Barnabe Jupiter, and Paul Mercury.
Act. 14. 11.

7. The reason, why Sacrifice is so only due unto God, as that it may not be
given unto any creature; first is, for that Sacrifice, is a visible known sign
of the delivery of ourselves unto him, unto whom the Sacrifice is offered, as
unto our God, as God himself witnesses, Why Sacrifice is only due unto God.
saying: They have forsaken me, and have Sacrificed to strange Gods. 4. Kings:
22. 17. Again, they have forsaken me, and have Sacrificed to strange Gods,
that they might provoke me to wrath. 2. Paral. 34. 25. and man being Gods, by
title of his creation, conservation, and redemption, may not give himself unto
any other, as unto his God; and therefore he may not offer Sacrifice unto any
creature. Secondly, God created man according to his own Image, to the Image
of God he created him: Genesis 1. 27. And as our Savior said of the tribute money.
Whose is this Image, and superscriptio^? They said unto him, Cesars. Then he
says to them; render therefore, the things that are Cesars, to Caesar, and the
things that are Gods, to God Matthew. 22. Whereupon Tertullian in his book of
idolatry, says: As the Image of Caesar, which is upon his coin, is due unto
Caesar, so the Image of God which is in Man, is due unto God, wherefore as thou
restorest money to Caesar: so thou ought to give thy self to God.

8. And for that exterior Sacrifice is so proper unto God, as a visible sign
of the invisible acknowledging him for our Lord in our hearts, and a divine
worship, or worship of Latria due only Why the Devils desire Sacrifice.
unto him, to signify the inward spiritual Sacrifice, wherewith the soul
offreth herself unto God, as unto the original cause of her creation, and end
of her happiness: therefore the Devil who is covetous of divine honor, and
ambitious to be esteemed as a God, desires to have external Sacrifice offered
unto him, as witnesses S. Augustine, The more fovvl, the more ambitions.
in the 19. Chapter of his 10. Book of the City of God, saying: The Devils
for no other cause, do desire Sacrifices to be offered unto them, then for that
they know, they are due unto the true God; for it is not true, which Porphyrie
affirms, and some others think, that the Devil desires to have Sacrifice
offered unto him, for that he delights in the savor of dead carcasses burned,
or roasted: but for that he delights in divine honor. They have store of the
savor of things burned every where, and if they should desire more the Devils
themselves could do this for themselves: but because these wicked Spirits, do
impudently challenge to themselves, to be God; they are not delighted, with the
smoke, which proceeds from the burning of any body, but that which proceeds
from the mind of an humble suppliant, or petitioner, who being deceived, is
become subject unto them, and they domineere over him, stopp in his passage,
unto the true God; that man should not become the Sacrifice of God, whilst he
is offered in Sacrifice unto another, who is not God. Again, in the 22. Chap.
of his 20. Book against Faustus the Manichean, he says: The proud, and wicked
Spirits, are not fedd with the savor of things burnt, or roasted in the
Sacrifices, which are offered unto them or with smoke, as many vainly think; but
they are fedd with the errors of men, not by a refection of their bodies, but
by a malicious delight, that they can by any means deceive, yea though it be,
by an arrogant pride of a dissembled majesty; and so glory, that divine honor
is exhibited unto them.

9. And if there had been any visible outward action, more due unto God, or of
greater esteem, Why our Savior redeemed mankind by a Sacrifice.
or of more worth in the presence of God, then exterior visible Sacrifice
representing the inward Sacrifice of the heart and mind; certain it is that the
Son of God, our Savior CHRIST JESUS, would have donn that act, or offered it
to God the Father for the redemption of mankind: Seeing he descended from
heaven, not to do his own will: but the will of God, that sent him: Ioh. 6. 38.
And God the Father in him was well pleased: Matthew. 3. 17. But seeing he
redeemed mankind, by exterior visible Sacrifice, representing the inward
Sacrifice of his heart, and soul; who can doubt but that of all the outward
actions of men, external visible Sacrifice, representing the invisible
Sacrifice of the heart, is the chiefest, and above all other visible outward
actions due unto God; which S. Augustine in his first book against the
adversaries of the Law, and the Prophets, and 18. Chapter further witnesses,
saying: Sacrifice is chiefly, and above all things due unto God.

CHAP. V. Of all the visible actions of men, exteri or visible Sacrifice is due
unto God alone.
1. ALl other exterior visible actions of men, except external visible
Sacrifice may be donn, or exhibited unto creatures, as visible adoration by
bowing to the ground, kneeling, openning of the lips, lifting up of the hands,
etc. have been and are given unto men, or creatures, even by good, and pious
men. As it is read of Abraham, Adoration may be given unto creatures.
who when he did see three men coming toward him, he rann to meet them and
adored to the ground. Genesis 18. 2. Again: Abraham rose up and adored the people
of the land, that is to say, the Children of Heth: Genesis 23. 7. yet Abraham is
called Father of the faithful. Romans 4. And likewise, when Jacob did see Esau
coming toward him, going forward, he adored prostrate to the ground seven
times, Genesis 33. 3. It being told Moses, that Iethro his father in law, was
coming toward him, Moses going out met him, adored, and kissed him, Exodus
18. 7. The Brethren of Joseph the Patriark, adored him prostrate to the ground,
Genesis 43. 26. Iosue fell flat to the ground, and adored an Angel: Ios. 5. 24.
Nathan the Prophet, adored king David, bowing to the earth. 3. Kings, 1. 23.

2. God Almighty, speaking of the reverence, which shall be used toward the
chief Pastors of his Church, in the New Law, says: Kings shall be they nureing
Fathers, and Queens they nurces, with countenance cast down toward the
ground, they shall adore thee, and they shall lick up the dust of thy feet.
Isa. 49. 23. The Children of the Prophets, Adored Elizeus adored.
Elizeus flat to the ground: 4. Kings 2. 15. The Children of Israel being
assembled together, they bowed themselves, and adored God, and then the King.
David adored.
1. Chronic. 29. 20. Whereby it is manifest, that exterior visible adoration by
bowing even to the ground, may be given both to God, and men; and that nether
it, nor any other outward visible sign (except the offering of visible
Sacrifice) is such a sign of divine worship, or Latria or so due unto God
alone, that they may not be given unto men: which S. Augustine (in the 4.
Chapter of his 10. book of the City of God) further witnesses, saying: There
is not any man to be found, who dare say, that Sacrifice is due unto any, but
to God alone.

3. Whereas some object, that S. John fell down The objection of S. John
adoring answered.
at the feet of an Angel to adore him, Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 8. And the Angel
said; See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, adore God. This only
proves, that S. John, and the Angel were humble, the one in adoring, and the
other in refusing to be adored, and that adoration by bowing down to the
ground, may be given unto both God, and his creatures, unless we should say,
that S. John being advertised in the 19. Chapter, that he was an Angel, would
yet notwithstandinh, in the 22. Chapter, adore him again, and fell down before
his feet, and willingly, and wittingly commit Idolatry, which is absurd, and
contrary to the Text; the Angel saying twice unto him, I am they fellow
servant, and one of thy Brethren; yet certain it is, that Angels, are not
fellow-seruants, and brethren to Idolaters: whereby it appears, that S. John
by twice falling before the feet of an Angel to adore him, did no evil act,
nor committed any sin.

4. Neither does the Angel say that he refused The cause why the Angel refused
to be adored by S. John.
to be adored of S. John, because it was evil, or only due unto God (which
should be contrary unto all the places of Scriptures before alleged) but the
cause, why he would not have S. John to adore him, was, as there he says: For
I am thy fellow servant, as contending with him in humility. Neither did the
Angel say unto S. John, Adore. God, to condemn S. John of ignorance, or
idolatry; for then, the Angel, would not have called him his fellow servant,
and brother, as he did twice; but to commend the eminency of his sanctity, and
greatness which was of such excellency, that out of duty or inferiority he
needed not, nor ought not to give adoration to any creature, but to God alone.
So S. John humbling himself before the Angel, and falling twice before his
feet, to adore him, the Angel exalts him, and calls him, fellow servant,
and brother; fulfilling the words of our Savior, saying; He that humbles
himself; shall be exalted. Mat. 23. 12. And this text, together with the rest,
inuincibly prove, that it is lawful to adore creatures, by falling before
their feet, seeing S. John the Evangelist, and the Patriarcks, and Prophets
and Children of the Church of God did use it; and that of all outward visible
adorations, the adoration by offering of visible Sacrifice, is due unto God
alone.

5. Faustus an Heretic of the sect of the Manicheans, All other outvvard
visible vvoorshipp due unto the Saint except Sacrifice.
accused the Catholic Christians, of the Primative Church, of Idolatry, and
superstition, for honoring Martyrs (even as the Puritans of this age, do
Catholics at this day,) as S. Augustine in the 21. Chapter of his 20. book
against him, witnesses saying: Faustus does calumniate us, for the honor we do
give unto the memory of Martyrs, saying, that we have converted them into
Idols. Where unto he there answers, as we now may say in his words unto our
calumniators: Christian people do celebrate together the memory of Martyrs,
with a Religious solemnity, to stir up imitation, to be made partakers of
their merits, and to be assisted by their prayers, yet so, as that we do not
offer Sacrifice unto any Martyr: but to the God of Martyrs, although we erect
Altars in the memory of Martyrs: for what Bishop, standing at the Altar, which
is erected in the place where the bodies of the Martyrs are, was ever heard to
say; we offer unto thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian: but that which is offered,
is offered unto God, who has crowned the Martyrs, at the memory of them, whom
he has crowned. That by the admonition of the place, the affection of our
minds, may be more inflamed with charity, toward those whom we ought to
imitate, and toward God, by their assistance. We honor Martyrs, How the
Martyrs are to he worshipped.
with that worship of love, and society, wherewith holy men are worshipped in
this life, whose hearts are prepared, to suffer the like for the truth of the
Gospel: only we worship the Martyrs more devoutly, because we may worship
them now securely, after their victory: for they being now conquerors, and
enjoying happy life, we may preach their praise, with more confidence, then we
can the praise of those, who are yet fighting in this life: yet
notwithstanding, we do not honor them, with that worship, which the Grecians
call Latria, and in latin cannot be expressed in one word, seeing it is a
worship properly due unto Divinity. Neither do we teach that any ought to be
honored with it, but only God. For seeing that the offering up of Sacrifice,
belongs unto this worship, in such sort, as that it is called their
Idolatria, who exhibit it unto Idols: in no sort we offer any such thing, or
command to be offered, either unto any Martyr, or unto any holy soul, or
unto any Angel. Thus S. Augustine.

6. The Grecian Idolaters, took the same exception against the honor, and
worship, which was done to the Saints deceased, which the Puritans do now; and
Theodoret who lived about the The honor due unto the saints.
time of S. Augustine, in his 8. book of the cure of Greek affections,
asweareth them, saying: Our Lord God has brought his dead into the Temples, in
place of your Gods, whom he has deprived of their glory, and given their honor
unto his martirs; for in lieu of the solemnityes of your Gods, Pan, Diana,
Jupiter etc. are kept the feasts of Peter, Paul, Thomas, Sergius, Leontius,
Antonius, Mauritius, and other holy Martyrs, and in place of that ancient pomp,
filthiness, and impudency, the feasts are kept modestly, chastely, and with much
temperance: now they are not besmeared with wine, nor made vain by riotous
banquets, nor dissolute through loud laughter, but with attention and divine
Hymns, and hearing holy Sermons etc. But yet, o Grecians, we do not offer
Hosts, or any Sacrifice to the Martyrs. Whereby we see, that amongst all the
visible honors, or worships which may or can be donn by man, only visible
Sacrifice, is due unto God alone, the rest may be exhibited or given unto
creatures.

7. Our Savior said: Thou shall adore the Lord thy God, and him only ((...))
shall thou honor, or serve with the worship of Latria, or divine worship Latria
due unto God alone.
Luke 4. 8. Where it is to be noted, that in the Greek tongue, in which S. Luke
writ; our Savior limiteth the worship of Latria only unto God, and not
adoration, for he does not say, Thou shall adore only the Lord they God, but he
does say, thou shall only honor or serve him with the worship of Latria, such
as is the offering of visible Sacrifice; and leaves adoration free, to be also
communicated unto creatures, which S. Augustine in his 61. Quest. upon Genesis
observes, saying: Abraham rising up adored the people of the land, Genesis 23. 7.
The Question is, how is it written, thou shall adore the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve? seeing that Abraham did so honor certain people of the
Gentiles, that he would also adore them; but it is to be observed that in the
same precept, it is not said: Thou shall adore only the Lord thy God, as it is
said, him only shall thou serve: which in the Greek tongue is ((...)) for such
service is only due unto God. Thus S. Augustine. Whereby it does appear, that
adoration, may be used indifferently upon occasion, either to God, or
creatures; but not Sacrifice for that of all the visible actions of men, only
visible Sacrifice, as a sacred sign of the inuisibe Sacrifice of our hearts, is
due unto God alone, and that without visible Sacrifice unto some creature,
Visible Idolatry cannot be committed without visible Sacrifice.
exterior visible Idolatry cannot be committed, because it consists only in
the offering of visible Sacrifice unto some creatures, as further also
witnesses Tertullian saying: If I should be called, to the Sacrifice of an
Idol, I will not go, for it is the proper office of the Idol; neither will I
assist, or any way help in such a work for if called to the Sacrifice of an
Idol, I should stand by, I should be guilty of Idolatry. If any one should
give wine unto one that is offering Sacrifice unto an Idol, or if he help in
some word, which is necessary to Sacrifice, he shall be esteemed as Minister of
Idolatry. Thus Tertullian: With whom agrees S. Augustine, in the 18. Chapter
of his 1. Book against the adversaries of the Law, and the Prophets, saying:
There are few found, who have been so bold, as to command, that Sacrifice
should be offered unto them, when out of their regal power, they might have
done it; but whosoever have been so bold as to command it, by it, they would
have themselves to be esteemed Gods.

8. And because that of all the visible actions To what thing any offered
Sacrifice, that was esteemed as his God.
of men, visible Sacrifice, is the only visible sacred sign of the invisible
sacrifyce of our hearts to God, and the only visible honor, worship or Latria,
which we owe only unto God alone, as unto our God, and Creator of all things,
therefore unto what thing soever, any man offered visible Sacrifice, that was
esteemed, and taken to be his God, and an act of Idolatry, though it were no
image, picture, graven thing, nor similitude of any thing, as witnesses the
Scripture, saing: They have Sacrificed unto the host of heaven, and have
offered drink offerings to strange Gods; Ierem. 19. 13. Again, They Sacrificed
to strange Gods, to the Queen of Heaven (which was the Moon) Ierem. 44. 15.
Whereupon S. Paul, says, that an Idol is not any thing, 1. Cor. 10. 19. how
then comes visible Idolatry? But by offering visible Sacrifice, unto any thing
whatsoever, which is not God; as S. Paul in the same place immediately
signifies, saying: the things which the heathens do immolate, to devils they
do immolate, and not to God: signifying hereby, that visible Idolatry is only
committed and an Idol is only made, by the offering of Sacrifice unto any thing
whatsoever, though it be as ugly, as much opposite, and as far contrary to
God, as is the devil. Whereupon S. Augustine (in the 21. Chapter of his 20.
Book against Faustus an heretic) says: The proud impiety of the Devils,
does arrogate Sacrifice unto them, that thereby they may be esteemed Gods, for
Sacrifice is divine honor, or honor only due unto deity.

9. By this which has been said, it is sufficiently manifest unto any
indifferent reader, that of all the visible actions of men, the offering of
visible Sacrifice, is only due unto God alone, seeing that unto whatsoever
thing, any man offers visible Sacrifice, (though it be unto as ugly a thing
as is the Devil yet he makes that thing an Idol, or false God, and commits
Idolatry, by giving divine honor, or the honor which is only due unto God,
(which we call Latria) unto it. Which S. Augustine (in the 22. Chapter of his
said book against the said Heretic) further witnesses, saying: Neither is it
true, which Faustus says that our former Jews, though they had the Temple of
God, immolations, Altars, and Priesthood (like the Gentiles) yet were they
separated from the Gentiles, only by the division, or not admitting of graven
things, that is to say, of Idols: for they might (as many Idolatry with out
images.
others do) without having of Idols, immolate to Trees, and Mountains, and
also to the Sun, and Moon, and the rest of the Stars, which if they should
do, they should serve with that worship, which is called Latria, the Creature,
rather then the Creator, and thereby have erred with no small error of impious
superstition, though they should have no graven Images. And this is sufficient
to show that the offering of visible Sacrifice, is so appropriated unto the
honor of God, that of all the visible actions of men, it only is due unto God
alone, and that these Sectaries, who have no visible Sacrifice offered upon
Altars, adore no God, with any visible honor, which is only due unto him alone.

CHAP. VI. By the instinct of Nature, all people who firmly believed that
there was a God, and his providence over mankind, offered external visible
Sacrifice to some God true, or false.
1. GOd almighty having created all things of nothing, as a pious parent, and
merciful Gods providence over his creatures.
father, out of the storehouse of his infinite goodness, and providence, has
bestowed upon every thing in his creation, a natural inclination, propension,
or instinct, to use means to attain unto his end, or chiefest good. As we see
by experience even in the elements, trees, plants, stones; whereupon the
Scriptures say, that God by his providence does govern. Wisd. 14. 3. And the
function, or office of providence is, as Aristotle The providence of God is to
direct men unto their lastend
says in the 6. of his Ethics; and S. Thomas in his 1. part. quest. 22. art.
1. To order, or direct things to their ends; and the end and happy life of man
being God, as witness the Scriptures. Exodus 33. 19. Ioh. 11. 15. and the
offering of visible external sacrifice, being due unto God only chiefly, and
above al things, as a Sacrament of the invisible Sacrifice of our hearts, and
souls unto him, and a holy sign of our acknowledging God, for our Lord God,
as I have proved in the precedent chapters; What reasonable man can deny, that
God, out of his providence toward mankind, (in directing him, as a
reasonable creature unto his end, and chiefest good) has also given unto all
mankind, a natural inclination, propension, and instinct to offer visible
sacrifice unto him, thereby to acknowlegd him for their God, honor him with the
worshipp of Latria, and profess the union of their hearts with him, their last
end, and chiefest good. Unless we should say, that God in the creating of
man, and in directing of men unto their last end, has used less goodness, and
providence, then he has toward trees, plants, and stones: with is absurd,
seeing that his mercies toward man, are above all his works.

2. From this instinct, it did proceed, that in the law of Nature, whilst men
lived in the beginning of the world, without writings, or any other ordinary
directions, or law, more then the instinct of nature proceeding from reason
(with is called the law of Nature) the faithful in the Church of God, used to
offer visible Sacrifice unto God; as Abel, Noe, Melchisedec, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and Job, who all offered exterior visible Sacrifice unto God, before
any other law was known, or published, but the instinct of nature, The law
of nature is written in the hearts of the Gentiles.
proceeding from reason, and is (as S. Paul says) Written in the hearts of the
Gentiles. Romans 2. 15. and was (as S. Hierom. upon the 24. of Isai, says) Given
unto al nations, before the law of Moses was written; which was not given by
God, unto the children of Israel, until the year. 2544. from the beginning of
the world, according to the Annals of Torniellus.

3. Neither could the defects in the sacrifice of Cain, be displeasing unto
God, as they were; Genesis 4. 5. if Cain had not been obliged by some law, to
offer sacrifice; for as S. Paul says: Romans 4. 15. Where there is no law, there
is no preuarication, Cains sacrifice displeasing, because it was not
conformable to the law of Nature.
or offense; nor the sacrifices of Abel, and Noe be grateful, and acceptable
unto God, as they were, Genesis 4. and 8. 21. but for that they were conformable
unto some law, and right: for, God is not a God, that will iniquity. Psalm. 5.
5. Yet before the law of Moses was given, which was not until the year 2544.
there was no other law, as al men Cain and Abel bound to offer Sacrifice by the
law of nature.
grant but the law of nature, written in the hearts of men. Wherefore seeing that
for those 2544. years, the faithful offered visible sacrifice, according to
some law: and there was no law, but the instinct of nature, proceeding from
right reason, which we call the law of nature: it manifestly follows, that
external visible sacrifice is due unto God, by the law, and light of nature.

4. From hence it is, that Cain, and Abel in the Cain and Abel offered
Sacrifice without a master or teacher.
beginning of world, had no need of any master, or teacher, to tell, or
teach them in general, that they ought to offer visible sacrifice unto God;
because they were taught it by the direction of their consciences, light of
reason, and wisdom given from above unto all mankind, as witnesses S.
Chrysostom in his 18. homily upon Genesis saying: Cain of the fruits of the
earth offered a Sacrifice to God. Consider how the builder of nature in grafted
in man the science of conscience: for I pray you tell me, who brought Cain to
this knowledge? no other but the knowledge, which is in a conscious mind. He
offered says the Scripture Sacrifice to God, of the fruits of the earth, for
he did know, and he did clearly know, that it was convenient or meet, to offer
something of his possession to God: not that God stood in need of any thing
that was his, but that he who inioyed such a be-benefit from him, should show
his gratitude. And again in the same homily he says: Cain had no teacher nor
Abel a prompter, or councellor, (to teach them to offer visible Sacrifice,) but
they were both moved to this oblation, by the dictamen of their consciences,
and by wisdom given from above unto mankind.

In like manner S. Clement, in the 20. chapter of his 6. Book of Apostolical
constitutions, affirms that Abel, Noe, Abraham, and others after them,
offered Sacrifice to God only moved thereunto by the law of nature. Whereupon
Eusebius Cesariensis in the 10. chapter of his first book, of Evangelical
demonstrations says: The ancient friends of God Abel, Noe, Abraham, etc.
offered Sacrifice, which (says he) we ought not to think to have been a rash
invention or a thing begunn after a human manner, but rather inspired from
above, sed deuino potius nutu insinuatu^. For which cause Tertullian in the 2.
chapter of his book against the Jews says: Levites to offer Sacrifice before
the leuiticall law.
Before the law of Moses was given, which was written in Tables of stone there
was a Law not written, which was naturally understood and kept by the Fathers*
for from whence was Noe found just, if the natural justice of the Law did not
go before him? from whence was Abraham esteemed the friend of God; if not by
the equity or justice of the Law of Nature? How came Melchisedec to be called
a Priest of the most high God, if there were not Levites before the leuiticall
Law, who offered Sacrifice to God? Thus Tertullian: whereby it appears that
men by the law of nature, and dictamen of their conscience, without a Master,
or Teacher or written law, are in general sufficiently instructed to offer
visible Sacrifice unto God, as a means whereby they may attain unto the union
of their hearts with him, who is their last end, and chiefest good. Whereupon
Origin in his first book upon Job says, In the time of the Law of Noe, Abraham
Melchisedec and Job, Priests by the law of nature.
nature, there were Priests who were not ordained to that office by the
prescript of any written law, but taught and instructed to do it by natural
wisdom. After this manner Noe executed the office of Priesthood: After this
manner Abraham, and Melchisedec were Priests; and also after them, Job himself
had the office of Priesthood. Thus Origin. With whom also agrees S. Ciprian in
his treatise of the reason of Circumcision, saying: Though many of the nations
of the earth, did judge Circumcision, which the Jews used, to be absurd and
unreasonable; yet following the law of nature, they retained the instruments of
expiation, or clensing from sin, and do immolate victimes, burn fatt, and
pour out there vows before God, with perfumes and drink offerings. Thus S.
Ciprian, whereby it appears, that the ancient Fathers believed visible
sacrifice to be due unto God, by the law, and light of Nature.

5. Secondly, by the defects, which every one finds in himself, natural
reason does dictate unto every one, that he is subject unto some higher
superior, whose help he has need of; which superior, call him what you will,
is God. And the same natural reason, which tells man, Reason tells man
that he must honor God, with such an honor as may not be given unto any other.
that he has a God, unto whom he is subject, and of whose help he has need,
tells him also, that he is bound to honor this God, with the highest kind of
honor, that can be given him upon earth, and acknowledge this his subjection,
by such inward affection, and outward signs or symbols, as neither are, nor
ought to be given unto any other, which is the external visible Sacrifice we
speak of; which (as we have proved in the 4. and 5. chapters) neither is, nor
yet ever was, offered unto any, but unto some true, or supposed God. Nature is
the cause of these things, which are done after one manner.


6. Thirdly Aristotle in his 7. book of his morals to Eudemon, says: That
nature is the cause of these things, which are always or for the most part
done after one manner; and fortune, or accident of these, which are seldom
alike. Which we find true by experience, in all natural, and accidental
things: as in the natural, and accidental things of the sun, moon,
planets, and elements, all whose natural motions, are constant, and after the
same manner; and accidental; variable, and changeable. Accident the cause of
mutability.
And seeing that all the sons of Adam, both faithful, and infidels, who
firmly believed that there was a God, or Gods, and his or their providence
over mankind, have all generally offered visible sacrifice unto some God, true
or false, as I have proved in the former chapters; what reasonable man can
doubt, that God of his infinite goodness, and mercies toward mankind, has
given unto mankind, a natural inclination, propension, and instinct, to offer
visible sacrifice unto him, thereby to acknowledge him for his God, Corruption
of nature, the cause why all offer not sacrifice.
and express the inward sacrifice of his heart unto him; and that the defect of
offering visible sacrifice, in those who use it not, is the corruption of
nature.

7. Fourthly, we have proved in our former chapters, that people of all nations
(Epicures and The impossibility of all me^ to agree, to offer visible
sacrifice, had not the law of nature dictated it unto them.
Atheists only excepted, who denied God, or Gods, and his or their providence
over mankind) offered visible sacrifice, unto some true, or supposed God. And
the people of all nations, who were upon the earth, could never meet together,
to make an accord, or agreement, to offer visible sacrifice, no nor yet the
heads, or kings of all nations, could meet together, to make this general
accord, that they would all offer visible sacrifice; or if they should have all
met together, yet speaking diverse languages, and being of diverse
dispositions, and humors, they would never have all agreed. But suppose, that
they should have all concurred together in one assembly, and agreed to offer
visible sacrifice: yet their diverse dispositions, natures, interests, reasons
of state etc. would not have permitted them, to have continued, for so many
thousand years, in this their agreement of offering visible sacrifice, without
alteration, or change, if the dictamen of their consciences, law and light of
nature, written in every man's heart, had not persuaded or compelled them unto
it; as we see by experience in the contract, or agreements, which are made, but
amongst some few nations, in other matters, from which they change, and fall
from in few years.

8. This which has been said, is sufficient to convince any indifferent reader,
that the offering The consent of nations, is from the law of nature.
of exterior visible sacrifice unto God, is due unto him by the instinct, and
law of nature. For (as Cicero a heathen man, in the first book of his Tusculan
questions, well observes) In every thing, the consent of nations, is to be
esteemed the law of nature. And again in the same book: The consent of
nations, is the voice of nature. Wheruppon S. Augustine (in his 49. Epistle and
5. question) says: Those who are skillful in the holy Scriptures of both The
Pagans not to be blamed for offering sacrifice.
Testaments, do not blame the Pagans, or heathen people, for that they build
temples, ordeine Priests, and offer sacrifice (because these things are taught
them by the light, and law of nature) but for that, they do exhibit those
things unto Idols, and devils. Thus S. Augustine. With whom agrees S. Thomas
2. 2. quest. 85. ar. 1. saying: The offering of sacrifice, is by Sacrifice by
the law of nature.
the law of nature (for says he) it proceeds from natural reason that man
should use some sensible things and offer them to God in sign, or token of due
subjection, and honor: as they use to do, who offer some thing, unto their
temporal lords, in acknowledgment, or manifestation of submission unto their
dominion; and this is that we call sacrifice. So S. Thomas.

9. And from this instinct of nature, proceeding The division of tongues, made
no division of sacrifice.
from reason, which we call the law of nature, written in the hearts of all men,
it came to pass, that after the building of the tower of Babel, and after that
God had so confounded the tongues of all men, that they could not one
understand another to consult together, what kind of religion they should
follow, or after what manner, or way, they should honor God, or Gods; they all
agreed, that God, or Gods, true or false, were to be honored, and adored, with
external visible sacrifice; as appears by the scriptures, and testimonies of
all ancient times: yet were they divided, and scattered over the earth, into
55. or, as others write, into 72. distinct nations, and tongues; so that it had
been impossible, for them all to agree in general, in the offering of
sacrifice, unto their true, or supposed Gods, had not the light of nature,
dictamen of their consciences, and wisdom given from above unto all mankind
in their creation, directed them.

10. And this dictamen, and light of nature, to Temples without sacrifice,
atheistical.
offer sacrifice unto their true, or supposed God, or Gods, was so inserted in
the hearts of al men, that Plutark a heathen man, taught by the light of nature,
in his book entitled, that there is no pleasant life according to Epicurus,
says: A temple without a sacred feast, or sacrifice, is atheistical, impious,
and irreligious. So constantly were Sacrifices, believed to be due unto God,
and sacred feasts, or communions to be made of things offered in sacrifice,
that even heathen men, who believed that there was a God, or Gods, and his or
their Providence over mankind, guided only by the law of nature, or the
dictamen of every man's conscience, esteemed those to be Atheists, impious, and
irreligions, who had temples, and yet had no sacrifice, nor communicated of
things offered in sacrifice. And Plutark in the same place, adding a reason,
why those who communicated together in their temples, and not of things offered
in sacrifice, were Atheists, and impious wicked people, says: For he that
should make a sacred feast (or communion) without offering of sacrifice,
stands by the Priest, as he would stand by a cook, or buicher, gaping after
meat, and that is all; whereby they contemn the sacred honor, or worshipp which
is due unto God by the law of nature, and profane the holy society, which
should be between men and God, and of men amongst themselves, and therefore
are instlie esteemed Atheists, and irreligious. And this is sufficient to show
unto any indifferent reader, that the offering of visible sacrifice, is due
unto God, by the law, and light of nature, or the dictamen of all men's
consciences, in whom the light, or law of nature is not extinct; or that
without infringing the law of nature, the offering of visible sacrifice unto
God, cannot be taken away, or neglected.

CHAP. VII. How visible Sacrifice, was offered unto God, in the beginning of
his Church upon Earth, and shall be until the end.
1. THis being the end, why visible Sacrifices were ordained by God, that men
might by them, visibly acknowledge him for their Lord God, honor him, with the
honor of Latria, or divine worship due only unto him, maintain a memory of
the passion of our Savior to come, or past, and preserve peace with him, and
amongst themselves; God of his goodness in the beginning of his Church upon
earth, in the Law of Nature, established the offering of visible Sacrifice in
man, not only by the law, and God established the offering of sacrifice.
light of Nature, but also by revelation, and inspiration immediately bestowed
upon Adam from himself, as witnesses S. Athanasius in his sermon upon these
words; All things are given me by my father, saying: Neither was Abel
ignorant, that he ought to offer of his first begotten, for he learned it of
Adam, who had it from God. For as the Scriptures say; Wisdom 10. 2. God
brought Adam out of his sin, and gave him power to contain all things.
Amongst which this was one, that he and his sons, and posterity, ought to
offer visible Sacrifice to God in sign of homage, and subjection unto him, and
union of hearts with him their Creator. Whereupon S. Chrysostom in his 18.
homily upon Genesis says, that both Cain and Abel, were moved to offer
Sacrifice; By the dictamen of their consciences, and by wisdom given from
above.

2. By this which has been said, it appears, that the offering of visible
Sacrifice unto God, was not only practiced in the beginning of the world by
Adam, Cain, and Abel; but also that it Sacrifice an article of faith.
was an article of faith, revealed unto man by God, in the Law of Nature, even
from the beginning of the Church of God upon earth, after the fall of Adam.
Whereupon S. Paul faith; By faith Abel offered a greater host to God, then
Cain: Heb. 11. 4. Where S. Paul signifies unto us, that Abel believing that
visible Sacrifice, as a sacred sign of the invisible Sacrifice of his heart,
was grateful to God, offered a visible Sacrifice, according to this his faith,
of the best things he had, and therefore was respected by God. And Cain
wanting faith, and belief in this point, offered according to the defect of his
faith, of his worst fruits; and therefore, God respected not his gifts Genesis
4. for without faith (as S. Paul says) it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11. 6.

3. Now seeing that Adam and his sons, who Adam, and his Sons, first
founders of the Church upon earth.
were the first founders of the Church of God upon earth, used external
visible Sacrifice, and external visible Sacrifice is a thing, only, chiefly,
and above all things, due unto God, as a Sacrament, representing the inward,
and invisible Sacrifice of the heart, and a matter of faith in the Law of
Nature: most certain it is, that external visible Sacrifice, shall not be
taken out of the Church of God, until the end of the world, seeing that as S.
Paul witnesses; Faith is always one and the same, saying: One Lord, one
Faith, Ephesians. 4. One faith in all times and ages immutable.
5. and not changeable, or mutable, but one, and the same spirit of faith, 2.
Cor. 4. 13. Whereupon S. Augustine in his 89. Epistle to Hilarious, and 3.
Question says: Faith is not variable but one. And the true Faith shall never
fail, until the end of the world; as the Scriptures affirm Mat. 13. 39.
Ephesians. 4. 13. and the many promises of Cod. Wherefore, seeing that visible
Sacrifice was used in the beginning, and first foundation of the Church of God,
upon earth, as a matter of faith, and as a thing due only to God; most certain
it is, that visible Sacrifice shall be practiced until the end of the world,
that we all meet (as S. Paul says) in the unity of faith, and knowledge of
the Son of God. Ephesians. 4. 13. which God himself further witnesses, saying:
I the Lord, this is my name, and I will not give my glory unto an other. Isa.
42. 8.

4. Secondly CHRIST JESUS delivered himself to death (as S. Paul witnesses)
that he might Christ planted a glorious Church which could not be without
Sacrifice.
present unto himself a glorious Church; Ephesians. 5. 26. with could not be where
the honor, and worship, which is only, chiefly, and above all things due unto
God, is taken away; such as is external visible Sacrifice, as I have proved
in the precedent Chapters. And whereas some object and say that S. Paul says:
Christ offered himself once, and one host etc. we grant that Christ offered
himself but once bloodily, which was upon the Cross, and but one substantial
host: because the same substantial body, which was offered upon the Cross, is
now daily offered, or given to God for us, as a sacred sign, of the invisible
Sacrifice of our hearts, according to his commandment, saying: Do this, the
same which he then did, when he took bread, and made it his Body and gave it to
God for us: as I shall show more at larg hereafter.

5. Thirdly the offering of external visible Sacrifice, is one of the chiefest
means, whereby Sacrifice the means of peace.
men preserve unity, peace, and society with God, and amongst themselves, as I
have proved in the 2. Chapter, and therefore this could not be taken away by
our Savior, the end of whose coming, into the world, was chiefly to pla^t
peace, and preach, as S. Paul says: Peace to them that were far of, and peace
to them that were nigh: Ephe. 2. 17. And God is not the God of dissension, but
of peace: 1. Cor. 14. 33.

6. Fourthly, Adam and his sons lived in the law of nature and instituted
external visible Sacrifice in the Church of God upon earth, according to the
Law of Nature (no other law being then published, or known, as all divines
generally Sacrifice instituted by the Law of Nature.
hold) and the law of nature being inserted, and ingrafted by God, as S. Paul
says: Romans 2. 15. in the hearts of all men, for them to follow, as a rule of
Justice, and an instinct of nature, proceeding from reason, as an everlasting
covenant, between God and Man: Isa. 24. 5. Certain it is, that our The Law of
Nature immutable.
Savior, could not take away external visible Sacrifice, from amongst men,
and move them to violate the Law of Nature, or change it, in the hearts of all
men: seeing that as S. Paul says: He continues faithful and cannot deny
himself: 2. Tim. 2. 13. to change his divine decrees, and alter the Law of
Nature in all men, or change the natural divine instinct, which he has
engrafted in all men to follow, even from the first beginning, of his Church
upon earth; which Lactantius in his 6: Book, and 8. Chapter of divine
Institutions observes out of the 3. book of Ciceros commonwealth saying:
Cicero almost with a divine voice, has in these words described the Law of
Nature, saying: The Law of Nature, is right reason agreeable Description of the
Law of Nature.
to nature, spread amongst all men, constant, and everlasting: To this Law it
is not lawful to add any thing, or to take away. Thus Lactantius and Cicero of
the Law of Nature. Wherefore seeing that visible Sacrifice was instituted by
the Law of Nature, most certain it is, that our Savior, came not to take it
away; but to institute it in better terms: with he did when taking bread he
gave thanks, and brake, and gave to the Apostles, saying: This is my Body which
is given for you (to God) do this for a commemoration of me. In like manner
the Chalice also, after he had supped, saying: This is the Chalice, the New
Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you (to God) This do ye as often as
you shall drink, for a commemoration of me. Wherefore, we may justly complayn
of these, who persecute the offering of visible Sacrifice unto God, in the
words with the Prophet Isaie used, when he complained of the Jews, for
violating the Law of Nature, saying: The earth is infected with the inhabitants
thereof, because they have transgressed the Laws, changed right, dissipated
the everlasting covenant: Isa. 24. 5.

7. Fifthly, the Prophet Daniel, promises that external visible Sacrifice
shall be offered unto God, in the Church of God, until the end of the
Sacrifice to last until the end of the world.
world saying: And in the half of the week, shall the host and the Sacrifice
fail, and there shall be in the Temple, the abomination of desolation, even to
the consummation: Daniel 9. 27. Again. The continual Sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the abomination of desolation shall be set up: Dan. 12. 11. And our
Savior himself, setting down the time when this Prophecy of Daniel, shall be
fulfilled, and when there shall be no more hosts, nor Sacrifices offered to God,
in his Church upon earth, says: And when you shall see, the abomination of
desolation, which was spoken of by Daniel, standing in the holy place, etc.
immediately afther the tribulation of those days, the Sunn shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven. Math.
24. And so forth describes the day of Judgment; signifying, that external
visible Sacrifice, shall be offered in the Church of God, until a little before
the consummation of the world.

8. Sixthly, God Almighty promised, saying: I will send of them, which shall be
saved, to the Gentiles, into the Sea, into Africa, and Lidia into Italy, and
Greece, to the Islands far of, to them that have not Priests and Leuits shall be
always in the Church to offer Sacrifice.
heard of me, and have not seen my glory: And they shall show forth my glory
to the Gentiles; and they shall bring all your Brethren, of all Nations, a gift
to our Lord. And I will take of them to be Priests and Leuits, says our Lord:
because as a new Heaven, and a new earth, which I make to stand before me,
says our Lord, so shall your seed stand, and your name: Isa. 66. 19. Where we
see, that God almighty promises to make Priests, and Leuits, (whose office is
to offer, and assist at the offering of visible Sacrifice) of the gentiles
converted unto Christianity, and that their seed shall not fail until the end
of the world. Whereupon S. Augustine in the 21. Chapter of his 20. Book of the
City of God alleging this place, says: God compares the converted Gentiles,
as it were by a similitude, unto the Children of Israel, offering unto him their
hosts, or Sacrifice, with Psalms in his house, or Temple, which the Church
does now every where: and has promised, that he would take of them Priests,
and Leuits for himself; which now we see done: for now Priests, are not by
succession of flesh, and blood, according to the order of Aron: but as it ought
to be in the new Testament, where Christ is the chief Priest, according to the
order of Melchisedech; thus S. August.

9. Seventhly, God promised by the Prophet Jeremy, saying: Behold the days
shall come, says our Lord, and I will raise up the good word, that I have
spoken to the house of Israel etc. This is the name they shall call him; the
lord of our just one etc and of Priests and Leuits, there shall not faill, from
before my face, a man to offer Holocausts, and to burn Sacrifice, and to kill
victimes all days. Ierem. 33. 14. Whereupon Theodoret in his interpretation of
this place, says: We see the event of this Prophecy, for the new Testament,
being given, according to the divine promise* The Priesthood according to the
order of Melchisedech is also given, which whosoever have obtained, do offerr
unto God reasonable Sacrifice.

10. Eighthly, S. Paul commands all Christians, No communion without
Sacrifice.
saying: As often as you shall eat this Bread, and drink the Chalice, you
shall show the death of our Lord until he come. 1. Cor. 11. 26. and our Lord
dyed, offering up himself to God, in an external visible Sacrifice, as our
adversaries do grant; whereby it is manifest, that exterior visible Sacrifice
by the command of the Scriptures, shall last until the later day.

11. Ninthly, external visible Sacrifice, being a thing only, and chiefly,
above all things due unto God, and given unto God, by the consent of all
Nations, thereby to acknowledge him for our lord God, and maintayn our union,
and society with him, and amongst our selves. And Antichrist at his coming, as
S. Paul faith: shall exalt himself Antichrist shall take away publik Sacrifice.
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he shall sit in
the Temple of God, showing himself as if he were God. 2. These. 2. It
necessarily follows that Antechrist shall not only as our Savior foretold
(in the 24. of Matthew and the Prophet Daniel in the 9. and 12. Chapters of his
Prophecies) take away, the offering of external visible Sacrifice unto the
true God: but also from all Idols, that there shall be no external visible
Sacrifice, publicly offered unto any Idol, or devil, but unto him only;
who will secretly worshipp the devil Mahuzim; Daniel. 11. and so he shall
publicly exalt himself, as the Scriptures say above all that is called God,
or that is publicly worshipped. Whereupon S. Ireneus in his first Book
against Heresies, and 25. Chapter says; He shall put down Idols, to persuade
others, that he is God, and to magnify himself, who will be an Idol, that will
have in it, the diverse errors of all other Idols.

12. Moreover S. Ireneus, speaking of the Cruelty In the time of Antichrist
the faithful who offer Sacrifice, shall be forced to fly.
of Antichrist, in putting down the external visible Sacrifice, in the Church
of God, in his first Book of Heresies, and 25. Chapter, says: In the time of
the tirannie of Antichrist, the saints who offer pure Sacrifice unto God,
shall be forced to fly away. And in the half of the week, shall be taken away,
the Sacrifice, and the Host; and the abomination of desolation, shall be unto
the consummation of time. With whom also agrees Hippolitus the Martyr (an
ancient Father who lived about the year 220. after the nativity of our
Savior) in his book of the co^summation of the world saying: In the time The
mourning of the Church after sacrifice is taken away by Antichrist.
of Antichrist, the Church shall mourn, with great sorrow because there shall
be in it neither oblations, nor offerings, nor incense, nor worshipp, grateful
unto God but the sacred Churches, shall be like Cottages, the pretions Body and
blood of Christ, shall not be extant in those days; the Liturgy or Mass
shall be put down, singing of Psalms shall cease, and reading the Scripture
shall be taken away.

13. And the like affirms S. Ephrem in his treatise of Antichrist, saing:
Before the end of the world at the coming of Antichrist, the whole Church of
Christ shall mourn with great sorrow, for that the divine oblation, and
sanctification shall be no more offered to God: then Sacrifice to cease in the
time of Antichrist.
the holy mystery of Priesthod shall cease; after three times, and a half
shall be fulfilled in the power, and work of the wicked Antichrist, and all
scandalls of the world benig consumed, as our Savior spoke by his own proper
mouth, then shall come the later day. So S. Ephren who lived about the year
370. after the nativity of our lord. And with these aforesaid Fathers agrees
S. Chrisostom in his 49. homily upon S Mattew saying: For three years and a
half the Sacrifice of Christians shall be taken away by Antichrist, the
Christians flying from him into the deserts, there shall be none to enter into
the Churches, or to offer Sacrifice unto God. S. Hierome in his commentaries
upon the 9. of Daniel is of the same mind saying: Hippolitus puts the last
week in the consummation of the world etc. whereof it is said: God will
confirm the covenant one week unto many, and in the other three years,
under Antichrist, the host and Sacrifice shall cease. Thus those Fathers of the
extirpation of visible Sacrifice, out of the Church of God by Antichrist.

14. Now seeing that Antichrist at his coming (as both Scriptures and Fathers
do testify) shall put down external visible Sacrifice; in such sort, as that
for a time, there shall be no external visible Sacrifice, publicly offered to
God upon earth, and that Antichrist, is not to come, until Antichrist is to
reign three years and a half.
the end of the world, as witnesses our Sauouir in the 24. of S. Matthew; and
Dan. 7. and to reign but three years and a half before the consummation of
the world, as affirms the aforesaid Hippolitus, in his said book of the
consummation of the world; S. Ireneus in his 5. book, against Heresies toward
the end; S. Hierome upon the 7. Chapter of Daniel: S. Cyril in his 25.
Catechesis: and S. Augustine in the 23. Chapter of his tenth book, of the
City of God, and others: it is manifest, Visible sacrifice taken away, the
world shall end.
that external visible Sacrifice, shall be offeto God, in the Church of God,
until the end of the world; and it being wholly taken away, which is only,
cheifely, and above all things due unto God, then shall come the consummation
of the world by fire, which shall burn, and destroy all these things, which are
upon earth. Man ceasing to honor God, with that honor, which is due only unto
him, as he is God, and Creator of all things, God will destroy man, out of the
face earth, and all things else, which upon earth, he created for man. So those
who deny, and persecute the offering Those who deny Sacrifice, hasten their
own torments.
up of external visible Sacrifice unto God, do but hasten the destruction of
the world, and the everlasting damnation of their own souls, and bodies, to
the verifying of the saying of the Prophet: The sinner is taken in the works of
his own hands: Psalm. 9. 17. he is fallen into the pit, which he made. Psalm.
7. 16. and so does but, as says the Apostle; heap to himself wrath, in the
day of wrath: Romans 2. 5. which our Savior himself also further signifies
saying: The bread which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world.
Ioh. 6. 51. As when the life of a man is quite taken from his body, the body
dies, and by degrees, returns unto that which it was in his first creation,
which is slime, dust, and ashes; so when the exterior visible Sacrifice, and
Sacrament, shall be quite taken away, for which God spares the world; then
the world shall be destroyed by fire, and shall return to be as it was: In the
beginning, when God created heaven and earth, and the earth was void, and
vacant, a darkness was upon the face of the earth; Genesis 1. 1. And shall so
remain, until God create a new heaven, and a new earth, which shall stand for
ever. Isa. 65. 17. Isa. 66. 22.

CHAP. VIII. The reasons why our Savior would not take away, visible Sacrifice
out of the Church but establish it in better terms.
FIrst, for that it shall be the work of Antichrist, Antichrist shall take
away Sacrifice.
to put down the daily Sacrifice as I have proved in the last Chapter, and
there fore to make Christ, to put down all special external Sacrifice, were
to make him Antichrist.

Secondly all other outward acts, obseruances, and worships, may be used, and
given unto men; only visible Sacrifice is due unto God, as he is God, and
Creator of all things, as I have proved, in the former Chapters. Wherefore, if
our Savior Sacrifice taken away, Religion is destroyed.
should have taken away, the offering of visible Sacrifice unto God, he had
taken away Religion, for Religion is a virtue, by which men do give due
worship, and honor unto God, as witnesses S. Thomas in his Secunda Secundae
quaest. 81. art. 1. Whereupon S. Cyprian, in his book of our Lords Supper,
says: Religion is destroyed, when there rests no more Sacrifice to be
offered: for as S. Augustine says, in the 21. chapter of his 20. book, against
Faustus: The offering of Sacrifice, does belong Sacrifice is divine honor or
only due to ditie.
unto the worship of Latria, which is a service properly due unto divinity.
Again, in the same book, and chapter, he says: Sacrifice is divine honor.
Wherefore, if our Savior had taken away, the offering of visible Sacrifice; he
had taken away the divine honor which properly belongs unto God, and had
destroyed Religion.

2. Thirdly, if our Savior had taken away visible Sacrifice, out of his
Church; he had taken away Priesthood: for by the law of nature, nations,
Sacrifices taken away Priesthood is destroyed.
and written law, and law of grace, Priests were ordained to this end, that
they might offer external visible Sacrifice unto God as we see by experience,
in all times, and in all nations, for at all times, and in all nations, those
who believed, that there was a God, and his providence over mankind, knew by
the dictamen of right reason, and nature, that they were to honor, and worship
God, with visible Sacrifice, as a thing only, and above all things belonging
unto him, as their God, and Creator, as I have showed in the 6. Chapter; and
also knew by the same light of nature, that every one was not fit to execute
that office, or could tell how to do it: wherefore they chose some, who
publicly should for the whole assembly, or company, perform that act.
Whereupon S. Paul says: Every high Priest is taken from amongst men, that he
may offer gifts and Sacrifices. Heb. 5. 1. Again, for every high Priest is
appointed to offer gifts, and hosts, wherefore it is necessary, that he have
something that he may offerr Heb. 8. 3. Whereby we see, that if our Savior, had
taken away the offering of external Sacrifice unto God, he had also taken
away Priesthood: which S. Ephrem in his treatise of Antichrist further
witnesses, saying in the time of Antichrist, for that the divine oblation, and
sanctification shall be no more offered to God, then the holy mystery of
Priesthood shall cease.

3. Fourthly, the Priesthood being taken away, Priesthood being taken away the
law is destroyed.
the law also is translated, and taken away, as witnesses S. Paul, saying: The
Priesthood being translated, it is necessary that a translation of the law be
made; Heb. 7. 12. Wherefore, if our Savior, had not instituted a visible
Sacrifice in his Church, he had not bin a lawgiuer, as the Scriptures call him:
James 4. 12. but a law destroyer. And from hence it is, that S. Ireneus, in the
15. Chapter of his ^5. book against Heresies, says: That Antichrist Antichrist
without a law.
shall be with out a law, as an Apostata: because he shall take away all public
visible Sacrifice, and Priesthood, on which the law depends, for as the
Scripture says: The Lips of the Priest, shall keep knowledge, and the law
they shall require of his mouth: Math. 2. 7. He that shall be proud refusing to
obey the commandment of the Priest, that man shall die. Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
Whereupon the Prophet Osee, when he would express, the wickedness of the
Children of Israel, in whom there was no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God;
but cursing and lying, and manslaughter, and theft, and adultery etc. says:
Thy people are as those who gainsay the Priest. Osee 4. 4. Whereby it is
manifest, that if our Savior had taken away external visible Sacrifice, he
had taken away the Law.

4. And for this cause, least that the Church of God, should at any time, be
without a religion, or law, our Savior presently after he had finished, the
Sacrifice of the Paschal lamb, took bread and gave thanks, and brak, and gave
to his Apostles, saying: This is my Body which is given for you (to God) Luc.
22. 19. And instituted the Sacrifice of the new law, and said to the Apostles
and their successors. Do this (that is give my body to God for you) in
commemoration of me, least that his Church should be at any time, without a
special visible exterior Sacrifice, Religion, and Law.

5. If our Savior, in the new law, had not instituted a proper visible
Sacrifice, wherewith God might be worshipped by men in the time of the When
Sacrifice is taken away, the chief visible honor due unto God is taken away.
new law, as he was in the old, but had wholly taken external visible Sacrifice
out of his Church, he had left no external visible act of Religion, whereby
men might have adored God, as God, and had depryued his eternal Father, of the
greatest external visible worship, and honor which he had upon earth, that is
to say, the worship of Latria, by offering external visible Sacrifice unto
him; which is absurd, seeing our Savior, came to add honor unto his etternall
Father, and not to diminish it Ioh. 8. 49.

6. Sixthly, the law of nature, and nations, and written law as I have proved in
the former chapters, teach us, to offer external visible Sacrifice unto God,
thereby to acknowledge his sovereignty, and supreme power over us; and our
Savior came not to break the law, but to fulfill it. Math. 5. 18.

7. In the communion of the old law, there was a Sacrifice, to represent the
Sacrifice of our Savior upon the Cross to come as witness the Scriptures,
Exodus 12. 6. and Fathers, as S. Chrysostom in his 61. homily to the people of
Antioch; S. Augustine in the 18. Chapter of his first book against the
adversaries of the law and the Prophets; therefore, there must be also a
Sacrifice, in the communion of the new law, to represent the Sacrifice of our
lord upon the Cross past: seeing (as I have said before) our Savior came not
to break the law, but to fulfill it. And as the Children Sacrifice as
necessary in the new law, as in the old.
of God, who lived before the Passion of Christ, stood in need of a Sacrifice
in their communion, to represent the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross to
come, and to apply the merits of the said Sacrifice unto them: So the Children
of the Church of God, who live after the Passion of Christ, stand in need of a
Sacrifice in their communion, to represent the Sacrifice of our Savior upon
the Cross past, to apply his merits unto them, who was slain (as S. John
says) from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13. 8. And as many as were saved,
in the law of nature, or written law, or shall be saved in the law of Grace,
all were, and shall be saved, by the merits of the passion of our Savior, and
his Sacrifice upon the Cross. And therefore, if in the law of nature, and
written law, they had need of external visible Sacrifice, to apply the
Passion of our Savior unto them; so likewise, have we in the new law,
seeing that the old law was a figure of the new, 1. Cor. 10. 6. Whereupon
S. Augustine in the 18. chapter of his 20. book against Faustus says: At this
present, Christians do celebrate the memory of the sacrifie of Christ passed
(upon the Cross) by the most holy oblation of the body and blood of Christ.

8. The chiefest act, whereby our Savior redeemed us, was his offering, or
giving himself to God for our Redemption, according to his word, saying: I
yield my life for my sheep, Ioh. 10. 15. Sacrifice taken away, the
commemoration of our Saviors passion is also taken away.
Against: Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us. Tit. 2. 14.
Wherefore, if our Savior, had taken away all external visible Sacrifice, out
of his Church; he had left in deeds or actions no express commemoration of his
Passion.

9. God Almighty, threatens it as a great To be deprived of Sacrifice, is
threatened as a punishment.
plague to the pleople of Israel, to take away from amongst them, for their
sins, Sacrifices and Altars, saying: Many days shall the kingdom of
Israel, sit without King, and without Prince and without Sacrifice, and without
Altar, etc. And after this, the children of Israel, shall return, and shall
seek the lord their God, and his goodness in the last days: Osee. 34. Where we
see, that God himself, accounted it a great plague, for the Children of Israel
to be without Sacrifice, and Altar, as they are, and shall be, until a little
before the last days, according to this prophecy; and at the last days, they
shall seek the Lord their God, and his goodness, and become Christians, and
have Sacrifice, and Altars. Wherefore, if our Savior, should have planted his
new law, and Testament, without any external visible Sacrifice, or Altar,
the new law had bin a law, and Testament of greater anger, wrath, and
punishment, then was the old law, and not a law of greater grace, and favor,
which is repugnant to the promises, saying: Christ came to preach the
acceptable year of our Lord: Psalm. 71. 1. Luc. 4. 19. Insomuch as S. Paul
speaking of this time of grace, says: Behold now is the time acceptable,
behold now the day of salvation. 2. Cor. 6. 2. etc.

10. As I said in the 2. Chapter, two things have alvvayes been, highly
esteemed amongst men, the honor of their God, and their unity, peace, and
society with him, and amongst themselves, and these two have been chiefly
mainteyned amongst men of all nations, by offering visible Sacrifice unto God,
and after by eating or communicating of the said Sacrifice amongst themselves,
as I have proved in the 2. chapter; By Sacrifice peace and unity is preserved.
and our Savior came not to take away peace, unity, and society of men with
God, or amongst themselves, but to plant it, saying: Not for the Apostles only
do I pray, but for them also, that by their word, shall believe in me, that
they all may be one, as thou (Father) in me, and I in thee, that they also in
us, may be one, that the world may know, that thou have sent me: Ioh. 17. 20.

11. God Almighty promised, by the Prophet Jeremy, that visible Sacrifice
should never be taken away, saying: Of Priests, and Leuits there shall not fail
from before my face a man to offer Holocausts, and to burn Sacrifice and kill
victimes all days: Ier: 33. 18. According to which promises, S. Paul
commands the Christians, to offer Sacrifice saying: you shall show the death
of our Lord until he come: 1. Cor. 11. 26. who dyed, offering up himself in a
visible Sacrifice, as our adversaries will confess.

12. If our Savior, had taken away the offering of visible Sacrifice to God,
and had instituted a communion, by taking, an eating, a peace of bread, and
apprehending Christ in heaven by Without Sacrifice there is no difference
betvveen the communion and eating of common meat.
faith, he had made no difference, between the eating of common meat, and the
communion; for every one who eats or drinks piously like a Christian, and
not like a beast, apprehends God or CHRIST JESUS our Lord in heaven, by the
hand of faith, as author, and giver of that meat, as often as they eat, or
drink.

13. The offering of visible Sacrifice, in general unto God, was a matter of
faith, planted in the Church of God upon earth, even from the first foundation
of the Church of God upon earth, after the fall of Adam, as I have proved in
the last Chapter; and faith is one, and unchangeable, as also there I have
proved. Whereby it is sufficiently Our Savior changed not the faith, but
ceremonies of the old Law.
manifest, unto any indifferent Reader, that our Savior at his coming, did
not, nor would take away, out of his Church which he founded upon earth,
external visible Sacrifice: but took away only the ceremonial law, and
planted external visible Sacrifice, in more worthy gifts, as made suertie of a
better Testament. Heb. 7. 22.

14. And to conclude, all the known world (as I have proved in the 2. and 3.
chapters) at the time of our Savior, offered visible Sacrifice unto some God
true, or false, thereby to adore him with the honor of Latria, or honor due
only unto God, and signify the Sacrifice of their hearts unto him, and union
with him. Wherefore if our Savior, had quite taken away the offering of
visible Sacrifice to any God: some Jew, or gentill would have accused him, or
the Apostles, of it; Our Savior never accused of taking away Sacrifice.
which we never read that they did; yet the Jews so highly esteemed visible
Sacrifice, as they accounted it a punishment, or curse, to be without it, as
appears, Dan. 9. 27. the 11. 31. and the 12. 11. Osee. 3. 4. Joel. 1. 9. and
the Gentiles esteemed it a sin worthy of death, to abuse it; as witnesses
Plato in his 10. Dialogue, and a sign of atheism and impiety to neglect it;
as testifyeth Plutark in his book entitled, That there Epicurus only for
fear offered Sacrifice contrary to his doctrine.
is no pleasant life according to Epicurus, who in doctrine and words denied
the offering of visible Sacrifice, but not in practice, for fear of the common
people, and not to displease the Athenians: as witnesses Cicero in his books
of the ends of good and evil, of Tusculans quest. and of the nature of the
God; and Plutark in his book against Coletes an Epicure. Wherefore, seeing that
it was a thing impossible, and altogether incredible, that our Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST, should quite take away the offering of external visible
Sacrifice to God: for the good of those, who are deceived, to the violating of
Religion, contempt of God, and damnation of their poor souls; it will be worth
our labor, yet more exactly to handle this matter, and seek out how, and what
visible Sacrifice, our Savior appointed for his followers to use in his Church
upon earth, which by Gods grace, I will do in the ensueing chapters.

CHAP. IX. Our Savior was to be a chief Priest of the order of Melchisedech,
and to offer unbloody Sacrifice in his body, and blood, under the forms of
bread, and wine until the end of the world.
1. THe Prophet David speaking of the Priesthood of our Savior, in the 109.
Psalm. and 4. Ver. according unto our account, Christ's Priest hood forever of
the order of Melchisedech was to be performed upon earth.
and 110. according to the account of Protestants, and Puritans, says: Our
Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him: thou art a Priest forever
according to the Order of Melchisedech. This to be spoken of our Savior, S.
Paul witnesses; Heb. 5. 6. 10. Heb. 6. 20. So here we have, that our Savior
was to be a Priest, not for once, or for a little while as upon the Cross, but
as long as the world shall last, until Eternity come; or as the Apostle says
until Christ shall come to Judgment, 1. Cor. 11. 26. For these words forever,
everlasting, are many times taken for as long as the world shall last, or for a
long time, as Leuit. 25. 46. Exodus 15. 18. Exodus 21. 6. Exo. 31. 16. Leuit. 23.
31. Eze. 26. 21. And S. Hierome in his commentaries upon the 26. of Ezechiel,
and 21. Ver. and upon the first to the Gal: and 4. Ver. affirms, that the
hebrew word Leolam, which is here translated (forever) does not signify, the
eternity of the other life, but the whole time of this life, or as long as the
world shall endure, etc.

2. The end, and use of Priesthood and offering The use of Priesthood and
sacrifice.
up of Sacrifice, is as S. Paul, says: Heb. 5. 1. to obtayn remission of
sins: but after the day of Judgment, and end of this world, there will be no
more any remission of sins: wherefore, it were in vayn to say, that Christ
were a Priest forever, in the other world of eternity, according to the order
of Melchisedech: seeing that in the eternity of the other life, there is no
remission of sins, or use of Priesthood, or Sacrifice according to the order
of Melchisedech; which S. Paul further signifies, saying: Where there is no
remession of sins (as in the eternity of the other life) now there is not an
oblation for sins. Heb. 10. 18. Again, S. Paul sayith: Every high Priest, is
appointed, that he may offer gifts, and hosts, wherefore it is necessary, that
he also have something, that he may offer. Heb. 8. 3. But it were absurd to say,
that Christ in heaven offered Sacrifice, hosts, or gifts, according to the
order of Melchisedech, seeing that in heaven, earthly Sacraments, and
Sacrifices, which are represented under outward corruptible material signs,
do cease, by reason of the imperfection, for in heaven is no imperfection, 1.
Cor. 13. 10.

3. And S. Paul, speaking of the Priesthood of our Savior, according to the
order of Melchisedech, says: If then consummation was by the Leuiticall
Priesthood, what necessity was there yet of an other Christ a Priest of the
order of Melchisedech, and not of Aaron.
Priest, to rise according to the order of Mechisedech, and not to be called
according to the order of Aaron, for the Priesthood being translated, it is
necessary, that a translation of the law, also be made, for Christ of whom
these things be said, is of another tribe, of the which none attended on the
Altar. Heb. 7. 11. Where we Chriests Priesthood to be performed on earth.
see that our Saviors Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech was to
be performed upon earth, as the Priesthood according to the order of Aaron was
performed upon earth, and the law was translated upon earth, and the tribes,
and Altars were upon earth.

4. Neither can this prophecy be understood of This Prophecy not understood of
the Sacrifice upon the Cross.
our Saviors Sacrifice upon the Cross, for that was but once offered; Heb.
10. 10. and if the Scriptures, here should speak of the Sacrifice of the
Cross, it should say, thou art a Priest for once, and not say, thou art a
Priest forever. Secondly S. Paul, says: Other Priests by death were prohibited
to continue, but Christ for that he continues forever, has an everlasting
Priesthood. Heb. 7. 23. But as our Savior offered himself in Sacrifice upon
the Cross, he was neither everlasting, nor immortal, but mortal and dyed,
and therefore, as he was offered upon the Cross, he was by death prohibited to
continue, as well as other Priests: wherefore it cannot be said, that Christ is
a Priest forever, according to the order of Melchisedech, because he offered
himself upon the Cross.

5. The Sacrifice of our Savior upon the Cross, was bloody, and rather
according to the order of Aaron then Melchisedech, of which order our Savior
was not, as S. Paul witnesses, saying: Christ Our Savior was not a Priest of
the order of Aron.
was not called according to the order of Aaron. Heb. 7. 11. Wherefore, seeing
that our Savior was to be a Priest to offer Sacrifice unto God, until the end
of the world, and that there neither is, nor has been, any other Sacrifice
offered in the Christian Church; but that which amongst Christians No Sacrifice
amongst Christians but that of the body and blood of our Lord.
is called the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, as all the
Christian Church, service, books, Histories, Chronicles, and testimonies of
ancient time bear witness; what Christian man can deny that our Savior, was to
be a Priest forever to offer this Sacrifice of his body and blood, by himself,
his Apostles and their Successors, until the end of the world, and that this
oath of God, is fulfilled, in offering, or giving to God, his body, and blood,
under the species of bread, and wine, according to his command, at his last
supper, when taking bread, he gave thanks, and brake, and gave to the Apostles,
saying: This is my body which is given for you. (to God) And in like manner the
Chalice after he had supped, saying: This is the Chalice of the new Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you (to God) Luc. 22. Do this (the same which he
then did) for a commemoration of me: especially considering, that these his
words are so plain, and manifest; and no where else, we find, that our Savior
either offered unbloody Sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech, or
commanded any of his followers to offer unbloody Sacrifice, but at his last
supper: and the Christian world, now for 1600. years, has generally believed,
that at his last supper, our lord offered unbloody Sacrifice, and gave his
body and blood to God for us after an unbloody manner, as in part I have
proved in the 2. Chapter, and shall prove more at large hereafter.

6. Neither does this hinder, the fulfilling of this oath of God in our
Savior, for that he is not visibly now upon earth, to execute Priesthood
according He who commands a thing to be donn, is said rather to do it then
his officer.
to the order of Melchisedech: for when a thing is donn by commandment of
another, who has lawful power, and authority to command, and virtue to
execute what is commanded: he who commands, is rather said to do the thing
commanded, then his officers, or ministers, who do it by his authority power,
and command. So our Savior commanding the Apostles, and their Successors, to
give his body to God for us, and shed his blood to God for us, and they doing
it by his authority, power, and command; he may be rather said, to give his
body, and shed his blood to God for us and offer Sacrifice, then Bishops, or
Priests, who do it but as his officers, and by virtue of his power, authority,
and command.

7. The Scriptures supposing Melchisedechs Melchisedechs Priesthood, supposed
by the Scriptures to be well known.
Priesthood, and Sacrifice to be well known, many times say, that Christ
shall be a Priest forever according to the order of Melchisedech: yet of
Melchisedechs Priesthood and Sacrifice, we have in the Scriptures no more, but
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, for he was the Priest of the most
high: or: And he was the Priest of the most high: Genesis 14. 18. Whereby it is
manifest, that he brought forth bread, and wine to offer it unto God in
Sacrifice; seeing that no where else, there is made any mention of any thing, he
could offer to God in Sacrifice, whereby his order might be known: neither can
it be said, that he brought them forth only to feed Abraham, and his soldiors,
who were filled with the victuals, and spoils of 4. kings, and gave the tithe
thereof unto Melchisedech, as appears in the same chapter; and then it had
binn needles to add, that he was a Priest of the most high, and how he blessed
Abraham.

8. Secondly, the Ancient Jews affirm, that Melchisedech offered Sacrifice in
bread and wine; The Ancient Jews affirm that Melchisedech offered Sacrifice
in bread and wine.
as Rabbi Samuel upon the 14. Chapter of Genesis saying: He set forth the acts of
Priesthood, for he was sacrificing bread, and wine to God. Rabbi Phinees upon
the 28. of Numbres, saying: In the time of the Messiah, all Sacrifices shall
cease, but the Sacrifice of bread, and wine shall not cease, as it is said:
Genesis 14. For Melchisedech the King Messiah, shall be exempted from the cessation,
of the Sacrifices of bread and wine, as it is said, in the 110. Psalm. thou art
a Priest forever, according to the order of Melchisedech. Rabbi Moses Hadarsan
upon the 14. of Genesis saying: Rabbi the son of Enachinam, said that this
Melchisedech was Sem, the son of Noe: but what is the meaning of this; that
he brought forth bread and wine? by this he showed, that he taught the act of
his Priesthood, which was to sacrifice bread and wine. And this is it which is
said in the Psalm: Our Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, thou art a
Priest forever, according to the order of Melchisedech. And Philo Iudaus in his
book of Abraham toward the end, says: that Melchisedech sacrificed in bread
and wine for the victory of Abraham. And Galatinus in his 10. book of the
secrets of Catholic verities, and Genebrard in his Chronology upon
Melchisedech, cite certain Rabbis, who translate these words of the 14. of
Genesis and 18. Ver. thus; Melchisedech offered bread and wine: The Catholic
Church translateth them, brought forth bread wine (and assigning the cause,
says) for he was Priest of the most high: as if she should say, that this was
his office, to offer bread and wine in Sacrifice to God. And Theodorus
Bibliander a Protestant in his 2. book of the Trinity and 89. leaf,
confesses, that it was a general received opinion amongst the ancient Jews,
that as the coming of the blessed Messiah, all legal Sacrifices were to
cease; and that only the Sacrifice, they called Theoda, of thancksgiuing,
praise, and confession, was to continue, with was to be performed in bread and
wine, as Melchisedech king of Salem and Priest of the most high God, in the
time of Abraham, brought forth bread, and wine.

9. The ancient Fathers were of opinion, that The Ancient Fathers affirm that
Melchisedech offered Sacrifice in bread and wine.
Melchisedech sacrificed in bread and wine, and that our Savior was to fulfill
the Type in Melchisedechs sacrifice, by offering up his body, and blood in
Sacrifice to God, under the forms of bread and wine. As S. Cyprian in his 63.
Epist. saying: Our Lord Jesus, offered a Sacrifice to God the Father, and
offered the same that Melchisedech did that is bread and wine, that is his
body, and blood. S. Ambrose upon the 109. Psalm. saying: Christ by the mystery
of bread and wine, is made a Priest forever, according to the order of
Melchisedech. S. Hierome in his 17. Epist. to Marcella, chapter 2. says:
Melchisedech then in type of Christ, offered wine and bread, and dedicated the
Christian mystery, in the body, and blood of our Savior. And with these
Fathers, does agree S. Augustine in his first Sermon upon the 33. Psalm. saying:
In the old law, you know that the Sacrifice of the Jews, was according to the
order of Aaron, in the slaughter of beasts, and that in a mystery; for then
the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, which the faithful, and
those who read the Scriptures know, was not instituted, which Sacrifice is now
dilated over the whole globe of the earth. Propound therefore, before your
eyes, two Sacrifices, that according to the order of Aaron, and this according
to the order of Melchisedech, etc. The Sacrifice of Aaron, was taken away, and
the Sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech, entered in his place: and
the Jews adbering unto that Sacrifice, which was according to the order of
Aaron, embraced not the Sacrifice which was according to the order of
Melchisedech, and so lost Christ. Thus S. Augustine.

10. Of this opinion, where both the Greek, and Latin Fathers, abundantly
cited by Coceius, in his 2. tome, and 6. book. Insomuch that Doctor Fulk a
Puritan in the 99. leaf of his book against Saunders says: I confess that
diverse of the old Fathers were of opinion, that the bread and wine brought
forth by Melchisedech, was Sacrificed by him. And Doctor Whytaker in the 818.
and 819. leaf of his book against Duraeus; and Calvin upon the 7. chapter to
the Hebrews, confess, that the ancient Fathers, were of opinion, that
Melchisedech sacrificed in bread and wine. Wherefore seeing that our Savior
was to be a Priest, until the end of the world, of the order of Melchisedech,
and to fulfill the type in the Sacrifice of Melchisedech, and Melchisedech
offered Sacrifice in bread and wine, no indifferent man cann doubt, whether our
Savior were to be a Priest, or no, to offer his body, and blood in Sacrifice,
under the forms of bread and wine, until the end of the world: seeing that
he instituted such a Sacrifice, and commanded, such a kind of Sacrifice, to be
used in commemoration of him, until the end of the world, and such a Sacrifice
has been used now amongst Christians 1600. years. Wherefore I conclude this
chapter with the words of S. Athanasius in his oration de fide maiore, cited
by Theodoret in his second Dialogue, saying: It is a body whereunto he said,
sit at my right hand; unto which body, the devil, the wicked powers, and the
Jews Christ a Priest by offering his body.
were enemies, by which body he was a high Priest, and an Apostle, so termed
for that mystery, which he delivered unto us saying: This is my body which is
broken for you; and this is my blood of the new Testament, not of the old,
which is shed for you. Thus S. Athanasius. And this is sufficient to show that
our Savior was to be a chief Priest of the order of Melchisedech to offer
unbloody Sacrifice in his body and blood, under the form of bread and wine,
until the end of the world, to the fulfilling of this Prophecy, which says:
Thou art a Priest forever, according to the order of Melchisadec. Psalm. 109. 4.

CHAP. X. At the coming of the Messiah, unbloody Sacrifice in the body, and
blood of our Savior, was to be offered every where, upon Altars, amongst the
converted gentiles.
1. THe Prophet Malachie, speaking of the state of the Church, after the
coming of the Messiah, and conversion of the Gentiles, says: Who is there among
you, (Jews) that will kindle fire at my altar for naught; I have no will in
you, says the lord of hoasts; and gifts I will not receive of your hand; for
from the rising of the sunn, even to the going down, great is my name among
the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrificing, there is offered to my
name a clean oblation: because my name is great among the Gentiles. Malach. 1.
10.

2. Here first we have, that after the coming of Sacrifice was to cease among
the Jews at the coming of the Messiah.
the Messiah, the visible external Sacrifice, which the Jews offered upon
Altars, should cease; which we find true by experience. For it is to be noted,
that it was not lawful for the Jews, to offer Sacrifice in any place, but at
Jerusalem. Deuteronomy. 12. 11. which being destroyed, by Vespasianus and Titus, soon
after the Passion of our Savior, and the Jews exiled from thence, they have been ever since, without any visible external Sacrifice, to the verifying of
the words, which were spoken by the Prophet Osee, saying: Many days shall the
children of Israel fit, without king, and without sacrifice, and without
altar, etc. Even unto the last days, in which they shall be converted unto
Christianitye. Osee. 3.

Secondly, that amongst the Gentiles converted Sacrifice in all nations amongst
Christians.
to Christianity, in every place, shall be offered Sacrifice upon Altars, which
we see also fulfilled by experience, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.

3. Thirdly, in the Hebrew tongue, in which the Prophet Malachy writ the
Sacrifice which was to cease amongst the Jews, and the Sacrifice which was to
be offered amongst the gentiles converted unto Christianity, are both expressed
by one, or the same hebrew word Mincha, which signifies an unbloody Sacrifice,
or Sacrifice of fine flower: for so it is expressed, Leuit. 2. 1. saying: When
a soul shall offer, an oblation of Sacrifice to our Lord, fine flower shall be
his oblation; where for oblation of Sacrifice, in hebrew is putt this word
Mincha; so the sense of the Prophecy is, Great is my name among the Gentiles,
and in every place there is offered to my name, a clean unbloody oblation, or
sacrifice. Which we see, also fulfilled by experience, in the offering up, of
the most immaculate body of the son of God, after an unbloody manner, all
over the world, amongst the gentiles converted unto Christianity. And there
neither is, nor ever has been, amongst Christians, any other external visible
Sacrifice, offered to God, but it; as appears by the Liturgies or
Masse-bookes of all ages and countries, and the books of ancient Fathers.

4. Fourthly: the Hebrew word Mincha, is by The Gentiles were to offer a proper
Sacrifice to God.
the judgment of both Catholics, or Puritans taken in the first place, where
it speaks of the sacrifice of the Jews, for a proper external visible
sacrifice, offered to God; and the text is so plain, that it can not be
denied. Therefore in the second place, where it speaks of Christian
sacrifices, it intends a proper, external, visible sacrifice offered to God:
seeing that in both these places, the sacrifice is expressed, by one or the
same word.

5. Fifthly the sacrifice of the Jews, which God The converted Gentiles were to
offer sacrifices upon altars.
rejected, was a sacrifice offered to him upon Altars as is manifest by this
text of Malachy, where he speaks of an Altar: and by that of Osee, the 3.
chap. where it is said; that the Jews shall be without Sacrifice, and without
altar. Wherefore it can not be denied, but that the Sacrifice, which is so
acceptable to God amongst the gentiles, converted to Christianity, must be a
sacrifice offered upon Altars, seeing they are both expressed by one or the
same Hebrew word; and so is the Sacrifice of the body, or blood of our lord, a
Sacrifice upon an Altar.

6. Sixthly: the Prophet says, There is offered A clean oblation.
to my mane a pure, or clean oblation; not only clean, and pure before men,
but before God to whom it is offered: and so is the oblation of the immaculate
body, or blood of the son of God, which is offered every where amongst the
Gentiles, converted unto Christianity; and there neither is, nor has binn
amongst Christians, any other pure, or clean oblation, which can minister
occasion of doubting.

7. Seventhly: though this pure and clean oblation, shall be offered up in every
place, amongst One host or oblation though offered every where.
the converted Gentiles; yet it shall be but one, and the same host, or oblation,
offered in every place; for the text says, it shall be a clean oblation, and
not clean oblations; and so is the sacrifice of the body and blood of our
lord, one and the same clean oblation, though offered in sacrifice by the
Gentiles converted unto Christianity, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; our
Savior not having many bodies, but one.

8. Eighthly: the Prophet says: That by occasion of this Sacrifice, The name of
God shall be great The name of God great, by occasion of this sacrifice.
amongst the Gentiles, converted unto Christianity. And what greather
Sacrifice, can there be then this, where the son of God is offered in
sacrifice for man, and man living in this exile, may receive, and communicate
God his creator? Seeing that herein, does wonderfully appear the charity or
unity of God with Christian men; and his omnipotency, wisdom, goodness, or
mercy. Whereupon S. Mark the Evangelist, who planted the Church of
Alexandria, in the Liturgy, or public Church book which he made for the
Church of Alexandria, fett down in the first to me of Bibliotheca Patrum,
says: We offer unto thee, o Lord, this reasonable, and unbloody worshipp of
Latria, ((...)) which to thee, o God all nations do offer, from the rising of
the sun, to the going down: from the north unto the south-all the Gentiles;
and in cense, and sacrifice, and oblation is offered to thy name in every place.

9. And in like manner the ancient Fathers understood this prophecy of
Malachie, to be spoken The Fathers understand the prophecy of Malachie, to be
spoken of the Christian sacrifice.
of the Sacrifice of the Christians; as Iustine martyr in his dialogue with
Triphon who lived in the year 150. after the nativity of our Savior,
alleging this place says: Then the Prophet foretold of the Sacrifices of
the Gentiles, which are offered in every place. S. Cyprian in his first book
against the Jews, and 16. chapter, allegeth this place, to prove, that the old
Sacrifices of the Jews, should be made void, and the Sacrifice of the new law
established, saying: That the old Sacrifice should cease, and the new be
celebrated: which appears by the first chapter of Isaie, Psalm 49. and
Malachie the first, saying: I have no will in you says the lord; and I will
not receive Sacrifice from your hands; for from the rising of the sun, unto
the going down, my name is glorified amongst the Gentiles, and in every place
the sent of incense is offered to my name, and a pure, or clean Sacrifice, for
my name is great amongst the Gentiles says the Lord. Thus S. Cyprian against
the Jews. S. Ireneus who lived with S. Polycarpe scholar to S. John
Evangelist, alleging this place, says of our Savior: He took bread, and
gave thanks, saying: This is my body, etc. and taught the new oblation of the
new testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles, offers to God in
all the world; whereof Malachie foretold.

10. S. Chrysostom in his commentary upon the 95. Psalm, cyting this text of
Malachie says: Behold how excellently, how perspicuously he has set fourth,
and described the mystical table, which is the unbloody host. Eusebius in his
1. book of Evangelical demonstrations chap. 10. alleges this place, to
prove that we ought to offer sacrifice, in the new law, saying: We Sacrifice
after a new manner, according to the new Testament, a pure host.

11. S. Augustine in his Oration against the Jews, says: What will you
answer to this? open your eyes at the last, and see the sacrifice of the
Christians offered to the God of Israel, from the rising of the sun to the
going down, not in one place, as it was appointed for you, but in every
place. And the like he has in his 18. book cap. 35. of the City of God,
saying: Malachie prophetizing of the Church, which now we see propagated by
Christ in the person of God, most plainly says unto the Jews: I have no will
in you, I will not receive gifts at your hands; for from the rising of the
sun unto the going down, great is my name among the Gentiles, and in every
place there shall be sacrificing, and offered unto my name a clean oblation;
because my name is great amongst the Gentiles. Now we may see, this sacrifice
offered unto God, by the Priesthood of Christ according to the order of
Melchisedech, in every place, from the rising of the sun unto the going
down: and the sacrifice of the Jews, unto whom it was said, (I have no will
in you, and gifts I will not receive at your hands) to have most manifestly
ceased. Wherefore do they expect another Christ, when they see, that which they
read in the Prophet, to be fulfilled, and could not be fulfilled but by him?
Thus Augustine. And the like is affirmed by many more of the ancient Fathers,
cyted at large by Coccius in his 6. book, and 6. article.

12. And this is sufficient to show, that at the coming of the Messiah, all the
sacrifices of the old law should cease, which we find true by experience; and
that a clean unbloody sacrifice, was to be offered every where amongst the
converted Gentiles; which also we find true, by experience: and to deny this,
where to overthrow the ancient Fathers arguments against the Jews: so
manifest it is, that a clean unbloody sacrifice, was (at the coming of the
Messiah) to be offered every where amongst the Christians, that without denying
the arguments the ancient Fathers used against the Jews, it can not be deneyd.

CHAP. XI. By the distinction of bloody and unbloody Sacrifices, is proved that
our Savior at his last supper offered unbloody Sacrifice in his body and blood.
1. FRom the beginning of the Church of God upon earth, there has been two
kinds of Two kinds of visible sacrifices from the beginning.
special visible Sacrifices, offered unto God; the one bloody, by carnal
effusion of blood out of the veins of some living thing; the other unbloody,
which had no such carnal effusion of blood, but in some resemblance, as by
pouring out of wine, or by dividing the thing offered to God, as we read in
Genesis 35. and 14. and Leuit. 2. 1. 6. and 14. and both the bloody and unbloody
sacrifices, were offered unto God, in his Church, even from the beginning of
his Church upon earth: for Abel offered a bloody sacrifice, Caine an unbloody:
Genesis 4. 3. 4. Melchisedech an vnblouddie, Genesis 14. 18. Jacob offered both, Genesis
35. 14. Genesis 46. 1.

In the law of Moses, there were many bloody Sacrifices ordained, Leuit. 1. 3.
and also diverse unbloody. Leuit. 2. 1. and 4. and 5. and 14. Leu 5. 11.
Unbloody sacrifices called gifts.


2. The unbloody sacrifices were commonly called gifts; as Cain offered of the
fruits of the earth, gifts to our lord. Genesis 4. 3. But to Cain and his gifts God
had not respect. Genesis 4. 5. Again. If thou offer a gift of the first fruit of
thy corn to our lord, of the ear being yett green, thou shall dry it at the
fire, and bruise it after the manner of meal, and so shall thou offer thy
first fruits. Leuit. 2. 14. Malachie the last of the Prophets foretelling, how
God would reject the sacrifices of the Jews, and have a clean oblation, or
unbloody sacrifice offered unto him, every where amongst the converted gentiles,
says: A gift I will not receive at your hands, Mal. 1. 10. Where the Prophet
accompteth a clean oblation, an unbloody sacrifice, and a gift offered to God
by Priests upon an Altar, as all one.

3. S. Paul also makes mention of these two kinds of sacrifices, and calls
th'vnbloudy sacrifices, gifts offered to God in sacrifice by Priests, saying:
Every high Priest, taken from amongst men, is appointed for men, in these
things which appertain to God, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for
sin. Heb. 5. 1. Again: Every high Priest is appointed to offer gifts, and
hosts. Heb. 8. 3. where distinguishing the two kinds of sacrifices, which where
offered by Priests in the Church of God, from the beginning of the world, he
calls the unbloody sacrifices gifts, and places them in the first rank, as a
more excellent kind of sacrifice, then hosts offered with carnal effusion of
blood.

4. Moreover, that clean and unbloody sacrifices are called gifts, S. Hierom.
upon the 25. chap. of Ezechiel, and 15. and 17. verses, does witness, saying:
that gifts were things of wheat flower, or barley flower, or oil offered to
God in sacrifice. Whereupon Theophylact upon this 8. chap. to the Hebrews, and
3. verse says: If we would diligently examine the difference between gift and
host, it is this, that an host is offered with blood and flesh: but gifts
consist of fruits, and other such things as are unbloody. With whom agrees
our adversary Samuel Purchase a Puritan, in the 6. chap. of his 1. book of his
relations of the religions observed in all ages, saying: Of sacrifices there
were from the beginning two kinds, the one called gifts, or oblation of things
without life: the other victimes, or slain sacrifices of birds and beasts.
Where it is manifest, that gifts offered to God by Priests, appointed (as Saint
Paul says) for that purpose, and unbloody sacrifice are all one.

5. These gifts, or unbloody sacrifices were also What gifts where unbloody
sacrifices.
of two sorts, that is to say, of things solid, as bread, wheat, new corn,
etc. or of things liquid, as of wine, oil, etc. If they were of solid things,
then the manner was in sign of the invisible sacrifice of the heart, to break
or bruise them: if of liquid things, then the manner was also in sign of
contrition, and the invisible sacrifice of the h^^t, to pour them fourth
before God: as appears in the solid, and liquid unbloody sacrifices, or
sacrifices of gifts, which where offered to God in the law of nature, and
written law. So the unbloody sacrifice, or sacrifices of gifts were
distinguished from the general offerings, gifts, oblatio^s and tenths of the
peole: first, for that the sacrifice of gifts, or unbloody sacrifices were
broken or shedd; the other offered whole: these were offered upon an Altar, by
Priests appointed for that purpose. Heb. 5. 1. the other offered at the Altar by
any one. Math. 5. 24. these were public sacred visible signs of the inward
contrition, and sacrifice of the hearts of them, who offered, as is proved
heretofore; the other, private duties, and donations, etc. So that not all
manner of gifts or oblations were unbloody sacrifices, or sacrifices of gifts:
but those which were broken or shedd to God upon an Altar, by a lawful Priest,
to signify the invisible sacrifice of our hearts.

6. This distinction putt down of bloody and unbloody sacrifices, or
sacrifices of gifts; it is easy to prove, that our Savior at his coming was
Our Savior established the sacrifice of gifts in his Church.
to offer unbloody sacrifice, or gifts, and to establish them in his Church:
for after the coming of the Messiah, all the bloody sacrifices were to cease;
as witnesses the Prophet David in the 39. Psalm: Prophet Malachie in his
first chapter: S. Paul. Heb. 10. and the Fathers cited in the last chapter to
this purpose. But our Savior was not to take away all kind of particular
exterior visible sacrifice, as I have proved in the 8. 9. and 10. chapters of
this book: therefore the unbloody sacrifice, or sacrifice of gifts, were to be
established in the Church of God, in the new law.

7. Moreover, the Prophet Malachie speaking of the sacrifice, which shall be
established in the new law, says, it shall be a gift, and clean oblation:
Malach. 1. whereupon Lactantius who lived about the year 290. in the 25.
chapter of his 6. book of divine institutions, says: There are two things
which ought to be offered unto God, gifts and sacrifice; gifts for ever,
sacrifice for a time; with whom agree the ancient Fathers cited before in the
last chapter, and many more, who shall be cited here after in the ensuing
chapters.

8. And as for the time, when our Savior was Our Savior at his last Supper
offered gifts to God.
to offer the sacrifice of gifts, or unbloody sacrifice, and to establish it in
his Church: it must needs be then, when he changed the Sacrament of the old
law, and instituted the Priests of the new, which was at his last Supper, as
appears by Judas Iscariot who was a Priest and Bishop, as witnesses S.
Peter Act. 1. 20. And yet could not be made before the last Supper; nor yet
after, seeing that presently after the last Supper, he went forth, and
betrayed our Lord: Luc. 22. and no man ever made a Priest, or Bishop, but he
instructed him, what he was to do.

Secondly, our adversaries in the book of their consecration of Priests, do
confess, that the consecration, and administration of the Sacrament of the new
law, does belong unto the office of the Priests, of the new law: but at the
last Supper our Savior not only consecrated, and administered the Sacrament of
the new law himself, as our adversaries confess; but also gave unto the
Apostles authority to consecrate, and administer the Sacrament of the new law,
saying: Do this (the same which he then did) for a commemoration of me; and
therefore he then made them Priests, and gave them authority, to offer
unbloody Sacrifice, or the sacrifice of gifts, and established the said kind of
sacrifice to be used in his Church. This set down, let us examine what our
Lord did at his last Supper.

9. First, he took bread, which was a meat or thing used in the sacrifice of
gifts, and unbloody sacrifice, Genesis 14. 18. Secondly, he blessed the bread,
Math. 26. 25. and so made it holy and consecrated to God, as al things offered
in sacrifices are. Thirdly, he brake it, Math. 26. 26. with was accustomed to
be donn, in all sacrifices of gifts, or unbloody sacrifices, as I have proved
in the 1. paragraphe of this chapter. Fourthly, he changed the substance of the
bread, into his substantial body, saying of that with was bread, when he
took it first into his hands, This is my body, and so made a change of the
substance of bread, into the substance of his body, as I shall prove more at
large here after, to show the power, and omnipotency of God, who can change,
and alter things created, at his will, and pleasure, which ostension of the
power of God, is used in all Sacrifices, as I have showed in the 2. chapter.
And lastly, he gave his body for a gift to God for us; thereby to signify, the
Sacrifice of our hearts, and our subjection unto him, and his dominion over us,
as is used in particular external visible Sacrifices, saying: This is my body
which is given for you. Luke 22. By which words, it is plain, and manifest
that the body, which our Savior delivered in the Communion to the Apostles,
was a particular gift, and unbloody Sacrifice given to God for us, to signify
the sacrifice of our hearts etc.

10. In like manner our Savior at his last Supper took wine, which also was
used in unbloody sacrifices, or sacrifice of gifts, as witnesses the Scripture
in the sacrifice of Melchisedech, Genesis 13. and after blessed it, as witnesses
S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10. So that it was holy, and consecrated wine to God, as is
the wine of all sacrifices; and changed the substance of that which before was
wine, into the substance of his blood, saying: This is my blood. Math. 26. 28.
To show the omnipotent power of God who is able to alter, and change all things
created at his will and pleasure; which alteration by some change of the thing
offered, is used in all sacrifices; and lastly, to shed his blood to God for
us, thereby to signify the invisible contrition, and sacrifice of our hearts,
and his dominion over us, and our subjection unto him, saying: This is my
blood, which is shed for you. Luke 22. not after a carnal, or cruel manner;
but after the manner of a gift, clean oblation, and unbloody sacrifice, as
witnesses the practice and experience of all ages; no Christian Catholic man
ever affirming, that our Savior at his last supper shed his blood after a
carnal cruel manner: but after the manner of gifts, and clean unbloody
Sacrifices, to the fulfilling of the Prophecies cited before in the 8. and 10.
Chapters.

11. Our adversaries confess that our Lord at his last Supper administered the
communion unto the Apostles: and it is never read of any sect, or sort of
people in former ages that they communicated together, and not of meat offered
in Sacrifice to God, except the Epicures and Atheists, as I have proved in the
6. Chapter of this book. Wherefore seeing that our Savior at his last supper
administered the holy communion; it is manifest, that he offered first sacrifice
in the meat which he delivered in the communion, before he delivered it; and
bloody Sacrifices being to cease in the new law, as I have proved; it
necessarily follows that our Savior at his last supper offered unbloody
Sacrifices of gifts, and administered the communion of the same: and that these
gifts, or unbloody Sacrifices were his body and blood, under the species of
bread and wine: seeing he in plain and express terms says of them: This is
my body which is given for you Luk 22. This is my body which is broken for you.
1. Cor. 11. This is my blood which is shed for you. Luke 22.

12. And after that our Savior at his last supper had offered a Sacrifice of
gifts, or an unbloody Sacrifice in his body and blood, and had communicated the
Apostles of the same, he presently by an express command established the said
kind of Sacrifice in his Church, for a commemoration of him saying: Do this
(the same which he then did) for a commemoration of me Luk 22; And this do ye
for the commemoration of me 1. Cor. 11. 24. Whereupon the Catholic anciens
Fathers believed that our Savior at his last supper offered unbloody
Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of gifts in his body and blood; and therefore sometimes
call the Sacrifice of the new law Gifts, sometimes unbloody sacrifice, as all
one thing, as I will show more at large in the next chapter,

CHAP. XII. The ancient Fathers believed that our Lord at his last supper
offered unbloody sacrifice in his body and blood, and established the same in
his Church.
1. FIrst, all the Catholic ancient Fathers, were The Fathers, Bishops or
Priests.
either Bishops or Priests, or both, and either daily, or often used and
practiced Liturgies, or public Church service books which teach the offering
of unbloody Sacrifice in the body, and blood of our Lord in their Churches,
and the administration of the Sacrament: as the protestant Bishops, and
ministers of England use the book of the order for the administration of the
Lords supper in their Churches: so they could not, but believe and teach, that
our Lord at his last supper offered unbloody Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of gifts
in his body, and No ancient books of the administatio^ of the Communion, but
teach unbloody Sacrifice.
blood, and established the same in his Church; unless our adversaries will
make them atheists, and hypocrites to say and do one thing, and believe
another. For there neither is, nor ever was before the rebellion of Luther,
amongst any sect or sort of Christians (reputed heretics to both parties
only excepted) any book of the administration of the holy communion, but those
which teach how to offer unbloody Sacrifice, in the body, and blood of our
Lord, and how to administer the communion in the same.

2. This is first manifest by the practice, and proceeding of our Adversaries
themselves; Protestant Bishops and Priests, are nevve inventions.
who when they did resolve in the 2. year of King Edward the sixth a child to
forsake the Catholic Religion, and faith in this point, and to have a
Religion wherein there should be noe offering of unbloody Sacrifice, or
receiving the body and blood of our Lord from the hand of a Priest, or Altar;
could not find before the time of the Rebellion of Luther any one Bishop, or
Priest, who had taken such orders, or was ordained a Bishop, or Priest of such
a Religion (known and reputed heretics to both parties only excepted) by
whom they could, or might have such Bishops and Priests made; nor yet any book
in the whole Christian world in the ages before Luther, where in they might, or
could find the forms, or manner of making, and consecrating such kind of
Bishops, or Priests. But seeing they would needs have such a kind of Bishops,
and Priests, and such a kind of Religion, they were forced to invent a new
form and manner of making, and consecrating Bishops and Priests, conformable
unto their desires; as appears by their book entitled, The form and manner
of making, and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

3. And this their form and manner of making those their Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons is so dissonant from all the manners and forms used before the
rebellion of Luther, that in the 36. Article of their own religion,
established by act of Parliament, they confess, that this their said book, is
a book, Lately set forth in the time of Edward the fixed, and confirmed at the
same time by authority of Parliament, and never before either The making of
Protestat Clergy, a late invention
set forth, or confirmed by any Council, or Parliament, but then divised, as
witnesses the statute it self, of the 3 and 4 year of Edward the sixth, in
the 12, act: saying: Be it enacted by the Kings Highness etc. that such form
and manner of making Protestant Clergy devised in the time of Edward the sixth.
and consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other
Ministers of the Church, as by six other men of this Realm learned in Gods
law, by the Kings Majesty to be appointed, and assigned, or by the most number
of them, shall be devised for that purpose and set forth under the great Seal
of England, before the first day of April next coming, shall by virtue of
this act be lawfully exercised and used, and none other, any other statute
law, or usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Thus this statute:
whereby we see that before the time of Edward the sixth, all the Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests etc. were so ordained, to offer unbloody Sacrifices in the
body and blood of our Lord: that our aduersaires could not find a form or
manner of making Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and who should not offer
unbloody sacrifice: but were forced to invent, and devise, as the statute
says, a new one; and this so contrary to the 3. Creeds and promises of God
unto his Church, that Thomas Rogers a Protestant Glosser upon the articles of
their Religion in his book entitled, The English Creed, at the end of the 36.
article ingeniously The Protestant Clergy no Catholics.
confesses: that this article (of the consecration of Protestant Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests etc.) is noe article of the Catholic Church, as a thing no
where to be found amongst Catholic Christians, but then devised by
Protestants.

4. And after that they had devised a form, and manner of making Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests etc who should not offer Sacrifice: in all the ages before
Luther (except only known and reputed heretics, atheists, and Epicures to
both parties) they could not find a book where the office of these kind of men
was set down without offering of sacrifice: but were also forced to invent a
new book of offices, for their said Bishops and Priests, called, The order for
the administration of the Lords supper never heard of to have been used amongst
any sort of men before Luther (except above excepted) as witnesses the said
book, or Order for the administration of the Lords supper, set down in the
end of their book of common prayer: and the statutes of the 5. and 6. year of
Edward the sixth; and first year of Queen Elizabeth, and experience it self:
our adversaries not being able to find any such book set forth for the
administration of any Lords supper amongst any sect or sort of men, from the
beginning of the world until the rebellion of Luther, known and reputed
heretics, atheists and Epicures to both parties only excepted.

5. The Apostles themselves believing that our Lord ordained them Bishops, and
Priests to offer unbloody Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of Gifts in his body and
blood, for a commemoration of The form of making Bishops, and Priests, set
dvvne by the Apostles
him, set forth also a form, or manner of consecrating other Bishops and
Priests, to offer unbloody Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of Gifts in his body and
blood, for a commemoration of him in the 8. book of their constitutions: where
in the consecration of a Bishop, the Consecrator says: Give unto him (that is
consecrated) o Almighty Lord, by thy Christ, the participation of the holy
Ghost, that he may have power to remitt sins, according to thy command, and
of loosing all bands, according to the power which thou have given unto the
Apostles, and of pleasing thee in meekenes, and purity of heart, by offering
unto thee always without fault and without sin, a pure and unbloody
Sacrifice, which by Christ thou have established the mystery of the new
Testament, as a fragrant smell of sweetenes. For as the Apostles say in the
last chapter of their said book: The only begotten Christ did not take this
honor to himself, but was instituted a cheef Priest by his Father, who being
made man for our sakes, and offering a spiritual host (his spiritual body)
to his God and Father, before his passion, and ordained us only, that we
should do the same when there were others with us whereof some also believed
in him: but whosoever does believe, was not forth with made a Priest or
obtained the degree of Episcopal dignity. And we offering a pure and
unbloody Sacrifice as our Lord ordained, have chosen Bishops, and Priests, and
seven Deacons. Thus the Apostles in their constitutions: and for the proof of
their authenticalnes, I referr you to the preface of Franciscus Turrianus, set
before them. The form and manner of making or consecrating Bishops, and
Priests thus established, there was never any Catholic Priest ordained, who
was not ordained to offer unbloody Sacrifice, or sacrifice of gifts in the
body and blood of our Lord, as witness all the Pontificals, or books set
forth for the ordayning of Bishops and Priests in the Church of God; nor ever a
catholic Bishop or Priest who had not for office the offering of unbloody
Sacrifice, or sacrifice of gifts in the Church of God. Whereupon S. Basil
Bishop of Capadocia (as witnesses Amphilochius in his life) desired of God
that he would give him wisdom, and understanding to write a Liturgy, or
public Church-seruice book with his own hand wherein he might offer
unbloody Sacrifice to God; and continueing in his prayer, our Lord appeared
unto him in a vision and said: According to thy petition, let thy mouth be
filled with praise in such sort as by thy proper words, thou may offer
unbloody Sacrifice. Again in his Anaphora, he prays saying: Thou o Lord make
us worthy that we may stand before thee with a pure heart and minister unto
thee, and may offer unto thee this reverend and unbloody Sacrifice for the
remission of our sins.

6, So likewise S. Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinopole, not only in his
Liturgy prays unto God that he may assist at his fearful Sanctuary, and
finish the unbloody Sacrifice without offense: but also affirms that Christ
as Lord of all, has delivered unto us the celebration of this solemn and
unbloody Sacrifice. And sometimes calls it, unbloody Sacrifice, sometimes
gifts, which was so extended all over that world in his time, that in his
homily upon the 95. Psalm. he says: In every place there are Altars, as God
foretold by the Prophet (Malachie) for expressing the Ecclesiastical
sincerity (of the new law) and laying open the ingratitude of the People of
the old law, he says unto them I have no will in you, says the Lord
omnipotent, and hosts I will not receive at your hands; for from the rising of
the sun unto the goeing down, my name is glorified among the Gentiles, and in
every place sacrifice is offered unto my name and a pure Sacifice. See how
plainly how manifestly he has set forth that mystical Table which is the
unbloody Sacrifice etc. The pure Sacrifice is certainly the chief mystical
Table, the heavenly and most venerable Host. so S Chrysostom.

7. In like manner, the rest of the ancient Fathers The ancient Fathers agree
able to the ancient Liturgies.
do also call the Sacrifice of the new law, somctimes gifts, and sometimes
unbloody sacrifices. As S. Dionisius Areopagita in the 5. chapter of his
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, saying: The Bishop after that he has showed the
gifts of the divine works, comes to communicate them himself and also
inuiteth others. Again: The Bishop does show the covered gifts, and that
which in them is one, he divides Unbloody Sacrifices called gifts.
into many. S. Clement in the 12. chapter of his 8. book of constitutions,
speaking of the sacred host after consecration says: We beseech thee (o Lord
(favorably to look upon these gifts set before thee. And in the 13.
chapter, he earnestly beseeches God, to receive the said Gifts offered for
all Bishops, Priests, Kings and the people there present and the whole Church.
Theodoret in his 2. Dialogue says, What do You call the gifts which are
brought before the invocation of the Priest? Answers: It is made of such like
seed. And after the sanctification, how do you call those things? Answers:
The body of Christ.

8. S. Ireneus in the third chapter of his 4. book of heresies says: Christ
taught the new oblation of the new testament, which the Church receiving Gifts
in the new Testament.
from the Apostles offers throughout the whole world to God, who gives us
for nourishment, the first fruits of his gifts in the new Testament. So
likewise, the 318. Fathers in the first general great Council of Nice in the 5.
cannon, according to the Greek copy, call the sacrifice of the new Law, A
most pure gift offered to God. Where we may observe, that those ancient Fathers
do call the sacrifice and Sacrament of the new Law Gifts of the divine
works, and a most pure gift, before they were received in the communion as
being the body and blood of our Lord independent of the faith of the receiver.

9. And in like manner the ancient Fathers do call the sacrifice of the new
Law, an unbloody sacrifice; as Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea in the 10. chapter
of his first book of Evangelical demonstrations saying: We are taught by the
most high Priest of all to offer unto the supreme God throughout our whole
life unbloody and reasonable victims sweet unto him. S. Gregory Nazianzen in
his first oration Julian the Apostata hated unbloody Sacrifices.
against Julian the apostata showing the auersion which this apostata had from
the sacrifice of the Altar, says: He profaned his hands that he might wash
them from the unbloody sacrifice, by which we communicate Christ, and his
sufferings, and divinity.

10. S. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, in declaratione Anathematismi 11. says We
offer the holy quickening, and unbloody sacrifice in the Church, believing
the body and precious blood which is set before us, to be not of a common
man, and like unto us, but of the word. Again in his book, de adoratione in
spirituli. 13. The table truly of proposition having bread upon it, did
signify our unbloody host wherewith we all are blessed, whilst we eat that
bread which is from heaven; that is to say Christ.

11. And it was a thing, so generally received in the Church of God, and so
universally believed of the whole primitive Church, that our Savior at his
last supper instituted an unbloody Sacrifice, clean oblation or gifts in his
body and blood to be offered by Bishops and Priests for a commemoration of
him; that three of the 4. first general Counsels, which ever were celebrated
in the Church of God, call the Eucharist or thing delivered in the communion,
the unbloody sacrifice: as the great general Council of Nice which was the
first general counsel which ever was celebrated in the Church of God, saying
In the time of the first general counsel of Nice, they offered unbloody
sacrifice.
in the third book and title of the divine table: Let us understand the Lamb
of God which takes away the sins of the world, to be placed upon the table
sacrificed after an unbloody manner by Priests.

12. In like manner S. Cirill Archbishop of Alexandria chief of the general
Council of Ephesus in the 26. Epistle set down in the first part of the same
Council writes after this manner unto Nestorius the heretic: for whose
condemnation In the time of the Council of Ephesus, they offered unbloody
sacrifice.
that Council was called; saying: I cannot omit this, that whilst we declare,
the death of the only son of God, and his resurrection from death, we also
confess his assumption into heaven, and celebrate the unbloody sacrifice in
the Church, and approach unto the mystical blessings, by which means we are
sanctified, as being made partakers of the holy flesh, and precious blood of
Christ the Savior of us all. Neither do we receive it as common flesh; God
forbidd we should do so, nor yet as the flesh of a holy man etc. But we
receive it as truly quickening flesh, and as proper flesh of the word it felfe
(which was incarnate.) Thus S Cyrill Chief in the general Council, to the
heretic Nestorius.

13. And in the 4. general Council which In the time of the Counced of
Calcedon they offered unbloody sa;crifice.
was that of Calcedon, Ischyrion, Deacon of Alexandria preferring in the third
act of the Council a bill of complaint unto the Council against Dioscorus
Archbishop of Alexandria a wicked man (amongst other things) accuses him of
this as of agreat crime: that whereas in Lybia for the sterilitie of the
country, wheat would not grow, the most pious Emperor; allowed wheates first
that (as he says) the unbloody host might be offered of it; and secondly for
the relief of Pilgrims, and the poor of the province: Dioscorus would not
permit the holy Bishops of the country to receive the said wheat, but would
forestall, it and buy it up with great sums of money; and in time of famine,
sold it again at most dear rates; and by these means, neither the terrible,
and unbloody sacrifice (as there it is termed) was celebrated nor the Pelgrims
or poor relieved. Thus Ischyrion in his complaint against Dioscorus the
heretic, unto the general Council of Chalcedon. Whereby it is sufficiently
manifest, that three of the four first General Councels called the Eucharist,
the unbloody sacrifice, and esteemd that our Savior at his last supper
offered unbloody sacrifice, or gifts unto God.

14. To this we may add the second Council of Nice, in the third Tcme of the
sixth section, saying: The 2. Council of Nice.
None of the Apostles, or of our famous fathers called our unbloody Sacrifice
which is donn in commemoration of Christ our Lord and all his dispensations,
the image of his body. Again, a little after in the same place, the said
Council says: Neither our Lord, or the Apostles, or Fathers ever called the
unbloody Sacrifice, which is offered by the Priest, an Image or sign. So
these four general Councels. Whereby it is manifest unto any indifferent
Reader, that our Savior at his last Supper offered in his body and blood, a
proper and special, visible, external unbloody Sacrifice; and ordained that
a proper, and special, visible, external, unbloody Sacrifice representing
the inward and invisible Sacrifice of our hearts, should be offered unto God in
his Church by Bishops and Pristes, thereby to honor God with divine worshipp,
or Latria only due to him; make commemoration of the passion of our Savior for
us, and preserve peace unity, and societiewith God and amongst our selves.
After what manner our Savior died for all.


15. For though our Savior died for all and his Sacrifice upon the Cross is
of such a value and virtue that it alone (for as much as is required on the
behalf of our Savior for the redemption of mankind), was sufficient to
redeem a thousand worlds, if there were so many: yet because this Sacrifice
of redemption was donn but once; and neither could, nor needed to be donn any
more; and our Savior did not, neither was it convenient that he should so
redeem mankind by his death, and passion, as that man on his part should have
nothing to do for his salvation, but only idly to believe, that Christ died
for him, and assure himself that he should be saved: therefore he ordained
that all those who would be saved should not only believe the whole articles
of the Faith which he planted upon earth; S. John saying in his second Epistle;
Every, one that reuolteth, and persisteth not in the doctrine of Christ, has
not God, but also that they should do those things which he has commanded,
comparing the rest unto fools, saying: Every one that hears these my
words, and does them not, shall be like a foolish man that built his house upon
the sand. Matthew. 7. Wherefore all those who are of years of discretion, and
will not be nombred amongst these fools, and perish eternally, are to offer
unbloody Sacrifice to God, thereby to honor God, with the worship of Latria,
due only unto him, apply the Sacrifice of the Cross unto them, make
commemoration of the Passion of our Lord, and fulfill his Commands. For as our
Savior commanded the Apostles to teach, and baptize, saying: Teach ye all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. Matthew. 28. 19: so also he commanded them to offer unbloody
Sacrifice, saying, after he had given his body for us: Do this for a
commemoration of me Luke 22.

16. If our Savior by his Sacrifice of Redemption upon the Cross should have
redeemed all If our Savior had redeemed all men with out doing any thing on
their parts, he had destroyed all moral virtues.
men absolutely, without requiring any thing to be donn on their parts, but
only to believe; he had destroyed all moral virtues, as patience, obedience,
humility, justice, fortitude, temperance etc. and also those theological
virtues of charity, and hope; and had been a means to plant idleness, sloth,
sin, and the works of the Devil amongst men: which is absurd; seeing that
as S. John says: For this appeared the Son of God, that he might dissolve
the works of the Devil. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. And the sin of sloth is to be
punished with everlasting torments. Matthew. 25. 26. And this is sufficieot to
show, how the ancient Fathers believed, that our Lord at his last supper
offered unbloody Sacrifice in his Body, and blood, and established the same
in his Church.

CHAP. XIII. The whole Christian world before Luther, believed that our Savior
at his last supper offered unbloody Sacrifice or Sacrifice of Gifts, in his
body and blood, and established them in his Church.
1. THe whole Christian world which was Unbloody sacrefice dilated over the
world.
before the Rebellion of Martin Luther, believed that our Lord at his last
Supper offered unbloody sacrifice, or sacrifice of Gifts, in his body and
blood, and established them to be used in his Church until the end thereof; as
witness all the Apostles, and Apostolical men's Liturgies, or public Church
service Books, both ancient, and modern which have been used before the
rebellion of Luther in any country, province, city, or parish in any part
of the Christian world, or by any known sect, or sort of men, (known and
reputed heretics to both parties only excepted:) all which books were made,
chiefly to express what passed at the last supper of our Lord, and to retain
in the Christian world a pious memory, and commemoration of him according to
his command, saying: Do this (the same which he then did) in commemoration of
me. In execution whereof, all those Liturgies, or public
Church-seruice-bookes were putt forth either by the Apostles themselves, or
Apostolical men; as witness the books themselves; unto which books howsoever
some prayer, names of Saints, or the like may be added, which is commonly donn
according to the necessity of the time, and the worthiness of Saints, arising
up in the Church of God: yet by the consent of both the Greek and Latin
Church, and all Christian Catholic men (in this point of the commemoration of
the Passion of our Lord, and expression of what passed at the institution of
the B. Sacrtment) there is noting added of moment, or substance.

2. And this does appear by the books themselves, All catholic public
Church-seruice books agree in sacrifice.
which though they have been dispersed in all ages and times, since they were
made through Christendom, and were penned by diverse of the Apostles, or
Apostolical men; yet in matter of the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the new Law
they all agree in one, and so uniformly express, the commemoration commanded
to to be observed, by our Lord at his last supper, by divine Gifts, or
unbloody Sacrifice in his body and blood; as though they had all in this
point, been penned at diverse times, by one man, and used in one city or
Church: which could never have been, if any of the said books had in this
point been corrupted. For to corrupt them all, in those mysteries which the
Christian Catholics have ever esteemed to be sacred, and all their
corruptions to agree in this point, they being for the most part daily and
publicly used, and practiced in all the Curches of Christendom, and no known
Christian Catholic man to take notice of such a general corruption, was a
thing impossible; as we see by experience in things of lesser moment, and more
rarely practiced, and of meaner account and reckoning. Neither could the whole
Christian Catholic Church (the promises of God unto his Church considered) so
suddenly decaie after the death, and Passion of our Lord, that in all
Christendom there should be no known public practice, of the right
administration of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord.

3. And if we look in to the first Liturgy or public Church service book
which was made The Christian unbloody sacrifice begunn at Jerusalem.
in the Apostles times for the Church of Jerusalem, where the Gospel first
began, and from whence it was to be spredd, and preached unto all nations,
according to the words of our Lord: Luck 24. 47. Act. 1. 8. as into the
Liturgy which was made by S. James the Apostle for the Church of Jerusalem,
whereof he was instituted Bishop by the Apostles, as witnesses Eusebius in the
22. chapter of his 2. book of histories; which Liturgy is also confirmed to
be his by the 32. Canon of the 6. general Council, by Proclus Bishop of
Constantinople, in his Tradition of the Divine Liturgy, and S. Cirill Bishop
of Jerusalem in his 5. Catechesis both which lived above 1200. years past,
and see what will be found there, it will direct us in all the rest.

4. In this Liturgy the Priest says: Lord, thou S. James his Liturgy.
have granted that we should confidentlie approach unto thy holy Altar, and
offer unto thee this reverend and unbloody Sacrifice for our sins etc. Let it
please thee, that these Gifts which we offer with our hands, may be
acceptable unto thee etc. Do not turn away from us sinners handeling tbis
fearful, and unbloody Sacrifice etc. Let it please thee o Lord that we may
be ministers of thy new testament, and sacrifice of thy immaculate mysteries,
and admit us approaching unto thy holy Altar according to the multitude of
thy mercies, that we may be worthy, who would offer unto thee Gifts, and
sacrifice for our selves, and for those sins which the people have committed
through ignorance. Grant us o Lord that we may offer unto thee with all fear,
and a pure concience this spiritual and unbloody Sacrifice etc. We bend our
knees unto thy goodness have mercy upon us o Lord, seeing that we worship, and
tremble when we are to aproache unto tby holy Altar, to offer this fearful,
and unbloody sacrifice for our sins, etc. We offer unto thee this venerable,
and unbloody sacrifice, etc. Send upon us and upon these gifts, thy holy
Spirit.

5. And setting down the words of consecration, he says: Jesus Christ the
night in which he was betrayed, or rather, the night in which be delivered
himself for the life, and salvation of the world, taking bread into his holy,
immaculate, blameless, and immortal hands, looking up into heaven, and
showing to thee God, and father, giving thanks, sanctifying, breaking, he gave
unto us his disciples and Apostles, saying: Take ye and eat, this is my body
which is broken for you, and is given for the remission of sins. In like
manner after he had supped, taking the Chalice, and mingling wine and water,
and looking into heaven and showing to thee God and Father, giving thanks,
Sanctifying, blessing, filling with the holy Ghost, he gave unto us his
disciples saying: Drink ye all of this; This is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shedd for you, and for many, and is given for the
remission of sins; do this for a commemoration of me; for as often as you
shall eat this bread, and drink this Chalice, you do show forth the death of
the Son of man, and do confess his resurrection until he come.

6. And further telling us, what these Gifts, and unbloody Sacrifices were,
he says: Christ our Lord does come forth, that he may be immolated, and given
for meat to the faithful. And putting a part of the consecrated bread into
the Chalice, mingling them together he says: The union of the most precious
body and blood of our Lord and God, and Savior Jesus Christ. And sygning the
consecrated bread, he says: Behold the lamb of God the Son of the Father,
who takes away the sins of the world, slain for the life and salvation of
the world. Thus S. James the Apostle; and much more to this effect in his
Liturgy, or public Church-seruice book, which he made for the Church of
Jerusalem, whereof he was Bishop.

7. And the like has all the rest of the Liturgies, or public
Church-seruice-bookes which were made by the rest of the Apostles, and
Evangelists, or Apostolical men, for the countries, and Provinces which they
had under their charge, or which they had converted unto the Christian
Catholic faith, to the publishing, and dilating the unbloody sacrifice or
sacrifice of Gifts in the body and blood of our Lord; which was begun in
Jerusalem by our Lord, and the Apostles, all over the world, for a
commemoration of our Lord, to the fulfilling of the prophecies in that kind.
As the Liturgy, or public Church-seruice Book of S. Peter made for the
Romans, and these western parts of the world. The Liturgy of S. Matthew made
for the Ethiopians and further parts of Asia, and Africa. The Liturgy of S*
Mark, made for the Egiptiens and Grecians; and so forth as they are set down
by Margarinus in his sixth Tome of his Bibliotheca Patrum. And in the first and
last Tome of the Bibliotheca Patrum, set forth by the Deuines of Colen.

8. Of these Liturgies, and public Church-seruice books, the before said
Proclus Bishop of Constantinople, in the place before cited writes thus: Very
many Pastors, and Doctors of the Church, who were famous for piety, and some
of those who succeeded the Apostles, have delivered unto the Church in writing,
the exposition of the mystitall Liturgy. Amongst whom S. Clement does
challenge the first place, who was a disciple of the Prince of the Apostles,
and declared his successor by the Apostles themselves, and S. James the first
Bishop of Jerusalem. Afterward Basil the great finding that many men
thought the former Liturgies to long, brought it into a more compendious form.
Not long after, our John who of his golden eloquence, was called Chrysostom,
having consideration of the infirmity of men, that they might have no excuse
took away many things, and prescribed a briefer form etc. After our savior
was assumptod into heaven, the Apostles before they were dispersed over the
world, being of one mind, and living together, gave themselves wholly unto
prayer, and finding great consolation in that mystical sacrifice of our Lords
body, they sunge the Liturgy at large with many prayers. Thus Proclus Bishop
of Constantinople, who lived above 1200. years past. And thus the unbloody
sacrifice, or sacrifice of the body and blood of Lord after an unbloody
manner, which was begun at Jerusalem by our Lord and the Apostles, was after
dispersed and planted all over the Christian world by the Apostles, and
Apostolical men their Successors, and has continued until this day, as we
may find by experience.

9. For our adversaries to say, that all these Liturgies, or public
Church-seruice books, which All the Liturgies could not be corrupted.
have been used by all nations, countries, and people who have bin converted by
the Apostles themselves, or Apostolical men, whose names would be to tedious
to rehearse, have in this point of the Sacrifice, and Sacrament been corrupted,
without assigning when, or where, or by what men, or means so maine sundry,
and diverse nations separated by place, government, tongues, in wars one with
another, divided many times in other points of Religion, could become so
generally corrupted in one, and the same point, and that a thing, which they
for the most part all practiced daily; is (as the Prophet says) but to excuse
excuses in sin. Psalm. 140. 4.

10. Neither may our adversaries say, as they use to do in other things, that
the Pope has brought up this, as new doctrine. For first, it was foretold by
the Prophets in the old law, before there were any Christian Popes. Secondly,
many of these nations, who use unbloody Sacrifice in the body and blood of
our Lord are so far distant from him, as that unless it were in these
late-yeares, that navigations, and traveling into strange countries has bin
more in use, they did scarcely know whether there were such a man or no; and
many of the^ remain yet in schism, and heresy, divided from the Pope; as
the Grecians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and other heretics in Egypt, the
Muscouits, and Russians.

11. Moreover, the before said Proclus in the place above cited affirms, that
by thse prayers of the Liturgy, They expected the coming of the holy Ghost,
that by his divine presence he might make the bread, and wine mixed with water,
which was prepared for the Sacrifice, the self same body and blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, which religious rite is truly observed until this day,
and shall be until the end of the world. Thus Proclus Bishop of Constantinople
about 1200. years ago; whereby it is manifest, that this doctrine of offering
unbloody Sacrifice in the body and blood of our Lord, and communicating of
the same, is no new doctrine, nor invented by any man, but instituted by our
Lord at his last supper in Jerusalem, and published over the world by the
Apostles, and Apostolic men, at the conversion of nations, as was foretold
by our Savior. Act. 1. As farther witnesses S. Hierom. in his commentaries
upon the first Chapter of Prophet Malachie, saying: In every place there is
offered an oblation, not an unclean one, as was offered by the people of
Israel: but a clean one, as is offered up in the ceremonies of the Christians.

The Conclusion
Though God be a spirit, and according to the Scriptures, is delighted with
that worship which proceeds from our spirits; yet because the foul, as long
as she is in this mortal body, cannot make her inward acts, oblations, and
Sacrifices of her self conveniently, and perfectly, except she behold the same
in some sensible oblation of a gift, or present offered visibly to God before
her, as a means, sign, or motive to move, and stir her up unto that interior
and visible Sacrifice of herself; the understanding of mortal men depending
upon the senses, according to that axiom; There is nothing in the
understanding which was not first either by it self, or by some resemblance,
in some one of the senses. Therefore God of is infinite goodness, condiscending
unto our capacities has instituted an exterior visible sacrifice in his
Church, to move and stir us up unto this interior and invisible, wherein he
so much delights: the example whereof we may find in prayer; God
understands that prayer of our hearts, and that which delights him most, is
the prayer of the heart and mind; yet because the operations, and acts of the
soul in this life, depend upon the organs of the body and senses, therefore
God has instituted vocal prayer, or prayer with the mouth in his Church, ^s a
sensible sign to provoke the heart fervently ^o pray and praise him: so that
those who would have men to practice and use the invisible sacrifice of their
hearts to God, and yet deny them the exercise of exterior visible Sacrifice;
are like unto those who would have men pray in their hearts, and study to
become learned, and yet permit them no books, nor exterior means to learn.
Which our most blessed Lord considering, at the institution of the new law,
left us not without an exterior visible sacrifice, but instituted it in his
body and blood under the curtains of bread and wine, the more powerfully to
move and stir up in us, the sacrifice of our hearts to God, by the
excellency, and eminency of the outward object, as I shall show, more at
large in the ensuing books.

FINIS.
CENSVRA.
TRractatus hic de Sacrificio, nihil continet quod aut rectae Fidei, aut bonis
moribus repugnet; imprimi itaque poterit and divulgari.

Louanij. 12 Febr. 1637. Antonius Louerius S. T. L, Apost. and Regius lib.
Censor.

OF THE VISIBLE SACRIFICE IN THE CHVRCH OF GOD.

THE SECOND PART.

Written by ANONYMVS EREMITA.

Sacrifice ye the Sacrifice of Justice, and hope in our Lord. Psalm. 4. 6.

Engraving of women

AT BRVXELLES, By HVBERT ANTONY Velpius, Printer to his Majesty. 1638.

THE PREFACE.
REligion (says S. Thomas in 22. quest: 81. Art. 1.) is a virtue by which men
give to God due worshipp and reverence: wherein he agrees with S. Augustine,
(in his book of the nature of God) saying: It is the office of religion to give
due honor unto God. And the honor and worshipp which is chiefly, and most
properly due unto God is the invisible Sacrifice of the heart, and the outward
visible Sacrifice of some creature to express the invisible Sacrifice of the
soul, as words do things, which is properly Latria or service due unto God,
as God and Creator of all things, as I have showed more at large in the 5. and
6. Chapters of the first part. Whereupon it comes to pass, that without the
offering of visible Sacrifice, there cannot be any perfect Religion; for though
some of the more pious sort of men, by a longer custom, and much practice, may
attain unto a continual, or often invisible Sacrifice of their hearts, by
inward anagogicall acts without the help of exterior visible Sacrifice; yet
because the minds of men in this life, depend upon the organs of the body for
their knowledge and operations, therefore they have need, to be lead by the
hand of sensible and visible things unto God, and invisible: because as S.
Paul says in the first to the Romans, the invisible things of God are known
by the visible, and the increated by the creature, and cannot in this life be
well known, or learned of man by other means. Therefore Religion cannot stand
without visible Sacrifice, which may as by a sign, or motive, conduct the
minds of men unto the invisible of the heart; so to be united unto God.

Again, the strength of a kingdom is the unity, or concord of the subjects
amongst themselves, and with their Sovereign under God; and by visible
Sacrifice, not only a league of freindshippe, and civil unity is made
amongst men, by the participation and communion of the thing, that is
sacrificed, as is proved in the 2. chapter of the first part; but also there
passes, as it were a covenant betwixt God and them, whereby they become his
particular people, and he their God, and Protector, without whose particular
providence and protection, no common wealth can either prosper or stand.
VVhereupon it comes to pass, that there cannot be any perfect common wealth
or well framed monarchy, without the offering of visible Sacrifice to God; for
which cause Aristotle, in the 7. of his politickes, speaking of the things
which are precisely necessary to the preservation of a commonwealth (guided
by the light of abondant reason) gives order that Special care be had of the
Sacrifice to the Gods: because this is the end and office of visible Sacrifice,
to unite men with God, and amongst themselves; as further witnesses S.
Augustine in the 5. Chapter of his 10. book of the City of God; saying:
Whatsoever things we read, to have been commanded by God diverse ways,
concerning sacrifices in mystery of the tabernacle, or of the temple, they are
referred unto the love of God, and of our neighbor; by which love peace,
unity, and concord, the commonwealth is established. Wherefore, seeing that
some kind of exterior visible Sacrifice, is so absolutely necessary, both to
the state of Religion, and the perfection of a common wealth, as that they
cannot well stand, or be without them, it cannot be that Jesus Christ our Lord,
the wisdom of his eternal Father, should either establish a Religion, or
plant a common wealth amongst men without the institution of a daily Sacrifice,
as I shall show more at large, in the ensuing chapters.

CHAP. I. Our Savior at his last supper instituted an unbloody Sacrifice, or
Gifts in his body, and blood, to be offered to God, in commemoration of him.
Our Savior coming into this world, not to destroy Religion, or take away
the honor, or worshipp due unto God, and the peace, unity, and society of men
with God, and amongst themselves; but to plant a more eminent Religion,
increase the honor of his eternal Father, and establish a more perfect peace,
union, and society between God and men, and of men amongst themselves, that
they might be The end of Christ's coming was peace, and unity of men with God
and amongst themselves.
one, as he and his Father are one, according to his word saying: That they all
may be one as thou Father in me, and I in thee, and they also in us may be one.
Ioh. 18. 21. To effect this his union, as soon as he had ended the external
visible Bloody Sacrifice of the Pascall Lamb, wherewith the Children of the
Church were united, and communicated in the old law, he presently instituted
the exterior, visible and unbloody Sacrifice, or Gifts of the new Law in his
body, and blood, under the species of bread and wine, that his Church should
not no for a little time, be without a Law, Religion, and particular exterior
Sacrifice, or God, without Sacrifice the means of unity.
his visible honor of Latria, or divine worship due only unto him, or the
Children of his Church, without that means of unity with him and amongst them
selves, which he desired. For after that the Sacrifice of the Pascall Lamb was
ended, before he arose from the table, taking bread he gave thanks, and brake,
and gave to the Apostles, Our Savior instituted Sacrifice in his last supper.
saying: This is my body which is given for you. Luc. 22. 20. Where first it
is necessary to observe that our Savior does not say, this is my body which
is given to you, as a Sacrament only to eat; but which is given for you to
God, as a Gift, or unbloody Sacrifice offered, or given to God.

2. Secondly, it is necessary to observe, that of the two kinds of
Sacrifices, which had been used in the Church from the beginning of the world,
the one was called Gifts, or unbloody, as I have proved at large in the 11.
Chapter of the first part: and the other bloody; both which were to be
fulfilled by our Savior at his coming, who came not to break the Law but, to
fulfill, Mat. 5. and to perfect those things which in the Law of nature, and
written Law were done in types, and figures of us: as witnesses S. Paul 1.
Cor. 10. and Heb. 7. therefore our Savior here at his last supper, to show that
he instituted an unbloody Sacrifice Why our Savior said This is my Body which
is given for you.
of Gifts, to be used in his Church in the new Law, to the fulfilling of the
Types, and Prophecies of the Law of Nature, and old Law concerning unbloody
Sacrifices, or Sacrifices of Gifts, said: This is my Body which is given for
you: and does not say, This is my Body which is Sacrificed for you: The better
to express himself, that here at his last supper, he instituted Gifts, or
Unbloody Sacrifices in his Body, to be given to God for us, in his Church,
until the end of the world, to the fulfilling of the Types, and figures, and
Prophecies in the Law of Nature, and old Law, concerning Gifts, or unbloody
Sacrifices. Whereupon the Scriptures, indifferently do use the words, Christ
gave himself Christ to give his Body for us, and to offer Sacrifice, is all one.
for us; And Christ offered himself for us, is all one, saying: Jesus Christ
gave himself for our sins. Gal. 1. Again: Jesus Christ gave himfelf, a
Redemption for all. 1. Tim. 2. 6. Again: Jesus Christ gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity. Tit. 2. 14. Whereby we see, that
to say: This is my Body, which is given for you: And, This is my Body which
is offered in Sacrifice for you, is all one according to the phrase of
Scriptures: only to say: This is my Body which is given for you, does more
fittly, and properly explicate, the Sacrifice of Gifts, or clean oblation, and
unbloody Sacrifice, which our Savior as high Priest of the Order of
Melchisedech, was to establish in his Church until the end of the world,
according to the Prophecies, Psalm. 109. 4. Heb. 7. 11. and 12. Mal^ 1. 10.

3. Thirdly, it is necessary to observe, that our Savior does not say here:
This is my body, which shall be given for you as, to be given afterward upon the
Cross: but, which is given for you, as at that present time. For we must
observe, that when our lord gave himself upon the Cross; He gave himself (as
S. Paul says, Tit. 2. 12.) a Redemption for all. So here, to distinguish from
the giving or offering himself upon the Cross, and to take away al
suspicion, or imagination, that here he should speak of the giving of his
body upon the Cross, he says: This is my body which is given for you, as in
an unbloody Sacrifice and not for all men, as in the bloody Sacrifice of the
Cross. And after that our Or Savior commanded the offering of unbloody
Sacrifice in his body.
Lord had offered Gifts, or unbloody Sacrifice, in his body to God, and
communicated the Apostles of the said Gifts, or Sacrifice, he then gave them a
command, saying: Do this for a commemoration of me; and instituted an
unbloody Sacrifice, clean oblation, or Sacrifice of Gifts in his body, to be
used in his Church, and gave the Apostles, and their Successors rightly
ordained, authority to offer an unbloody Sacrificie, or clean oblation, or
Gift, in his body for commemoration of him, until he come to Judgment, to the
verifying of that which was spoken by the Prophet Malachie, saying: From the
rising of the Sunn, even to the going down, great is my name amongst the
Gentiles, and in every place there is Sacrificing, and there is offered to my
name a clean oblation.

4. In like manner, our Savior, Taking the Chalice, he gave thanks, and gave
to the Apostles, saying: Our Savior instituted an unbloody Sacrifice in his
blood.
Drink ye all of this, for this is mi^ my blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many, unto remission of sins: Math. 26. or: This is my blood of the
new Testament, that is shed for many Mar. 14. or: This is the Chalice the new
Tectament in my blood, which is shed for you. Luc. 22: as it is in ihe original
greek, and as Protestants and Puritans translate these texts. Where first we
are to observe, that he does not say, this is my blood which is shed to you, as
in a communion only to eat, but which is shed for you to God, as an unbloody
Sacrifice, where there was no carnal, but spiritual effusion of blood.

5. Secondly, we must observe, that when our Savior shed his blood upon the
Cross, he shed it for all the world, as witnesses the Scripture 2. Cor. 5.
14. 2. Cor. 5. 19. 1. Ioh. 4. 14. and therefore to distinguish here, this his
shedding of his blood at his last Supper, from that shedding of his blood upon
the Cross, he says: This is my blood which is shed for many, or, which is
shed for you, and does no say, This is my blood, which is shed for all, Our
Savior upon the Cross shed his blood for all: and at his last Supper for many
only.
to show that here at his last Supper, he did not shed his blood for all men,
as he did upon the Cross, but for many; as for these only of his Church etc.

6. It is to be noted, that the blood, which was here shed, was in a Chalice,
according to his words, saying: This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my
blood: that upon the Cross was shed out of his side, Upon the Cross our
Saviors blood was shed out of his side; at his last Supper, in a Chalice.
as witnesses the Scripture, saying: One of the Soldiers with a spear opened,
his side, and presently there came forth blood, and water. Ioh. 19. 34.

7. The Evangelists, here set down the actions of our Savior; what our Savior
did at his last Supper, and what he would have his Church to do, in
commemoratio^ of him; and not what the Jews were to act, or execute upon him
at his Passion: and therefore they say, JESUS took bread, and blessed, and
brake, and said etc. and do not here speak of what the Jews were to do at his
Passion.

8. It is to be noted, that the Sacrifice of our Savior upon the Cross, was a
Sacrifice of Redemption, which was to be applied unto us by Baptism, the
Sacraments, Faith; Hope, and Charity etc: and that this Sacrificie of his last
Supper, is a Sacrifice of Religion, commemoration, and application of that, as
a principal means, where by we may become partakers of the fruit and benefit
of that upon the The Sacrifice at the last supper, is not a Sacrifice of
Redemption, but of commemoratio^, or application of it unto us.
Cross: and therefore our Savior, says* This is my blood which is shed for
many unto remission of sins: for as many, as shall worthily use it, by way of
application, and commemoration of the Sacrifice of the Cross unto them selves,
as our Savior witnesses immediately adding: This do ye as often as you shall
drink for the commemoration of me. 1. Cor. 11. 25.

9. It is much to be noted, that by these words, This do ye, as often as you
shall drink for the commemoration of me: Our Savior, did not only give
authorite unto the Apostles, and their Successors rightly ordained, to offer
unbloody Sacrifice in Our Savior commanded a Sacrifice in the Chalice.
his blood; but also commanded them, that they should not drink of the Chalice
in commemoration of him, without first offering it in Sacrifice to God, saying:
This do ye (that is shed my blood to God for you, or for many) as often as you
shall drink for the commemoration of me; absolutely forbidding them, to make
commemoration of him, in the Chalice, or to drink of it in memory of him,
without shedding it, or offering it first in Sacrifice unto God, for many unto
the remission of sins.

10. And the causes why our Savior here binds the Apostles, and theirs
Successors, not to drink of the Chalice in commemoration of him, before they
offered it in Sacrifice to God were, first for that our Savior offering of him
felfe in Sacrifice for us, was the chief part of his Passion; in such sort as
if our Savior had died, and yed had not offered his death in Sacrifice for us;
we had received no benefitt by his Passion: and therefore he forbids the
drinking of the Chalice in commemoration of him, before it be offered in
Sacrifice. A sin te communicate not of things offered in Sacrifice.
Whereupon the sons of Hely are called sons of Beliall 1. Kings. 2: because
they would eat of the meat which was prepared for the commemoration of our
Lord, before it was offered in Sacrifice; and so left out the commemoration of
the chiefest part of the Passion of our Lord which was his volontarie offering
of himself in Sacrifice for us. Secondly in the old Law the Jews did not
drink of these Sacrifices, or commemoration of Christ to come, but only eat, as
is manifest, number. 15. 5. 7. 10. number. 28. 8. 14. In so much as, that there The
cause why our Sauoiur commanded a Sacrifice in the Chalice
was the penalty of death imposed upon those Priests, who should drink wine,
whilst they were serving in the Tabernacle: Leuit. 10. 9. And amongst all the
Jews, it was esteemed a profane thing, and a token of idolatry, to drink of
their drink offerings: Deuteronomy. 32. 30. Hest. 14. 17. Cor. 10. 7. Therefore our
Savior said: This do ye (that is, shed my blood to God for you, or offerr
unbloody Sacrifice in my blood for you) as often as you shall drink, for the
commemoratio^ of me. Otherwise if our Savior, had not given them, an expres
command, to offer the Chalice in Sacrifice, before they drunk of it; either
they would not have offered Sacrifice in the Chalice, or else they would not
have drunk of it; not to trangress the old Law, where they used not to drink of
their drink offerings in the Sacrifices, and communion; but of a cup of
ordinary wine, after the Sacrifice and communion was ended, as appears by the
ritual of the Jews.

11. And if we examine the institution of the B. Sacrament, set down by S.
Paul, we shall find also, that our Savior at his last Supper, instituted an
unbloody Sacrificie in the Sacrament of his body, and blood; S. Paul saying:
Our Lord Jesus, in the night he was betrayed, took bread, and giving thanks,
brake, and said (as it is in the original greek, and as Protestants and
Puritans translate it) take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you,
this do in remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11. 24. Where first we may observe, that
he does not say: This is my body which is broken to you, as in a Sacrament;
but which is broken for you to God, as in a Sacrifice, after the manner of
unbloody Sacrifices, which were divided, and broken, as I have showed in the
11. chapter. Secondly, our Savior, says: This is my body which is broken for
you, to express himself, that he then offered Gifts, or unbloody Sacrifice
for us to God: and commanding the Apostles, to observe that kind of Sacrifice
in his Church, adds: Do this in commemoration of me.

12. If our Savior, in administration of the communion, If our Savior had not
intended a Sacrifice, he would not have used the words proper to signify a
Sacrifice.
had not intended to offer unbloody Sacrifice, or Gifts, he would not (when
all the world used to offer Sacrificie in their Communion) have used these
words so often, which are proper to signify an unbloody Sacrifice, or Gifts;
as: This is my body which is given for you. This is my body which is broken
for you. This is the blood of the new Testament which is shed for many. This
is the Chalice, the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you: but have
left them out: for if he had not intended to offer Sacrifice, these words
would have bin better left out, and the sense of his words, would have bin
more clear, and manifest, if he had said thus: Taking bread, he gave thanks,
and gave to them, saying: Do this for a commemoration of me. And then there
would have bin no dispute, or difficulty about the text; but these former
words being in the text, and these aforesaid texts, being thus set down in
the Greek Bibles, and the Protestants and Puritans themselves translating
them after the before said manner, in their English Bibles, and the ancienet
Fathers understanding them to be spoken of unbloody Sacrifce, and the whole
known Nothing more manifest in the Bible, then, that our Savior at his last
Supper instituted a Sacrifice.
world (Atheists and Epicures only excepted) using them to communicate of
things offered in Sacrifice, as I have proved in the 3. Chapter of the first
part; there is nothing more manifest in the Bible, then that our Savior, in
the administration of the communion at his last Supper, instituted an unbloody
Sacrifice in his body and blood.

13. To this which has bin said, if we add the A Sacrifice commanded by S.
Paul in the Communion.
words of S. Paul, where he commands us, saying: As often as you shall eat
this bread, and drink the Chalice, you shall show the death of our Lord until
he come. 1. Cor. 11. 26: and our Lord not dying against his will, but
voluntarily, and willingly offering The offering of himself in Sacrifice, the
chiefest act in the Passion of our Lord.
up himself in Sacrifice for us, Isa. 53. 7. Ioh. 10. 16. 19: how can any
Christian man with reason doubt, whether we should offer Sacrifices or no, in
commemoration of his death; especially seeing, that as I have said before the
offering of himself in Sacrifice for us, is the chiefest act, whereby we
receive benefit by his sacred Passion: for if our Savior had dyed, and had not
offered, or given his life for our Redemption, we had received no benefit by
his sacred death. Whereby we see, that of all the absurdities, this is one of
the greatest, to grant (as Puritans do) that we ought, in the administration
of the Sacrament, to make a commemoration of the Passion of our Savior for us,
and yet deny, that we ought to offer Sacrifice in his commemoration; when the
offering of himself in Sacrifice for us, is the chiefest thing in his Passion,
and the greatest benefit we have received by his death, and so manifestly
expressed and commanded in the Scriptures, that we ought to show forth his
death, and give his body to God for us, as often as we shall consecrate the
Communion, as that it can not be denied: and that to communicate, and not of
things offered up in Sacrifice; is by the Scripture accounted a great sin. 1.
Kings. 2. and contrary to the practice of all Nations, as I have showed in the
first part. Wherefore our Adversaries, if they would speak, or proceed
consequenter, they should either deny, that they ought to make a commemoration
of the Passion of our Lord, in their Lords Supper: or else use an external
visible Sacrifice in their Lords Supper, to show forth the Sacrifice of our
Lord upon the Cross. And this is sufficient to manifest unto any indifferent
Reader, that our Lord at the institution of the most blessed Sacrament,
instituted an unbloody Sacrifice or Gifts in his body and blood, under the
species of bread and wine, to be offered unto God in commemoration of him.

CHAP. II. How these words, this is my body which shall be delivered for you,
import also a Sacrifice in his body.
1. IF we read this Text of S. Paul, according to the vulgar latin
translation, which says: This is my body which shall be delivered for you. 1.
Cor. 11. 24. it agrees in one, with that of S. Luke, which says: This is my
body which is given for you: and with that of the greek translation, which
says: This is my body which is broken for you; when the Scriptures say; This
is my body which is given for you; or, This is my body which is broken for you,
in the present tense, they intend, that it is then given unto God for us, after
the manner of Gifts, and unbloody Sacrifice: and where the Scriptures say:
This is my body which shall be delivered for you; or, This is my blood which
shall be shed for you; in the future tense; they intend, that it shall be shed for
us, after the manner of unbloody Sacrifice, in the Church, until the end of the
world.

2. For proof whereof as I have said before, it is first to be noted, that here
in the words of consecration, and administration of the blessed Sacrament, Our
Savior speaks of the actions of his Church and not of the Jews.
our Savior speaks of his own actions, and the actions of those, who were
to make a commemoration of him, and not of the actions of the Jews, and
therefore says: This is my body which shall be delivered for you, in
commemoration of me. So that when the Apostles were to make a co^memoration of
our Savior (as they did for the most part every day, Act. 2.) they were to
deliver that same body to God for us, and to offer Sacrifice with that body,
and not with any other; and therefore presently after these words; This is my
body which shall be delivered for you (to God) he adds; Do this in
commemoration of me; to signify, that the same body which he then delivered,
should be delivered also to God for us, in his Church, until he come again.
And this is manifest by the text it self: for S. Paul, who sets it down,
relates what S. Paul relates what our Savior did, and not what the Jews
were to do.
our Savior did at his last Supper, and not what the Jews were to do,
against him in his Passion; saying: Our Lord Jesus, in the night he was
betrayed, took bread, and giving thanks, brake, and said: Take ye and eat,
this is my body, which shall be delivered for you, in the commemoration of me.

3. Secondly, at his Passion, and in the Sacrifice upon the Cross, his body
was not delivered by himself, to be crucified, but by Judas, and the The
Jews delivered our Savior to be crucified.
Jews, Judas saying: What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you:
Matthew. 26. 15. And the chief Priests, and ancients of the People, brought him
bound, and delivered him unto Ponce Pilate, Matthew. 27. 1. and Pilate having
scourged Jesus, delivered him unto them, for to be crucified: Matthew. 27. 26. So
here he could not speak of the delivering of his body to be crucified: for
then (when he says: Do this in commemoration of me) he should command them,
to deliver his body to the Jews, or desire to be crucified again: which is
absurd: but he says: This is my body which shall be delivered for you, to God
in his Church, for a commemoration of me: which accordingly, when find true by
experience: for the same substantial body which he delivered then, according
to the Catholic faith, has bin ever since, and is at this time delivered for
us in commemoration of him, all over the world, to the fulfilling of these his
words: This is my body which shall be delivered for you, and of the Profecies,
and Promises, and also of this his command, Do this in commemoration of me.

4. Thirdly, if our Savior, had not intended a Sacrifice in his last Supper,
and that his true, real, and substantial body, should not be in it; he would
not have spoken these words: This is my body which shall be delivered for you:
but have left them out, and have said, take ye and eat this bread in
commemoration of me, and so it had bin a clear case, that he had neither
offered Sacrifice, nor given his body in the communion. But he being God, and
truth it self, and sent into the world to teath us the truth, and he saying in
the communion: This is my body which shall be delivered for you, this do ye for
a commemoration of me: no indifferent man can deny, but that our Savior
commanded us to give, or deliver his body to God for us, in the commemoration
which we were to make of him, or that S. Paul, and the Apostles offered not
Sacrifice in the body of our Lord, and also taught the Corinthians to offer
Sacrifice in the body of our Lord; seeing he says, that he delivered unto the
Corinthians, that manner of administrating of the communion, which he received
from our Lord. And in like manner; though the Greeks, for the most part say of
the Chalice, which is shed for you, and the Latins, for the most part say,
which shall be shed for you, as Luke 22. 20. yet they both in effect say one
thing, and importe a Sacrifice in the blood of our Lord: the greeks intending
by these words, that How is shed and shall be shed, co^curr in one.
the blood of our Lord is shed for us unto God, at that present time; and the
Latins, that it shall be shed to God for us in his Church, until the end of the
world.

5. Fourthly, our Adversaries cannot deny; but that our Savior in these
words, taught S. Paul to consecrate, and administer the holy communion; and
S. Paul the Corinthians, and did not teach what the Jews did, or were to do,
when they were to crucify our Lord; the text is so plain: So that these
words: This is my body which shall be delivered for you; or blood which shall be
shed for you; have relation unto the consecration, and administration of the
communion, and not unto the Passion of our Savior upon the Cross, inflicted
upon him by the Jews. Whereby it is most manifest, that here our Savior
says; This is my body which shall be delibered for you, and blood which shall be
shed for you, when you consecrat the communion, make commemoration of me, or
celebtate the memory of the last Supper; and so gives Bishopps and Priests
and express command, not to administer the holy communion, without offering
Sacrifice in his body and blood to God for us; which according Christ deliured
his body for us: and offered his body in Sacrifice for us all one.
to the phrase of Scripture, is all one with offering Sacrifice: the Scriptures
saying: Christ was delivered up for our sins. Romans 8. 25. God spared not his
own son: but for us delivered him, Romans 8. 31. Christ loved me, and
delivered himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loved the Church, and delivered
himself for it, Gal. 2. 25. for Christ was offered in Sacrifice, or offered
himself in Sacrifice for us.

6. Fifthly, that here our Savior does not speak of his body, and blood, as it
was to be delivered, or shed upon the Cross for our Redemption, is manifest,
for that, there upon the Cross, his body Christs' blood shed upon the Cross
for all; at his last supper for many.
was delivered, and his blood was shed for all mankind, as S. Paul witnesses
saying: Christ dyed for all. 2. Cor. 5. 14. as he shed his blood upon the
Cross, he is the propitiation for our sins (who are of his Church) and not
for ours only, but also for the whole worlds, Ioh. 2. 2. reconciling the world
unto himself. 2. Cor. 5. 19. as he delivered his body, and blood upon the
Cross, he is Savior of the world, Ioh. 4. 14. whereupon the believing
Samaritans said: We believe, and do know that this is the Savior of the world
indeed, Ioh. 4. 41. But at his last Supper, to show that he does not speak of
the giving, or delivering of his body upon the Cross, or the shedding of his
blood upon the Cross, he does not say: This is my body which shall be delivered
for all: but, this is my hody which shall be delivered for you, who are of my
Church, for to the Apostles he spoke it. And likewise, This is my blood of the
new Testament, that shall be shed for many unto remission of sins, Matthew. 26.
28. And again, This is my blood of the new Testament, that shall be shed for
many. Mark 14. 14. Whereby it is manifest unto any indifferent Reader, that
here, at his last Supper, our Savior does not speak of the delivering of his
body, or shedding of his blood, at it was upon the Cross, but at it is in the
Liturgy, or Mass, seeing he limiteth this delivering of his body unto the
Apostles, and this shedding of his blood unto many, and not unto all.

7. Our Savior here made, and established the new Testament in his blood,
saying of his blood: Our Lord at his last supper, made his Testament.
This is my blood of the new Testament. Mar. 14. Whereupon Tertullian in the 40.
chapter of his 4. book against Marcion says: Christ established his Testament
sealed with his blood, in the mention of the Chalice; and Doctor Featly a
Puritan, in the 8. chapter of his Grand Sacrilege, avoucheth that Christ
calls the cup his Testament, or last legacy. But the old Testament was not
made, or confirmed without a Sacrifice, The old Testament was dedicated with
Sacrifice; and therefore the new.
as witnesses Moses Exodus 24. and S. Paul, Hebr. the 9. Therefore neither
was the new Testament made or established without a Sacrifice; seeing that the
old, was a type of the new, and to be fulfilled in it.

8. The dedication, or making of a Testament, ought to be a man's own free act,
and will, and A Testament ought to be a man's own free will.
not the act of an other man, or men's. And the death of our Lord upon the
Cross, and the shedding of his blood upon the Cross, was the act of the
Jews, as witnesses the Scriptures, saying to the Jews: You by the hands of
wicked men, have crucified, and slain Jesus of Nazareth. Act. 2. 23. Again,
You did kill Jesus, hanging him upon a tree. Act. 5. 30. Wherefore, the
shedding of his blood, at his Passion, could not be the dedication of his
Testament: seeing that it was not his own act, but the act of the Jews; not
could be his own act, seeing that it is not lawful for any man to kill
himself. Whereby, it is manifest, that here at his last Supper, our Lord made
his Testament, and bequeathed his body, and blood unto his Church, to be
offered in an unbloody Sacrifice to God for us, and received in the communion
until he come again.

9. It is manifest to experience, that S. Paul Manifest by experience.
taught the Corinthians, and Grecians to offer unbloody Sacrifice, in the body,
and blood of our Lord, and to communicate of the same: for that the
Corinthians, and Grecians, even from their first conversion unto the faith by
S. Paul (which was many years before he writh his first Epistle to them, Act.
18. 21. and 1. Cor. 16.) used unbloody Sacrifice, and communicated of the same,
as I have proved in the 12. chapter by three of the four first general
Counsels, that is to say; the Council of Nice, Ephesus, and Calcedon, which
for the most part consisted of Grecian Bishopps. And before any of these
general Counsels, was the Provincial Council of Ancyra, in the lesser Asia,
not far from Corinth, which for the most part consisted of Grecian Bishopps of
those Provinces, unto which S. Paul had preached, before he writh this Epistle
to the Corinthians; as of the Bishopps of Antioch, Caesarea, Galatia, and
Phrigia, Act. 18. 22. and 23. yet these Bishopps offered unbloody Sacrifice, in
the body, and blood of our Lord, as appears by the 2. Canon of the said
Council, which decreed, that if a Priest, or Deacon in the time of
persecution, should offer incense unto an idol, and after recover himself,
and fuffer constantly for the faith; then he should retain the honor of his
sea, and place; but not be admitted aine more, either to offer Sacrifice, or
assist at the offering of Sacrifice, or holy Liturgy.

10. Who can better tell us, what manner of communion, S. Paul taught the
Corinthians, and Grecians, and what is the sense of these words, in S. Paul's
Epistle, which concern the holy communion, then the Corintbians and Grecians
themselves, who not only received this Epistle from S. Paul but also saw his
practice, and example a year, and a half together, Act. 18. 11. when the
custom of Priests was for the most part, to administer the communion every
day, Act. 2. 42. And amongst the Corinthians, who can better tell us, what S.
Paul did, and taught in this point, then S. Dionisius Areopagita who was
converted by S. Paul, not only S. Dionisius Bishopp of Corinth.
many years before he writh this Epistle, Act. 17. but also was the first
Bishopp of Corinth, unto whom S. Paul writ this Epistle (as withnesseth
Eusebius in the 22. chapter of his 4. book of Histories) yet he in the 3.
chapter of his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, setting down the manner, and form
which was used in his time, in the administration of the communion, shows
that they used to communicate of the body, and blood of our Lord, offered to
God in Sacrifice, as they do in the Catholic Church at this day; saying: The
Bishopp as soon as he has said holy prayers, upon the divine Altar, begins
to incense it: and proceeds to set down a short Rituall, or form of a
solemn manner of offering unbloody Sacrifice to God, in the body, and blood of
our Lord, and a communion of the same, performed by a Bishopp, and diverse
Priests, Deacons, and other Officers to assist him, as is used in great
solemnities, even unto this day, in all our Cathedral and principal Churches,
as is to be seen more at large, in the said 3. chapter of his Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, and the practice of all solemn Sacrifices, in every Cathedral
Church.

11. Now seeing that S. Paul speaking of the administration of the blessed
Sacrament, says to the Corinthians: I received of our Lord, that which also I
have delivered unto you, many years ago, when I was with you, Act. 18. 11.
and the Corinthians, and Grecians administrated the communion, in the body, and
blood of our Lord offered in unbloody Sacrifice; it is manifest that both S.
Paul taught the Corinthians, to offer unbloody Sacrifice in the body, and
blood of our Lord, and so to communicate of the same, and that our Savior
himself instituted an unbloody Sacrifice, and communion in his body, and blood.

12. Moreover, not only S. Paul had bin at The faith at Corinth, before the
vvritte^ word of this Epistle.
Corinth, before he writ this Epistle, and taught them by practice, what they
were to do in the communion, and what to believe: but also Prisilla, and
Aquilla, Act. 18. 18. Apollo, Act. 19. 1. Stephanus Fortunatus, and Achaicus,
were at Corinth, and instructed them by practice, what they ought to do in the
communion, and what to believe before this Epistle was written, as appears,
1. Cor. 16. which considered, and seeing that the Corinthians, even in the
infancy of their Church, offered unbloody Sacrifice in the body, and blood of
our Lord, and communicated of the same, as I have proved in the 12. chapter by
the consent of many Counsels, and Fathers of the primitive Church; who can
doubt, whether S. Paul taught the Corinthians, and Grecians, to offer unbloody
Sacrifice in the body, and blood of our Lord, and to communicate of the same,
that is not willing to be deceived? seeing that it is more hard, and
uncertain, for men to gather, and understand a thing delivered by an Epistle
only, and that in this point brief, and short; then both by seeing it donn,
and practiced many years, and by an Epistle also both together; when an
Epistle only, may with greater facility be altered, and changed, then a
Religion which is settled, and established in many cities, and provinces, as
we see by experience.

CHAP. III. The Scriptures, and all known Christian-mens books, who writ of
this subject before Luther (reputed heretics to both parties only excepted)
teach a Sacrifice in the body, and blood of our Lord.
1. THe Scriptures are so plain, for the institution of an unbloody Sacrifice,
or Sacrifice The Scriptures manifest for Sacrifice.
of Gifts in the body, and blood of our Lord, that S. Augustine, speaking of the
old Testament (in his Oration against the Jews, seth down in the beginning of
his 6. Tome) says unto them; Search the Scriptures, for they bear testimony
of this clean Sacrifice, which is offered unto the God of Israel, noth of your
nation only, from whose hands he foretold, that he would not receive: but of
all nations, who say, come let us ascend unto the mountain of God: not in
one place, as it was commanded you, in the earthly Jerusalem; but in every
place, even unto Jerusalem it Sacrifice offered in every place in S.
Augustines time.
self. And in like manner, preaching unto the Christians (in his first Sermon
upon the 33. Psalm) he says: Faithful men, who have read the Gospel, do
know, the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, dilated over the whole
globe of the earth. Thus S. Augustine, both unto the Jews, and faithful
Christians, whereby we gather four things; first, that in the opinion of S.
Augustine, both the old, and new Testament speak plainly, and manifestly
enough of an unbloody Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our
Lord, which was to be used in the new Law. Secondly, that the Sacrifice of the
body, and blood of our Lord, was in S. Augustins time, Dilated over the whole
globe of the earth, and believed of all faithful men. Thirdly, Why our
Adversaries read Scriptures, and find not Sacrifice for Christians.
that the cause, why our Adversaries do not, or will not believe, that we
ought to use, an unbloody Sacrifice in the body and blood of our Lord, is not,
for that the Scriptures do not sufficiently speak of it: but for that, they
are blinded with obstinacy, and obduratio^ of heart with the Jews; and so
though they read the Bible every day, and hear it read many times; yet as our
Lord said: Seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not; neither do they
understand etc. for their heart is waxen gross, The Jews deny Christian
Sacrifice.
Matthew. 13. 13. Fouerthly, our Adversaries in denying, that we ought to offer
Sacrifice in the body and blood of our Lord, do take part with the Jews, and
Gentiles, against the faithful Christians of all former ages.

2. Again S. Augustine in his said Oration against the Jews, says unto them,
as we in his words S. Augustins speech to the Jews, applied to our
Adversaries.
may say unto our Adversaries: Least you should think (o Jews) because you
do not offer Sacrifice, and that God will not receive Sacrifice at your hands,
that Sacrifice is not to be offered unto God, which he indeed does not stand in
need of, who wants not any of our goods: yet that he is not without
Sacrifice, which is not profitable unto him, but unto you: he adds and faith,
from the rising of the sun, even unto the goeing down, my nane is made
famous in all nations, and in every place, there is offered a clean Sacrifice
unto my name, for great is my name in the Gentills, says the Lord omnipotent.
What will thou answer to this (o Jew?) open thine eyes, yet at last, and see
the Sacrifice of the Christians, to be offered from the rising of the sun,
unto the goeing down, not in one place, as it was appointed for you; but in
all places; not unto any God what soever, but unto that God, who foretold
these things, the God of Israel. Thus S. Augustine against the Jews; whereby
we see, that the whole Catholic Church, dilated over the world, in S.
Augustins time, not only offered Sacrifice to God in the body, and blood of our
Lord, as they do now; but also believed, that they were taught so to do by
the Sriptures.

3. And not only in these books, S. Augustine speaks of the Sacrifice of the
Christians, offered S. Augustins often repetition of the Sacrifice of the body,
and blood of our Lord.
unto God, in the body, and blood of Christ: but also often in his other
works, he calls the Eucharist the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of
Christ: as in the 25. chapter of his first book against Cresconius, saying:
The only Sacrifice of the body it self, and blood of our Lord. And in 27.
chapter following: The Sacrifice of the body, and blood of Chist. And in the 8.
chapter of his 22. book of the City of God, he tells us, how one of his
neighbors, Hesperius by name, a Tribune, finding his cattle, and servants to
be molested by evil Spirits, came unto his Priests, in his absence, and
desired, that some one of them, would come thither, and by his prayers drive
away these wicked The Sacrifice of the body of our Lord, expelled wicked
Spirits.
Spirits: One went, and offered there (says S. Augustine) the body of Christ,
praying as well as he could, that the vexation might cease; and by the mercies
of God, it forth with ceased. And in the 10. chapter of the same book, he
says: We Sacrifice, and do immolate Sacrifice to God only; and the Sacrifice
it self, is the body of Christ. In the 11. chapter of his first book de
origin animae, he says: According to the Catholic faith, and Ecclesiastical
rule, it is by no means granted, that the participation of the body and blood
of Christ, should be offered, for such as are not baptized. Which he also
repeateth again in the 15. chapter of his 2. book.

4. In his 1. Sermon upon the 33. Psalm, he says: The sacrifice of the body
and blood of our Lord, This sacrifice spread over the whole earth.
which the faithful, who have read the Scriptures do know, was not in the
time of the old Law, which sacrifice is spread over the whole globe of the
earth. And again, in his second Sermon upon the same Psalm, he says: Christ
(at his last Supper) instituted a sacrifice of his body, and blood, according
to the order of Melchisedech. Whereupon in his 86. Epistle, he says: Christ
gave his blood to drink before his Passion. And in the 20. chapter of his 12.
book against Faustus, he says: In this Sacrament is drunck, that which flowed
out of the side of Christ. And upon the 56. Psalm he affirms; that the Jews
who crucified Christ, and afterward were converted, to believe in him, in this
Sacrament, drunck by grace the same blood which through fury they had shed.

5. And because the same body, and blood of One body and blood in all sacrifices
our Lord, is offered to God in all Christian Sacrifices, which was offered to
God in the Sacrifice of the Cross, though after an other manner; therefore S.
Augustine, in the 12. chapter of his 9. book of Confessions, calls that,
which is offered to God in Sacrifice by Christians, the Sacrifice of our
Redemtion, saying: The Sacrifice of our Redemtion, was offered for his Mother,
after her decease, at her Funerals. And in the 13. chapter of the same book,
speaking of his said Mother S. Monica, says: She desired to be remembered at
the Altar of God, where at she used to assist without pretermission of This
Sacrifice dispensed from the Altar.
any one day, and from whence she knew, that holy sacrifice to be dispensed,
whereby the hand writing was blotted out, which carried our condemnation in it,
and whereby our Enemy had triumphed over us. Thus the glorious S. Augustine,
and that according to the Scriptures, as he further affirms in the 3.
question of his 49. Epistle, saying: The sacrifice, which we Christians do now
offer, is not only demonstrated by the written word of the Ghospells; but also
by the Prophecies.

6. Neither is this expression of the Sacrifice of the body and blood our Lord
found only in S. Augustine; but also in the rest of the ancient Fathers, who
are commonly styled Doctors of the Catholic Church; as namely in S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, and S. Hierome: for the Church being in
peace in their times, the first four of these five, that is to say S. Basil,
S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory, every one of them set forth
books, where in they express the form, and manner how to offer Sacrifice in
the body and blood of our Lord with great solemnity, Fouer Doctors set forth
Missalls.
and how to administer the Sacrament in the same; which books are extant in
print, under the Titles of The Liturgy of S. Basil, The Liturgy of S.
Chrysostom, The Mass of S. Ambrose, and the Book of the Sacraments of the
circle of the year, set forth by S. Gregory the Pope. Where of the first two
are printed with their works; the latter are printed by Pamelius in his two
Tomes of the Missalls of the Latin Fathers; which Liturgies or Missalls, are in
substance the same, with those Liturgies and Missalls, which are used at this
day in the Catholic Church for the offering of Sacrifice in the body and
blood of our Lord; and also with the Liturgies and Missalls, which were before
their times; as with the Liturgy of S. Peter, S. James, S. Andrew, S. Mark,
S. Clement etc. as may manifestly appear unto any man, who shall take the
pains to view them.

7. Moreover, S. Ambrose in the 2. chapter of his 4. book of Sacraments sets
down the words, which at this day are used in the Catholic Church, in the
consecration of the Eucharist, and offering Sacrifice in the body and blood of
our Lord, saying: Will thou know how the Eucharist is consecrated by divine
words? He are the words; The Priest says; make this oblation apply able unto
us, reasonable, and acceptable, which is down upon the figure Bread a figure
of Christ's body, before consecration.
of the body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. (that is to say, upon the
bread, not yet consecrated) After it follows: Who, the day before he
suffered, took bread into his holy hands, looked up into heaven unto thee o
holy Father Almighty eternal God, giving thanks blessed, broake, and broken
gave unto his Apostles, saying: Take and eat of this all, for this is my body
which is given for you. And in like manner, he took the Chalice after he had
supped, that is the day before he suffered, looked up into heaven, unto thee
holy Father Almighty, eternal God, giving thanks, blessed, delivered to his
Apostles, saying: Take ye, and drinck ye all of it, for this is my blood:
consider every thing, he says: who the day before he suffered, he took bread
into his holy hands; therefore, it is bread before it be consecrated; but when
Christ's words do approach it is the After consecration, the Eucharist is the
body of Christ.
body of Christ. Finally, hear him saying: take ye, and eat ye all of it,
This is my body. And before the words of Christ, it is a Chalice full of wine
and water: but as soon as the words of Christ have done their work, there is
made the blood, which redeemed the People; therefore, consider after how many
sorts, the word of Christ is powerful to convert all things. And to conclude,
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, does testify unto us, that we receive his body
and blood, and ought we to doubt of his sincerity and testimony? Thus S.
Ambrose, explicating the manner of the consecration of the body and blood of
our Lord in his time, and the certainty there of in the Eucharist, before
receiving: which manner of consecration is also used in the Catholic Church,
at this day. Again in the 6. chapter of the same book, he shows that the
intent of these words: As often as you shall do this; so often you shall do
it, in commemoration of me, until I commeagaine, were to command a Sacrifice
in the commemoration of his Passion; and for that cause, he immediately adds
to these words: The Priest says; therefore mindful of his glorious Passion,
Resurrection from hell, and Ascension into heaven; we do offer unto thee, this
immaculate host, reasonable host, unbloody host, this holy bread, and Chalice
of eternal life; and beseech, that thou would receive this oblation in thy
high Altar by the hands of thy Angels, as thou have vouchsafed to receive the
Gifts of thy child Abell, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that
which the high Priest Melchisedech offered unto thee. Which words are also
used in the in the offering of Sacrifice in the body and blood of our Lord, in
the Catholic Church, even until this day.

8. S. Hierome, who, as we have placed them, is the sixth amonst the ancient
Doctors of the Catholic S. Hierome of the Sacrifice, and Sacrament.
Church, so constantly believed a Sacrifice, and communion in the body and
blood of our Lord, that in the 5. chapter of his 3. book against the
Pelagians, he says; Christ has taught his Apostles this: that these who have
daily confidence in the Sacrifice of his body, may bouldly say; Our Father
which art in heaven, as the Catholic Church uses, even until this day, in
the daily Sacrifice of his body. Upon the first chapter to Titus: A Bishopp is
to offer pure victimes every day to God, for his own sins, and sins of
the People. In the 19. chapter of his first book against Iouinian: Priests
ought always to offer Sacrifice for the People. In the 3. chapter of his book
against Vigilantius, defends the Bishopp of Rome, who (as he says) offered
Sacrifice to God over the venerable bones of Peter and Paul. In his 150.
Epistle: Moses has not given us true bread: but our Lord Jesus he is the
guest and the banquet, he is he that eats and who is eaten: we drink his
blood, and without him we cannot drink it, and daily in his Sacrifices, we
tread forth the new redd wine of the branch of the true vine, and of the
viniard of Sorac, which is as much as to say, chosen; and out of these we
drinck new wine of the Kingdom of the Father. In the Preface of his 5. book
upon the Prophet Jeremy, alluding to the communion of Christians, he says:
The People of God shall eat the bread which was borne in our village of
Bethlem, where he sometimes lived a religious life, in a monastery. Upon the
3. chapter of Sophonias; Priests serve the Eucharist, and distribute our Lords
blood to his People. In his Epistle to Heliodorus he says: God forbidd that I
should speak any sinister S. Hierome his respect to Priests.
thing of those, who succeeding to the Apostolical degree, do make the body
of Christ with their holy mouths, by whom we also become Christians. Again in
his Epistle to Euagrius, he says: At the prayers of Bishopps, and Priests, the
body and blood of Christ is made. Which eminency, and dignity of consecrating
the body and blood of our Lord, who is the lamb without spott, and the light
of heaven, so penetrated his heart, that though a Priest, yet out of his
profound S. Hieromes humility.
humility, and venerable respect to so great a Mystery (as is the
consecration of the body and blood of our Lord) would not venture to
consecrate, or offer Christian Sacrifice, as witnesses S. Epiphanius in his
Epistle to John Bishopp of Jerusalem, translated out of greek into latin by
S. Hierome himself, and fett down both amongst S. Hieromes Epistles, and in
S. Epiphanius his works, where he says: That after he had seen that there
were a multitude of holy brethren, or friars gathered together in a Monastery,
and the holy Priests Hierome and Vincent (who lived amongst them) out of their
modesty and humility, would not exercise the offering of Sacrifice, due unto
their function, nor labor in this Sacrifice the chiefest salvation of
Christians.
part of the Ministry, which is the chiefest salvation of Christians; he
ordained S. Hieromes brother a Priest to supply the necessity of the
monastery, for the offering of Sacrifice, and the administration of
Sacraments: as further witnesses S. Hierome in the 3. chapter of his Epistle
to Theophilus, against John of Hierufalem, and Epiphanius above cited.

9. By this which has been said, it is so manifest, that all the six aforesaid
ancient Doctors of the Catholic Church not only held and taught a Sacrifice in
the body and blood of our Lord, and a communion of the same, but also that this
their opinion was agreeable to the Scriptures, that it is without all
controversy. Before all those Doctors, flourished Optatus Mileuitanus, who
writing Optatus Mileuitanus.
of the fury of the heretical Donatists, against the Eucharist of the body
and blood of our Lord, consecrated by Catholic Priests, says in his 2. book
against Parmenianus. That your aforesaid The fury of the Donatists against the
Sacrifice, and Eucharist of Catholics.
Bishopps might violate all holy things, they commanded the Eucharist to be
cast unto dogs; not without a manifestation of the judgment of God, for the
same dogs becoming madd, with their teeth tore their Masters, as thieves
and guilty of the holy body. etc. Again in his 6. book describing yet more at
large, the fury of these heretics, against the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of our Lord, offered by Catholic Priests, says: What is so
sacrilegious, as to break, raise, or remove the Altars of God, upon the which
you also sometimes offered? wpon which the vows of the People, and the members
of Christ are borne; where Almighty God is inuocated, where the holy Ghost
being desired, does descend; from whence many take the pledge of eternal
salvation, the defense of faith, and hope of Resurrection, etc. for what is the
Altar, but the seat of the body and blood of Christ? All these things your
fury has either raised, or broken, or removed, etc. What had Christ offended
you, whose body and blood did dwell there (upon the Altar) for a certain time?
What have you offended against yourselues, that you should break these Altars,
upon the which for many years before us, you offered as we think holily?
whilst that you do wickedly persecute our hands there, where the body of
Christ does dwell, you strike your own, whereby you imitate the Jews. They
cast their hands on Christ upon the Cross, and you strike him upon the Altar.
And afterward* This wicked deed is doubled, whilst you break the Chalices,
the bears of the blood of Christ; whose species you have turned into masses or
lumpes, providing merchandise for wicked fayres. Thus Optatus.

10. S. Cyprian, lived abond the year 240. and S. Cyprian his belief of this
Sacrifice.
he in his 63. Epistle, proves against the Aquarij (certain heretics who
were in his time) That Jesus Christ our Lord God, was author, and teacher of
this Sacrifice, of his body and blood, which in his time, was used, and
believed throughout the Christian world, as there he proves at large, and by
the same places of Scripture, which Catholics at this day, allege against
the different opinions of their adversaries; adding also in the same Christ at
his last Supper offered himself in Sacrifice.
Epistle, says: Who is more the Priest of the high God, then our Lord
Jesus Christ, who offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same,
which Melchisedech had offered, that is bread and wine, to wit his body and
blood. Again, Jesus Christ our Lord God, he is the chief Priest of God the
Father, he offered first himself to God the Father, and commanded that (which
he then did) to be done in commemoration of him. Moreover, he there says, to
the Aquarian Heretics, who would only use water, and no wine in the Sacrament
of the Chalice: The blood of Christ, wherewith Christ blood seen in the
Chalice.
we are redeemed and quickened, cannot be seen to be in the Chalice, when wine,
whereby the blood of Christ is showed, is not put into the Chalice. And citing
the words of consecration, as they are set down by S. Matthew, in the 26.
chapter of his Gospel, adds: Hereby we find, that the Chalice which our
Lord offered, was mixed; and that it had bin wine, which he called his blood:
whereby it does appear, It was first wine, and after his blood.
that the blood of Christ, is not offered, if there be no wine put into the
Chalice, neither is our Lords Sacrifice celebrated, with lawful
sanctification, unless our oblation, and Sacrifice shall be answerable to the
Passion; wherein our Savior shed blood and water, etc. John. 15. 34. Again;
As with this common wine, the mind is set at liberty, the spirits freed, and
all sorrow Christian drinck, the blood of Christ.
banished: so by drincking the blood of our Lord, and the healthful cupp, we
cast away the memory of the old man, and do forgett our former worldly
conversation, etc. Again: How shall we shed our blood for Christ, who are
ashamed to drinck the blood of Christ. This, and much more to this effect, has
S. Cyprian in one before said Epistle, besides what he has dispersed through
his other works.

11. Alexander the first, was made Bishopp of Rome, in the year 121. and
suffered a most cruel martyrdom, for the faith in Rome, when the faith of
Christ, flourished amongst the Romans, as our Adversaries confess: and he in
his first Epistle unto all Catholics, repeating the words of consecration,
adds: With such hosts God will be delighted and pleased, for nothing can be
greater in Sacrifices then the body and blood of our Lord: neither is there any
oblation more to be desired then this, for this exceeds all oblations, which
is to be offered unto God, with a pure conscience, and to be received with a
clean heart, and to be worshipped of all. Thus S. Alexander.

12. S. Clement (of whom S. Paul makes mention, Philippians 4. 3.) in the 57.
chapter of his 2. book of Apostolical constitutions says: Let the Bishopp
pray in these words; conserve o Lord thy People safe, and bless thine
inheritance, etc. Afterward let Sacrifice be made, all the People expecting
and praying insilence; and Sacrifice being donn, let every order a part
receive the body of our Lord, and the precious blood, approaching in order,
with modesty, and reverence, as unto the body of the king, before they
received it. Thus these most ancient Fathers, of the Sacrifice of the body, and
blood of our Lord instituted by our Savior, and continued in the Church of
God, as they prove, by the same Authorities of Scriptures, which the
Catholics alleadg at this day. And all Christian men's books, and works, who
have written of this subject, are so conformable, to the doctrine of those
before cited Fathers in this point of the Sacrifice, of the body and blood of
our Lord: that our Adversaries (known and reputed heretics to both parties
only excepted) are not able to assign, or bring forth any book written before
the rebellion of Luther, which denies the offering of Sacrifice to God, in the
body, and blood of his only Son, amongst Christians. And this is sufficient
to prove, that the Scriptures, and all known Christian men's books, who writ
of this subject, before Luther (known and reputed heretics or enormish
erroneous men to both parties only excepted) teach a Sacrifice in the body and
blood of our Lord.

CHAP. IV. Remission of sins, and other blessings are, and may be obtained,
by the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord.
1. THe Sacrifice of our Redemption, which The Sacrifice of the Cross, like a
Pardon at the end of a Parliament.
our Lord offered for us upon the Cross, is like unto a general Pardon, at
the end of a Parliament; which is in it self sufficient, to pardon all his
Majesty's subjects for the offenses there in specified, were they tenntymes
more then they are: yet actually, it pardons not any one of them, but those
who use the means, which his Majesty's laws require in that case, for the
applying his gracious general pardon unto themselves; which is to sue out a
writ of pardon, or the like. So the Passion of our Lord, and his Redemption
upon the Cross, is in it self sufficient to redeem tenn thousand worlds (if
there were or could be so many) from everlasting pains, and from the
punishment imposed upon man, for original and actual sin; as wittnesseth S.
John saying: Christ is the propitiation of our sins, and not for ours only;
but also for the whole world: yet actually (according to the common concurse of
God) it redeemeth not any one man, from everlasting torments, but those who use
the means, to apply the Passion of our Lord, and his Redemption upon the
Cross to themselves, expressed in the Law of God, as withnesseth S. Paul,
saying: Christ was made to all that obey him, cause of eternal salvation. Heb.
5. 9.

2. And amongst the many means, which Almighty God has left unto mankind, to
apply the Sacrifice of our Redemption, and merits of Christ's Passion unto us,
this is one, the offering of a certain, and particular, external visible
Sacrifice unto God, representing the inward Sacrifice of our hearts and the
Passion of his Son, thereby to acknowledge him for our God and supreme
Sovereign Lord, and apply the meritt of the said Passion unto ourselves, for
the remission of our sins; as is manifest by the practice of the Church of
God, even from the beginning, or first plantation there of upon earth: for
Abel, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, and the Children of Israel, offered
particular visible Sacrifice to God, in commemoration of the Passion of our
Lord to come, for the remission of sins by his Passion; who was presenly
promised, upon the fall of Adam, Genesis 3. 5. and in virtue, Slain from the
beginning of the world. Apoc. 13. 12. Whereupon S. John says: He has redeemed
us to God in his blood, out of every tribe, and tongue and people, and nation.
Apoc. 5. 9. And there is no salvation in any other. Act. 4. 14.

3. In proof here of, By faith (in Christ to come) Abel offered a greater host
to God, then Cain, by which Abel by Sacrifice obtained testimony of Justice
he obtained testimony, that he was just. Heb. 11. Noe built an Alter to our
Lord, offered holocaustes upon the Alter. And our Lord smelled a sweet savor,
and said: I will no more curse the earth for men: and God blessed Noe, and his
Sons. Genesis 8. and 9. Job (when the days Noe by Sacrifice obtained blessing.
of feasting which his Children made, were past) arising up early, offered
holocausts for every one of them: For he said, least my Sons have sinned.
Job. 1. Our Job offered Sacrifice for the remission of sins
Lord said to Eliphaz the Themanite, my fury is wrath against thee, and
against thy two friends: take therefore seven oxen, and seven Rams, and go to
my servant Job, and offer holocaustes for your selves, and my servant Job shall
pray for you etc. that the folly be not imputed Eliphaz by Sacrifice and prayer
obtained remission of sins.
unto you, Job 42. In the written Law, God often commanded the Priests, and
People, to offer Sacrifice for the remission of their sins, saying: If the
multitude of Israel be ignorant, and through ignorance, do that which is
against the commandments of our Lod etc. they shall offer for their sins a
Calfe etc. and the Priest praying for them, our Lord will be propitious unto
them. Leuit. 4. 13. If a Prince sin through ignorance etc. he shall offer an
host to our Lord, a Buck of the goats without spot, etc. and the Priest shall
pray for him, and for his sin, and it shall be forgiven him. And if a Soul of
the People of the Land, shall sin through ignorance, doing any of these
things, that by the Law of our Lord are forbidden, and offending, etc. he shall
offer a she goat without spot, etc. The Priest shall pray for him, and it
shall be forgiven him. Leuit. 4. 27. and the like is said of many other
Sacrifices, offered for sin, in the 4. 5. and 6. chapters of Leuiticus; which
manner of offering Sacrifice, for the remission of their sins, continued in
the Church of God, amonst the People of Israel, until this last Supper of our
Lord.

4. At the last Supper of our Lord, our Savior did not take away out of his
Church Priesthood, and Sacrifices for the remission of sins, in such Our
Savior constituted a Sacrifice for the remission of sin.
sort, as that he would have no more exterior visible Sacrifice offered unto
God, for the remission of sins. This is contrary to the Law, and the
Prophets, wcich he came to fulfill, and not to break. Math. 5. but translated
the Priesthood, from the order of Aron, unto the order of Melchisedech. Heb. 7,
and changed the Sacrifice of brute beasts, which were offered in commemoratio^
of him, for the remission of sins in the old Law, into the Sacrifice of his
body, and blood, under the species of bread, and wine, for the remission of
sins in the new Law; to the fullfilling of the Law, and the Prophets,
concerning Priesthoop, Sacrifices, and the remission of sins by Sacrifice,
offered in commemoration of him; when taking bread, he blessed, brake, and gave
it to his Disciples, and said: This is my body which is broken for you. Cor.
11. for the remission of sins, as wittnesseth Origin in his 35. Tract upon S.
Matthew. S. Chrysostom, upon the 26. of S. Matthew, and S. Damascene in the 14.
chapter of his 3. book, Orthodoxae fidei: who all citing this text, in the
places aforesaid, and there unto, as the true sense, and meaning thereof, and
words of our Lord, For the remission of sins which are not put into the
Bible, at the consecration of the bread, because they are annexed unto the
consecration of the Chalice, Math. 26. yet the Liturgy, or public
Church-seruice book, set forth by S. James the Apostle, has these words of
our Lord thus: This is my body which is broken, and given for you, for the
remission of sins, S. Mark, in his Liturgy reads: This is my body which
is broken for you, and distributed in the remission of sins, S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, and the Aethiopians in there Liturgies read: This is my body which
is broken for you in the remission of sins.

5. in like manner our Savior taking the Chalice, He gave thanks, and gave to
the Apostles saying, The Chalice offered for the remission of sins
drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many unto remission of sins. Math. 16. and then offered Sacrifice in
his body and blood under the species of bread, and wine for the remission of
the sins of many, according to his words: and when he had donn, he
established the remission of sins, by the giving of his body, and shedding of
his blood unto God, under the species of bread, and wine, saying: This do for
a commemoration of me. Luke 22. And, This do ye as often you shall drinck for
the commemoraton of me. 1. Cor. 11. And so fullfilled the Law, and the
Prophets, concerning Sacrifice for the remission of sins, by establishing in
his Church, that one, pure, and clean oblatio^, or host of his body and blood,
under the species of bread and wine, for the remission of sins, in place of
the many, and diverse Sacrifices, which were used in the Law of nature, and
written Law of Moses.

6. And that this change of Sacrifice for the remission of sins, might be the
better known Propitiatory Sacrifice not taken away but changed.
our Lord did not speak only once of it, but diverse times, and said: This is
my body which is broken for you, for the remission of sins; as wittnes the
Liturgies, before cited, and S. Damascene in the 14. chapter of his 3. book,
Orthodoxae fidei: and also said: This is my body vhich shall be broken, or
delivered for you, for the remission of sins, as wittnes Origin, and S.
Chrysostom in the places before cited. And this diversity of words, our Lord
used Propitiatory Sacrifice commanded
to express, that he both then broke his body to God, for the remission of
sins; and also commanded, that it, and no other body should be broken to God
for us, for the remission of sins, in his Church, and so made void all the
Sacrifices of the old Law, and established this of the new; and therefore also
he said of the Chalice: This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed
for many, for the remission of sins; and, This is my blood of the new
Testament, which shall be shed for many unto the remission of sins, as wittnes
the greek and latin Bibles: for the greek Bibles read these words in the
present tense, and the latins in the future tense, to signify unto us, that
our Lord, then at his last Supper, offered Sacrifice to God the Father in his
body and blood for the remission of sins; and withal gave an express
command, that no other kind of Sacrifice, should be offered for the remission
of sins in his Church, but the Sacrifice of his body and blood; which we see
fulfilled.

7. As faith in Jesus Christ to come, and the Sacrifice of our Lord upon the
Cross to come, did Salvation at all times by virtue of our Lords Passion.
not hinder the faithful in the Law of nature, and written Law, from the
offering of Sacrifice to God in the commemoration of Christ's Passion to come,
for the remission of their sins: so neither may it do in the Law of grace:
seeing that Christ, was slain from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13. 8. and
by virtue of his Passion, the faithful in the Law of nature, and written Law,
were saved as they are now, as our Adversaries together with us confess;
though now, the faithful in the Law of grace, have better means: because the
Law brought nothing to perfection: but, an introduction to a better hope. Heb.
7. 19. And, Jesus is made a surty of a better testament. Heb. 7. 22. which he
should not be, if in the new Testament, he had not instituted (as he did) a
propitiatory Sacrifice for sin in better terms.

8. And not only the Scriptures, at the institution All high Priests ordained
to offer Sacrifice for sin.
of the blessed Sacrament, do affirm that our Lord offered a propitiatrie
Sacrifice, in his body and blood for the remission of sins: but also S.
Paul, says: Every high Priest, taken from amongst men, is appointed for men,
in these things which appertain to God, that he may offer Gifts, and Sacrifice
for sin. Heb. 5. 1. wherefore seeing that our Savior was a high Priest
according to the order of Melchisedech. Heb. 5. 10. it is certain that he
offered Gifts, and unbloody Sacrifice for the remission of sin: seeing that
every high Priest did it. And considering that he ordained the Apostles
Bishops, The Apostles high Priests.
and his Priests at his last Supper; Act. 1. it necessarily follows, that at
his last Supper, he both offered Gifts, and unbloody Sacrifice for the
remission of sins: and also ordained the Apostles Bishops, and high
Priests, for to offer Gifts, and unbloody Sacrifice for the remission of
sins: and seeing that at his last Supper, there is mention made of no other
Gifts, given, or broken to God for the remission of sins, but his body, and
blood, under the species of bread, and wine: it manifestly follows, that our
Lord at his last Supper, instituted an unbloody Sacrifice, or Sacrifices of
Gifts, in his body, and blood, under the species of bread, and wine to be
offered in his Church, for the remission of sins; because he then taught his
Church what she should do herin.

9. And not only the ancient Fathers when they have occasion to speak of the
last Supper of our The Fathers affirm that our Lord instituted a Sacrifice for
the remission of sins
Lord, affirm that our Savior offered unbloody Sacrifice in his body and
blood, for the remission of sins, as S. Clement, in the 12. chapter of his 4.
book of Apostolical constitutions: S. Alexander in the 2. chapter of his
Epistle unto all Catholics: S. Irenaeus in the 23. chapter of his 5. book of
heresies: Origin in his 35. Tract upon S. Matthew: S. Cyprian, in his 63.
Epistle: S. Chrysostom in his 28. homily upon S. Math: S. Augustine in the 24.
chapter of his 1. book, De Peccatorum meritis: but all the public Liturgies,
or Church service books, for the administration of the communion, which have
bin used by any nation, or people in the Church of God before Luther (reputed
heretics only excepted) affirm, that our Lord at his Last Supper, instituted
a Sacrifice in his body, and blood for the remission of sins: as the
Liturgies, or books of the administration of this Sacrament, set forth by S.
Peter, S. James, S. Mark, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, etc. and all the whole
Church of God (the promises of God considered) could not decaie in the right
use, and belief of this Sacrament.

10. Our Savior coming to fulfill the Law, Our Savior came to fulfill the
Law, and the Prophets concerning Sacrifice.
and the Prophets, as he wittnesseth Math. 5. and all the Sacrifices in the Law
of nature, and Law of Moses, being figures, and shadows of this one, and only
Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, as wittnes the Scriptures,
saying: Priests that offer Gifts according to the Law, serve unto the example,
and shadow of heavenly things. Heb. 8. 5. for the Law had a shadow of good
things to come. Heb. 10. 1. And all these things hapened to them in figure. 1.
Cor. 10. for the Law brought nothing to perfection: but an introduction to a
better hope. Heb. 7. 19. Whereupon S. Augustine, in the 20. chapter of his
book, against the Adversaries of the Law, and the Prophets, says: Israel
according to the flesh, did serve in the shadows of the Sacrifices where with
the singular Sacrifice The Sacrifices in the old Law, shadows of the
Sacrifice in the new.
was signified, which now the Israel, according to the spirit, does offer.
Again in the same chapter he says: Our Lord has sworn, and it shall not
repent him: Thou art a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech,
to commend that healthful Sacrifice, wherein his holy body, and blood is shed
for us, where of the Sacrifices, which were commanded, to be immolated of
unclean beasts, were shadows. Whereupon it follows, that the Sacrifice of
the body, and blood of our Lord, was not only to be a propitiatory Sacrifice,
for the remission of sins; but also a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, peace, laud,
and praise, and for the obtaining of all those things, for which the diverse,
and sundry Sacrifices of the Law of nature, and written Law, were used, to the
fulfilling of the Law, and Prophecies, concerning these Sacrifices.

11. Wherefore, seeing that in the Law of nature, and Law of Moses, there were
not only propitiatory The diverse Sacrifices of the old Law fulfilled in the
Sacrifice of the new.
Sacrifices, for the remission of sins; but also of Thanksgiving, and for
peace, as also upon vows made for the obtaining so^me good thing, to the honor
of God, and good of persons, as is set down in the 7. chapter of Leuiticus,
and other places; as also for cessation of plauges, or other punishments, as is
specifyed in the 2. of Kings, and last chapter: and in like manner for the
preservation of the temporal life of men, which Onias the high Priest
practiced, in the fact of Heliodorus, 2. Machab. 3. and the people of Israel
for the preservation of the life of Darius, and his children; Esdras, and 6.
chapter: what Christian man, can with reason deny, that the Sacrifice of the
body, and blood of our Lord (wherein all these Sacrifices are to be perfectly
fulfilled) may not be offered to God, for the obtaining of all, or any one of
these, or like benifits; especially, seeing that it has bin the practice of the
Catholic Church in all ages, as appears by all the Liturgies, or public
Church service books of ancient times, where in the manner of offering the
body, and blood of our Lord to God, under the species of bread, and wine, is
set down, not only for the remission of sins; but also for the obtaining
those other particular blessings, comforts, and consolations, as is to be
seen, in the said books at large.

12. S. Augustine so constantly believed this S. Augustine, of the remission of
sin by Sacrifice.
doctrine, that in his 57. question upon Leuiticus, he says: By these
Sacrifices (of the old Law) this only Sacrifice (the new) was signified,
wherein is true remission of sins: from taking the blood of which Sacrament
in nourrishment, there is no restraint; but rather an exhortation unto all to
drinck it. And speaking of the practice, and use of this means, for the
remission of sins, in the 12. chapter of the 9. book of his confessions,
says: That the Sacrifice of our redemption was offered for his Mother, for the
remission of her sins after her death: and yealding the reason, why the
Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, was offered for her, in the next
chapter, adds: All though she was so quickened, and renewed in Christ
(whilst she remained yet amonst us) that thy name was praised both in her
belief, and life: yet I dare not affirm, that after thou hadest regenerated
her, by her Baptism, there issued no word out of her mouth, against thy
commandment. And in the 25. chapter of his 10. book of the city of God, he
says: that at the time of the universal judgment, it will be necessary, that
some be purged by the fire of the judgment: because then, Noe man can offer
Sacrifice for his sins; showing, that the offering of Sacrifice in the body,
and blood of our Lord for the remission of sins, shall not cease until the
end of the world, and then adding, says: For all who offer Sacrifice for their
sins, are commonly in the sin, for the remission whereof they do offer
Sacrifice, and when they have offered, and it shall be acceptable to God, then
their sins are forgiven.

13. S. Cyprian, lived about the year 240. yet S. Cyprian, and the whole
Catholic Church, of the remission of sin by Sacrifice.
speaking of the practice of the Catholic Church of his time, in his 66.
Epistle, says: The Bishopps which were before us, have religioussy, and
prudently decreed, that none of the brethren departing out of this life, should
name for his Executour, or Ouerseer a Clergy man, and if any did, there should
be no offering for him, nor Sacrifice celebrated for his ease, or rest. In the
year of our Lord 121. S. Alexander, the first, was made Bishopp of Rome; yet
he in the 2. chapter of his first Epistle unto all Catholics, repeating the
words, of the institution, of this Sacrifice, of the body, and blood of our
Lord, for the remission of sins, presently adds, saying: Crimes, and sins
are blotted out, by offering these Sacrifices to God. And to conclude; the
remission of sins, by the offering of the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of
our Lord, was so generally believed to be a matter of faith; that in the most
flourishing time of the Church, A^^ius was condemned of heresy, for denying
amongst other things, the offering of Sacrifice for the dead. As wittnesseth
Epiphanius in his recapitulation of all heresies: S. Augustine, in the 53.
heresy of his book of heresies: and S. Damascene, in his book of 100.
heresies. And if it were the faith of the Catholic Church, to believe, that we
might offer the Sacrifice, of the body, and blood of our Lord, for the
remission of the pains, and punishment due unto some sins after death: no
man can with reason deny, but that also, it was the faith of the same Church,
to offer the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, for the remission of
the sins of the living.

14. And it was not only the custom of the Catholic Church, to offer the
Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, for the remission of Sacrifice
offered for other blessings.
sins; but also for obteyning of other benefits. Tertullian in his book to
Scapula, says, that in his time, They offered Sacrifice for the health of the
Emperor: as we do many times for our Sovereign Lord king Charles, his Queen,
and Children. S. Augustine in the 8. chapter of 22. book, of the city of God,
relates how one of his Priests offered the body of our Lord in a house that was
possessed with evil Spirits; and the wicked Spirits ceased to trouble the house
any more.

15. S. Chrysostom upon the 95. Psalm, setting down the practice of the
Catholic Church, in S. Chrysostom, of the custom of the Church, in offering
Sacrifice.
offering Sacrifice, says: In every place are Altars, and Doctrine: This God
foretold by the Prophets: for expressing the Ecclesiastical sincerity, and
manifesting the ingratitude of the Jews, he says unto them: I have no will in
you says the Lord omnipotent; neither will I receive hosts from your hands;
for from the rysiing of the sun, unto the goeing down, my name is glorified
amongst the Gentills; and in every place, Sacrifice is offered to my name, and
a pure Sacrifice. See how fully, and plainly, he has interpreted the
mystical table, which is the unbloody Sacrifice, and calls pure incense, the
holy prayers, which are offered with the Sacrifice; for this incense does
recreate God; not that which is taken from the roots of the earth; but that
which is breathed from a pure heart. Let my prayer therefore, be delivered as
incense in they sight: do thou see, how it is granted to this Angelical
Sacrifice, to shine most brightly in every place? do thou not see, how
neither the Altar, nor the Canticle is comprehended, within any limits? In
every place incense is offered to my name. Therefore most certainly, the
principal mystical table, and the heavenly, and the most venerable host, is
the pure Sacrifice. There is also amongst us diverse kinds of Sacrifices: for
the Law of the old Testament, had diverse hosts, some for sin, others which
were called holocaustes; others, Sacrifice of praise; others of health; others
for the cleansing of Leapers; briefly, there were others, and many, and
diverse, for those who were censured to innumerable expiations. Great was the
number of the Sacrifices of the old Law, and above measure; all which the new
grace entering upon, does comprehend in one Sacrifice; by appointing one and a
true host: thus S. Chrysostom. With S. Chrysostom agrees S. Leo, in his 8.
Sermon upon the Passion, saying: Now (o Lord) the carnal Sacrifices ceasing,
the one oblation of thy body and blood, does fulfill the diversity of hosts,
(in the old Law) and as there is one sacrifice for all the victimes (of the old
Law) so now there is one Kingdom of all nations. Whereby we see, that the
Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, may be offered to God, for the
obteyning of all, or any of those blessings, or benefits, which were assigned
unto all, or any of the Sacrifices of the old Law, or Law of nature: because
they are all fulfilled in this one, and healthful Sacrifice, to the fulfilling
of the Law, and Prophets concerning Sacrifice.

16. And by this Sacrifice, appears the beauty, The beauty of the Church, in
offering Sacrifice for her necessities.
and excellency of the Catholic Church: for that dispersed, throughout the
world, not only she daily offers her self to God, with the body, and blood
of our Lord, and commemoration of his Passion: but also humbly prefers all
her petitions, and prayers, desiring, that by the merits of Sacrifice of her
dear Lord upon the Cross, and The manner how Sacrifice obtains remission
of sins.
the Gift of his body, and blood there present; God would bestow upon her
Children grace, and the Gift of penance for there sins, or the like. And if
they put no impediment on their part, God bestows upon them grace, to do
penance for their sins, and therefore says: This is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many unto remission of sins. Math. 26. even ^o^
as many, as put no impediment, or stopp to the grace, and gift of penance,
which should be obtained by it, or to the other blessings, which by means of
the said Sacrifice, they shall desire, at the hands of God: supposed they be
expedient for the salvation of their souls, wherein, there should be no
difficulty amongst Christian men: considering, that they were promised, by the
Sacrifices of the old Law, when grace and favor did not so much abound:
Sacrifice and prayer of more force, then only prayer.
and that our Lord says of prayer only: Ask, and it shall be given you, for
every one that asks, receaueth. Math. 7. How much more then, shall this be
verifyed, when fervent prayer is joined with the gift of the body, and blood of
our Lord, and the commemoration of his Passion, by which God, Has reconciled
all things unto himself. Coloss. 1. 20.

CHAP. V. How our Savior commanded, that we should give to God for us, the
same body, and blood which he gave, and shed; and how all the hosts offered in
Sacrifice, or given in the communion, are one, and the same.
1. WHen our Savior instituted the communion, and gave commandment Our
Savior said not, preach this, or believe this: but do this.
to the Apostles, to make a commemoration of him, he said not, as puritans
would have it: Preach this, or believe this, or apprehend me in heaven by
faith. For it is supposed that every one, before he come, either to consecrat,
or receive the communion, believes all the Articles of his faith: but taking
bread, he gave thanks, and brake, and gave to them, saying: This is my body,
which is given for you, do this in commemoration of me: and so commanded them,
to consecrat his body, and to give his body to God for us, in commemoration of
him, and not another body, or thing. Whereupon it comes to pass, that the
body, which our Savior gave then to God for us, and the body, which ever since
has been given to God for us, or shall be given for us, or received in the
Catholic communion, unto the end of the world, is all one body, hosts, or
things; though given to God for us, and received at diverse times, and in diverse
places, by a multitude of people. Insomuch as, all the Christian Catholic
Priests, who offer Sacrifice, and all the Christian Catholic communicants, who
either have, or shall receive, or offer Sacrifice in the Church of God (for as
much as concerns the hosts, or thing offered in Sacrifice or received) do
offer, and receive all one host, all one body, even the same which our Savior
then gave to the Apostles, and the same which now sits at the right hand of
God the Father in heaven, though not after the same manner; but under the
species of bread, and wine.

2. For the better understanding whereof, it is necessary to observe, that
these words Sacrifice, Oblation, Gifts, Communion, etc. are somtymes taken in
the Scriptures, and Fathers for the thing sacrificed, offered, given, or
communicated; and somtymes for the actions in the Sacrifice, Oblations, Gifts,
or Communion; so when we say, that the Sacrifice, Oblation, Gift, or Communion
of all Christian The thing sacrificed, is one every where, though the actions
be diverse.
Catholics, is all one, we intend the thing sacrificed, offered or given, and
not the actions: for the actions whereby the Sacrifice is consecrated, offered
or given are diverse, and many; even as many as there are men, who consecrate,
or receive; and so the Sacrifices, Oblations, Hosts, and Communions, may be
said to be many, though the substantial thing consecrated, offered, and given
in the communion be one, and the same body, according to these words of our
Savior saying: Do this, the same which he then did, who consecrated his true,
and real body, and gave it to God for us, and unto every one of the Apostles
in the communion; if we will believe the express Text it self.

3. And this S. Paul excellently explicateth out of the 39. Psalm. saying:
Christ coming into the world, he says, host, and oblation thou would not;
but abody thou have fitted to me: Holocaust for sin did not please thee: then
said I, behold I come. In the head of the One body in place of all the
Sacrifices of the old Law.
book it is written of me: That I may do thy will o God; saying before:
because hosts, and oblations, and holocausts, and for sin thou would not:
neither did they please thee, which are offered according to the Law (of
Moses) then said I: Behold I come, that I may do thy will o God. He takes
away the first, that he may establish that which follows. Thus S. Paul Heb.
10. 5. where the Apostle does excellently show, that when the hosts, oblations,
holocausts, and sin offerings, which were used in the old Law, should be
abrogated, and taken away out of the Church, as they were, at our Saviors last
Supper, after that he had eaten the Paschall Lamb: then presently a The
Sacrifices of the old Law ended, presently the Sacrifice of the new begun.
body should succeed in all their places, of such excellency, and perfections,
that it should be worthy, and fit to be offered to God; which we find true by
experience: for as soon as our Savior had ended the Paschall Lamb, and in it
all the Sacrifices of the old Law, he presently took bread, and brake, and
gave thanks, and said: Take ye and eat, this is my body, which is given for
you, to God, in place of all the Sacrifices of the old Law, and establishing
the giving of his body to God for us, added: Do this in a commemoration of me,
and so as S. Paul here says: he took away all the former Sacrifices of the
old Law, to establish the giving of his body to God for us, which was to
follow after they were abrogated, or ended.

4. Though in the old Law, there were many Sacrifices, Holocausts Oblations,
and Hosts: yet in the new Law all the Sacrifices, Oblations, and Hosts should
be but one; as S. Paul says: A body thou have fitted to me, one body in all
the Sacrifices of the new Law, though offered in every place, amongst the
converted One host at the last Supper, upon the Cross, and daily Sacrifices of
the Church.
Gentiles, as was foretold by the Prophet Malachie; which here also S. Paul
further signifies, saying: Christ offering one host for sins for ever,
fitteth on the right hand of God: for by one oblatio^, has he consumated for
ever them that are sanctified: showing that in the new Law, there are not many
Hosts, Oblations, or Holocausts to be offered; but only one Host, the body of
the Son of God, which was given for us to God at his last Supper, and upon
the Cross, and shall be given to God for us in his Church, until the end of
the world, according to the words of our Savior, saying: This is my body,
which is given for you, (to God) do this for a commemoration of me, as S. Paul
adds until he come to Judgment, 1. Cor. 11. Whereupon S. Augustine in the 20.
chapter of his 10. book of the city of God, says: Christ is the Priest, he
it is that offers, and he is the oblation: The Christ both the Priest, and
the oblation.
Sacrament of which thing, he would that it should be the daily Sacrifice of
the Church; which being the body of him, her head, has learned to offer
herself by him, and of this Sacrifice, the many, and diverse ancient Sacrifices
of the Saints, were signs; that whilst this one Sacrifice, was figured, or
set forth by many, one thing might, as it were be expressed, by many words,
and be much commended without tediousnes. To this chief, and true Sacrifice,
all the false Sacrifices have given place. Thus S. Augustine, where the Saint
manifestly and clearly shows, that Christ himself is the oblation in the
daily Sacrifice of his Church, succeeding in place of all the Sacrifices of the
Saints in old Law, and that the Church which is his body, has learned to
offer herself by him to God in ths one, and yet daily Sacrifice of his Church;
which is the same that the Catholic Church does teach at this day.

5. Moreover S. Augustine in the 20. chapter of the 17. book of the city of
God, reciting this same place, which S. Paul has before cited, out of the 39.
Psalm. says: To be partakers of this table, is to begin to live; for in another
book which is called Ecclesiastes, he says. There is no such good belonging to
man, as that he shall eat, and drinck; which we may easily understand, to
belong unto the being partaker of this table, which the Mediator himself, or
Priest of the new Testament, according to the order of Melchisedech, does bring
in, of his body and blood; for that Sacrifice has succeeded, in place of all
those Sacrifices, of the old Testament, which The Sacrifice of the body and
blood of our Lord, succeeds all the Sacrifices of the old Law.
were immolated in figure of this to come: for which cause we also do
acknowledge, that voice of the same Mediator, speaking by way of Prophecy, in
the 39. Psalm: Sacrifice and oblation thou would not; but a body thou have
fitted to me; for in place of all these Sacrifices, and oblations (of the old
Law) his body is offered, and administered to the communicants. So S. Augustine:
where he shows most plainly that, this same body of Christ, is offered in
Sacrifice, and delivered in the communion unto all the communicants. Again in
his book upon the Psalms, expounding these words of the 39. Psalm. alleged
here by S. Paul, he says: Sacrifices and oblations thou would not. What
Christians are not without Sacrifice.
then? are we therefore in this time, sent away with out Sacrifice? God
forbid. But a body thou have fitted to me, therefore thou would not the
other, that thou might perfect this etc. and so showing that this body is
that, which is sacrificed, and given in the communion, adds: In this body we
are, of this body we are partakers, that which we have received we know, and
you that do not know, shall know, and when you have learned; I pray to God,
that you may not take it to your condemnation: for he that eats and drincketh
unworthily, eats, and drincketh judgment to himfelf. So S. Augustine.

6. Primasius Bishop of Vtica in Africa, and a disciple of S. August. upon the
10. to the Hebrews, says: In the Sacrifices of the Altar, the host is one,
and not many, though it be offered up by many, in diverse places, and at diverse
times: the divine power of the word The Sacrifice offered by many is one,
though offered in diverse places, and at diverse times.
does make that there are not many Sacrifices, but one, all though it be
offered by many etc. Neither is there now, one greater Sacrifice, and an other
lesser, or one offered to day, and another to morrow; but always the selfsame,
having equal magnitude. Wherefore this Sacrifice of Christ is one, and not
many; for if it should be otherwise, because it is offered in many places,
there should be many Christ's: which God forbidd: one Christ therefore is in all
them places. And as that which is offered every where, is one body, and not many
bodies: so also the Sacrifice is one. Thus Primasius.

7. And in like manner S. Chrysostom upon the 10. to the Heb. says: The holy
oblation, by what Priest soever it be offered, is the self same, which Christ
gave to his Disciples, this has nothing less in it then that All Priests offer
the same oblation, or host.
had; because men do not sanctify it, but Christ himself, who before had
consecrated that. And in his 24. Hom. upon the first to the Corinthians,
speaking of the Christian Sacrifice, which was upon the Altar, says: This
body, when it was placed in the manger, was reverenced The same body upon the
Altar, which was in the manger, and adored by the Magi.
by the Magi, who though wicked, and Barbarous men (by nation) yet left their
country, and home, and undertook a long voyage: and when they came, they adored
with great fear, and trembling. Let us Citizens of heaven, imitate at least
these Barbarous people: for they though they saw him in a manger, and in a
cottage, and not in such state, as thou see him now: yet they approached unto
him, wit great reverence: and thou do not see him in a manger, but upon the
Altar, not held by a woman, but by a Priest assisting, and a number of Angels
flying about these things, which are set before thee. And the same Saint upon
the 10. chapter to the Hebrews, and 17. Hom. speaking more at lardge, of our
Christian Sacrifice, says: This Sacrifice (which now we use in the Church) is
an example of that, which Christ offered, even the self same: for we offer
always the same; not now truly another, but always the same; wherefore the
Sacrifice is one for this reason. Because it is offered up in many places, are
there not many Christ's? No indeed, but one Christ every where, who is wholly
Christians offer alvvayes the self same Sacrifice.
here, and wholly there; one body, and even as one body is offered in many
places, and not many bodies; so there is one Sacrifice. He is our Bishopp, who
offered that host, which does cleanse us, and we offer even the same, which was
then offered, which cannot be consumed. This is done in commemoration of him,
which was then done; for he said: Do this (the same that he then did) in
remembrance of me. Thus S. Crysostome. Where still we see, that the same body
or host is offered in all Catholic Sacrifices, and received in their
communions; in such sort, as that all Christian Catholics receive equally the
same body of our Lord in the communion. Whereupon the same S. Chrysostom in
his 18. Homily upon the 2. Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, says:
Sometimes there is no difference between the Priest, and the people, as for
example, when they receive the terrible mysteries: for we admit all equally
unto them; for it is not in the new Law, as it was in the old, where the
Priest did eat somethings, and the people others; where it was not lawful for
the people to eat of those things, of which the Priest did. In the new Law it
is far otherwise; seeing that one body, and one cup is set before all men.

8. And the like affirms S. Ambrose in his first prayer for preparation to
Mass, saying: O Lord Jesus Christ, with what contrition of heart, with what
fountain of tears, with what reverence and fear, with how great chastity of
body, and purity of mind, this divine and heavenly Sacrifice is to be
performed, where thy flesh is in verity taken, where thy blood is in verity
drunken, where the highest are joined to the lowest, where the holy Angels are
present, where thou art the Christ the Priest, and the Sacrifice.
Priest, and the Sacrifice after a wonderful and unspeakable manner
established. Thus S. Ambrose: with whom also agrees Theodoret upon the 8.
chapter to the Hebrews, saying: It is manifest to those who are learned in
divine things, that we do not offer an other Sacrifice: but we celebrate the
memory of this one, and healthful (Sacrifice) for this our Lord himself
commanded us saying: Do this in commoration of me. So Theodoret: whereby it
appears, that the want of believing that the same body or host is given to
God in all Christian Catholic Sacrifices, and is received by all in the
communion; is not any defect in the Scriptures, but the want of learning (as
Theodoret says) in divine things.

9. In like manner our Savior instituted, and commanded, that we should offer
in Sacrifice unto God, and communicate of the same substantial blood, which he
shed for us to his heavenly Father, and gave in the communion, When taking the
Chalice he gave thanks, and gave to the Apostles, saying The same blood of our
Savior every where offered.
(as Protestants and Puritans translate) drink ye all of this for this is my
blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of
sins, Math. 26. 27. and then gave a commandment, saying: This do ye, as
often as you drink it, in remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11. 25. and so ordained,
and commanded the Apostles, not that they should shed for us to God, or
communicate of any new thing, but the same blood, which he then shed for us: and
therefore he says: This do ye, and not a resemblance of this, or do a thing
like this. Wherevpo^ S. Paul says: The Chalice of blessing which we bless, is
it not the communication of the blood of Christ. 1. Co. 10. 16. Herein
consists the excellency of the Sacrifice, and communion in the Catholic
Church, that all The excellency of the Sacrifice, and communion in the
Catholic Church.
offer one, and the same Sacrifice, and communicate of one, and the same
substantial body, and blood of Christ under the species of bread, and wine.
And therefore all who worthily communicate in the Catholic Church, are all
one, because they are all united corporally, and spiritually to the one, and
the same body of the Son of God, and so become as S. Peter, says: Partakers
of the divine nature. 2. Pet. 1. 4. and be (as S. Paul says) members of
Christ's body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Ephesians. 5. 30. Whereupon S.
Chrysostom in his 2. Hom. upon the 2. Epistle to Timothy, says: The holy
oblation, whether Peter offer it, or Paul offer it, or any other Priest, is the
self same, which Christ himself gave to his Disciples, which Priests now also
do consecrate; this has nothing less then was in that.

10. If our Savior had not intended, that the Apostles should consecrate, and
give to God the same body, which he did, and also give the same body in the
communion, which he did, but a piece of bread, or the like, as I have said
before; he would not have said: This is my body, which is given for you, or,
This is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for many, for remission of
sins, but Our Saviors words in vain, unless he had spoken of his true
and real body.
have left them out, and the sense would have been better and more clear thus:
Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brak, and gave to his Disciples, and said,
take ye, and eat; do this for as commemoration of me; and taking likewise the
Chalice, he gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, drinck ye all of this; this
do ye as often as you drink it. And then it had been a clear case, that our
Savior had instituted a Puritan communion, to eat a piece of bread, and drink
a supp of wine in remembrance that Christ dyed for us, and be thankful. But
seeing that our Savior gave his body to God for us, and gave his body and
blood in the communion, and commanded us to do the same; there is no place
left, for any Catholic Christian man to doubt, whether the body, or thing,
which our Savior gave to God for us, at his last Supper, offered upon the
Cross delivered in the communion, and which is now offered, or given to God in
the Church of God, and delivered in the communion, be one and the same
substantial body: unless we either deny the plain Text of Scripture, and the
consent of the Catholic Church, for these 1600. years, or the omnipotency of
God, and say that he cannot effect it, and so has deceived his Church, for
these many hundred years together, both which is absurd, and not befitting
the thoughts of any Christian.

11. Moreover our Savior, promised to give bread to eat, which should be his
flesh, saying: The Our Savior promised to give bread to eat, which should be
his flesh.
bread which I will give, is my flesh, etc. Ioh. 6: but he did no promise, to
give his flesh to eat, cut into pieces; for that was the error of the
Capernits: but his whole flesh, and body; and so promised that his whole flesh,
and body should be in diverse places distributed, or given by himself, and
carried in his own hands, who is both able to do what soever he promised, Romans
4. 20. and will vvatch upon his word to do it, Ierem. 1. 12. As we find by
experience he did, in the institution of the communion, according to the
plain, and express Text of Scripture, saying: Jesus took bread, and blessed,
and brake, and gave to his Disciples, and said: Take ye, and eat, this is my
body, Math. 26. And the Scriptures cannot be broken, as our Savior himself
said, Ioh. 10. 35.

12. That one, and the same substantial body of our Lord, may by the
omnipotency of his will, not only be Sacramentally in diverse places at the
same time, as it is in the blessed Sacrament; but also visibly and personally,
is manifest; for our Adversaries confess, that the body of our Lord, has The
body of our Lord both in heaven and earth at the same time.
always bin in heaven, since the time of his Ascension: yet the Scriptures
say, that since the time of his Ascension, S. Paul being in prison, our
Savior, stood by him, and said, be constant etc. Act. 23. 11. and seeing that
our Savior stood by S. Paul in the prison, and spoke unto him, standing by
him; Our Savior stood by S. Paul.
certainly he was upon earth: unless our Adversaries, will make our Savior to
have so long legs, as that being in heaven, he may also stand upon the earth,
which is absurd: and then he should not be contained in heaven, as our
Adversaries affirm.

13. At the vocation of S. Paul, S. Luke, says, that the men who were in the
company of S. Paul when our Lord spoke unto him, Heard a voice: but S. Paul
heard our Saviors voice.
saw noe man, Act. 9. 7. so there was a man present to be seen; otherwise, it
were in vain, for the Scriptures to say: They saw no man, when there was none
to be seen. Again, S. Ananias, said unto S. Paul: The God of our Fathers has
preordinated the, that thou should know his will, and see the S. Paul heard
our Saviors voice, from his mouth.
just one, and here his voice from his mouth, Act. 22. 15. all which words
import, the personal presence of our Lord upon earth, for otherwise S. Paul,
could not have heard our Lords voice from his mouth, if he had bin in heaven:
neither would the Scriptures have said, that he had heard his voice from his
mouth, if our Lord had appeared only in a vision, or resemblance, and not in
his proper person: for that had not bin his mouth; but a resemblance of it.
Wherefore seeing that S. Paul heard our Lords voice from his mouth, it is
manifest, that our Lord was personally upon earth.

14. The cause why our Lord appeared to S. Paul, was as our Savior then said:
To this end, that Our Savior ordained S. Paul Minister of the Gospel.
I may ordain the a Minister, and wittnes of these things, which thou have
seen, as were the rest of the Apostles, who were made Ministers of the
Ghospels, and witnesses of the Resurrection, not from heaven, or in a vision
only; but by our Lords personally appearing unto them upon earth. Whereupon S.
Paul says: Am not I an Apostle, have not I seen Christ Jesus our Lord, 1.
Cor. 9. 1. which argument had not bin sufficient, to prove that he was an
Apostle, had he not seen our Lord in person here upon earth; as did the rest of
the Apostles: but only in a vision: for S. Ananias also saw our Lord after his
Ascension in a vision, Act. 9. 10. yet he was not an Apostle.

15. Moreover S. Paul, affirms that he saw our Savior, as the rest of the
Apostles saw him, S. Paul savv our Savior, as the rest of the Apostles did.
which was corporally here upon earth, saying: Our Lord was seen of Cephas;
after of the eleven: Then was he seen of more then fine hundred Brethren:
moreover he was seen of James, and last of me, 1. Cor. 15. 15. where he puts
no difference, between his manner of seeing our Lord, and the manner, in which
the other Apostles, and Disciples saw our Lord, which was in his proper person.
Wherefore seeing that our Lord is always personally in heaven, and shall be
personally in heaven until the day of judgment as our Adversaries confess;
and yet the Scriptures so often affirm, that S. Paul (since his Ascension)
saw him upon earth, heard him speak standing by him, heard his voice from his
mouth, was ordained Minister of the Gospel by him, and wittnes of his
resurrection from death, as were the rest of the Apostles; and the ancient
Fathers, with one voice so constantly affirming, that the body of our Lord
after consecration is in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar; who without
Testimony of Scriptures or Fathers shall affirm, that one, and the same true,
real, and substantial body, cannot by divine power, be in diverse places at
one, and the same time, that is not very incredulous.

CHAP. VI. One, and the same substantial body, and blood of our Lord, in the
holy Sacrament, is in diverse places, and under diverse dimensions, at the same
time. Our Saviors providence in preventing error in this Sacrament.

1. Our Savior foreseeing, that there would come a time, when there should
arise men, who would call themselves Christians, and yet both deny the offering
of visible Sacrifice, in his body, and blood, and also that God, by the power
of his will, could putt one, and the same, his substantial body, in diverse
places, and under diverse dimensions, (at the same time) to prevent their
incredulity, at the institution of the blessed Sacrament, not only said once,
of the thing, which he delivered in the communion unto the Apostles, This is my
body which is given for you: This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my blood
which is shed for you, Luke 22. but also to establish this truth, of the being
of his one, true, real, and substantial body; and blood in all the Christian
Sacrifices, and Sacraments, which were to be offered, and communicated
throughout the whole world, that there might never be any more question, or
doubt of it amongst Christians, who should profess the doctrine of
Jesus Christ, spoke Our Savior spoke often of this Sacrament.
often of this Sacrifice, and Sacrament, at his last Supper, and Sacrament, and
said upon diverse occasions: This is my body; This is my body which is given
for you; This is my body which is broken for you; This Chalice is the new
Testament in my blood, drink ye all of this; for this is my blood, of the new
Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins; This is my
body, which shall be delivered for you; Drink ye all of this, for this is my
blood of the new Testament, which shall be shed for many, unto remission of
sins; This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed
for you: as not only do wittnes, the greek, and latin Bibles, Math. 26. Mar.
14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11. and both the greek, and latin Fathers, in their
several works: but also the practice of both the greek, and latin Church, in
their several Liturgies, or books of the consecration, and administration of
this Sacrament; and no where, either in the greek, or latin Bibles, or in the
greek or latin Fathers, or in the ancient Liturgies, or Sign never read
amongst the words of the institution of the Sacrament.
books of the consecration, and administration of this Sacrament, are the
words of the institution of this Sacrament, read: This is only a sign of my
body, or: This does only signify my body, as our Adversaries would have them
to say, or signify: but every where, both in the greek, and latin Bibles, and
in the greek, and latin Fathers, and ancient books of consecration, and
administration of this Sacrament, where the words of the institution of this
Sacrament are read, or alleged, they are read and alleged: This is my body:
This is my blood etc.

2. And though the Grecians, always in their The greek Bibles, read the
words of the institution in the present tense.
Bibles, and for the most part in their books of the consecration of this
Sacrament, and other books, read the words of the institution of this Sacrament
in the present tense, as: This is my body, which is given for you, or which is
broken for you, and: This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for
many: and the latins for the most part, both in their Bibles books of
consecration, and other books, read them in the future tense, as: This is my
body which shall be delivered for you, and my blood which shall be shed for you:
yet neither of them find fault with the other, or reprehend the diversity in
reading: because our Lord, at the institution of this Sacrament, spoke often of
his body, and blood, and not only said, that it was his body, and blood, which
he then gave, broke, and shed to God for us, and delivered in the communion
unto the Apostles; but also said, that the same his body, and Our Savior
instituted a Sacrifice in his body to the fulfilling of the Law, and Prophets.
blood, should be delivered, and shed to God for us, as a clean oblation, or
unbloody Sacrifice, in his Church until he come to the fullfilling of the Law,
and the Prophets.

3. In the old Law, there were clean, or unbloody Sacrifices, Leuit. 2. 1. 4.
and 5. Leuit. 5. 11. and these things were donn in figure of us, 1. Cor. 10. 6.
For the Law brought nothing to perfection; but an introduction to a better
hope, Heb. 7. 19. And the Prophets, speak of Priests, Levites, and unbloody
Sacrifice, or a clean oblation to be established in the new Law; as Isaie 61.
6. Isaie 66. 21. Jeremy 33. 18. Psalm. 109. 4. Daniel 9. 27. Malachie 1. 11.
And therefore our Lord said of his body, and blood in the institution of this
Sacrament: This is my body, and blood which is given, and is shed for you now,
and shall be given, and shed for you in the commemoratio^ of me: To fulfill the
Law and the Prophets, concerning Priests, Levites and unbloody Sacrifice.

4. The Grecians, in their Bibles, reading always these words in the
institution of this Sacrament, in the present tense, do demonstrate, that our
Our Savior at the institution of the Sacrament, did not speak of his boby as
upon the Cross.
Lord, at the institution of this Sacrament, did not speak of the giving or
breaking of his body, or shedding of his blood upon the Cross, but of his then
breaking of his body, and shedding of his blood, at the institution of the
communion, to the verifying of his words, spoken in the present tense; and the
sayings of the ancient Fathers, who affirm that he was then at his last
Supper, both the Priest, and victime, host, or gift, and both the banquet, and
the guest; as of S. Cyprian in his 63. Epistle; Origin in his 35. Tract upon S.
Matthew; S. Gregory Nissen in his Oration of the Resurrection; S. Ambrose in
his first preparation to Mass; S. Chrysostom in his 28. Homily upon the 1.
to the Corinthians; S. Hierome in his 2. question, of his 150. Epistle unto
Hedibia, and in his Commentaries upon the 80. Psalm, and upon the 11. chapter
of Osee; S. Augustine in the 20. chapter of his 10. book of the city of God,
and in his 2. Sermon upon the 33. Psalm, saying: Christ carried himself after
a certain manner, when he said: This is my body: because, he carried himself
under the species of bread. Neither was was his body broken upon the Cross, as
wittnes both Sriptures, and Fathers; John. 19. 39. Exodus 12. 46. S. Chrysostom
upon the 10. chapter of the 1. to the Corinthians, and Theophilact, and
Oecumenus in the same place: neither will our Adversaries be able to find
these words, is broken, put for shall be crucified in the whole Bible; for though
the Prophet Isaie say: He was bruised for our iniquities; or as the Septuagint
read: He was made infirm or weak for our iniquities; yet no where do they
say: He was broken upon the Cross; or put these words, is broken, for shall be
crucified, as both one: because the Scriptures say, that he was not broken
upon the Cross, and cannot be contrary unto themselves. Neither was the time
of our Lords Passion, then begun, as our Adversaries also confess, and
therefore our Lord, could not then say, and say truly: This is my body which
is broken for you, intending that it was broken for them upon the Cross, or in
his Passion.

5. Neither is it any way probable, that our Lord, who was truth itself, and
descended down Not probable that our Lord would use equivocation in his last
will, and testament.
from heaven, to teach men the way of truth, should in the making of his
Testament, instituting of a Sacrament, and administrating of the communion, and
going to his Passion, not only equivocate, and put the present tense so often
for the future, and use analogy of times, in a thing which did concern all
men's saluations, contrary to the common custom of speech, and understanding of
reasonable men: but also, leave the consecration of a Sacrament to be made, or
recorded to all future ages, in words, which of themselves should not be true.

6. Neither is it any way probable, that the 3. The Eua^gelists would not put
down the last will, and Testament of our Lord, other wise then he spoke it.
Evangelists, and S. Paul, or any of them, would have penned these words of
the institution of this Sacrament, in the present tense, without any further
exposition, had not our Lord, both spoken, and intended that they should be
understood in the present tense: seeing that words are instituted to signify
the real intention of men's minds, especially in last wills, and Testaments, in
matters of Sacraments, and serious affairs, which concern all men's souls,
and not for to say one thing, and think another.

7. This Sacrament, is published, to be worthily received of all those, who
shall receive it under penalty of everlasting fire, and damnation, 1. Cor. 11.
which cannot be without a true faith, and belief in this Sacrament: and how
cann they have a The danger of using equivocation in the last will and
testament of our Lord.
true faith, or belief of this Sacrament who know not by faith, but by
conjecture only, what this Sacrament is, or what our Lord instituted, as
wittnesseth experience. For when our Adversaries say, that these words of the
institution of this Sacrament: This is my body, which is broken for you, are to
be understood thus, This is a sign of my body which shall be crucified for you:
how do they know that these words, a body, is taken in this place for a sign
of a body, is for shall, and broken for crucified, but by a mere conjecture:
seeing that neither Scriptures, nor Fathers, nor practice of the Catholic
Church of former ages, do tell them so, nor yet any dictionary, or lexicon in
any language.

8. The same greek Bibles in the same places, do affirm, that our Savior
speaks of his own actions about the communion, and what he would have the
Apostles to do, in the consecration of the communion, and not what the Jews
were to inflict upon him, at his Passion, as I have proved at large in the 1.
and 2. chapters of this book.

9. The greek Fathers who understood greek, and knew the mind of our Savior,
and his sense, and meaning of these his words of the institution of this
Sacrament, as well as our Adversaries, do arffirme, that our Lord, then at the
institution of The greek Fathers affirm, that our Lord at his last Supper
instituted a Sacrifice in his body and blood.
this Sacrament, offered Sacrifice, in his body, and blood, as S. Irenaeus,
saying: Christ (at his last Supper) taught the new oblation of the new
Testament, which the Church having received from the Apostles, does offer unto
God, throughout the wholeworld, which was the Sacrifice, of the body, and blood
of our Lord, as I have proved in the former chapter. S. Chrysostom, in his 24.
Homily upon the 1. to the Corinthians: Christ (at his last Supper) commanded
himself to be offered in lieu of the slaughter of boastes: and in the 27.
following: In steed of the blood of beasts, he brought in his own blood. S.
Gregory Nissen, in his Oration of the Resurrection: Christ, after an
unspeakable, and hidden manner of Sacrifice, preoccupated the violent force of
his death, and being the Priest, and the Lamb of God, offered himself an
oblation and victime for us. When was this donn? when he exhibited his body to
be eaten, and his blood to be drunk by his familiar friends. Whereupon
Theodoret upon the 109. Psalm, says: Christ did begin the Priesthood (of the
new Law) in the night, when he undertook the Cross, when he took bread and
brake, etc. And Occumenus upon the 5. to the Hebrews says: Christ delivered
the form of his Priesthood (of the new Law) unto Priests in the mistical
banquet and Supper. So the grecians Fathers.

10. The first amongst the Fathers who cite these words of the institution of
this Sacrament, The first Fathers who alleged the words of the institution
of this Sacrament.
are S. Alexander of the latin Church, and S. Iustine Martyr of the greek
Church: the words of S. Alexander I have set down in the 3. chapter: S.
Iustine Martyr writ a 2. Apology, for the Christians unto Antoninus Pius the
Emperor, and Senate, and people of Rome, in the year of our Lord 150. or as
Eusebius in his Cronikle says in the year 143. In which Apology he plainly
and manifestly proposes unto the Emperor, Senate, and people of Rome, the
faith of the Christians in his time, concerning the Eucharist, saying: These
who amongst us are called Deacons, give unto every one of the Assistants to
take of this bread, and wine and water, made the Eucharist, and also to carry
to the absent. And this meat is called amongst us the Eucharist, whereof it is
not lawful for any to be partaker, but those who believe, that our doctrine is
true, and have been washed with the lauer of remission of sins, and
regeneration, and do live according to the ordinance of Christ, for we do not
take these things as common bread nor common drink; but after the same manner,
that Christ Jesus our Savior was made flesh by the word of God, and had flesh
and blood for our salvation; so also have we been taught that the food (whereof
by change our flesh and our blood are nourished) made the Eucharist, by the
word of prayer proceeding from him, is the flesh and blood of the same Jesus
made flesh. For the Apostles in their commentaries called the Ghospells, have
related unto us, that Jesus has ordained them to do so: that he took kread,
and making it the Eucharist, he said: Do this in commemoration of me: This is
my body. And taking likewise the Chalice, and making it the Eucharist, he said:
This is my blood. And gave them to the Apostles only. Thus S. Iustine to the
Emperor, Senate, and people of Rome in the year 143. or 150. Whereby we may
observe, that not only the faithful of these times believed that the same
flesh, and blood which was incarnate, was in diverse places, and under diverse
dimensions at the same time in the Eucharist, or communion: but that this
command of our Lord, Do this for a commemoration of me, was taken, even in the
infancy of the Church, to be a command, given unto the Apostles, and their
Successors, in the Church of God, to consecrate the true, real and
substantial body, and blood of our Lord, under the species of blood, and wine;
and that the words of our Lord in the institution of the communion, which are
spoken in the present tense, as This is my body which is broken for you, or in
the future tense, as This is my body which shall be delivered for you, are both
to be understood of his body in the Sacrifice, and communion; and not upon the
Cross; as This is my body which is broken for you, now, and This is my body
which shall be delivered for you, to God in the commemoration of me. Whereupon S.
Chrysostom, in his 24. Homily upon the 1. to the Corinthians, says to the
communicants in the holy communion, Thou art not nourrished of one body; and he
of an other: but we are all nourrished of the same body, one and the same
substantial body of our Lord, being in all the Christian Communions, under the
species of bread, by the will and power of our Lord.

11. Sum also of the greek Fathers, allege So^me greeck Fathers, read the
words of institution in both tenses.
these words, of the institution of this Sacrament, in the future tense, as
This is my body which shall be delivered for you, and yet also understand
thereby, that one, and the same substantial body, of our Lord, should be given
to God, for us in all Christian Sacrifices, and be administrated in the
communion, to all the communicants: as S. Irenaeus (who lived about the year
180.) in the 23. chapter of his 4. book of heresies; S. Dionisius Alexandrinus
(who lived about the year 250.) in his Answer unto the objections of Paulus
Samosatenus (an heretic) set down in the 3. Tome of Bibliotheca Patrum;
Theodoret, upon the 1. to the Corinthians, and 11. chapter; S. Chrysostom in
his 83. Homily upon S. Matthew, etc.

12. The latin Bibles, more manifestly to demonstrate unto all men that our
Lord at his last Supper, spoke diverse times of his body, and blood, and that
the same his substantial body, and blood may be in diverse places, and under
diverse dimensions, The Latins read the words of institution, in both senses.
at one, and the same time; read those words, in the institution of this
Sacrament, in both tenses, and say of the body: This is my body which is given
for you, 10. Luk 22. And also, This is my body which shall be delivered for you;
This do ye for the commemoration of me, 1. Cor. 11. plainly, and manifestly
to show: that one and the same substantial body of our Lord, both was then
given to God for us, and shall at all times be given to God for us, when we
make commemoration of our Lord.

13. So likewise, the Greeks in their Bibles, Noe contradiction betvveen the
greek, and latin Bibles in the words of the institution of the Sacrament.
read always these words, in the institution of the Chalice, in the present
tense, and the Latins (without contradicting or gain saying, what the greeks
read) do always read them, in their Bibles in the future tense, (Math. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke 22.) manifestly to declare unto all Christians, that the same
substantial blood of our Lord, which was shed to God for us, in the
institution of the commemoration of our Lord; the same substantial blood shall
also be shed to God for us, in all the commemorations which we shall rightly
make of him: because God speaking of one and the same substantial blood, said
so.

14. When our Lord said: This is my body which is broken for you. And, This is
the Chalice, the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, he spoke of
the institution of his commemoration, and when he said: This is my body which
shall be delivered for you, and, This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my
blood which shall be shed for you, he spoke of the commemoration which the
Apostles, and their successors, should make of him, in his Church: and so gave
a command, not only that the Apostles, and their successors, should break, and
shed the same his true, real, and substantial body, and blood to God for us,
in the commemorations, By the Law of God, nothing is to be offered in Sacrifice
to God, or received in the communion, but his body, and blood.
which they were to make of him: but also, that they should not break, or shed,
any other body, or blood, but his, in the commemorations, which they were to
make of him: and so made a Law, that only his body, and blood, under the
species of bread, and wine, should be offered to God in Sacrifice, and received
in the communion of Christians, and nothing else; and abrogated the Priesthood,
and Sacrifices of the old Law, and established a Priesthood, and Sacrifice in
his body, and blood, under the species of bread, and wine, according to the
order of Melchisedech in his Church, to the fulfilling of the Law, and
Prophets. Whereupon, the Apostles in their time, decreed, in their 3. Canon,
saying: If any Bishopp, or Priest, contrary to the ordinance of our Lord,
should offer any thing upon an Altar, as honey, milk, or syder, instead of
wine, or any compounded thing, or any kind of birds, or beasts, or beans, or
pease, transgressing our Lords constitution, let him be degraded.

15. The old Law as S. Paul says, brought nothing to perfection: But an
introduction to a better hope. Heb. 7. 19. to be performed in the new, where
Jesus is made a suerty to a better Testament. Heb. 7. 22. Whereupon, our
Savior coming to perform this hope, and better Testament, changed all the
Sacrifices of the old Law, which were Christ changed the Sacrifice of the old
Law.
in sheep, Bullockes, Birds etc. into the Sacrifice of his own body, and
blood; and therefore said at the institution of the Eucharist: This is my body
which is given for you, and also: This is my body which shall be delivered for
you; most plainly, and manifestly to express, the change of all the
Sacrifices of the old Law, into the only Sacrifice of his body, and blood; and
declare his prohibition, to offer any thing in Sacrifice unto God, but his
body, and blood; and therefore, said: This is my body which shall be delivered
for you: This is my blood which shall be shed for you; to prohibit the offering
of any thing in Sacrifice to God, but his body, and blood, and the same body,
and blood which he then offered, or gave to God. Whereupon S. Augustine in the
20. chapter of his 17. book of the city of God, says: The Sacrifice of
Christ's body, and blood, succeeded in place of all those Sacrifices of the old
Law. Again, in the same chapter: For all those Sacrifices, and oblations of
the old Law, Christ body is offered, and administrated in the communion, to the
communicants. And in his 2. Sermon upon the 33. Psalm, he says: In the old
Law was the Sacrifice according to the order of Aron: but afterward, Christ
instituted a Sacrifice, according to the order of Melchisedech, of his body,
and blood. And the like has S. Cyprian in his 63. Epistle to Cicilianus: S.
Ambrose in the 4. chapter of his 5. book of Sacraments: S. Hierome, in the 2.
chapter of his 17. Epistle; and in his 126. Epistle: S. Ephanius in his 55.
heresy: Theodoret upon the 109. Psalm: S. Leo in his 8. Sermon upon the
Passion: And S. Damascene in his 14. chapter of his 4. book, Fidei orthodoxae.

16. And whereas our Adversaries, say, that God cannot, put one, and the same
substantial God can best tell, what he can do.
body, and blood in diverse places, and under diverse dimensions, at one, and the
same time; who can better tell, what God can do, then God himself; and the
consent of all the Catholic Fathers, who have treated of this subject. And
seeing that God said, it was his body, which he delivered in the communion, and
all Christians, who lived before Luther (reputed Heretics to both parties only
excepted) believed it to be his body, (as I have proved in the 3. chapter) what
Christian can doubt of it?

17. The Latin Fathers, to prevent the infidelity of our Adversaries, in this
point, do also in The greek, and latin Fathers, allege the words of the
^nstitution^ of the Sacrament, as our Lord spoke them.
their other works, and books, read the words of the institution, of this
blessed Sacrament, sometimes in the present tense, and also sometimes in the
future tense, and yet do not contradict one another, or find fault, at the
differing, and diversity of reading: because our Lord, at the institution of
this Sacrament, spoke many times of his body, and blood, and so accordingly as
he spoke of them, they repeat his words, and allege them sometimes in the
present tense, and sometimes in the future tense; as S. Augustine in the 24.
chapter of his book, De peccatorum meritis; S. Hierome in his commentaries,
upon the 1. Cor. 11. S. Ambrose upon the 22. of S. Luke S. Cyprian in his 63.
Epistle: and S. Alexander, in the 2. chapter of his first Epistle unto all
Catholics; yet S. Alexander was made Bishopp of Rome, in the year 121. And
though these aforesaid Fathers in the places above said, allege the words of
our Lord, in the institution of this Sacrament, in the future tense; yet they
all, as it were with one voice affirm, that in these words, our Lord
instituted a Sacrifice in his body, and blood, to be offered to God, in
commemoration of him, in his Church, as I have proved at large in the 13.
chapter of the first part.

18. And to conclude, it is so manifest unto the judgments of our Adversaries,
that our Lord, Our Adversaries corruption of the Testament of our Lord.
at his last Supper, gave his body to God for us, and shed his blood, and that
one, and the same substantial body, and blood of our Lord, by the omnipotency
of his word, and will, may be at one, and the same time, in diverse places, and
under diverse dimensions: that our Adversaries themselves cannot find any
means, how they may avoid, or disprove it; but by disannulling, corrupting,
and adding to the last will, and Testament of our Lord: as by interpreting, my
body, sign or figure of my body: is, shall: broken, crucified; or the like: by
which means, they may prove any thing true, be it never so false, and any
thing false, be it never so true: and their error here in, is so much more the
greater, for that they practice it, upon the last will, and Testament of our
Lord; when S. Paul, says: A man's Testament being confirmed, no man
disannulleth, or adds thereunto. Gal. 3. 15. And this is sufficient to prove,
that one, and the same body of Christ is in diverse places, and under diverse
dimensions in the blessed Sacrament.

CHAP. VII. How our Saviors is chief Priest, or agent in offering unbloody
Sacrifices, and administering Sacraments.
1. TO let thee understand (dear Reader) how our Savior, being in heaven,
does, Christ head of his Church, and chief Priest.
and shall offer upon earth, unbloody Sacrifices, in his body, and blood, under
the species of bread, and wine, to God the Father, and is a chief, and high
Priest upon earth, according to the order of Melchisedech, until the end of
the word; it is necessary to observe: first, (as S. Paul says) that Christ is
head of the Church, himself the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. Secondly,
that our Savior is chief, or high Priest in the Church of God, according to S.
Paul, Heb. 5. 5. 9. So that whatsoever is well done, by mortal Priests, in
the Church of God, is done by his authority, and power, given unto mortal
Priests, his ministers, Whatsoever is rightly done in the Church, is chiefly
done by Christ.
and servants, according to the words of S. Paul, saying: Paul the servant of
Jesus Christ. Romans 1. 1. Again; what is Apollo, and what is Paul? The
ministers of him in whom you believed, and to every one as our Lord has given:
I planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase. 1. Cor. 3. 4. Thirdly,
that the power, and authority of Christ Jesus is always invisibly present, at
all the actions of mortal Priests, his ministers, and servants, chiefly, and
principally effecting, and doing whatsoever they do rightly, or well in his
Church; according to his word, saying: I am with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world. Math. 28. 20. Again; Neither he that planteth, is
any thing, nor he that waters; but he that gives the increase, God. 1. Cor.
3. 7. So that when mortal Bishopps, or Priests, who are rightly ordained, do
offer Sacrifice, or administer Sacraments in Church of God, it is Christ Jesus,
that chiefly, and principally, as head of his Church, and high Priest, does
offer the Sacrifice, and administer Christ by his omnipotency works the
affects in the Sacrifice and Sacraments.
the Sacraments, and by the omnipotency of his power, works the exchanges,
fruits, or effects they have, or do produce. Wherevpo^ S. John. says: Christ
is he that baptizeth. John. 1. 33. Again: Jesus abode with the Apostles, and
baptized. Io. 3. 22. Howbeit, (as the same Apostle says) Jesus did not
baptize; but bis Apostles, Io. 4. 6. So our Savior said unto his Apostles:
Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven. John.
20. 21. 22. Yet God said: I am, I am he, that take clean away thine
iniquities. Isa. 43. 25. Isa. 44. 22. Ier. 31. 34. So when Bishopps, and
Priests rightly ordained, do offer Sacrifice, and consecrate the body, and
blood of our Lord; it is our Lord himself, who chiefly does offer Sacrifice,
according to his former words before alleged. And S. Augustine in his 4.
Sermon of the Innocents, saying: What cann be more reverend, or more honorable,
then to rest under that Altar, upon which Sacrifice is celebrated unto God, in
which our Lord is the Priest, according as he said: Thou art a Priest for ever.

2. As God said: Be light made, and by the omnipotency Similitudes, of Gods
operation, by his word.
of his worp, Ligt was made, and continues in his functions, and operations
even until this day: and as God said: Led the earth shoot forth green
herbs, and such as may seed, and fruit trees, yealding fruit after his
kind, etc. And by the omnipotency of his word: It was so donn, and the earth
brought forth green herbs, such as seedeth according to his kind; and trees
that bears fruit: and shall do until the end of the world: even so in the
unbloody Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the body, and blood of our Lord: Our
Savior taking bread, blessed, and brake, and gave to the Apostles, saying:
This is my body which is given for you; do this for a commemoration of me: and
by the omnipotency of Gods word, the Apostles, and their Successors, rightly
ordained, receive power, and authority to give his body (even that which
sits at the right hand of God) for us, and shall have power until the end
of the world, as it does with the light to shine, and the earth to shoot
forth green herbs, and trees.

3. S. Iustine Martyr, who lived with the Apostles scholars, and presently
after the Apostles S. Iustine of the Sacrament.
times, in his 2. Apology, which he made in behalf of the Christians, unto
Antoninus Pius the Emperor, Senate, and people of Rome, declaring unto us what
was the faith of the Christians of these primitive days in this point, says
that The Eucharist was made the flesh, and blood of Jesus by the word of prayer
proceeding from him, at the institution of this Sacrament. For the Apostles
(says he) in their commentaries, which are called their Ghospells, have
related unto us, that Jesus has ordained them to do so. That he took bread,
and making it the Eucharist, he said, do this for a commemoration of me: This
is my body: And taking likewise the Chalice, and making it the Eucharist, he
said: This is my blood; thus S. Iustine, where he shows, that in the infa^cy
of the Church the faithful believed the Eucharist to be made the flesh and
blood of our Lord, by the omnipotency of his word, and prayer, spoken at the
institution of this Sacrament, as chief agent in offering unbloody Sacrifice,
and in the consecration thereof.

4. S. Irenaeus in the 2. chapter of his 5. book of heresies, says: When the
mixed Chalice, and the bread broken does perceive the word of God, it is made
the Eucharist of the blood, and body of Christ. Again in the same chapter: The
bread, and wine receiving the word of God, is made the Eucharist, which is the
body, How constantly in S. Irenaeus time, they believed in the real presence.
and blood of Christ. Thus S. Irenaeus, who lived with S. Polycarpe, scholar
to S. John the Evangelist, and in his time, when as yet some of the Apostles
scholars were living, and the actions of our Sauiwere fresh in the memory of
men, the realitie of the body, and blood of our Savior, was so universally and
constantly believed to be in the B. Sacrament, or Eucharist by the omnipotency
of The body, and blood of our Lord, is in the B. Sacrament, by the omnipotency
of his word, and not by faith only.
his word that in his 4. book of heresies, cap. 34. he alleges against
certain heretics, who denied Christ to be the Son of God, the real being
of his body, and blood in the Sacrament, or Eucharist by his word; to prove
thereby that Christ was the true Son of God; who by his word could effect it,
and make good what he said; which otherwise he could not do, unless he were
the Son of God, saying: How will it be manifest to these (heretics, that
deny Christ to be the Son of God) that the bread upon which thanks are
given, is the body of their Lord, and the Chalice his blood, if they do not
say Christ to be the Son of the builder of the world, that is to say, his
word, by which trees bear fruit, fountains flow, the earth first does give
the blade, afterward the ear, and then full wheat in the ear. Again, how
do they say, that the flesh does comme to corruption, and not receive life,
which is nourrished of the body, and blood of our Lord; therefore, either let
them change their opinions, or abstain from offering Sacrifice in these things,
which are before spoken of; (that is to say, the body, and blood of Christ)
our opinion (who hold Christ to be the Son of God) is consonant to the
Eucharist; and again, the Eucharist confirms our opinion; for we offer unto
him Sacrifice, these things which are his, preaching agreably The omnipotency
of Gods word, works the change in the bread
the communication, and the unity of the flesh, and the spirit; for even as
the bread which is of the earth receiving the vocation of God, is now no more
common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, the earthly, and the
heavenly; so also, our bodies receiving the Eucharist, are now no more
corruptible, having hope of the resurrection. So S. Irenaeus, where we see,
that in his time, the Catholics did so little doubt, that the body, and blood
of Christ, was in the B. Sacrament, by virtue of his word, that they urged it
to prove, Christ to be the Son of God, and taught it, as a consonant opinion,
to say, that Christ was the Son of God, because his body, and blood was in
the Eucharist, by virtue of his word: and again, that his body, and blood was
in the Eucharist, because Christ was the Son of God.

5. In the like manner, the rest of the Fathers, in their succeeding ages,
affirm that the body, S. Cyprian of the change in the bread, by the
omnipotency of the word of God.
and blood of Christ, was in the B. Sacrament, by the omnipotency of his word;
as S. Cyprian in his book of our Lords Supper, saying: The bread which our Lord
gave to his Disciples, was not changed in outward form or shape, but in
nature, by the omnipotency of the word, it is made flesh. As in the person of
Christ, the humanity was seen, and the divinity lay hidd; so after an
unspeakable manner, the divine essence does pour itself into the visible
Sacrament, that men might use a religious devotion about the Sacraments, and
might have a more simple, or sincere access unto the truth, even unto the
being partakers of the spirit, whose body, and blood the Sacraments are.

6. Eusebius Cesariensis lived in the year 320. Eusebius, of the change by the
power of God.
and he (as it is set down in the 3. book, and 45. chapter of the Pararells
of Damasus, says: Many Priests while they are in sin, do work the holy
things (or offer Sacrifice) neither does God turn away from them; but by his
holy spirit, does consecrate the Gifts, set before them; and bread certainly
is made the precious body of our Lord, and the cupp the precious blood of our
Lord. S. Cyrill, how Christ works the change in the bread


7. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem lived in the year 370. and he in his 4.
Mystagogica says: Seeing that Christ himself does say, and affirm after this
manner of the bread; This is my body; who ever hereafter dare doubt? And he
likewise saying and affirming, This is my blood; who I say, cann doubt, and
say, that it is not his blood? Heretofore at Cana in Galilea, only by his will,
he changed water into wine, which is near unto blood, and is he not worthy to
be believed, that has changed wine into his blood? He being invited to a
corporal marriage, wrought a wonderful miracle; shall we not much more easily
confess that he gave his body, and blood to the Children of his Spouse?
Wherefore with assuredness, let us take the body and blood of Christ; for
under the species of bread, the body is given thee, and under the species of
wine, the blood is given, that having received the body, and blood of Christ,
thou may be made partaker of his body, and blood: we shall be bearers of
Christ, after that we have received his body, and blood into our members.

8. S. Gregory Nissen, brother to S. Basile the great, S. Gregory Nissen of
the change in in the bread by the word of God.
lived in in the year 380. and he in his 37. Oration catechetica, says: As
Christ by eating bread, made it is divine body; so likewise here, bread being
sanctified by the word, and prayer (as the Apostle says) and not by eating and
drinking, becomes the body of the word, changed by the word, saying: This is
my body.

9. S. Ambrose (who lived in the year 370.) in S. Ambrose of the change in the
bread, by the omnipotency of Gods word.
the 9. chapter of his book, of those, who are begunn to be instructed in the
mysteries, says: If human blessing (of Moses, Elias, and Elizaeus) was of
such force, as that it could alter nature, what shall we say of the divine
consecration, where the words themselves of our Lord, and Savior do work,
for this Sacrament, which thou do receive, is made by the word of Christ. If
the words of Elias were of such force, that they could call fire from heaven,
shall not the word of Christ, be sufficient to change the species of the
Elements? Of the works of the world thou have read, that because he spoke the
word, they were made; he commanded, and they were created: therefore, the word
of Christ, which could make of nothing, that which was not; cann it not change
those things which are, into that which they were not? for the difficulty is
not lesser, to give new natures to things, then to change natures. Again in
his 4. book, and 4. chapter of the Sacraments, speaking of the Sacrifice, and
Sacrament of the Altar, he says: This bread, is bread before the words of the
Sacraments: but as soon as consecration is added unto it, of bread it is made
the flesh of Christ. This we affirm; how cann that which is bread, be the body
of Christ? by consecration. And with what words, and speeches is consecration?
with the words of our Jesus: for in the rest which are said, praise is given
unto God prayer is made for the people, for kings, etc. but when we come, that
the venerable Sacrament should be made, then the Priest does not use his own
words, but the words of Christ. Therefore, the word of Christ does work this
Sacrament. What word of Christ? even that by which all things are made. Our
Lord commanded, and the seas were made; our Lord commanded, and all creatures
were begotten. If therefore, there be so great force in the words of our Lord
Jesus, that these things could begin to be, which were not; how much more will
they be able to effect, that those things may be, which are, and be changed in
an other. But hear the Prophet saying: He said, and they were made; he
commanded, and they were created. Therefore, that I may answer thee, it was
not the body of Christ before consecration; but after consecration, I tell
thee, that then it is the body of Christ. Again, upon the 38. Psalm, he
says: It is the word of Christ, which consecrated the Sacrifice, which is
offered. Thus S. Ambrose.

10. In like manner S. Chrysostom in his Homily, S. Chrysostom of the change
of the bread into the body of our Lord, by the power of God.
de proditione Iudae, says: It is not man, that does make these things, which
are exposed for consecration upon the table of our Lord, the body and blood of
Christ: but he who is crucified for us, Christ: The words are pronounced with
the Priests mouth; and they are consecrated by the grace, and virtue of God. He
said: This is my body; by these words, the things exposed are consecrated. And
as that voice which said, increase and multiply, and replenish the earth, was
said but once, yet at all times has this effect for generation, nature
concurring: so this word but once said, and yet it gives strength to the
Sacrifice which is upon all the tables of the Church, even until this day,
and shall do until his coming to judgment. Again, in his 83. Homily upon the
S. Matthew, he says: We (Bishopps, or Priests in the consecration of this
Sacrament) hold but the place of Christ's Ministers, for he who does santify, or
make the change, is Christ himself. Thus S. Chrysostom.

11. S. Hierome upon the first chapter to the Galatians, says: Although some
think me worthy of reprehension, S. Hierome of this change.
for that in my book which I writ of the preservation of virginity, young
women ought to fly from wine, as they do from poison; yet it does not repent
me of what I said; for I rather contemn the effect or work of wine, then the
creature it self. And I took liberty to give this counsel unto a virgin,
warm with a heat proper unto her years, least upon occasion of drinking a
little, she might drink much, and perish: otherwise I did know, that wine was
consecrated into Christ his blood. Thus S. Hierome.

12. S. Augustine in his 3. book, and 4. chapter, S. Augustine of the change in
the Sacrament, by the power of God.
De Trinitate, says: We do not say, that the articulat words pronounced with
the tongue, or the sign of letters, written in skinns, is the body and blood
of Christ: but that only which is taken from the fruits of the earth and is
consecrated by mystical prayer, etc. It is not sanctified, that it may be so
great a Sacrament; but by the spirit of God, working inuisibly, seeing that God
does work all the things, which by corporal motion are made in that work.

13. Again in his book of sentences, ad Prosperum, cited by Gratian, in his 2.
distinction, he says: In the species of wine, and bread which we see, we
do honor invisible things, that is to say, flesh and blood; neither do we
equally esteem of these two species, after consecration, as before
consecration; for before consecration, we faithfully confeffe, that they are
bread, and wine, as nature has formed them; but after consecration, they are
the flesh, and blood of Christ, which the blessing has consecrated. S.
Cyrillus Alex. of the change in the Sacrament, by the power of God*


14. S. Cyrillus Alexandrinus (who lived in the year 430.) in his Epistle, ad
Calosirium, says: Do not doubt whether this be true (that the body of our
Savior is in the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the Altar) Christ manifestly
saying: This is my body; but rather receive the word of our Savior in faith;
for seeing he is truth, he does not lie. Therefore, they are madd, who say,
that the mystical blessing does cease, from the sanctification, if any part
thereof should remain until the day following: for the most holy body of
Christ, vvillnot be changed, but the virtue of the blessing, and the quickening
grace is continually in it: for the quickening virtue of God the Father is the
only begotten word, which is made flesh, not ceasing to be the word, but
making quickening flesh. So these ancient and prime Fathers of the Church of
God. Whereby it is sufficiently manifest to any indifferent reader, that not
only the true, and real body, and blood of our Savior, is in the Sacrifice,
and Sacrament of Christian Catholics; but that it is there, by virtue of the
omnipotency of Gods word, and not by the faith of him that receaueth it, as
Puritans would have it.

CHAP. VIII. How in general, our Savior by his omnipotency, together which
Priests his instruments, and Legates, does consecrate his true, real and
substantial body, and blood in the blessed Sacrament.
1. GOd has two Kingdoms here upon God has two Kingdoms upon earth.
earth, the one, the temporal Kingdom of this world, of which it is, said:
The earth is our Lords, and the fulness thereof: the round world, and all that
dwell therein; Psalm. 23. 1. The Other Kingdom is the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ's Church militant here upon earth: of which it is said: The son of man
shall send his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all
scandalls, and them that work iniquity. Math. 13. 41. And both these
Kingdoms, and all that is wrought in them, were miraculously at the first
founded, and established by the omnipotency of the will, and Both Gods
Kingdoms, are miraculously founded.
word of God: according to the words of the Prophet, saying: God spoke, and
they were made. Psalm. 32. 9. and this first foundation of these Kingdoms, and
establishing them in their operations, was miraculous, because they were not
before: but being thus founded, and established, now their ordinary operations,
are not miraculous: because God has given unto either of them, their several
ordinary natures, dispositions, properties, and qualitis, which they are
ordinarily to reteyne, and keep, unto the end of the world: God having so
ordained, and decreed by the omnipotency of his will, and word.

2. For the better understanding hereof it is necessary to observe, that
mirakles, as S. Augustine, in What is miraculous and what natural.
the 14. chapter of his 6. book of the Trinity, says: Are these things which
are done contrary to the usual course of nature, either in divine or humane
things: and the nature of all things, is the common and usual course of all
things: whereupon Aristotle (in the 7. book of his moralls to Eudemon) says:
Nature is the cause of those things, which are always, or for the most part
donn after one manner. So those things, which are usually, or commonly donn, in
either of these Kingdoms, we do not call miraculous, but natural: and though
the things which be usually or commonly donn in the Kingdom of Christ's Church,
here upon earth, be supernatural, and miraculous, in respect of the things
which are commonly, and usually donn in the temporal Kingdom of this world,
for that they are never, or rarely donn in it, not cann be donn in it, without
a miracle, and alteration of the common course of things, in the temporal
Kingdom of this world: as if for example a man who were no Priest in the
spiritual Kingdom of Gods Church, but a lay man only in his temporal
Kingdom, by pronouncing the words of absolution, after confession, or by
reading the words of consecration, over the bread, and wine fittly prepared,
should truly, and really forgive sins, or consecrate the body, and blood of
our Lord: this I say were a miracle: because these things are neither
ordinarily, nor usually done by lay men of Gods temporal Kingdom: nor can
be done, unless God contrary to the ordinary course of absolution from sins,
and consecration, do supply the defects: yet those (the institution, and
ordenance of God supposed) are no mirakles, when they are donn in the Church of
God by Priests, who are instituted by God for that purpose, because they are
commonly, and usually done by them: so likewise if a Priest by doing any act,
which precisly belongs unto the spiritual Kingdom of Christ's Church
hereupon earth, should bring forth a tree, or plant; this were a mirakle:
because that by the exercice of Christian religion, trees, or plants, are not
ordinarily, or usually brought forth: yet that the earth brings forth trees,
and plants, is no miracle; because the earth usually, and commonly does it.

3. Secondly it is necessary, to observe, that as all All the works of God,
miraculous in the foundation of his Kingdoms.
the works of God, in the foundation of his temporal Kingdom here upon
earth, are above nature, and natural reason, supernatural and miraculous, as
the creation of the heavens, earth, Son, Moon, Stars, etc. of nothing: so
likewise are all the works of God, in the foundation of his spiritual
Kingdom, of the Church of Christ, here upon earth; supernatural, and
miraculous, and above the reach of humane sense, and natural reason: as that
God should have a Son, a Virgin should remain a Virgin, and yet bring forth a
Child; God to die upon a Cross, men to be borne again by Baptism, and
cleansed from their sins, the body of the Son of God, to be in the
Sacrament of the Altar etc. whereupon S. Paul says: faith must not be in the
wisdom of men: but in the power of God. 1. Cor. 2. 5. Wherefore, seeing that
all the works of God, in the foundation of his spiritual Kingdom, which is
the Church of Christ hereupon earth, are miraculous, and supernatural, and
above the reach of common sense, and natural reason: it must needs be, that
also the The institution of the communion, miraculous.
institution of the communion, which is a Sacrament, and work of God in the
foundation of his Church, must also be a work of supernatural power, and
virtue, above the reach of humane sense, and natural reason: and therefore, it
should be a vain thing; to go about, to give a reason in nature, how our Lord
did, or does consecrate his real, and substantial body, and blood in the
blessed Sacrament, but only by similitude, in the foundation, conservation, and
preservation of his temporal Kingdom: so by the way of similitude, from that
which our Adversaries do believe, to bring them unto that, which they believe
not, that they may save their souls.

4. This observed, we do not always fly unto miracles, in every particular
act, or spiritual exercise The acts of Christian religion, now not
miraculous.
of our religion; as when every child is baptized, or when every Priest does
consecrate: because God by the omnipotency of his will, and word has
established his spiritual Kingdom, of his Christian Church after this manner:
so that now this supposed, her ordinary actions, and operations are not
miraculous: but according to the common, and usual course of the acts, and
operations, which God has established, in the spiritual Kingdom of his
Church, and according to that spiritual nature, which God has given unto her,
at her first foundation. So that, whereas before Baptism was instituted by our
Lord, if any one should have pronounced the words of Baptism, and have powered
water upon a man, who never was baptized, it would have had no power, or virtue
to remit sins, or to make him a child of the spiritual Kingdom of God; and
so the first institution was miraculous: because the water, and the words had
not this power before: but now, since that God Almighty, by the omnipotency of
his power, has instituted Baptism, and established it in his Church, and
given unto it, this spiritual virtue, and power to cleanse men of their sins,
make them Children of this spiritual Kingdom which is his Church, and Heirs
which Christ of eternal life; now this is no miracle: but it is the spiritual
nature, and property of Baptism, which God who has given the nature, and
properties unto all things, which they have, has given also unto it: and
therefore, now this being supposed, it is no miracle, that when a man is
baptized, his sins are forgiven: but it should be a miracle, that a man
should now be baptized, according to the rights of Baptism, and his sins
should not be forgiven: because God having once given this spiritual virtue
unto Baptism, and having made it, the nature, property, and quality of
Baptism, cannot take it away, without altering the course of the nature,
property, and quality of Baptism, which is a miracle.

5. Lykwise when our Lord instituted the B. Sacrament, he took bread, blessed,
gave thanks, and said: This is my body, and by virtue of his omnipotency,
consecrated it, or made it his true, real, and substantial body; and when he
had donn, said unto Bishopps, and Priests rightly ordained: It is the property
of Priests rightly ordained, to consecrate the body, and blood of our Lord.
Do this (the same that he then did) for a commemoration of me, and by virtue
of his omnipotency, they do the same, that he then did. The first institution
was supernatural, and miraculous: but afterward, Bishopps, and Priests, did,
and do consecrate the same body, and blood which our Lord then did, without any
new miracle: because he who created all things of nothing, and has given unto
every thing, that nature, property, and quality which it has, has also
given Bishopps, and Priests rightly ordained this property, and quality. So
now it is not a miracle, that Priests do consecrat the true, real, and
substantial body, and blood of our Lord; but it should be a miracle, if now
that the Eucharist is established, they do that which our Lord then commanded
them to do, and yet should not consecrat his true, real, and substantial
body, and blood: because that then, our Lord should suspend or alter the
properties, and qualities, which he has given to Bishopps, and Priests, which
would be a miracle.

6. In like manner in other things: In the beginning God created heaven and
earth, and the earth was void, and vacant. Genesis 1. 2. and neither brought forth
herbs, nor trees, nor grass, nor plants, nor ever would have donn, if God had
then let it alone, and neither have said, nor donn, any more unto it: but
afterward God said: Let the earth In the beginning it was miraculous, that
the earth should bring forth herbs plants, and trees.
shoot forth green herbs, and such as may seed, and fruit trees, yiedling
fruit, after his kind, such as may have seed in it self upon earth: and it was
so donn. Genesis 1. 11. this was a supernatural, and miraculous work of God: but
ever since, it hat been natural unto the earth, to bring forth herbs, and
fruit trees, without any new miracle: because God, who is the giver of all the
properties, and qualities, which things have, gave also unto the earth this, to
bring Now it is proper to the earth to bring forth herbs, and trees.
forth herbs, and fruit trees. And it should be a miracle, if the earth
should not do it.

7. And the like we may say of the having of Children, and creation of souls:
God created man, to his own image, to the image of God he created him, male and
female he created them. Genesis 1. 27. that is, he created their souls: for Adam
he formed of the slyme of the earth, and Eve of a rib taken out of Adams side,
Genesis 2. And upon their first creation, they had no children, nor could have, or
begett any until God, said: Increase, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
Genesis 1. 28. And this first was a miracle, that God should give that power unto
men, and women, to be his instruments, of bringing forth souls into the
world: but now that the generation of men is established, it is no miracle, but
agreeable to the usual course of nature, that God in the generation of men,
does creat souls: but if nature concurring, men, and women should bring forth
bodies without souls, it would be a miracle: because God should suspend, or
alter the course of nature, which he has established in the creation of souls
in the generation of men.

8. So as men and women, God, and nature concurring, bring forth souls into
the world until this day, and shall do until the end by virtue of these words
once spoken, saying: Increase, and multiply. Genesis 1. 28. So Bishopps, and
Priests rightly ordained, in bread and wine fittly prepared, have hitherto, and
shall until the end of the world, consecrate the true, real, and substantial
body, and blood of the Son of God, by virtue of these words, once said: Do
this (the same that he then did) in commemoration of me. And in due
consideration, it seems as hard a thing, that men, and women, should be God
Almigties instruments, to bring forth so many millions of souls into the
world, which before were not: as for Bishopps, and Priests to be his agents,
and instruments of making one body, that was before, to be in diverse places,
and under diverse demensions.

9. If our Puritans believe, that by virtue of these words, Increase and
multiply, once spoken, Almigtie God does so concourr in the generation of men,
as that they have souls: I see noe difficulty, why they should not believe,
that Bishopps and Priests rightly ordained, by virtue of these words, once
said: Do this (the same which he then did) should not have power, and
authority as The cause why Protestans, and Puritans deny the real presence in
the B. Sacrament.
agents, and instruments of God, to consecrate his true, real, and
substantial body, and blood: if it be not, but because they want the Sacrament
of order, and know that these words, Do this, were not spoken unto them. And
therefore knowing that they have no authority, or power to consecrat, and yet
resolve to be as they are; not to fall into manifest idolatry, and to teach the
people, to esteem, and adore a piece of bread for God; of two evils, have
chosen the lesser; and therefore say that after consecration, there is nothing
but bread, and wine, our Saviors words effect nothing* the whole business
consists in taking bread, and apprehending Christ in heaven, by the hand of
faith, and be thankful. Otherwise if we should seek to pry, and dyue into,
by natural reason, how, and when, and after what manner, God creates souls
in the generation of men, and infuseth them into their bodies; or of what
substance they are of, or how they being spiritual, inform the body and make
one man with the body, what operations they have, where the will,
understanding, and memory are placed, and how they are divided, seeing the
soul has no parts, how the soul moves the body, and preserves it from
corruption, how it affords ability te see, hear, smell, touch, and taste; in
what gulf the memory puts all these species of things, which she reteyneth,
from whence they come, when they are called for, and where some lie hid, which
cannot be found, when we would, and how, and where we find then; we shall find
no less difficulty in these things, then in knowing how a body, that already
is, may at the same time be in diverse places, and under diverse dimensions, and
species by the will, and power of God.

10. And if none should believe, that he had a soul unless he did know
certainly, and manifestly all these, howes; then few would attain unto the
belief, that he had a soul, thoug all men should study Aristotle's book de
anima, or what soever books they could find to that purpose all their lives yet
what is more familiar unto a man, the^ his soul, wherewith he lives, and
mooues: whereby we see, ho absurd a thing it is, not to believe the mysteries
of our faith, unless we cann certainly, and manifestly know by reason, how
every thing in particular is: for then it were not a mystery of faith, but a
thing manifest to our senses: whereas faith, Is an argument of things not
appearing (to the senses) Heb. 11. Wherefore as in the creation of all As in
the founding of his earthly Kingdom God spoke, and things were so done: so in
founding his spiritual Kingdom, which is his Church.
things, and establishing his earthly Kingdom, God spoke the word, and we
believe that they were made of nothing, by the omnipotency of his word, though
we know not how God made them, or could make them of nothing, more then by the
omnipotency of his word: so here establishing the B. Sacrament in his Church,
he took bread, and blessed, and said: This is my body, and likewise wine, and
said: This is my blood, and we believe, that the bread was changed into his
body, and the wine into his blood, by the omnipotency of his word, though we
know not how God could change bread into his body, or wine into his blood, and
putt them into so little a room, and under the species of bread, and wine,
but by the omnipotency of his word. And as after, God had created the earth,
and mankind, he said to the earth: Let the earth shoot forth green herbs, and
such as may seed, etc. and to man: Increase, and multiply, and we believe,
that both the earth, and man by the omnipotency of his word, received virtue,
and power to do that which he said, though we do not know, where this power
lies, or in what part, or how these things come to pass, more then by the
omnipotency of his word: so after that God had instituted this Sacrament, and
consecrated his body, and blood, he said to Bishopps, and Priests rightly
ordained: Do this, and This do ye, and we believe that Bishopps and Priests
rightly ordained, have power to consecrate the body, and blood of our Lord,
though we do not know, where the power lies in Priests, or how it comes
to pass more then by the omnipotency of the word of God.

11. Besides that which I have said in the former Chapter, S. John Damascene
in the 14. chapter of his 4. book Orthodoxaefidei, explicateth this point at
large, saying: Our Lord breaking the bread, gave it unto his Disciples, saying:
take, eat this is my body etc. S. Damascene of the manner how the body of our
Lord comes to be in the Eucharist.
If then the word of God be quickening, and full of efficacy, and all that our
Lord has willed, he has done: if he has said, let light be made, and it was
done: if he have said, let the firmament be made, and it vas donn: if by the
word of God the heavens have been established, and all their virtues by the
spirit of his mouth: if the heaven, and the earth, and the water, and the fire,
and all their ornaments, and man himself, who is so famous a living thing, have
been perfected by the word of our Lord: if God the word itself, willing it,
was made man, and was formed of the pure, and immaculate blood of the holy
always Virgin, without seed, and flesh united hypostatically with him: could
he not make the bread his body, and the wine and water his blood? He said in
the beginning, let the earth bring forth green herbs, and even until this
day, by the fall of rain, the earth does bring forth her proper plants,
aided, and fortified by the commandment of God. And God has said, This is my
body: do this in commemoration of me: and this by the omnipotency of his
command, will be donn until he come. Thus S. Damascenus, of the change of the
bread and wine, in the consecration of the blessed Sacrament, by the
omnipotency of God. Eusebius Emissenus in his Sermon of the body of our Lord,
speaks to the same effect, saying: When the creatures of bread, and wine, are
placed upon the Altar to be blessed, before they are consecrated by the
invocation of the holy Ghost, there is present the substance of bread, and
wine; but after the words of Christ, there is Christ's body and blood; and what
great matter is it, if he who could create all things by his word, could
convert, and change these things, which he had created, into other natures.

12. If our Adversaries will grant as commonly The spiritual kingdom more
excellent then the temporal, and therefore more probable to be founded by the
omnipotency of God.
they do, that God by the omnipotency of his word, established this earthly,
and worldly kingdom, and all things that are therein, which for the most part
is so possessed by wicked men and devils, that our Savior himself, does not
let to call the devil: Prince of this world. Ioh. 12. 31. and 14. 30. and S.
Paul to call him: God of this world. 2. Cor. 4. 4. How can any man, think it
absurd, for us to say, that the same God, by the omnipotency of his word, has
established the mysteries of our faith, and the kingdom of his Church upon
earth, which he has purchased, and planted with his blood, and has espoused
unto himself forever. Osee 2. 19. seeing, that they confess our Savior to be
God, and in the mystery of the holy communion, to have taken bread, blessed,
and said: Take ye, and eat, This is my body, and likewise to have taken the
Chalice, given thanks, and gave to them, saying: Drink ye all of this, for this
is my blood.

13. This was the argument, which moved the ancient Fathers, to believe the
real presence of the body, and blood of our Lord in the blessed Sacrament, the
omnipotency of the vvrd of God, as I have abundantly proved in the precedent
chapter. For as S. Augustine in his 3. epistle to Velosianus says, in the
vvonderfull works of God, and high mysteries of our faith: All the reason of
the deed, is the omnipotency of the doeer. Whereupon S. Chrysostom in his 83.
Homily upon S. Matthew, exhorts all Christians, saying: Let us believe wholly
in God, and let us not contradict him, although that which he says, seem
contrary to our reason, and our sight. Let his word have more authority with
us, then our reason, or our eyes etc. Let us not behold only the objects which
are there proposed (in the blessed Sacrament) but let us embrace his words,
for his words cannot abuse us; but our sense is easily deceived. His word has
never failed; but our sense is mistaken every hour. Wherefore seeing that the
word itself says: This is my body; let us be persuaded, and believe it, and
we shall see it with the eyes of our understanding. Thus S. Chrysostom; with
whom agrees Gaudentius in his 2. Tract of the reason of the Sacraments,
saying: When our Lord gave the consecrated bread, and wine unto his Disciples,
he said unto them: This is my body. Let us believe him I pray you, whom we
have believed; Truth does not know what it is to lie.

14. Wonderful are the works of God in his earthly kingdom of this world;
yet seeing that our Lord descended from heaven, and was incarnate, to erect a
spiritual kingdom, far more excellent, then is this material kingdom of
the earth, even so excellent, as that he says: I will dwell, and walk in
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 2. Cor. 6. 16. What
marvel, if in this his spiritual kingdom, he work more vvonderfull things,
then he did in that material; seeing that he erected this, for his friends,
and founded that, for all sorts of men, and women, and beasts. And this is
sufficient to show in general how our Lord, by the omnipotency of his word,
consecrateth his body and blood, with Bishopps, and Priests his Officers, and
Legates.

CHAP. IX. Of the certainty of the presence of the true, real, and
substantial body, and blood of our Lord in the blessed Sacrament, after
consecration, by the omnipotent power of God.
1. FIrst: these are as we may say the properties The qualities, and
conditions of God.
of God. 1. To do all things what soever he would. Psalm. 113. 1. Secondly, He
is faithful in all his words. Psalm. 144. 14. Thirdly, Able to do what soever
he promised. Romans 4. 21. Fourthly, With him all things are possible. Math. 19.
26. Fifthly, There shall not be impossible with him any word. Luke 1. 37.
Sixthly, The word, which proceeds from his mouth shall not return unto him
void, but it shall do whatsoever he would, and shall prosper in those things,
for which he sent it. Isai. 55. 11. Seauenthly, He will watch upon his word, to
do it. Ier. 1. 12. Eighthly, He is truth it self. Io. 14. 6. And to conclude,
it is impossible for God to lie. Heb. 6. 18.

2. Secondly, our Savior in plain, and manifest The promises of Godt, o give
his flesh and blood for meat, and drink.
words promised, that He would give meat that perishes not, but endures to
life everlasting; bread that descended down from heaven; that if any any man
eat of it (worthily) he dye not; living bread, that came down from heaven;
bread which is his flesh, the flesh of the son of man, drink which is his
blood: meat in deed, drink in deed, himself to eat; and so forth, as it is
set down in the 6. chapter of S. John.

3. That our Savior in the 6. of S. John, speaks of the B. Sacrament, the
ancient Fathers do abundantly wittnes, whose authorities are cited at large,
by Bellarmin, in his book of the S. John in his 6. chap. vvriteth of the B.
Sacrament.
Eucharist. Maldonate upon the 6. of S. John, and Doctor Saunders in his book,
That our Lord in the 6. of S. John has spoken properly of the Eucharist. I
will content my self, for the further proof hereof, which the words of S.
Augustine, in the 1. chapter of his 3. book, de consensu Euangelistarum, where
after that he has cited, the words of our Lord, at his last Supper, as they
are set down by the rest of the Evangelists, says: That S. John in that place,
has not spoken any thing of the body, and blood of our Lord: but in an other,
he does manifestly wittnes that our Lord had far more copiously spoken hereof;
which was this 6. of S. John, for no where else has he spoken of the
Communion. Again in the last chapter of his 4. book, he says that S. John,
does rarely write that, which the rest do: Yet when he comes to the Lords
supper it self, which none of the rest passed over with silence, he extends
himself much more copiously, out of the Cellar of our Lords breast, where he
used to repose his head. And in the 20. chapter of his first book, De
peccatorum meritis, he says: Let us hear our Lord speaking this of the
Sacrament of his holy table; except you eat may flesh, etc. So that it cannot
with any reason be denied, that S. John, in his 6. chapter speaks of of the
blessed Sacrament.

4. Moreover, this is the condition, and nature of God Almighty, that he never
gives, or performs The condition of God, is to give more, then he promised.
less then in clear, and manifest words he promises: but for the most part,
more then he promises, as becomes the liberality, and magnificence of his
infinite mercies: for he that gives more then he promises, does not deceive,
but he who gives less, is a deceauer, and an impostor. So it is blasphemy,
to affirm, that Christ who is true God, should give less, then he promised in
so manifest, and plain terms, and these so often repeated. Wherefore, seeing
that he often promised with clear, and manifest words in the 6. of S. John,
that he would give living bread, bread that came down from heaven, bread which
is his flesh, for the life of the world; meat which is his flesh, and drink
which is his blood; meat which who soever eats worthily, has life
everlasting, and abides in Christ, and Christ in him; it cannot without
blasphemy be affirmed, that Christ has not truly, and really performed those
things, which he has so often, and so plainly, and clearly promised, and that
rather more then less, then his words import; which cannot be, unless he give
his true, real, and substantial body, and blood, himself under the species of
bread, and wine unto us for meat: for whatsoever inferior thing, he should
give, which should be less then himself, the same should also be less then
his promise.

5. And the want of performance (if any such thing could possibly be) were so
much the more Our Saviors assurance in giving his flesh.
remarkable; for that our Savior, with a double assurance, or as it were with
a kind of oath, affirms, saying: Amen, Amen, I say to you; unless ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in
you. Io. 6. 53. Whereupon S. Augustine in his 41. Tract. upon S. John, says:
Truth says, Amen, Amen, I say unto you; what a thing is this, that our Lord
shoul, say: Amen, Amen, I say unto you? He commends it very much, which he
so pronounces; seeing that if it be lawful so to say: Amen, Amen, I say unto
you, is his oath.

6. Wherefore, seeing that it is impossible for God to lie and alter all these
his before said properties, and conditions, it necessarily follows, that our
Lord at the institution of the communion, gave his true, real, and
substantial body, and blood unto the Apostles in the communion: and instituted
that his true, real, and substantial body, and blood should be administered in
the communion, to the fulfilling of those his words here spoken in the 6. S.
John, and also at the institution of this Sacrament: where he does not only
say: This is my body, and this is my blood; but, This is my body, which is
given for you: and, This is my body, which shall be delivered for you: This is my
blood, which is shed for many: and, This is my blood, which shall be shed for
many.

7. If after all these fair words, and large promises, of receiving from our
Savior, this heavenly God cannot fail to fulfill his many and serious
promises.
food, and divine meat, we should receive from him, only a piece of bakers
bread, and supp of vintners wine, which notwithstanding all that it has from
him, or on his part, is even after consecration, but a piece of bread, and supp
of vintners wine, without any real quality, entitie, substance, flesh, body,
or blood of his in it, more then is in other bakers bread, and vintners wine
(which is the assertion of our Adversaries) who could with reason think, or
believe that Christ were God, faithful in his words, and just in all his
promises?

8. That the Puritans say, they receive the true, real, and substantial
body, and blood of The Protestans, and Puritans communion, a mere imagination
or fiction.
our Lord by faith, eat his flesh and blood by faith, imagine him there,
though he be as far of in deed, and truth, as it is to heaven; that's nothing
to the purpose. For first, these are their own words, which are no where to be
found in the Scriptures. Secondly, we do not look for the actions of men, what
they do, or ought to do, when they communicate or receive: but for the actions
of God in preparing, and giving the thing they are to receive, before they
receive it. Thirdly, faith or imagination can not make a thing really absent,
to be really present, as is manifest by experience, and to believe that a thing
which is indeed absent, is really and indeed present; is but a deceit in the
imagination, and a false faith, which cann never make that which is not
present, to be present. Fourthly, suppose that these sayings of the Puritans,
were true; then the words, and promises of Christ were false, and so he should
not be true God; for these are not his words, promises, works, and actions,
but theirs: wherefore if they say true, then our Lord has not fulfilled his
promises, and so was not true God, not faithful in all his words. But seeing
that he was true God, and Son of God, and truth it self, it necessarily
follows that he fulfilled these his promises so sole^nely made, and gave his
true, and real flesh to eat, and blood to drink in the Communion.

9. And this was as I have said heretofore the argument Christ was God,
because he could change bread into his body
of S. Irenaeus, to prove against some heretics (who denied Christ to be God)
the changing of bread into his body, and wine into his blood, saying in the 34.
chap. of his 4. book of heresies: How will it be manifest to these (heretics
who deny Christ to be the Son of God) that the bread upon which thanks is
given, is the body of their Lord, and the chalice his blood; if they do not
say, Christ to be the son of the biulder of the world, that is to say, his
word, by which trees be are fruit, fountains flow, the earth first does
give the blade, afterward the ear, then full wheat in the ear. Thus S.
Irenaeus, who lived why lest yet some of the Apostles scholars were living,
and the actions of our Savior, and the Apostles were fresh in the memory of
men. And from hence it is, that even in the primitive Church, none denied, that
Christ gave his true, flesh, and blood in the Communion, but those who denied
him to be God; as witnesses S. Hilarious in his 8. book of the Trinity,
saying: Christ said, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, he
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, remains in me, and I in him.
There is no place left to doubt of the truth of the flesh, and blood (of our
Lord in this Sacrament) for now by the profession of our Lord himself, and by
our faith (or according to our faith) it is truly blood, and these things being
taken (into our hands, as was the custom of the primitive Church) and
swallowed down do work this, that we may be in Christ, and Christ in us. And
is not this truth? It falls out verily that it is not esteemed true by those,
who deny, Christ to be God.

10. From hence it is, that when our Lord first preached of this blessed
Sacrament, in the 6. of S. Peter believed the real presence, before he
understood it.
S. John, S. Peter (as witnesses S. Augustine, upon the 54. Psalm) did not
then understand (how our Lord would give us his flesh to eat, and his blood to
drink) but he believed the words to be good, which he did not understand, and
that they should eat his true flesh, and drink his true blood: because Christ
was God, and Son of God: and therefore casting of all doubts, and misbeleef
against this Sacrament, and firmly believing, that they should eat his true
flesh indeed, and drink his blood indeed; answered: Lord unto whom shall we
go, thou have the words of eternal life; and we believe, and have known, that
thou art Christ the some of God. Ioh. 6. 68.

11. The reason why S. Peter answered thus, was; because the Jews, and many of
the Disciples, The reason of S. Peter's answer to our Savior, vvhenothers
believed not his words spoken about this Sacrament.
who murmured at our Saviors words (and said: This saying is hard, that they
should eat his flesh, and drink his blood) did not believe, that he was God,
but only man, saying: How cann this man give us his flesh to eat? who if they
had believed, that he was God, and Son of God, would have made no difficulty,
in believing that he would give them his flesh to eat, and his blood to
drink; knowing that with God, all things are possible. Math. 19. 26. and that
there shall not be impossible with God any word. Luke 1. 37. And therefore S.
Peter said: Thou have the words of eternal life, and we believe, and have
known, that thou art Christ the Son of God. According to the profession of
his faith formely made, saying: Thou art Christ the Son of God. Math. 16. 16.
And therefore he, and the rest of the Apostles (only Judas excepted) believed,
that he both could, and would give The institution of the Sacrament, often
repeated in the Scriptures, least there might be any doubt.
them his flesh to eat, and blood to drink.

12. And least there might be any doubt made, whether our Savior gave his
body, and blood in the Communion, or no; S. Matthew, S. Luke, S. Mark, and S.
Paul, when they speak of the institution of the communion, do all affirm,
that our Lord took bread, and blessing, said: Take ye, and eat, this is my
body; and likewise the Chalice, saying: Drink ye all of his, for this is my
blood. Insomuch as amongst them all, accounting both the body, and blood (least
there might be any doubt made of the delivering his body to eat, and his blood
to drink) they repeat it eight times in the words of institution, besides
other places.

13. And to take away all doubts, and distrust, that our Lord in the
institution of the communion, did not give his body to eat, and blood to
drink, according to his promise in the 6. of S. John, our Lord did not only
say: Take ye and eat, this is my body, and: Drink ye all of this, this is my
blood: but also added a reason, or cause, why he would have them to eat, and
drink that holy Why our Savior would have the Apostles to receive the
communion.
communion, saying: for this is my body; as wittnesseth Alexander the first,
who was made Bishopp of Rome in the year 121. in the 2. chapter of his 1.
Epistle to all Catholics. Origin in his 35. tract upon S. Mattheuw, S. Ambrose
in the 5. chapter of his 4. book of Sacraments. S. Mark in his public
Liturgy, etc. And again: For this is my blood, as wittnesseth S. Mattheuw.
Matthew. 26. 28. S. Ciprian Epist. 63. S. Hierome Epist. 150. etc. where our Lord
does assign unto the Apostles, as a cause, or reason, why he would have them
eat, and drink of that which he had prepared for them in the communion; for,
or because it was his body; for, or because it was his blood: showing unto
them, that the motive, which moved him so much to desire the institution of
this blessed Sacrament, and that they should eat, and drink of it, was
because it was his body, and blood, and that he might feed them with his body
and blood to the fulfilling of what he had promised in the sixth of S. John.

14. Moreover, all the people, and nations, unto All nations unto which the
Apostles preached, believed the real presence.
which the Apostles preached (which would be to long to reckon up) believed
that our Lord, both then did, and now does give his body to eat, and his blood
to drink, in the Communion; as is manifest by their chronicles, histories,
records, monuments, books of common prayer, and practice; and it is not
possible, that all the nations, unto which the Apostles preached, being so
infinite many, and so far distant one from another, divided by diverse
languages, principalities, and kingdoms, should all fall into one, and the
same error, as we see by experience, and into an error How impossible it is,
for the real presence to be invented by any man.
so hard to be embraced, a^ it is to believe, that under the species of all
little piece of bread, was the body of the Son of God, which sits at the
right hand of God the Father in heaven, and under the species of a little wine,
was the blood of the Son of God, and adore, and respect them as his true,
real, and substantial body, and blood: when at the first speaking of it by
our Lord, it seemed a thing so improbable, that not only the Jews murmured at
it, but also many of the Disciples were sca^dalised to hear of it, insuch sort
as, at the hearing of it only, they went back, and walked no more which our
Lord. John 6. And yet notwithstanding all this, can it be imagined, by any
understanding man, that after the death of our Lord, all the whole Christian
world, without a teacher, and without a master, would believe these things, of
themselves, and no man to take notice, either when, or where, or how, they
fell into these supposed gross errors, as the Comike says: These things are
not well devised, Dauus.

15. And because the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church, most firmly
believed, that the Great sinners not communicated, until after many years of
penance.
same body, and blood of our Lord, which sits at the right hand of God the
Father in heaven was in the B. Sacrament, after consecration; therefore they
did not communicate great sinners as adulterers, drunkards, apostatas, and the
like, until after many years of penance, as wittnesseth the Council of
Iliberis celebrated in the year 305. throughout: the Council of Arles held in
the year 314. can. 14. and 23. the Council of Ancira gathered the same year:
the first great Council of Nice. Can. 10. 11. 12. and 13. according to the
greek copy: which they did, for the great respect they had to the most sacred
body, and blood of our Lord in the communion: Not to give that which is holy
unto dogs, nor cast pearls before swine; according as our Lord had given
commandment. Matthew. 7. 6.

16. If these ancient Fathers, of the primitive Church, had believed, that in
the blessed Sacrament, after consecration, there had been no real entity, or
quality, more then is in bakers bread, and vinteners wine, and that by taking a
piece of bread, and apprehending Christ in heaven, by the hand of faith, they
might have received worthily; they would never have retained penitent sinners
so long from the holy Communion, as sometimes three years, sometimes five,
sometimes ten, and sometimes until their deaths, and that in time of severe
persecution.

17. Moreover, about 80. years after the nativity Diverse accused of heresy in
the primitive Church, for denying the real presence.
of our Lord, Simon Magus, and Menander; were accused by S. Ignatius, for
denying that the Eucharist was the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ; as
wittnesseth Theodoret in his 3. dialogue. And about the year 250. Paulus
Samosatenus Bishopp of Antioche, amongst other things, was condemned of
heresy, by the Catholic Church of his time, for affirming that the blood of
our Lord, in the B. Sacrament, was corruptible, and mortal blood, because our
Lord said of his blood: Take it, and deuyde it amongst you: How (said he) cann
it be incorruptible blood, if it be divided, and powered out? As wittnesseth
Dionysius Alexandrinus in his Epistle to the said Paul, set down in the 3. to
me Bibliothecae Patrum, and may be gathered out the profession of faith, set
down by the Fathers of the Church of that time, and sent unto Paulus
Samosatenus, set down by Bini in the 1. Tome of the Councels, fol. 162.

18. These things considered, what shall we say, unto the promises of God unto
his Church, which The promises of our Lord made void, if his body, and blood
should not be in the B. Sacrament.
S. Augustine in the 2. chapter of his 1. book against the Epistle of
Parmenianus, caleth: The thunders of the divine testament, which God gave in
promise unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose God he affirmed himself to be,
saying: I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and Jacob, this is may name
for ever. And what was said to Abraham: In thy seed shall be blessed all
nations? Genesis 12. 22. What is said to Isaac? In thy seed shall be blessed all the
nations of the earth. Genesis 26. What is said to Jacob? I am the God of Abraham
thy Father, and the God of Isaac; be not affrayd etc. they seed shall be as the
sand of the sea, to the west, and to the south, and to the north, and to the
east, (in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America) and in thee, and in thy seed
shall be blessed all the nations of the earth. And least the Jews should think,
that this is spoken of them, the Apostle declares, what is intended by the
seed of Abraham, saying: To Abraham, and to his seed were the promises made,
and he does not say, to seeds, as in many; but as in one, to thy seed, which
is Christ, Gal. 3. Wherefore seeing that it was promised which so great
authority, and published by so great a truth, and now they do contradict it,
who will be called Christians. Thus S. Augustine, of the promises of God to his
Church, which he calls the thunders of God.

19. What shall we say of these, and many more the like promises of God unto
his Church, set down in both Testaments; as that it shall possess the gates of
her enemies. Genesis 12. The mountains shall be moved, and the little hills shall
tremble; but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and the conuenant of my peace
shall not be moved. Isa. 54. Our Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by the
arm of his strenght, if I shall give thy wheat any more, to be meat to thine
enemies. Isa. 62. All the ends of the earth shall remember, and be converted to
our Lord. And all the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight. Psalm.
21. 37. In his days shall arise justice, and abundance of peace, so long as
the moon endures. And he shall rule from sea to sea, and from the River (of
Jordan where he was baptized, and began to preach) unto the end of the world.
Psalm. 71. 6. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Matt. 16. 18. The
holy Ghost shall abide with her for ever. Io. 14. 16. The house of God, the
Church of the living God, the pillar, and ground of truth. 1. Tim. 3. 15. Go,
teach all nations, be hold I am with you all days, even to the end of the
world. Matthew. 28.

20. What shall we say unto our 3. Creeds: the The three Creeds not alvvaies
true, if the body, and blood of our Lord should not be in the B. Sacrament.
Apostles creed, wherein the Apostles themselves taught Christians, to believe
in all ages, and times, as an article of our faith, the Catholic Church, or
that Church which was generally dilated over the world? The Nicen creed, which
was made in the 1. general Council, which ever was in the world, by 318. holy
Bishops, which teach us to believe, that there is but one true Church, and
that Church to be Catholic, or generally dilated over the world, and founded by
the Apostles? Athanasius his Creed, which says: Whosoever will be saved, it is
necessary above all things, that he hold the Catholic faith, which faith
except a man keep whole, and inuiolate, without all doubt he shall
everlastingly perish. When now for 1600. years, there has been no Church or
faith, Catholic or generally dilated over the world, but theirs, who believed,
that our Savior at his last Supper, gave his body to be eaten, and his blood
to be drinken, and have believed that they in the Communion, have received the
true, real, and substantial body, and blood of our Lord, and have honored it,
and respected it, as his true body, and blood; as I have proved heretofore, and
shall prove more all large hereafter.

21. If the true, and real body, and blood of our Lord be not in the blessed
Sacrament, how could the Christians of those ages, say: I believe the
Catholic Chuch, or faith, when there was no Catholic Church, or faith, in
those ages, which held not the true, and real presence of our Lord in the
blessed Sacrament, after consecration, and before receiving? Were not the
articles of our faith true in all ages, and times, since they were delivered by
the Apostles? What shall we say unto all those promises of God unto his
Church, and unto our three Creeds? Shall we say, that God has failed in his
promises, now for 1600. years? How shall we persuade men to believe him
hereafter? Or induce men to believe, that the Scriptures are true?

22.. What shall we say of our three Creeds? shall we say, that the Apostles
Creed has not always ben true, since it was made? Or shall we say that our
3. Creeds have been hitherto false? Or rather shall we not say: Our Lord is
faithful in all his words. Psalm. 144. 14. God is true, and every man (that
speaks contrary to his word and promises) is a liar. Romans 3. 4. and believe
as an article of our Creed, that the true, real, and substantial body, and
blood of our Lord is in the blessed Sacrament after consecration, by the
omnipotency of the word of God, and so make good the promises of God, our 3.
Creeds, and the honor of the Catholic Church of former ages.

23. If thou be a Christian, and esteemest Christians bound to honor their
Parents.
that thou art bound to keep the ten commandments, and honor they carnal
Father, and Mother; how much more art thou bound to honor God, who is Father of
all Fathers, and the Catholic Church, who is Mother of all Mothers, who are, or
shall be saved. So do but believe thy Creed, which teaches thee to say, I
believe in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord: and not to say, I believe mine own wit, judgment, knowledge, or
learning, and persuade they self, that thou art bound to honor Father and
Mother, and then thou will find, that it is as certain, that the true, real,
and substantial body, and blood of our Lord is in the blessed Sacrament after
consecration (when it is consecrated aright, by a Priest lawfully ordained) as
are certain the articles of they Creed, or that the promises of God are true;
or that thou art bound to keep the fourth commandment.

CHAP. X. The Amen, or conclusion of this book, and how all faithful
communicants have used to say Amen, to the body, and blood of our Lord in the
blessed Sacrament, before they communicated.
1. Our Savior foreseeing the infidelity, which would arise amongst men
toward the end of the world, against this article of the real presence of the
body, and blood of our Lord in the Eucharist, after consecration, Confirmation
of the real presence by oath.
affirmed under a kind of oath, that we shoud eat his flesh, and drink his
blood, saying: Amen, Amen, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood; you shall not have life in you. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has life everlasting, and I will raise
him up at the last day. Io. 6. For as S. Augustine in his 41. Tract upon the
Gospel of S. John says: Amen, Amen, is after a certain manner, Christ's
oath. And this our Savior did to establish in men, a confident assurance of
the delivering of his true, and real flesh to eat, and blood to drink in the
Communion. For to think, that Christ our Lord, who came down from heaven to
teach men the truth, should use a kind of oath in so serious a matter, as did
concern the everlasting life, or death of all his Auditors, and yet
equivocate; rightly considered, is too great an impiety, to enter into the
heart of any one, who professes himself a Christian: so that it cannot be
doubted, but the end, why our Lord used this his kind of oath, or earnest
asseueration, was to assure the faithful, that The cause why our Savior
confirmed the real presence by oath.
he would give them his true, real, and substantial flesh to eat in the
Eucharist: for as S. Hierome in his commentaries upon the last chapter to the
Galathians, says: In the old Testament God confirms his words, by a
certain custom of swearing, saying: I live says the Lord, etc. and our
Savior in the gospel by the word, Amen, does pronounce these things to be
true which he says.

2. This Doctrine, being thus established by our Lord, under his kind of oath;
the Apostles also according to the example of our Lord, foreseeing Prevention
against future difficulties.
the difficulty, which in future times would arise about it, taught the
Children of the Church of God, in the celebration of this Sacrament, either
presently after the words of the consecration of the body, and blood of our
Lord; or before the Communion, or both, to add to their acclamations, and
consent, by saying Amen, either to the words of consecration, or else to the
Priest, when he should call the Eucharist the body of Christ: thereby to
instruct all her faithful children, constantly to believe, the being of the
true, real, and substantial body of our Lord in the Eucharist, after
consecration, before Communion; and courageously to profess this their
belief, by acclamations of, Amen, to the confusion, and shame of all those,
who at any time thereafter should deny it. As wittnesseth the practice of the
Church in all ages, even from the Apostles times, both in the public
Liturgies, or Church service books, and the works of the ancient Fathers.

3. And as for the Liturgies; the Liturgy of S. James the Apostle, set fort
for the Church of Jerusalem, says: Jesus taking bread into his holy,
immaculate, Amen to the real presence taught by S. James.
inculpable, and immortal hands, looking into heaven, and showing to thee God,
and Father, giving thanks, sanctifying, breaking, he gave unto us his
Disciples, and Apostles, saying: Take ye, and eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you, and given for the remission of sins. Whereunto the people
aswere with a loud voice, Amen, to demonstrate that they believed the
Eucharist after the consecration, to be the true, and real body of Christ;
for, to say, Amen, is as much as to say: It is true. And the like they answer
after the consecration of the chalice, the Liturgy saying: Then the Priest
takes the chalice, and says: In like manner also, after he had supped, taking
the chalice, and mixing it with wine, and water, and looking into heaven, and
showing to thee God, and Father, giving thanks, sanctifying, blessing, filling
with the holy Ghost, he gave it to us his Disciples, saying: Drink ye all of
this, this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you, and for
many, and is given for the remission of sins. Where unto the people answer
with a loud voice, Amen: constantly to show their faith, and belief of the
true, real, and substantial blood of our Lord in the Eucharist after
consecration, and before they received it.

4. Amen, is an Hebrew word, used in confirmation What Amen signifies.
of a thing spoken of before, and signifies true, or truth; as it is true, or
be it so. As witnesses the Scripture, saying: The Levites shall pronounce, and
say to all the men of Israel, with alowde voice, cursed is the man that makes
a graven thing (or idol) and shall put it in secret, and all the people shall
answer and say; Amen: Cursed is he that honoreth not his Father, and Mother,
and all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is he that remoueth his neighbors
bounds, and all the people shall say, Amen; etc. as is set down, Deuteronomy. 27. So
likewise S. Paul says: To God be honor, and glory for ever, and ever, Amen.
Romans 16. 27. Again, The holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. Apoc. 22. 5. So that
the saying, of, Amen, does signify the free consent, and confirmation of the
thing spoken of before, or propounded to be donn. Wherefore, seeing that both
our Savior, and the faithful in all ages, added, Amen, to the words spoken of
the flesh, body, and blood of our Lord in the Eucharist: it is most manifest,
that both it was the true flesh, and blood of our Lord, which they spoke of,
and the faithful in all ages, believed it to be the true flesh, and blood of
our Lord, even that which was borne of the blessed Virgin Mary: for as S. Paul
says: He that supplieth the place of the vulgar, how shall he say, Amen, upon
thy blessing? if he know not what thou say? 1. Cor. 14. 16. Whereupon S.
Hierome in his Commentaries upon the last chapter to the Galathians, says:
Moreover, that Amen, does express the consent of the hearers, and is a seal
of the truth; the first Epistle to the Corinthians does teach us, where S.
Paul says: But if thou bless with the spirit, he who supplieth the place of
the common people, how shall he say, Amen to thy blessing, because he knows
not what thou say: whereby he declares, that an unlearned man, cannot
answer that it is true, which is said (as Amen signifies) unless he
understand that which is taught. Whereupon the Priest in the primitive Church,
before he administered the Communion to the vulgar common people, admonished
them, that it was the body, and blood of Christ: as witnesses Pelagius (who
lived in the time of S. Hierom) in his commentaries The people advertised of
the real presence.
upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and 11. chapter, saying: When we
receive the Sacrament, we are admonished by the Priest, that it is the body,
and blood of Christ.

5. Not only in the Liturgiy of S. James, which was used for the administration
of this Sacrament Amen to the real presence ansvvered by all nations
at Jerusalem, the people answered, Amen, to the words of consecration, and to
the Priest, when he says: The body of Christ, or blood of Christ: but also in
the rest of the Liturgies, or publik Church service kooks: as in the Liturgy
of S. Peter, which was made for the latin Church; the Liturgy of S. Mark,
made for the greek Church; the Liturgy of S. Basil, made for the Church of
Capadocia; the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom, made for the Church of
Constantinople; in the Liturgy of the Ethiopians made by S. Matthew, the
Priest representing the person of our Savior, says: This is my body; the
people answer, Amen, Amen: so we believe it to be, and confess, and do praise
the Lord our God, this is truly thy body. The Priest says, etc. This is my
blood of the new Testament, etc. The people answer, Amen, Amen, Amen; we
believe it and confess, and and do praise the Lord our God, this is truly thy
blood etc. The Priest says: This is the body holy, honorable, and vital of
our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, which has been given for remission of
sins, and the obteyning of life everlasting, to those who take it truly;
Amen: This is the blood of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, holy, honorable,
and quickening, which has been given for the remission of sins, unto all
those who shall truly receive it, Amen. This is truly the body, and this is
truly the blood of Emanuel our God, Amen: I do believe it, now and for ever,
Amen.

6. To this end, that the people might answer, Amen, to the words of
consecration, and confirm Why anciently the words of consecration were
spoken a lovvde.
their belief of the true, real and substa^tiall being of the body, and blood
of our Lord in the Eucharist after consecration, in the primitive Church, the
words of consecration were pronounced with a loud voice, that all the people
present at the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord, might answer,
Amen, to the confirming, and professing of their faith, which continued as it
seems, until about the year 700. about which time, diverse men reteyning
the words of consecration, would sing them up, and down the streets as The
occasion why the words of consecration are spoken which a lovv voice.
they walked, and in other indecent places, unfit for such sacred words; and
also certain shepherds, who had retained the words of consecration by heart,
erected a stone for an altar, and placed bread, and wine thereon, pronounced
the words over them, as they had seen Priests to do: whereupon, fire came down
from heaven, consumed the bread, and wine, and stone, and so astonished the
shepherds, as that for a long time after they could scarce speak, as
witnesses Sophronius in the 196. chapter of his Prato Spirituali; Remigius
Antisiodorensis in his exposition of the Mass, and Alcuinus in his book De
diuinis officijs: for remedy whereof, and such like profaneness, the latin
Church has brought up the custom, to pronounce the sacred words of
consecration with a low, though a distinct voice. Yet never thelesse, even
until this day, when the Priest does communicate himself, before he receive,
houlding the Eucharist in his hands, he says: The body of our Lord
Jesus Christ keep my soul to everlasting life, Amen: and after communicates
himself. And when he communicateh any other, before he deliver the Eucharist,
he holds it in his hands, and says: The body of our Lord Jesus Christ keep
thy soul to life everlasting, Amen.

7. In the Liturgy, or Mass of S. Ambrose, set forth for the Church of
Milan, the Priest publicly shows the consecrated host unto the communicants,
and says with a loud voice, The body of Christ; and the people before they
receive, in confirmation, that they believe it to be the body, before it be
delivered unto them, and to profess their faith in this point, answer, Amen.
The same custom was used also in the administration of the chalice when the
Communion was distributed in both kinds: as appears by the 49. question of a
book dedicated to Orosius, by some attributed to S. Augustine, which says,
that before the Priest administrated the Chalice unto those who communicated in
both kinds, he said: The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: and he that
communicated, in profession of his faith, that he believed it to be the very
blood of our Lord, independent of his faith, and before he communicated,
answered, Amen. So the whole Church of God, having at all times, even from the
first foundation thereof by the Apostles, used publik acclamation, in the
confirmation of their belief of the real presence of the body, and blood of
our Lord in the Eucharist before receiving, and independent of the faith of the
receauer: I leave it to the discretion of every understanding man, to think,
how absurd it is, now after 1600. years, for any man, who desires to bear
the name of a Christian, to deny it.

8. Moreover, the Catholic Church, has always had so great a care, to
preserve in all her The decree of Apostles, that none should receive, without
answering, Amen.
children, the belief of the true, real, and substantial body of our Lord in
the Eucharist before receiving; that the Apostles, amongst other things
decreed, that none should receive the Eucharist, without professing it to be
the body, and blood of Christ, by answering Amen, to the Priest, or Deacon,
when he calls the Eucharist, before receiving, the body or blood of Christ:
as witnesses S. Clement in the 13. chapter of his 8. book of Apostolical
constitutions, saying: Let the Bishopp deliver the oblation to the people,
saying: The body of Christ, and let him who receaueth it, say Amen: but let
the Deacon hold the chalice, and administering it unto others, let him say the
blood of Christ; the chalice of life; and he who does drink it, let him say,
Amen. Thus the Apostles; whereby we see, that this answer of Amen, by the
people unto the Priest, affirming the Eucharist to be the body, and blood of
Christ before receiving, is an Apostolical constitution; conformable to the
words of our Lord, saying: Amen, Amen, I say unto you, unless you eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in
you. If the Son of God affirm, under Amen, Amen, that the meat he would
give, should be his flesh, and the drink his blood: what are the Sons of men
who deny it; but deceived people?

9. This practice, of the profession of the body, and blood of our Lord, to be
in the Eucharist, before receiving by the common people, being thus established
in the Church by the Apostles, it continued as a general custom amognst the
laiety and whole Church in succeding ages, as witnesses S. Iustine Martyr in
his second Apology to S. Iustine Martyr, of the answering, Amen.
the Emperor Antoninus Pius, the Senate, and people of Rome; who setting down
the manner, and custom, which the Christians used in their Communion, says:
At the end of prayers, we salute one an other with a kiss. Then is offered unto
him, who is chief amongst the brethren, bread, and a cupp mixed with wine and
water; which after that he has received, he gives praise and glory to the
Parent of all things, in the name of the Son, and holy ghost; and gives
thanks a good space, that he is esteemed by him worthy of these things; which
being rightly performed, or finished, all the people which are present, do
give the blessing to the prayers, and thanksgiving, saying: Amen. And Amen in
the Hebrew tongue, is as much as to say, be it donn After that both the
Prelates have given thanks, and all the people have given their blessing (by
saying Amen) those who amongst us are called Deacons, give unto every one that
is present, etc. And we take it to be the flesh, and blood of Jesus Christ.
Thus S. Iustine, who lived with the Apostles scholars: whereby it appears,
that even from the first plantation of the Church of Christ upon earth amongst
the nations, the laiety, and common people used to aswere, Amen, to the
blessing, and consecration of the Eucharist; thereby publikly to declare, that
they most firmly believed it to be the body, and blood of Christ, independent
of the faith of the receauer.

10. Not long after S. Iustine Martyr, lived Dionysius Alexandrinus, who in
his Epistle to Xistus Dionysius Alexandrinus.
Bishop of Rome, recorded by Eusebius, in the eight chapter of his 7. book of
histories, makes mention of the answering, Amen, to the words of
thanksgiving, and consecration, by the laiety, and common people, saying: that
a certain brother, who had for a long time been esteemed a faithful man
amongst them, and received the Communion: because he had been baptized by
wicked heretics, with tears, and sorrow desired of him, that he might be
baptized again according to the custom of the Catholic Church; Which verily
(says he) I durst not do: but told him, that the daily Communion, whereof he
did participate with the faithful, was of force sufficient to purge his soul;
for he who had heard the thanksgiving; he who together with the rest, had
pronounced, Amen; he who had approached to the table; who had stretched forth
his hands to receive that holy food, who had received it; who had been for so
long a time partaker of the body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, I durst
not wholly renew his Baptism. Thus S. Dionisius.

11. S. Cirill of Jerusalem in his 5. Catechesis, S. Cirill of Hier.
makes also mention of this custom, saying: Thou presenting thy-self to the
Communion, do not come with thy hands extended, or thy fingers open: but
making thy left hand serve to thy right, as a seat, or throne as he who ought
to receive the king, and contracting together the palm of thy hand, receive
the body of Christ, answering, Amen. And after thou have sanctified thine eyes
by the touching of the holy body, receive, or be partaker of it with
confidence, using great ear, that thou loose none of it; for all that thou
do loose, account it as the loss of one of thy proper members, etc. Having
communicated the body of Christ, present thy-selfe to the chalice of his blood,
not stretching forth thy hands, but incline in manner of adoration, or
worshipp, saying Amen: and this donn, sanctify thy-selfe, and participate of
Christ. Thus S. Cirill. For the better understanding whereof, it is to be
noted, that the Grecians received the body of our Lord, into the palms of
their left hands, and covred it with the right, and so the left hand was as a
seat or throne to the blessed Sacrament, until the communicant received it;
which he did not presently, but after some pious meditation, or considerations:
yet at the deliuring of the Eucharist into the palm of his hand, the Priest
said (according to the constitutions of the Apostles) The body of Christ, and
he who received it answered, Amen, and afterward communicated himself.

12. S. Ambrose also in the fifth chapter of his 4. book of Sacraments affirms
that it was the custom S. Ambrose.
of all those who received, to profess the Eucharist to be the body of our
Lord; his words are these: It was truly, a great, and venerable thing, that God
rayned Manna to the Jews from heaven: but understand, which is greater, Manna
from heaven, or the body of Christ? The body of Christ certainly, who is the
inlarger of heaven, etc. Therefore, thou do not say Amen in vain, when thou
take it; now confessing in spirit, that thou receauest the body of Christ.
The Priest says unto thee: The body of Christ, and thou say, Amen, that is
to say, true. That which thy tongue does confess, let thy affection hold.

13. S. Leo also the great, speaking of this answering S. Leo.
by Amen to the Eucharist, when it was called the body of Christ, in his 6.
Sermon of Fasting in the 7. Month, says: Seeing that our Lord does say; If you
do not eat the flesh of the Son of Mann, and do not drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you: you ought to communicate after such asort to the
holy table, as that you doubt nothing at all, of the body, and blood of Christ,
for that is taken by the mouth, which is believed by faith. And in vain do
these answer, Amen, who dispute against that which is taken. Thus S. Leo.

14. This custom of answering Amen to the Priest, when he called the Eucharist
the body of Christ, was so universally practiced in the primitive Church; that
Cornelius, who was a holy Martyr, and made Bishop of Rome about the year 254.
Nouatus the heretik changed the answer of Amen.
in his Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antioche, set down by Eusebius in the 35.
chaper of his 6. book of Histories, amongst other things, accuses Nouatus an
Arch-heretike, of a most greevous offense; for that when he had offered
Sacrifice, and should distribute unto every one part of the Sacrament, he would
take the hands of the communicants, between both his hands, and would not let
them go, until he had bound the communicant with this oath: Swear unto me by
the body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will never forsake me,
nor return to Cornelius. And the miserable man (says S. Cornelius) who was to
receive, did not taste of the blessed Sacrament, before he had bound himself
unto him after this manner. And he who should receive the Sacrament, said this
(in lieu of Amen, which he ought to have said) I will from this time forward,
no more return to Cornelius. Thus S. Cornelius in disciphering the wickedness
of the heretic Nouatus: whereby we see, that even in the primitive Church,
both the Eucharist was believed to be the body, and blood of Christ, before
receiving: and that the whole Church of God in all ages, used to acknowledge it
to be the body, and blood of Christ before they received.

15. S. Augustine in his 29. Sermon upon the words of the Apostles makes also
mention of this testimony, which all the faithful have ever given to the body,
and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, before receiving, says: You know, o
faithful men, what testimony you have given unto the blood which you have
received; for certainly you say, Amen. Whereupon The answer of Amen, cries
against the Adversaries of the real presence, like the blood of Abel.
S. Augustine in the 10. chapter of his 2. book against Faustus a Manichean
heretic, who contemned the blood of Christ in the Eucharist, compares the
crying of the blood of Christ out of the mouths of the faithful, who answer
Amen unto it, before they receive it, unto the crying of the blood of Abel,
which was shed upon earth by his brother Cain, saying: God says to Cain, what
have thou donn? The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me, from the earth.
Even so the divine voice in the Scripture (saying, This is my blood) does
reprehend the Jews: for the blood of Christ has alowd voice upon earth, when
Amen is answered unto it, by all nations, at their receiving of it. This (of
Amen) is the clear, or manifest voice of the blood which the blood itself,
out of the mouth of the faithful redeemed by the same blood, does express.
Thus S. Augustine: whose words we may use word for word against our
Adversaries, changing only Jews, for Puritans.

16. Wherefore, I humbly beseech the, Reader, whosoever thou art, that shall
read these our books, and do not believe the real presence; seriously to
consider with thyselfe, in what a lamentable, and miserable estate thou live;
seeing that (as S. Augustine says) not only all faithful people, who ever
received the communion in the Church of God, cry against thee, as guilty of
the blood of our Lord; but also the blood of Christ itself, out of the mouths
of the faithful who have received, even as did the blood of Abel against his
brothe Cain: and have compassion of thyselfe, yet whilst there is time: let
not thy senses deceive thee, nor the obstinacy of thy will hinder thee; nor yet
sloth or negligence, so lull thee a sleep, that thou will not hear the cry
of all faithful people, and nations. If life please thee, do not contemn
life, when it is offered unto thee in the bread of life, but prepare thy heart
to receive it worthily, that thou may live eternally.

Amen.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. WHat we understand by visible Sacrifice, and of the whole scope of
this book. CHAP. II. The necessity of visible Sacrifice, and the end or cause,
why it was instituted, and used. CHAP. III. All the Gentiles, and heathen people
(Atheists, and Epicures only excepted) offered visible Sacrifice unto their
supposed Gods. CHAP. IV. Of all the visible outward actions of men, exterior
visible Sacrifice is chiefly due unto God, as God and Creator of all things.
CHAP. V. Of all the visible actions of men, exterior visible Sacrifice, is only
due unto God alone. CHAP. VI. By the instinct of nature, all people who firmly
believed, that there was a God, and his providence over mankind, offered
external visible Sacrifice, to some God true or false. CHAP. VII. How visible
Sacrifice was offered unto God, in the beginning of his Church upon earth, and
shall be unto the end. CHAP. VIII. The reasons why our Savior, would not take
away visible Sacrifice out of the Church, but establish it in better terms.
CHAP. IX. Our Savior was to be a chief Priest of the order of Melchisedech,
and to offer unbloody Sacrifice, in his body, and blood, under the forms of
bread, and wine, until the end of the world. CHAP. X. At the coming of the
Messiah, unbloody Sacrifice, in the body, and blood, of our Savior, was to be
offered every where upon altars, amongst the converted Gentiles. CHAP. XI. By
the distinction, of bloody, and unbloody Sacrifices, is proved that our
Savior at his last supper, offered unbloody Sacrifice, in his body and blood.
CHAP. XII. The ancient Fathers believed that our Lord at his last supper,
offered unbloody Sacrifice in his body, and blood, and established the same in
hi Church. CHAP. XIII. The whole Christian world before Luther, believed, that
our Savior at his last supper, offered unbloody Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of
Gifts, in his body, and blood, and established them in his Church. CHAP. XIV.
The conclusion.
The Chapters of the 2. book.
CHAP. I. Our Savior at his last Supper instituted an unbloody Sacrifice, or
Gifts in his body, and blood, to be offered to God in commemoration of him.
CHAP. II. How these words: This is my body, which shall be delivered for you,
import also a Sacrifice in his body. CHAP. III. The Scriptures, and known
Christian men's books, who writ of this subject before Luther (reputed heretics
to both parties only excepted) teach a Sacrifice in the body, and blood of our
Lord. CHAP. IV. Remission of sins, and other blessings are, and may be
obtained by the Sacrifice of the body, and blood of our Lord. CHAP. V. Our
Savior commanded that we should give to God for us, the same body, and blood
which he gave and shed, and how all the hosts offered in Sacrifice, or given in
the Communion, are one. CHAP. VI. One and the same substantial body, and
blood, of our Lord in the holy Sacrament, is in diverse places, and under diverse
dimensions at the same time. CHAP. VII. Our Savior is chief Priest, or agent,
in offering unbloody Sacrifice, and administratring Sacraments. CHAP. VIII. How
in general our Savior by his omnipotency, together with Priests his
instruments, and Legates, does consecrate his true, real, and substantial
body, and blood in the blessed Sacrament. CHAP. IX. Of the certainty of the
presence of the true, real, and substantial body, and blood of our Lord in
the blessed Sacrament, after consecration, by the omnipotency of God. CHAP. X.
The Amen, or conclusion of this book, and how all faithful communicants have
used to say Amen, to the body, and blood of our Lord, in the blessed Sacrament
before they received.
FINIS.
APPROBATIO.
TRactatus hic secundus (de Sacrificio) nihil continet, quod aut rectae Fidei,
aut bonis moribus repugnet: imprimi itaque poterit and diuulgari.

Datum Bruxell. die 15. Maij 1637. Henricus Calaenus S. T. L. librorum Censor.


