A true Copy of a writing Testimonial by aucthority devised and commanded, to
satisfy the world, and to clear Zachary Dow, of London Draper and his
Children, from the reproach of a hand writing, falsely compacted and
maliciously published in Blackwell Hall and else where against him, and also
from that most injurious Claim of 238. li. upon the same writing made by one
Sara Babington now Sara Gough the wife of John Gough as appears.

TO all Christian people to, whom this present writing shall come, John Gough
of Hoddeson in the County of Hertford, Gentleman, and Citizen and
Marchanttador of London, and Sara now wife of the said John Gough, and late
wife and Administrator of all and Singular the Goods Chattells Rights and debts
which late were of Edwyn Babington, late Citizen and Draper of London
deceased, send greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Whereas there was found
out a writing in the nature of a Receipt supposed to be the hand of Zachary
Dow, Citizen and Draper of London* wherein was expressly set down, the Sum
of two Hundred thirty eight pounds, little more or less, of lawful money of
England, and the said comme to be the late Queens money, received by the said
Zachary Dow, at the hands of the said Edwyn Babington, predecessor of me the
said John Gough, and late husband of the said Sara, who by virtue and force of
the Administration aforesaid, made claim as her right, to the said writing in
the nature of a Receipt, and to the sum of money mentioned in the same, which
said writing is now lost and cannot be found. Now know ye therefore that we
the said John Gough and Sara wife of the said John Gough, having duly weighed
and considered the inualidity of the said writing in nature aforesaid, do for
us and either of us, our Heirs, Executors, administrators, and assigns, and
every of us for ever, utterly disclayme the same and the sum of money,
therein contained, and every part thereof. And also (not noely) acquit,
exonerate and discharge the said Zachary Dow, his heirs executors, and
administrators, and every of them for ever, of, for, and from all indemnity,
incombrance, molestation Contumely, and impeachment whatsoever which may from
us, either, or any of us, if it should hereafter be found, be inferred or
inflicted upon the said Zachary dow* his executors, administrators, or
assigns or any of them. But also bind our selves and either of us our heirs
executors, administrators, and assigns and every of us unto the said Zachary
Dow, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, firmly by thiese
presents, instantly to deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said Zachary
Dow, his executors or assigns the said writing in nature aforesaid, (if the
same happen to be found at any time hereafter) without any fraud or further
delay.

In witness whereof we the said John Gough and Sara wife of the said John Gough,
have hereunto set our hands and seals the Eight and twentieth day of November*
in the Eight year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, James by the grace of
God King of England, France, and Ireland* Defendour of the faith etc. And of
Scotland, the four and fortith 1610
7 Psalm: 14 Verse. Behold he shall travail with wickedness:
For he has conceived mischief,
But he shall bring forth a lie.


