Of Diuorcement.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross the 10. of May. 1601.

By John Dove, Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed by T. C. 1601.

The Preface.
I Had not published my late Sermon, the world being already so full of
books, had I not been mistaken by some which understood it not, and unjustly
traduced by others which heard it not, reporting of it, as they would have it,
and not as I delivered it, not so much offended with the Sermon, as with the
Preacher. They take exceptions: Against the matter, as if the doctrine were not
sound. Against my words, and manner of delivering it, as irreuerend, because I
presumed not only to speak against Beza without craving pardon, without
ascribing praise and commendation otherwise due to his great deseruings, but
also to pass him over slightly, calling him by his bare name, without
addition; as if so doing, I did Peccare contra formam sanorum verborum, 1. Tim.
1. 13.
not keep the pattern of wholesome words. Against the text it self, as
unseasonable for the time, and unpleasing to the auditory. Against my division
and reading of the text, as strange and insolent, the like never heard of
before: as if I had offered violence to the holy scriptures.

I answer with the Apostle: I pass little to be judged by you, 1. Cor. 4.
or of man's judgment. I have builded upon no other foundation then that which
is already laid, 1. Cor. 3.
that is, Jesus Christ: whether I have builded gold, silver, pearls, or
timber, hay stubble, whether my work will abide, and prove such for the which
I shall receive wages, or not: let it be made ^a^^est, I fear not that day, I
refuse not the (...) trial, which is the only true judge of all men's works.
The holy Ghost has taught me in the mean while that the Ministers of Christ
must pass through many things, ^. Cor. 6.
honor and dishonor, good report and bad report, as deceivers, and yet true.

M. Beza cannot blame me for dissenting from him, because he has done so by S.
Augustine and all the Fathers: nor for using his name without addition, because
he has done the like by S. Paul and all the Apostles. I dare not follow S.
Paul farther then he is a follower of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
and therefore must dissent from Beza when he dissenteth from Christ. I was not
then ignorant how thanklesse an office it was to speak of him, whose
authority is with some, more canonical then the canonical scriptures, to
name Beza before them which have only heard of his name, but know not how to
spell it, (for they call him Bezer, as also Bellarmine they call Bellamye,)
they would be Doctors of the Law, 1. Tim. 17.
but know not what they speak, or whereof they affirm,) it is very likely
they have read his works, and are able to judge of his doctrine. But I came
thither to preach Christ, not to commend any man, for so had I not been the
servant of Christ. And this I may speak without offense: M. Beza has not
delivered all truth, but left some to others to be delivered. And therefore I
exhort them that they would not condemn this doctrine because he holds the
contrary, Epist. Iudae v. 10. and 16.
least they immitate the false Prophets which speak evil of the things which
they know not, and have men's persons in admiration, whom also they know not,
and so commit grosser Idolatry by worshipping a man, then Saint John did by
worshipping an Angel.

If an Angel from heaven preach new doctrine, Apoc. 19.
he is accursed, Gal. 1. 8.
much less may the doctrine which any man publishes, be presently received
without further trial, Eo nomine, because he taught it: 1. John. 4.
but the spirit must be tried, the doctrine must be examined, be the credit of
the Doctor never so great.

I have always opposed my self against popularitie, as an enemy to true
godliness, supposing that they which preach mortification, ought their selves
to be mortified from vain ostentation of great auditories, ambitious desire
of many followers, and glorying in multitudes of Disciples, Ioh. 6. 15.
by the example of our Savior, which withdrew himself from the multitude,
when he saw they would take him up and make him a King. And therefore have I
refrained to intrude my self into such great assemblies; as also that I might
not defraud mine own congregation, but contented my self to keep my station
in mine own watchtower, over that flock only, over which God has made me
an ouerseer. I desire his glory and not mine own: I say with John the Baptist,
Ioh. 3. 30.
he must increase, and I must decrease. But being called to that place of so
great expectation, I thought it fit to choose mine own text; in which choice,
if the wiser sort of men will say I have erred, I will crave pardon for mine
error.

I was required by the Magistrate, upon shorter warning then ordinary, to
supply a course, which else had stood void; so that my tongue was become the
pen of a swift writer: yet have I not by reason of haste, Ier. 48.
done the work of the Lord altogether negligently, neither was I with the
Disciples careless what I should speak, Math. 10*
looking that it should be given me in that hour; but my heart did with the
Prophet David, Psalm. 45.
first indite the matter before I spoke it. In expounding this text, I did as
Daniel expounding a dream, Dan. 2.
use both prayer and meditation: and I assure my self, I have according to the
Apostles rule, 1. Tim. 2.
showed my self approved unto God, a workman which needs not to be ashamed
dividing the word aright. And whosoever will stand to the Cathechisme and
rudiments of Christian religion, and submit himself to the rules of Logic,
will he, nill he, he must confess, that my reading and dividing the text is
very natural, and no way forced. Concerning this point, I am to satisfy a
kind of men differing from the other of which I spoke before, which will have
marriage after diuorcement, as well of the party innocent as of the nocent, to
be adultery; and yet the diuorcement it self, which they grant to be a
dissolution of marriage, to be lawful, so that they will build without a
foundation, and make a consequent without an antecedent. For how can marriage
after diuorcement be unlawful, if the diuorcement it self stand good? How is
it possible to grant a divorce, but with full power to marry again? when the
first marriage is lawfully dissolved, what can hinder a second marriage? But to
strengthen their error* they except against the division of my text: they will
have it to be but categoricall, which I have said to be hypotheticall, they
allege that no proposition can be hypotheticall unless it be conditional.
To oppose themselves against me, they except against the Cathechisme it self,
against the grounds of Logic, by which they lay themselves open to no small
reproach. Every young scholar which has learned Seron can tell the^ that all
hypotheticall propositions are not conditional, but some copulative, some
disjunctive, and that all propositions are hypotheticall, which may be
resolved into two categoricalls, and that therefore these words as they are set
down in Saint Matthew, and more plain in S. Mark, and most plain in S.
Luke, the commas and points being in all three alike observed: to wit, Vxor^m
dimittens, and aliam ducens, maechatur, That is, both he which diuorceth his
wife, and he which marries an other, commits adultry, are an hypotheticall
copulative proposition, and contain in them two categoricalls: Vxorem
dimittens maechatur, and vxorem aliam ducens maechatur, Both of them being
without exception perfectly true propositions in Logic, according to the
definition and form of a proposition. But for as much as I have divided my
text according to form, which is the very life of all divisions, my divisions
is justified who have divided the whole text into three propositions. The case
being clear concerning the form, that this text contains three true
propositions, they can contend with me only about the matter of the first
proposition, whether it be Secundum qualitatem in ^e, vera or falsa. They ask
how it can be adultery for a man to put away his wife, when he does not
only abstain from the second marriage, from all carnal knowledge, but also
from coveting of any other? Adultery say they, consists only in carnal
knowledge, and in coveting, and no writer of credit will say that there can be
any other adultery. By which words they make Saint Chrysostom to be a
Writer of no credit, De invent. sanctae crucis. Hom 20.
which says: Viro casto qualiscunque vxor bona videtur, quia perfecta
charitas vitia non sentit. Qui diligit vxorem, de soluendo matrimonio legis
praecepta necessaria, non habet, vbi autem de soluendo matrimonio lex
requiritur, illic iam odium demonstratur, vbi odium inuenitur, illic iam
fornicatio esse cognoscitur. A chaste man will think well of his wife though
faulty, because perfect charity will not epsy offenses. He which loves his
wife, thinks the law of diuorcement superfluous and very needless: but
where advantage of law is required for the undoing of marriage, there hatred
appears; but where there is hatred of a man's wife, there is also fornication.
Again, Quemadmodum, si videas hominem assidue amicitias medicorum colentem,
exipsare statim intelligis quia infirmus est: sic and cum videris sieve virum
sieve mulierem de dimitte^dis vxoribus aut viris lege^ interrogantes, cognosce
quia vit iste lasciuus est, and mulier illa meretrix est. Even as that man
which continually resorteth to the Physician to ask advise, shows that his
body is not sound: so when man or wife asks counsel of the Lawyer how they
may be divorced, the man so doing is dishonest; the woman so doing, is
adulterous. Likewise, they make Vrsinus to be a writer of no credit, which
interprets this commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, in this
manner. The scope and drif^ of this commandment (says he) is the
preservation of chastity, and the upholding of marriage, and all things are by
it forbidden, which any ways are causes, or effects, antecedents, or
consequents, contrary to chastity, or contrary to marriage. But say I, by
diuorcement marriage is dissolved, and therefore not vpheld or maintained by
such a diuorceme^t as is allowed to be good; and yet with a restraint from a
second marriage, men and women are caused to burn in lust, and defrauded of
that benefit which God has appointed to be a remedy against fornication: and
therefore by it, chastity is not preserved, and by a consequent adultery is
committed. But to answer them in a word, how he which diuorceth his wife
commits adultery, he commits adultry two manner of ways: first as a
principal offender, because he breaks wedlock; for so diuorcement is
defined the dissolution of marriage, or untying of the knot of sacred wedlock:
and the briefest sort of the English and Duch Cathechismes, have in stead of
thou shall not commit adultry, in more general terms, thou shall not break
wedlock: whereby it is the judgment of the Churches of England and Germany,
that all breach of the law of wedlock is adultery: and wedlock is in no
degree so highly broken as by diuorcement* by which it is dissolved. Secondly
he commits adultery as a party accessory, for he gives his wife allowance
to marry again, which my adversaries do confess to be adultery. That the
intent and meaning of diuorcement is to undo the first marriage, and give
license to the second marriage, who can speak better the^ the Jews
themselves, of whom the Christians did learn it, and the Christian Churches
which do receive it and put it in practice? That the diuorcement which was
permitted by Moses, was with permission also to marry again, it appears by
Moses himself. Deuteronomy. 24. That it is so among the Jews, in these days it
appears by the very form of their Schodule or Bill of diuorcement, which
has these words, do vxori meae potesttatem eundi quo velit, nubendi cui velit.
I give my wife liberty to go whither she will, and to marry whom she will.
That it is so understood among the Christian Churches where diuorcement is
practiced, it is plain by the confession of M. Beza in his book De diuortio,
as in my Sermon I have declared. As for my manner of reading, let them ready as
I have read it, or as it is in the original, all is one in substance, (I did
it but for explication sake, as an Interpretor, not as a bare reader) they
cannot understand it otherwise then I did read it: let them divide it as I did,
or otherwise, it will make a difference in outward form, the doctrine will be
the same. Only this advertisement I will be bold to give to some kind of
Preachers in our Church: that true preaching does not consist in heaping up of
common places, in prolixitie and length of speech, in multitudes of quotatio^s
of Authors, chapters and verses, nor in rash delivering of doctrine taken by
tradition, upon the bare relation and credit of others, without further
examination. But he which will expound such a text as this is, must suppose it
to be like the Hebrew Bible, which needed the Chalde paraphrase that the Jews
might understand it: the rock in the wilderness which was to be cleft by
Moses his rod before water would issue out of it: Ex. 17.
the Land of promise, Psalm. 59.
which was not presently discovered: 1. Reg. 18.
the heaven which was shut up, and opened but by Elias his prayers, before it
rayned: Deuteronomy. 25.
the corn which was trodden with the oxes foot, and rubbed by the hands of the
Disciples before it was eaten: Math. 12.
the book to be unsealed by the Lamb, before the mysteries in it could be
revealed: Apoc. 5.
the face of Moses, which had a veil or covering before it, Ex. 34.
to be removed before his beauty could appear: Iud. 14. and 15
the tooth in the Asses iaw-bone, and the Lions carcass which required
Sampsons strength, before his thirst could be quenched, before sweetness
could be drawn out of the strong, or meat out of the eater: the handling of
it may not be triuiall or vulgar.

Having thus according to my poor talent, delivered that which I hope will not
be offensive to the godly, because it is co^sonant to Gods word, nor scandalous
to the state, as tending to schism, or maintenance of strife, because it is
according to the Decree established the last Parliament, by the general
consent of the Clergy; my humble desire is, that the world would so think of
us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God, of whom
it is required that every one should be found faithful, and to think of me
concerning M. Beza, that I do bless and magnify God mightily for all the good
parts which are in him, that I am Famulus seruorum Dei, touching all the true
servants of God, I live to do God and them service. And so I commend them to
the gracious protection of him whom they serve.

A SERMON PREAched at Paul's Cross the 10. of May, 1601.
Math. 19. verse. 9. I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife
(except it be for whoordome) and marry an other, commits adultery: and
whosoever marries her which is divorced, commits adultery.
AN answer to a question, propounded by the Pharisees to our Savior Christ,
concerning diuorcement of Wives from their Husbands, and by a consequent, of
Husbands from their Wives, whether it be lawful or no? The answer is
negative, that no diuorcement is lawful. For, first he shows that no man may
put away his Wife for any cause. Secondly he proves it, for as much as if
any man has put away his wife, he has done it of fact only, and not of
right, and his fact is held unlawful, according to Gods word, because he may
not marry any other while she lives. Thirdly, he proves that he which
has put away his wife can marry no other while she lives, because she can
marry no other while he lives. For these three conclusions do necessarily
follow: The first. If the putting away of a man's wife be of this nature that
still she continues his wife: then it is no diuorcement. The second: If the
putting away of a man's wife be of that effect that she is no longer his wife:
then he is no longer her husband. The third: If she be no more his wife, she
may marry an other, and if he be no more her husband, he may marry an other,
therefore the knot of matrimony is dissolved, and both are free. But our
Savior teaches that neither of them is at liberty to marry again,
therefore that the bond of matrimony remains firm, and therefore that there
can be no diuorcement. These things are easily apprehended, but the difficulty
is, how these co^clusions may be collected out of this text.

May it please you to vouchsafe me your attention, and laying aside all
preiudicate opinions, not to pass your censure against me before you have
heard all that I will say. For, if you come with prejudice your hearts shall be
made fat, ^sa. 6. 9. et^*
your ears heavy, your eyes blind, as the Prophet speaks, that hearing you
shall not understand, that seeing plainly you shall not perceive. If ye condemn
me before ye have heard me, then do ye not follow the Apostles rule. 1 Thessalonians.
5. 21.
Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete. try all things, and hold only that
which is good: and then are ye not sincere hearers of Gods word, therefore
hear and then judge. If ye condemn this doctrine as erroneous because to you
it seems strange, and you do not sufficiently conceive it (I speak to the
unlearned) then do you measure Gods truth by your own error, the power of God
by your own weakness, the depth of gods wisdom by the shallownes of your own
reach. Vrsinus before his Catechism, alleges six reasons why me^ reading
the scriptures (albeit learned) yet understand the^ not, whereof one is
prejudice, ten why reading they profit but a little, whereof five are these:
ignorance of the true drift and scope of that which they read, they follow not
the analogy of faith, they contain not themselves within the bounds of
divinity, they contemn the judgment of the Interpreters, they stand too
peremptorily upon the bare word and letter. Among six rules which he gives,
for the better understanding of any Text, one is a true desire to learn, and
zealous intent to go away better instructed. Another I add of mine own
observation, which is this: the right understanding of the Text, consists
much in the true reading of the same; for, if ye mistake in reading, ye cannot
but fail in understanding. And because many of this Auditory are defective in
all these points, I desire you according to these Premises, to hear me with
indifferency, and not with prejudice, as condemning me because Beza and
Melancthon and others are of a contrary opinion, to weigh well the true drift
of our Savior in this Text, to follow analogiam fidei and loci, the analogy
of faith in general, and of this place in particular, to co^tein your selves
within the bounds of divinity, that ye harken to the Interpreters, I mean the
ancient Fathers which were nearest to Christ, and farthest from corruption:
that ye dwell not upon bare and naked letters, that ye hear me with a desire
to learn, and according to mine own rule, that ye would hear how to read
this Text, because many Divines do not read it rightly, and therefore no
marvel though they expound it falsely. For, legere and non intelligere est
negligere, to read and not understand, is not truly called reading, but mere
negligence: Balthazar could read the Characters written by the hand in a wall,
Dan. 5. ^ 5.
mean tekel peers he has numbered, he has weighed, he has divided: so could
the wise men of Babell, but a more exact kind of reading was required of
Daniel, that was, to read and understand, and he read it in more ample manner
then it was written: God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it, thou art
weighed in a balance and found too light, thy Kingdom is divided and given to
the Persians. Wherefore let us not read cum neglectu sed cum intellectu, not
ignorantly but intelligently; not as Balthazar, but as Daniel; as readers which
know what they read, else it is in vain to read.

I say unto you, etc. In which assertion is a kind of Elleipsis or want of
words, which defect, as it is very common in the Greek and Hebrew, so it is
commonly supplied by the learned Reader and Translator, by addition of words to
make the sense perfect, as Daniel did. Do not entertain so irreligious an
opinion of me as if I should add any thing of mine own unto Gods word, and
yet where the original Text is obscure and imperfect like unto this, somewhat
must be added out of Gods word, which by the circumstances of the place and
very co^nectio^ and coherence of it, does appear to be necessarily understood,
but so that the addition be printed in other characters, that it may be
distinguished from the original. And least this kind of reading the
scriptures should seem strange and insolent, Beza in his Latin translation
of the new Testament does the like, not in so few as an hundred places, we
will instance for example sake. S. Paul writes in this manner. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3
Let no man deceive you by any means, for except there come a departure first,
and the man of sin be disclosed: which words are so imperfect, that they
carry no sense; but Beza in his Latin translation reads it otherwise, by
adding these words in other characters: The day of the Lord shall not come. Let
no man deceive you by any means, for the day of the Lord shall not come,
unless there be a departure first, and the man of sin be disclosed. Which
addition is necessarily understood by the circumstances of the place, for in
the next verse going before, he showed that the day of Christ was not so near
as the Thessalonians supposed, and in this verse he shows a reason: because
there must come a departure first. Likewise in the same Chapter, S. Paul's
words are these: The mystery of iniquity does already work, Verse. 7.
only that which withholdeth, until it be taken away. Which Beza reads in
this manner: The mystery of iniquity does already work, only that which
withholdeth, shall withholde until it be taken away: and so according to the
office of a faithful Tra^slator, makes that plain in the translation which
was obscure, by reason of the Elleipsis in the original, and yet was not
wanting in the original because it was necessarily understood. In like manner:
this Text being Elleipticall or defective for want of words, and the sense of
it obscure and dark; we must add words in the English, but in other
Characters, and read in this manner.

I say unto you, that according to the permission of Moses, He that puts
away his Wife unless it be for whoordome, commits adultery, and if he
marry an other, he commits adultery: and whosoever marries her that is
divorced commits adultery. Which words, we must of necessity understand to
be inserted, because else we shall not only leave the sense maimed and
imperfect, but also include a manifest contradiction to that which our Savior
concluded in the words immediately going before, as I shall show unto you.
Wherefore our new Divines for want of right reading this Text, do misconster it
four ways. First, they think our Savior speaks affirmatively that
diuorcement is lawful, whereas he speaks negatiuely, that diuorcement is not
lawful. The second, they take this answer to be particular; as if in some one
case, that is, in case of adultery, and for some persons, as when one is
nocent and the other innocent, diuorcement were lawful, whereas it is
universal that no diuorcement is lawful, be the case whatsoever, or the
persons whosoever. The third, they suppose it to be hypotheticall, because he
says: whosoever puts away his wife except it be for fornication, etc. as
if that were aequipollent with this: if a man puts away his wife for
fornication, it is no adultery, whereas it is catagoricall, because this
exception in the Parenthesis (unless it be for fornication) is merely void,
and no exception at all, as I will make manifest unto you, and of no more
validity then if it were left out. The fourth, they think that in these words
are comprehended but two propositions, whereas there are three: for, though our
Savior says: He that puts away his wife and marries an other commits
adultery, naming adultery but once, yet it is twice understood, both in the
putting away of his wife, and in the marrying of an other, and therefore all one
as if he had said: he that puts away his wife commits adultery by
putting her away, and if he marry an other, he commits adultery also by
marrying an other, like that saying of our Savior: He that breaks the least
Commandment and teaches men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of
Heaven. Which words, do not import only that the breach of the commandment
together with so teaching, makes a man the least in the kingdom of heaven,
but also the breach it self, although he do not teach it, as S. James shows:
so he that puts away his wife commits adultry, Jacob. 2. 10.
though he does not marry any other. Wherefore according to that which I have
delivered unto you, I divide my text, as it naturally divides it self, into
three propositions, the first being as a text, the other two as a gloss or
exposition; to wit, the second an exposition of the first, and the third an
exposition of the second; the first, which is the text, that there can be no
diuorcement, where he says: it is adultery for a man to put away his wife
although he marry no other: the second, a proof that there can be no
diuorceme^t, because he which puts away his wife can marry no other; where
he says, it is adultry to marry an other; the third, a proof of the second,
that he which puts away his wife can marry no other, because his wife which
is put away can marry no other. And of these three propositions in they due
place.

Concerning the first proposition, that there can be no diuorcement, and that
it is the drift of our Savior in this text to disanull all diuorcements.
I say unto you, whosoever puts away his wife) I showed you before, how
there was an Elleipsis or want of words to be supplied. Not as though I would
by that supply of words serve mine own turn, or seek to advantage my self,
for I need not, and if we content our selves with the bare, naked and
imperfect words of the Greek text, which the adversary uses for his best and
only advantage, no diuorcement can be proved ot of them. That I may examine
the bare words: who so puts away his wife except it be for fornication
commits adultery: It is no good consequent that therefore if a man put away
his wife for fornication, it is no adultery: nor this; he that puts away
his wife and marries an other, commits adultry, therefore if he put her
away and marry no other it is no adultry, as it may appear by the like. Leuit.
1^. 1^
Moses says: Thou shall not take a wife with her sister while she lives:
will you therefore argue out of these words, that when a man's wife is dead, he
may marry her sister? Our Savior says: Marc. 16. 16
Whosoever believes and is babtized, shall be saved. Will you therefore
conclude against S. Ambrose that Theodosius the Emperor which did believe and
was not baptized, was not saved? The holy Ghost says: Mat. 1. 18.
Joseph knew not Mary until she had brought forth her first borne son, and
that Mary was found with child before Joseph and she came together: will you
therefore conclude with Heluidius the Heretic against S. Jerome, Hieron.
co^tra ^eluidiu^
that Mary was not a perpetual Virgin, and that she was the mother of other
children? and that after the birth of Christ, Math. 28.
Joseph and Mary came together? Our Savior says, I will be with you till the
end of the world. Paul says, ^. Cor. 15.
Christ shall sit on the right hand of his Father until he make his enemies
his footestoole: Decretal. lib. 5. Tit. 40 cap. 6. verba intelligenda sunt, non
secundum quodsona^t, sed secundu^ mentem proferentis,
will you therefore conclude that Christ shall leave us after the end of the
world? or cease to sit on his fathers right hand after his enemies are subdued?
You will ask me then, if these words: (Except it be for fornication) be no
exception, but merely Idle, why does our Savior use them? Hilar.
Intelligentia dictorum ex causis est assumenda dicendi, quia non sermonires,
sed reisermo est subiectus.
or how can it stand with the nature of the holy Ghost to speak idly? These
words are not idle, and yet make nothing in favor of diuorcement. S. Augustine
answers in this manner. Si ille maechatur qui dimissa vxore fornicatrice aliam
ducit, cur ergo dominus interposuit causam fornicationis? in^mo, cur non dicit
simpliciter: qui dimissa vxore aliam ducit, maechatur? If he which puts away
an adulterous wife and marries an other, De adulterinis coniugijs. lib. 1.
cap. 9.
commits adultery in so doing, why did our Savior put in this caution,
saying, except it be for fornication? Why did he not say rather absolutely,
that he which puts away his wife and marries an other commits adultery?
Quiae dominus illud quod grauius adulteriu^ est commemorare voluit quam id quod
est minus, nam grauius adulteriu^ est pudica vxore dimissa alia^ ducere quam
impudica, vt Iacobi quarto, scie^ti bonu^ facere and non facienti peccatum est
illi, nu^quid idcirco peccatum est illi qui nescit bonu^ facere and, ideo no^
facit^vtrumque peccatum est, sed illud maius istud minus, ita in his
adulterijs, sed vtrumque est adulterium. Because our Savior would speak of
that adultery especially which was most heinous, rather then of the other
which is a less offense, for it is a more grievous adultery to put away a
chaste wife and marry an other, then to put away a dishonest wife and marry
again, even as according to the Apostle. Iac. 4. 17.
To him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin. Will you
therefore conclude, that to him which knows not how to do well, and therefore
does it not, to him it is no sin? Both are sins, that greater and this lesser,
so both these are adultry, though one be greater and the other lesser. But for
your farther satisfaction, mine own answer is this: These words of our Savior
(except it be for fornication) do show that the drift of our Savior was
two-folde, to show what was supposed to be lawful by the permissio^ of Moses,
and what was indeed lawful according to the word of God, for they afford two
several constructions, secundum permissione^ Mosaicam and veritate^ euangelica^
according to the permissio^ of Moses, and the truth of the Gospel, according
to Moses his permission, which was a man, and did like a man, diuorcement was
permitted, only in case of adultery, but according to the immutable and
incorrupt verity of the scriptures, Christ denies diuorcement to be lawful,
as by the analogy of this place does appear. For, when our Savior says:
wherefore I say unto you: mark upon what occasion our Savior does say these
things unto them? confer the beginning of the Dialogue or conference of the
Pharisees and our Savior, with the end of the same, and his purpose will
appear. Whereupon does our Savior deliver this definitive sentence concerning
diuorcement unto them, but upon their falsifying and belying the words of
Moses, which he restores to the true sense and meaning thereof? In the
beginning of the conference, the Pharisees asked Christ tempting him and
saying: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every fault, making no
mention of marrying again? He answers, it is not lawful for any fault, and
proves his denial by arguments drawn; first from the nature of marriage,
that which is but one cannot be divided, vnitas est indiuisibilis, but the man
and wife are one; therefore they cannot be divided. The Mayor is a principle in
Arithmaticke, Genesis 2. 14. 1.
and cannot be denied: the Minor is Ipse dixit a principle in divinity. Cor.
6. 16
Secondly, Ephesians. 5. 3.
from the definition of diuorcement, no man can sever the^ whom God has joined
together, but to divorce, is to sever man and wife, whom God has joined
together, Deuteronomy. 24.
and this in effect is all that may be said of this question. But, the
Pharisees not satisfying themselves with this answer, reply against it, and
press him with the authority of the scriptunre. Moses say they, commanded
the man to give his wife a Bill of diuorcement and put her away. He answers
them, that in so alleging the words of Moses, they falsify the Text three
manner of ways. First, whereas they say Moses commanded, it is not so, for
Moses did but suffer them for the hardness of their hearts; Math. 5.
there is great difference between a commandment and a tolleration, they be
of sundry natures. In deed our Savior says It has been said: Let him give
her a Bill of diuorcement. Which words do import a commandment, but by whom
was it said? only by the Jews, according to their received error, for God
never said it, as also in the same place: Ye have heard how it has been said,
thou shall love they neighbor and hate thine enemy. Math. 5. 43.
But if ye read the place of scripture to which it has relation, Leuit. 19. 18
ye shall find they have misreported of it: for there is mention only of the
love of our neighbor, If any object that the history is otherwise related in
Mark* I answer with Greg* Decretal. lib. 5. Tit. 40. cap. 7. Nihil obstat
narrandi diuersit as etc.
not of the hatred of our enemy, that is but their own collection. Secondly,
whereas they build upon this tolleration of Moses, it is no sufficient
foundation to ground upon, because Moses in this his tolleration did not
permit diuorcement as a thing honest and lawful, but that he did as a man, to
bear with the hardness of their hearts, dispense with them in this case,
contrary to Gods word, where he says: From the beginning it was not so. But
whatsoever is contrary to the first institution of marriage as it was in the
beginning appointed of God is adultery. For we are not to regard the received
error of the Jews, but the truth of Jesus Christ* as Ignatius says ad
Philadelp. Vrsinus Doctr. Christ. 2. part, in 7. praecep. Scopus precepti non
maechaberis, est conseruatio castitatis and munitio coniugij. Quicquid ergo
facit ad castitarem and muniendum coniugium, hac Jege praecipitur, contrarium
prohibetur. Sub adulterio prohibentur omnia vitia castitati contraria, and
little cognatae species, causae, occasiones, effectus, antecedentia,
consequentia.
Antiquitas mea Jesus Christus est. My antiquity is Jesus Christ. And S.
Ambrose: de virginibus: Nos noua quae Christus non docuit iure damnamus,
quoniam via fidelibus Christus est, si ergo Christus non docuit quod docemus,
nos illud detestabile iudicamus. We do justly condemn all doctrine as
novelty which Christ has not taught, because he is the only teacher whom the
faithful must follow: if therefore Christ be not the author of that which is
taught, we adiudge it a damnable doctrine that is taught. And Cyprian Lib. 2.
Epist. 3. Si solus Christus audiendus est, no^ debemus atte^dere quid aliquis
ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus prior
fecerit neque sequi oportet hominis consuetudinem sed dei veritatem. If the
sheep of Christ do hear his voice only, we must not be inquisitiue what
others have done before us, but what Christ which is before all has appointed
to us, neither must we follow the customs of man, but the truth of God. Bigamy
was permitted to the Patriarchs, yet unlawful: so diuorcement to the Jews,
though unlawful. It were very hard if our Savior having thus pronounced
diuorcement to be unlawful and repugnant to Gods institution, should in this
text being the next verse following after, contradict himself and allow it to
be lawful. Thirdly, whereas they falsify Moses, as if Moses did tolerate
diuorcement for any cause, saying: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife
for any fault? Our Savior does lay before them their error, affirming that
Moses in that place which they allege, did not permit diuorcement for any
cause but only for one cause, and that cause is here specified to be
adultery, where he says: whosoever (according to Moses his permission)
puts away his wife except it be for whoordome, commits adultery. And yet
he explaineth that again saying: that according to truth he cannot put her
away for adultery, because he can marry no other, neither can she marry any
other, but both shall be adulterous. But, for the better satisfying of your
selves, confer this place of Matthew, with that of Deuteronomie, which is the
ground of all this disputation, and you shall find that the Pharisees have not
dealt ingenuously, but very falsely.

The words of Moses are these. Deuteronomy. 24.
If a man take a wife, if so be that she find no favor in his eyes because he
has espied some filth in her. There is the only cause, he does not say any
cause, but one cause, which is filth; but filth is according to the Hebrew
phrase adultery, as it appears by the fourth verse of the same Chapter,
where whoordome is called by the general name of filth. So these words of our
Savior are not only a farther explanation of that text of Deuteronomie which
the Pharisees had corrupted, but also a definitive sentence, and positive point
of doctrine, that diuorcement being so common, was held among the hard-hearted
Jews as lawful, because it was suffered by Moses, contrary to the
commandment of God, and first institution of marriage, which was from the
beginning of the world. Moreover, because the Pharisees ask why did Moses
command to give a Bill of diuorcement and put her away? and Christ answers;
Moses did but permit: some Divines do grossly mistake the sense thereof,
affirming these words to include partly a commandment, according to the words
of the Pharisees, partly a tolleratio^ according to the words of Christ; to
wit, a tolleration only to put away their wives, and a commandment that if
they would use the liberty of this tolleration granted unto them, yet that
they should first give a Bill of diuorceme^t, that all proceedings might be
according to order, but they are deceived by reading the vulgar translation,
and other corrupt Interpreters, for they translate it: Let him write her a Bill
of diuorcement; which translation has brought them into this error. But
according to the Hebrew, Tremelius translateth in this manner: If a man take a
wife and she find no favor in his eyes, because he has espied filth in her,
in so much that he do give her a Bill of diuorcement, etc. Here is no such
commandment, as let him give her a Bill; but only a supposition, if he do
give her a Bill of diuorcement, (because unless the Bill were first given,
Vide Chrysostom. in Lib. de libel. repud.
the diuorcement was not tolerated) so that Moses is so far from
commanding, that he does not so much as tolerate it in express words, but
only per tacitum consensum, by not forbidding it expressly, and so supposing
such an enormitie to be committed according to their practice; only he
commands this, that after it is done, if the woman after her departure
marry an other, that then she shall not return to her first husband again.

And, whereas some Divines take it pro concesso, as a thing granted, that the
formal writing a Bill of diuorcement, did ratify the diuorcement and make an
act lawful, it is clean contrary. You will say then, if the Bill could not
add strength to the diuorcement to make it good, L. Ideser, dom. in monte
why was it given? S. Augustine answers, that a Bill of diuorcement was first
devised to show the Jews how ungodly a thing diuorcement was, for as much as
it was lawful for none to write Bills of diuorcement, but only the Scribes and
learned Doctors of the Law, to whom only it appertained by their office,
scribere sacras liter as to write in the holy tongue, and because it was even
among them held for a crucell and unnatural fact for a man to put away his
wife, and this Bill of diuorcement could not be engrossed suddenly, but it
required time and space: when the plaintiue resorted to the Scribes office to
have the Bill drawn, the Scribe was first to lay open to the party grieved
the unlawfulness of such proceedings, and to persuade him by all means to
desist from so badde a purpose, and be reconciled to his wife again, and to
take better deliberation, and repair to the office some other time, to try if
the party grieved could by such delays be better advised in cold blood. But
if so be that he continued obstinate and intractable, that his hatred toward
his wife could not be pacisied; then of two evils the least was chosen, to
avoid a greater mischief: rather then the Jew should murder his wife, it was
vltimum refugium, the only refuge left, to give a Bill of diuorcement.
Tremelius in his notes upon this place, observes these four things: First,
that this tolleratio^ of which we spoke, did extend only to that time present,
when they were in the wilderness, and not to be endured after they should live
under a settled estate in the land of Canaan, because it is written in the
fourth verse of that Chapter, Thou shall not suffer the land to sin, which
the Lord shall give thee to inherit; so that there was an inhibition or
restraint against Iosue and his successors that they should suffer no
diuorcements. The second, that this fact was even then manifestly condemned by
Moses when it was permitted, because he says in the 4. verse: The woman which
is put away and marries an other, is polluted by the fact of her husband which
did put her away, and so give her occasion to marry an other, and that is
abomination in the sight of the Lord. The third, that diuorcement is as
unlawful as poligamy or marriage of many wives, of which neither have any
warrant out of the word, but that the Jews living then not by precept but by
example, not of the godly, Genesis 4.
but of the wicked, learned poligamy of their fathers, of which the first was
Lamech, and diuorcement of the Egyptians, which were Infidels. The fourth,
this tolleration of Moses was not in regard of Gods people in general, but
only of the Jews in particular, which could not by any arguments be persuaded
to renounce the poligamy of their ancestors, or diuorcement of the Egyptians.

Having spoken of the analogy of this place in particular, to show that the
purpose of our Savior Christ was to disanull diuorcement: I come to the
analogy of faith in general, to show what faith it self has taught us to
believe concerning this question. Whosoever puts away his wife, etc. which
words give me occasion to define diuorcement, and to show what it is for a man
to put away his wife. In which definition I must follow the example of
Aristotle, which defined the things which were not. For when he had showed
how impossible it was, that there should be either vacuum or infinitum, yet
defined them both, only supposing those things to be, which the nature of
things does not afforde. In like manner I say: Diuortium est non ens;
diuorcement is a thing which is not, nor cannot be, and that the Jews did
divorce their wives only in their gross imaginations, because being put away,
yet they continued their wives, and their separation was breach of wedlock,
even as in the story of Elisaeus, they which came to apprehend the Prophet were
strooken with blindness, so that when they thought they were at Dothan, 2.
Reg. 6. Genesis 3. 8. Jonas. 1.
their eyes being opened they found that they were in Samaria: and as Adam,
when he thought to hide himself from God in the thicket, was still in his
presence: and as Jonas thought himself safe from danger by flying to Tharsis,
when he was most in ieopardie: so they think themselves innocent by giving
Bills of diuorcement, when they live in adultery and are nocent; but supposing
that to be which cannot be, I will define diuorcement out of the scriptures,
to prove that there can be no diuorcement. Our Savior says: Whom God has
joined let no man separate. In which words, is contained the definition of
diuorcement, Diuortium est seperatio viri and coni^gis authoritate humana qui
coniuncti su^t authoritate diuina. Diuorcement is a separation of man and wife
by the law of man, which are joined together by the law of God. But that is an
impossibility that man should make a nullitie of that which God will have to
continue firm and stable, that man should undo, and make to be of no
validity, which God does ratify and make to stand good: that man's error
should make an unity to be a number, an indivisible thing to be divided, truth
to be no truth, marriage to be no marriage, something to be nothing, set the^
at liberty which in nature do, and must continue bound. Our Savior Christ
has thus defined diuorceme^t as you have heard, and out of his own definition
of diuorcement, has argued to prove that there can be no diuorcement; and if
ye will stand to the definition of our Savior Christ, you must confess that
there can be no diuorcement.

The same may also be proved by the definition of marriage, Lo^o com* de
co^iugio.
which Melancthon defines in this manner. Matrimonium est legitima and in
dissolubilis coniunctio vnius maris and vnius faeminae. Marriage is a lawful
and indissoluble joining together of one man and one woman. But, if marriage be
such a conjunction as is not capable of any dissolution as he terms it: Loco
com* de diuortio.
he forgets himself in the next tract after, where he affirms that for
adultery a man may put away his wife and marry an other, that if a man be
boisterous, froward, cyclopicall, barbarous to his wife, if he be crabbed,
rogish, the wife may put him away and marry an other: that if he neglect his
family, the Magistrate may warrant her to marry an other. Others do define
marriage to the same effect as Melancthon did, but in more words: That
marriage is a lawful and perpetual joining together of man and wife by the
consent of them both, for the begetting of children, avoiding fornication, and
mutual comfort. In which definition, the material cause of marriage is man
and woman, the final cause mutual comfort, procreation, auoydance of sin: the
efficient cause the mutual consent of them both, but the formal cause which is
the very nature, essence, and life of the same, is their lawful and perpeutal
joining together, but whatsoever is to a man perpetual, is during life: these
things being so, it cannot stand with faith that marriage should be
dissolved, Romans 7. 2.
the parties living. The Apostle says therefore: The woman which is in
subjection to the man, is bound by the law to the man while he lives, but if
the man be dead, she is delivered from the law of the man; in which words he
shows how the knot of marriage cannot be untied but by death. 1. Cor. 7. 16
And to the married I command, not I, but the Lord: let not the wife depart
from her husband, but if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be
reconciled unto her husband: In which words, where he says: first, let not
the wife depart, secondly, if she depart, let her remain unmarried; he
intimates two manner of departures, the first, is a vinculo, a rupture of the
knot of marriage: the second a mensa and thoro, from bed and board; the first
he says may not be, because it is contrary to the institution of marriage;
the second, if unhappily it follow, that for the incontinencie of the one
party, the other party be grieved and cannot be reconciled unless they
depart, yet that departure be but for a season, until they can be reconciled
again, and that is no diuorcement. For there are three departures from the
marriage bed which are lawful, two private, the third public: the first
with the consent of both parties, 1. Cor. 7. 5.
one dispensing with the other, where the Apostle says: Defraud not one an
other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to
fasting and prayer, and again come together, least Satan tempt you for your
incontinencie. The second, in case of necessity, it is lawful for the man to
dispense with himself, as if the woman be infected with a contagious disease,
that he cannot do the office of an husband without manifest danger of his
life, and it is no fraud because it is not voluntary. The third, if the wife
be an adulteress woman, because it is a public scandal, he may by the
public magistrate be separated from his wife for her chastisement until she
show manifest tokens of amendment. And yet as the Magistrate must be very
sparing to interpose his authority in such a case, Tho. Aqui. in 1. Cor. 7.
as to enter between the bark and the tree: so again, there be seven
exceptions which debar the Magistrate from granting any separation from
bed and board, although incontinencie be evidently proved: as, if the woman
be enforced by violence not giving consent, Genesis 24*
as Dinah was: if by plain and simple oversight she be deceived, Genesis 29.
taking one for an other, as Jacob was when Laban put Leah in his bed in
steed of Rachel: if the woman by great presumptions in law, and the general
view of the world, supposing her husband by his long absence to be dead, do by
public allowance without guilt of conscience marry an other: if her husband
himself be consenting to her adultery, as Sara gave her maid Agar to lie with
Abram, Genesis 16.
for then it is his fault as well as hers: if he by refusing to accompany with
her has abused her weakness and so given her occasion to fall, he cannot with
a good conscience be a plaintiue against her: if he knowing his wife to be
incontinent do bear with her for the present time, he ought not afterward to
complain, because law does suppose a reconciliation and forgiveness of the
crime, and after forgiveness there ought to be no punishment. But the
greatest occasion is this: if the woman be able to plead compensatio^ against
her husband; John. 8.
that is, if he have been incontinent as well as she, as our Savior wrote with
his finger in the dust concerning the woman taken in the act of adultery: He
which will throw the first stone at her must be guiltless himself. Great.
decret* pars ricausa 32.
The Canon law says: quaest. 6.
Nihil iniquius quam fornicationis causa dimittere vxorem qui and ipse
co^uincitur fornicari, cap. 1. ex Aug. de ser. in monte.
occurrit enim illud: qui alteru^ iudicas teipsum condemnas. Qua propter
quisquis vult fornicationis causa dimittere vxore^, cap. 8.
prior debet esse a fornicatione purgatus. Romans 8.
Nothing can less stand with justice then that an adulterer should put away an
adulteress, for in judging her, according to the rule of the Apostle he
condemns himself; therefore he which will accuse his wife, must first look
well that he be clear himself. Again: To. cap. ^.
Quales vultis vxores vestras inuenire, tales sitis and vos, intactam quaeris,
intactus esto, puram quaeris, noli esse impurus. Be to your wives as you will
that they shall be to you; will you have them continent, your selves must be
chaste; he which will have his wife to be Sara, himself must be Abraham; he
which will have his wife to be Rebecca, himself must be Isaac; he which will
have his wife to be Rachel, himself must be Jacob; he which will have his
wife to be Elizabeth, himself must be Zachary. And I counsel all
hard-hearted husbands, which seek diuorcement from their wives, to consider if
they themselves have not been some occasion of that evil which they lay to
their charge? whether compensation may justly be pleaded against them or not?
and to remember the story of Judah, Genesis 3^.
which judged his daughter in law Thamar worthy of death for playing the
harlot, whom he himself had defiled, not knowing her because her mask was on
her face, but upon the sight of a cloak, a staff and a ring which he had
left with her, confessed her to be more righteous then himself. But none of
these seperations which I have rehearsed, can untie the knot of matrimony,
neither are they to be intended to continue for ever, but for a time,
therefore they are no diuorcement. S. Chrysostom says: Lib. de libello
repudij.
Ne mihi leges ab exteris co^ditas legas praecipientes dari ^ibellum repudij,
and diuell^. Neque enim iuxta illas iudicaturus est te Deus, in illa die qua
ve^turus est, sed secundum suas, vt ipse statuit. In ^pso formationis modo
legem induxit quam ego nunc scribo. At quaenam illa est? Haec vtique: Eam sibi
quisque vxorem seruet semper quam initio sortitus est, haec lex antiquior est,
quam illa de libello repudij, and in tantum quantum Adam ipso Mose. Do not
tell me of men's new laws concerning diuorcement, but of Gods old law
concerning marriage, for God at the day of judgment shall not judge thee
according to the law which man has devised, but according to that which his
self has commanded. But the positive law which God prescribed to man in his
creation was this, that he should during life cleave unto that wife which he
has at the first taken unto him. And that law of marriage is by so much more
ancient then this of diuorcement, as innocence is before sin, and Adam
before Moses. Again: Quemadmodum serui fugitini etiamsi domum herilem
relinquant, catenam secum habent attrahentem: it a and mulieres etiamsi viros
relinquant, legem habe^t pro catena se p^rsequentem, and adulterij accusante^,
accusantem etiam recipientes. As when a servant runs from his M. the chain
of bondage does pursue him, and bring him back again to his master, so when
a woman leaves her husband, the law of Matrimony is as a chain to draw her
back again to her husband, to lay adultry to her charge for her departure, and
adultery to their charge which shall receive her.

In which words he speaks plainly, it is adultery for man and wife to
depart, and it is adultery for them to marry again. Moreover: Mulier quam diu
vixerit maritus subdita est legi, quae autem subdita est legi, etiamsi millies
libellum repudij det, adulterij ligabitur lege. The woman is bound by the law
to the man while he lives, but she which is bound by the law, shall be an
adultresse by the law, if she leave her husband, notwithstanding a thousand
Bills of diuorcement.

Concerning the second proposition, that he which has put away his wife can
marry no other while she lives.
The second follows the first as a necessary consequent, because a man
cannot put away his wife, he cannot marry an other. For, numerosum coniugium,
multitude of wives is not permitted, no man may be the husband of two wives.
The grounds are laid down already in the handling of the first proposition,
so that it shall be sufficient in the second to answer the reasons of them
which maintain contrary doctrine, and because in so short a scantling I cannot
touch them all, I will speak of some. The differences of opinions which they
hold are these; some, that the man by privilege of his Sex may marry again,
but the woman may not: others, that the party innocent may marry, but the
nocent may not: of which I shall have fitter occasion to speak when I come to
the third proposition, and in the handling of this proposition I will answer
Beza, which alleges 7. Lib de diuortio.
reasons why a man may divorce his wife for inco^tinencie, and that after
diuorcement is granted, both the man and the woman, the offended and the
offender may marry again.

His first argument is this: Christ being asked what he held concerning that
diuorcement, which in his days was in use and practice among the Jews, which
was not only a separation from bed and board, but also a dissolution of the
knot of marriage, that liberty was given to marry again? answered, that in
case of adultery it was lawful. To which I answer, that as Beza alleges,
so our savior Christ did speak of that divorce me^t, which was the^ practiced
and understood to be a dissolution of marriage, and intended that they might
marry again. But how did our Savior speak of it? not affirmatively, but
negatiuely, as before I showed; so that this argument is a fallacy called
petitio principij, and he disputes ex non coucessis, taking that as granted
which from the beginning we have denied: he understands the answer of our
savior to be affirmative, which is negative: to be particular, which is
universal: to be hypotheticall, which is categoricall: to contain but two
propositio^s, which comprehends three, and so constereth this text contrary
to the analogy of faith, and of this place, contrary to the judgment of the
soundest Fathers, the Canon law, the practice of Christ his Church, from the
Apostles until his own time, yea contrary to the nature of wedlock, to the
express words of our Savior, as I have showed. Great decret 2. pars. 32.
causa. 7 quaest. 1. and 2. cap Aug. de bono coniugali* cap 7.
The Law says: Interueniente diuortio, non abeletur co^faederatio nuptialis,
it a vt si coniuges sint seperati, cum illis adulterium committant, quibus
etiam fuerint post repudium copulati. They which are separated remain man and
wife after separation, and they live in adultery if they marry other, because
the knot of marriage abides firm. De adult. con^ug. li. 2. cap. 4.
Again says S. Augustine, even as he which has once received the Sacrament
of baptism, cannot be unbaptized again while he lives; so they which have
entered into the holy estate of marriage, cannot be unmarried again while they
live. And as one Council says: Council.
placuit secundum euangelicam and apostolicam doctrinam, Mil^uitan cap. 17.
vt neque dimissus ab vxore nec dimissa a marito, alteri co^iungantur, sed it a
maneant, aut sibi reconcilientur. It is the doctrine of the Apostles and
Evangelists, that neither the man nor the woman which are parted, shall marry
again, but either refrain from marriage, or reconcile themselves one to the
other. Neither must they being reconciled, be married a new as some of late
have practiced among us, because the knot being not broken the first marriage
is firm.

His second objection: that it is injustice to punish the innocent for the
nocent: but if when diuorcement is granted, yet the plaintiue which has sued
the divorce, shall be restrained from marriage, he must either be in danger of
burning in lust, because he cannot contain, or else be compelled to receive
again his adulterous wife which was divorced: then is it all one as if there
had been no diuorcement. So Augustines answer is: Ad Pollentium. lib. 2. cap.
10.
Lex diuina non est mutanda propter querelas hominum, si querelas
incontinentium velimus admittere, necesse est quamplurima adulteriae
permittere. Man's complaint of injustice must not alter the law of God. And if
the Magistrates ears shall be open to such complaints, the high way shall
be laid open to incontinent livers. Innocentius has said well to the
purpose, a woman may be long sick of an infectious disease, which cross is
remediless, why cannot the husband as well contain in case of adultery as of
sickness? and where Beza replieth that the case is different between a
diseased person whom the hand of God has afflicted, and one which by adultery
has made a voluntary breach of wedlock: that is no replye, because in
respect of the plaintiue which has not the gift of continency the gift is all
one, and yet sometimes it falls out, that women have dangerous infections,
not only by the hand of GOD, but also by their own misdemeanour of themselves.

The third, 1. Cor. 7.
is an allegation of the Apostle: He which cannot abstain, must marry, but a
man which is separated from his wife may want chastity, and therefore must
marry. I answer S. Paul out of S. Paul, he which cannot contain let him
marry, but let him marry in the Lord, nubat in domino, not otherwise, but he
cannot marry in the Lord which is married already; he cannot take a second
wife which is not freed from the first: therefore if he cannot contain, let
him be reconciled to his wife, that is a present remedy against fornication.

The fourth: he asks (whereas S. Augustine says the man is bound to forgive
his wife upon repentance) what if her repentance be but feigned? and what if
after forgiveness there be a relapse into adulterye again? why should a
Christian be bound to such an inconvenience? I answer, that whereas he
thinks it an hard condition for a man to forgive his wife upon repentance,
being not assured whether she repent unfeignedly or no; nor resolved whether
she will afterward remain chaste or no: The like may be objected against
them which are excommunicated by the keys of the Church, which showing
themselves penitent do crave absolution, and to be received again into the
congregation of the faithful: he which is to pronounce absolution cannot
judge of the contrition of the inward man, and yet he must absolve, and leave
the rest to God, which knows the secrets of the heart. Man can go but by
outward appearance, and in charity hope the best. So must a man do by his
wife; We must not negare lapsis paenitentiam, despair of them that fall,
because they may arise again. Mat. 18.
Christ being asked by Peter how often a man must forgive his brother?
answered, seventy times seven, but if a brother, much more a wife. Therefore
says S. Augustine: Adpoll. l 2.
Durum tibi videtur adulteri coniugi reconciliari? cap. 6. and ^.
durum non erit si fides adsit. Cur adhuc deputamus adulteros vel baptismo
lotos vel paenitenta sanatos? Does it seem an hard condition to thee to be
reconciled to thy adulterous wife? If it seem difficult, then faith is
wanting: where is charity, if we condemn them still to be adulterous which
are cleansed by the water of baptism, and washed by the tears of repentance?
He rendereth a reason of this doctrine. In the old Law men were frobidden to
receive such women as were polluted by adultery, being so heinous offense as
it could not be cleansed by sacrifice, but under the new Testament by the blood
of Christ, 1. Sam. 18.
which is a more worthy sacrifice then all the rest, all offenses are forgiven,
and therefore David as a figure of the new Testament received Saules daughter
an adulterous woman; and since, John. 8.
Christ has said to the woman, I will not condemn thee, sin no more; Quis
non videt ignoscere debere maritum cui ignouisse videt Dominum? shall not the
husband forgive her whom Christ has forgiven? or esteem her as polluted whom
the blood of Christ has cleansed? Quibus hoc Christi factum displicet, hos non
seueros castitas fecit, sed ipsi aegroti medicum reprehendunt, in adulteros
adulteri saeuiunt. They which like not of this judgment of Christ, are not so
severe against others because themselves are chaste, but themselves being
sick, mislike their physician; and punish adultery, being adulterous
themselves; like the men which brought the woman to our Savior to be stoned,
their selves being offenders. I ask says he, whether it be lawful to put her
to death by the law of the Romans, or to put her away by the law of God? Si
licet, melius est vt ab vtroque se temperet, and a licito illa peccante
supplicio, and ab illicito illa viuente coniugio, quum eni^^ vtrumque secundum
legam Christi sit illicitum, sieve adulteram occidere, sieve illa viuente aliam
ducere, ab vtroque est abstinendum, nec illicitum pro illicito faciendum. If it
be lawful to do either, yet is it better to do neither of the^. Not to do all
which in extremity we may, but to abstain from that lawful punishment when
she offends, and this unlawful marriage while she lives. But seeing both
are unlawful by the law of Christ, which neither determines that adultery
should be punished with death, neither allows a man to marry again while the
adulteress lives; both are to be forborne, and one sin is not to be
requited with an other.

The fi^t: If the husband may not put away his wife for adultery and marry an
other, then must the gap be opened to dishonestie, and a chaste man must will
he, nil he, be subject to an harlot. That which he alleges against us,
makes most of all for us, the restraining of marriage after diuorcement is so
far from giving occasion to be unchaste, as it keeps many within the bounds
of chastity, which otherwise would not contain: for who sees not that if
they which be divorced may marry again, when husbands and wives are weary one
of an other, they will confess adultry that they may be divorced and mary
others?

The sixth, Council. Aulatensis can. 10.
is a decree of an ancient Council, that such me^ as take their wives in
adultery, themselves being chaste, and are prohibited to marry others should
be persuaded to refrain while their wives are living. This also makes for us,
for the fathers in that council were so far from allowing the second
marriage, that they withstood it two ways, praecepto and consilio, both by
commandment, and also by advice: by commandment, because they say by law
it was prohibited: by advice, because they used persuasion to the contrary,
having power of themselves by their decree to have made it lawful, had they
not held it according to the word of God to be unlawful.

The last, Epiph. co^tra Cathores.
is the authority of Epiphanius, saying: that if a man marry a second wife,
his first being divorced, he is not subject to the censure of the Church, so
as he converse but with one, and forsake the company of the other: but in such
case his frailty is tolerated. In which words, what does Epiphanius say more
then we have said already, that the Church has sometimes tolerated the^
which have put away one wife and married an other: which practice if it were
honest, and just, and consonant to Gods word, what needed a tolleration? Moses
had not been said to have tolerated diuorcement, other Magistrates usury,
other stews, other drunkenness, if these things had been lawful.

As for Melancthon which affirms that if the husband be unkind to his wife,
and neglect the care of his family, the Christian Magistrate may warrant her to
marry an other: his assertion is like the charters of great Princes, which
write test meipso, witness my self. For soundness of reason, testimony of
scriptures, grounds of divinity, he can have none in the favor of so
monstrous an opinion, neither does he allege any. If he have any show of
proof to ground his absurdity upon, it can be but this. 1. Tim. 5.
He which cares not for his family has denied the faith. 1. Cor. 7.
And if the unbelieving husband will needs depart, let him, for a brother or
sister is not subject in such things. But these words were concerning such as
were married, during the time of their infidelity before they were converted
to the faith; of which sort we have none in Christian Commonwealths; and yet
not so as if an unbelieving husband could be forced by the Magistrate to
depart; only if he will depart says the Apostle, let him depart, but if he
be content to dwell with her, she must not forsake him: and still this
conclusion stands firm, if he do depart, so long as his wife lives he may
not marry.

Of the third proposition, the woman which is divorced may not marry.
Whosoever marries her which is divorced commits adultery. It follows
then, that she remains still his wife from whom she was divorced, else it were
no adultery for a man to marry her, and if she remain his wife, then is he
still her husband, notwithstanding the separation, therefore it is no
diuorcement. De adule, Coniug. li. 1. cap. 11.
So says Augustine: Illud qui dimissam duxerit maechatur, quo modo verum esse
potest? nisi quia ea quam duxit vxor, aliena est priori marito a quo dimissae
est adhuc viuenti? sienim suae, non alienae vxori miscetur, tum non maechatur,
at maechatur, ergo aliena est cui miscetur, si antem aliena est, tum non cessat
illius essa vxor a quo dimissa est, si autem cessat, tum huius alterius est cui
nupsit, et si huius, tum non maechus iudicandus est sed maritus. That saying of
our Savior: he that marries her which is divorced commiteth adultry: how can
it be true? unless because the woman which he has married, is an other man's
wife: that is, his from whom she was divorced, so long as he lives? for if he
marry no man's wife but his own, then is it no adultery: but it is adultery,
therefore she is an other man's wife, and not his own, else he could not be
judged an adulterer, but her lawful husband. Chrysostom. de lib. re. pudij.
Seruis quidem licet mutare dominos viuentes, vxori autem non licebit viros
commutare viuentes, alioqui adulterium perpetrabit. (...)
A servant has more liberty in the bondage of his service, then a woman in
the freedom of her wedlock, he may change masters, she may not change
husbands, while her first husband lives. Secundae nuptiae priore marito
viuente pollutio sunt non matrimonium. For if she take an other husband she is
defiled, but she is not married. If then he which marries her that is divorced
commits adultery, why does Beza allow her to marry? His answer is:
Whosoever marries her which is divorced, unless she be divorced for adultery,
commits adultery by marrying her, but if she be divorced for adultery she
may lawfully marry. By which answer do but vouchsafe to take knowledge of the
great inconveniences which shall be brought, and burdens which shall be laid
upon a Christian kingdom. They which be married, will upon their
discontentments commit fornication that they may be unmarried, then it will be
no more then this: (...) fatuu^ fateor, quem calceus vrget et vxnor, If a man's
shoe pinch him, no more but go to the shoomakers shop and buy a new pair of
shoes: if a man's wife grieve him, a present remedy, to go to the church and
mary a new wife. And the^ shall the question be, who shall keep the children? S.
Augustine is of a contrary judgment to Beza. De adult. coniugijs. lib. 1. cap.
9.
Qui dicimus: Qui mulierem praeter fornicationem dimissam ducit maechatur, no^
ideo maechari negamus qui ea^ducit quae propter fornicatione^ dimissa est,
vterque enim est maechus, qui ob fornicationem dimittit and aliam ducit, and
etiam qui citra fornicationem dimittit and aliam ducit, non enim ex hoc alter
maechus negatur quoniam alter maechus exprimitur. We which say, he is an
adulterer which marries her which is divorced, unless she be divorced for
adultery: do not therefore deny but he is an adulterer also which marries
her that is divorced for adultery, for they are both adulterers, whether it be
for fornication or not: if they marry her which is put away. For the
affirmation of the one to be an adulterer, is not a denial but that the other
also is an adulterer. Although says he, S. Matthew by expressing one adulterer,
and concealing the other, has made it hard to understand, yet other
Evangelists speaking in a generality have made it plain, that it is to be
understood of both, because Mark says: M^c. 10. 11.
Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry another, commits adultery
against her: and if a woman put away her husband and marry an other, Luc. 16.
18.
she commits adultery. And S. Luke has the same. Qui ergo not sumus vt
dicamus: Est qui maechatur vxore dimissa alteram ducens, and est qui hoc
faciens non maechatur, quu^ euangelium dicat omnem maechari qui hoc facit? Who
is man that he should distinguish more subtly then the holy Ghost has
distinguished? saying: some men which put away their wives and marry are
adulterers, and others are not, when S. Mark and S. Luke being expositors of
S. Matthew, show that all are adulterers which marry them which are put away,
be the cause of their diuorcement whatsoever? Neither can this answer of Beza
satisfy, that in Geneua adultery is punished with death, and so all
controversies are ended; for then what needs diuorcement? If when the man
has put away his wife for adultery, the Magistrate do put her to death, the
case is clear, he may marry again: not because she is divorced, but because
she is dead. But many Christian Lands have no such law as to punish adultery
with death, neither are Christians bound to take examples by Jews and Turks
which did, and do the same. The law of the Gospel has imposed no such
commandment upon us, but every kingdom has Christian liberty to establish
such civil laws, as the wisdom of the land shall see fit for the state to
bear. It does not make against us that by the law of God adultery was
punished with death among the Jews, no more then that by the Iawe of God,
theft was not punished with death among the Jews, but with restitution of
four and fiue-folde. It was not lawful among the Jews to gather the
glaynings of their own harvest, Ex. 22. 1.
nor to let the bodies of them which are hanged to hang all night to sow two
sorts of grain together as Wheat and Rye in one field, Leuit. 19. 9
for Christians these things are lawful. Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
God gave three laws unto the Jews, one moral which remains still in force
among all nations the second ceremonial, which was abrogated by the death of
Christ: the third judicial for civil government, which did belong to the
Jews only but punishment of adultery with death was a part of the judicial
law, and therefore binds not us to obey it which be Christians. But S.
Hierome says: Ad Amandum presbyterum.
Omnes occasiones Apostolus amputaens ^parte definit viu^nte viro adulteram
ass mulierem si alteri nupserit. The Apostle preuenteth all qu^^kes and
euasions, setting it down as a positive doctrine, that what woman soever
marries while her first husband lives, she commits adultery: Ad Apolle^t.
li. 2. cap. 4.
And S. Angustine: Licite dimittitur coniux propter causam fornicationis, sed
manet vinculu^ prioris propter quod reus sit adulterij qui dimissam duxerit,
etia^ ob causam fornicationis. Canon. apost. 47.
A woman may be separated from her husband for fornication, but still she is
his wife, and he which marries her commits adultry, although she were put
away for fornication. In so great a cloud of witnesses of our side, we may
bebolde, notwithstanding the judgment of Beza, and the late writers of the
reformed Churches.

The Libertines of our age, now living, give a prerogative in this case to the
man above the woman, because of the Sex, because the one is a man, the other
but a woman; as if the one might marry, but not the other, abusing the word of
God to their own damnation, turning the grace of God into wantonness.
Vindiciae contra tyrannos.
Even as others will prove rebellion and high treason out of the scriptures,
that the people are above their King: out of the scirptures, so will they take
liberty to themselves out of the scriptures, to maintain their unclean and
licentious life, as that the man may put away the woman and not commit adultery
in marrying an other, but the woman may not do the like, because, say they,
the man may have many wives, but the woman may not have many husbands. Their
proof is the saying of Nathan to David. ^. Sam. 12.
Thus says the Lord: I anointed thee King over Israel, delivered thee out of
the hand of Saul, gave thee thy Lords house, and thy Lords wives into thy
bosom, and if that had not been enough, I would have given thee such and
such things: why then have thou taken Vrias his wife? Innocentius the third
makes answer, that David and the Patriarchs had by particular dispensation
from God, multitude of wives, and were excused of poligamy, which we are not:
even as Jacob told a lie, Genesis 27.
the Israelites robbed the Egyptians, Ex. 11. 2.
Sampson murdered the Philistines, Iud. 16. 30.
the Levites compassed the walls of Jericho, Joshua. 6. 15.
with their Trumpets of Rams horns upon the Sabbath day, but we may not do
the like. But says he: Christiana religio adulterium in vtroque sexu aquali
ratione punit. Innocentius Epist. 3. ad Exeuperiun. De 10 chordis cap. 3.
Christian religion punishes adultery in man and woman both alike. And
Augustine: Tu exigis hoc ab vxore and non vis reddere hoc vxori? Marriage
duties must be kept as well of the man as of the woman.

Others there be, which make a distinction between the party innocent and the
party nocent; as if the one might marry, but not the other. But that the
party nocent may marry as well as the innocent, I prove by these four
reasons. The first, the custom and practice of the Jewish Church when Moses
lived, from whence the Christians have learned diuorcement, Moses says: Deuteronomy.
24.
If a man take a wife, and she find no favor in his eyes, because he has
espied filthiness in her, in so much that he do give ger a Bill of
diuorcement, and she marry an other, and her second husband divorce her in like
manner, or die, let her not return to her first husband again, after she is
defiled. By which word it is evident, that when Moses lived, women which were
divorced for adultery did marry again, as well as their husbands which did
divorce them. The second, is the set form of words which the Jews at this
time do use in their Bills of diuorcement, which is after this manner. In the
sixth of the Sabbath, the 12. of the month of Adar, the year of the creation
of the world, 5306. in the City of Cremona, lying upon the River of Poe in
Italy; I Samuel Carmin, the son of Rabbi Daniel Saphard, do of mine own
vuluntarie motion send away from me, my wife Rachel, the daughter of Rabbi
Ezra Parizol, and do give her free liberty to depart whether she will, and
marry whom she will: and that there may be no let^e or hinderance to the
contrary: Sixti senensis Biblioth. sanct. lib. 2. ex libro Rabbi Mosis d^ Co^i.
I have given her this Bill of diuorcement, subscribed and sealed according to
the constitution of Moses and Israel, in the presence of these witnesses:
Mardochi Gabriel, Elias Cephat, Manuel Pandin. The third, the definition of
diuorcement, which is given by our Savior Christ in the Gospel: it is a
seperating of them by the law of man, which are linked together by the law of
God, which is as much as the untying of the knotte of marriage so that if the
knot be untied, both are free. The husband and the wife are relat^, one cannot
be without the other: if she be bound, she is some bodies wife, the^ he which
divorced her is her husband: there cannot be a wife without an husband, nor an
husband without a wife. The 4. whereas they which speak in favor of the party
innocent, take advantage of the words, and argue thus: He which puts away
his wife, unless it be for fornication, and takes an other, commits adultry*
therefore if it be for fornication, it is no adultry. If that kind of arguing
be good, I can by the same, prove that the party nocent may likewise marry,
and thus I argue: He which marries her which is divorced, unless she be
divorced for fornication, committe^h adultry* therefore if he marry her which
is divorced for fornication, it is no adultry. Thus have I proved that neither
man nor woman, nocent nor innocent, may marry again: and leaving doctrine, I
come to exhortation.

S. Paul says: I am a debtor to all, Romans ^
both to the wise and the unwise, I have ministered already strong meat unto
the^ which are men, I must now give milk unto them which are babes, and do as
the Scribe did* which when the Jew did demand of him a Bill of diuorcement,
did dissuade him: So, that I may dissuade all that intend it, and persuade them
which have already done it, to receive their wives into favor again. John
the Baptist came in the spirit of Elias, Mal. 4.
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children. I pray God that I may come
also in the spirit of Elias and John the Baptist, to turn, not only the
hearts of the fathers to the children, but also the husbands to their wives:
which doing, I shall do a work of charity, a piece of service acceptable
unto God. Why should a man divorce his wife? why should he not upon her
repentance receive her again after she is put away? S. Peter w^^^eth to all
husbands in this manner. 1. Pat. ^. 7.
Ye husbands, dwell with your wives as men of knowledge, giving honor unto the
woman as unto the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted* In which I observe the
generallitie that husbands must dwell with their wives, and not depart from
them: the five particulars, how they must dwell with them; as men of knowledge.
Wherein does this knowledge or discretion consist? in giving honor to the
woman? why should the man give honor to the woman? because she is the weaker
vessel. Why should her weakness be so much respected, as that honor should be
given to her fragilitie? because notwithstanding her weakness and infirmity, she
is an heir and co-heire of salvation as well as her husband, and therefore he
must respect her as himself. What is the mischief and inconvenience which
else may follow? God cannot be well served between them both, because their
prayers will be interrupted.

The Husbands then must dwell with their wives, what that is, it is explaned
by Saint Paul, the best expositor of Saint Peter; (Be it spoken with
circumcised hearts) The husband (says Paul) must give due benevolence to the
wife, 1. Cor. ^.
and the wife to the husband^ what that is he shows afterward, (let no man
think that unclean which the holy Ghost has spoken) The wife has not power
over her own body but the man; and the man has not power over his own
body, but the woman. Again: Defraude not one an other except it be for a
time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and come together
again, least satan tempt you for your incontinency. To dwell with a man's
wife, is to be an help unto her, as Joseph was to Mary* he which has not a
care of his family, 1. Tim. 5.
has denied the faith: but he which forsakes the company of his wife, does
neglect his family two manner of ways: first concerning thrift, secondly
concerning good name and same, because both of them shall be suspected to be
incontinent livers.

Husbands must dwell with their wives as men of knowledge. Ephe. 5.
The man is the woman's head, 1. Cor. 11.
as Christ is the man's head, and God is Christ's head, the woman is but the
Image of the man, as the man is the Image of God. But there must needs be more
perfection in the head wherein are all the senses, vegetation and
understanding, the^ in the body which has but vegetatio^ and one only sense,
that is feeling; in the body, then in the shadow; in the archetypus or first
form, then in the Image of the same. All beasts in the old law were unclean,
and unfit for sacrifice, which did not ruminate and chewe the cudde: there was
represented discretion, but men must be better the^ are beasts, therefore they
must live discreetly with their wives, but a discreet man will of himself
consider, that by how much he excels his wife in knowledge understanding and
all manner of perfection, so he ought to conceal many infirmities in the woman,
to devour, and as it were swallow up many indignities which do arise of her
weakness. God says: Henceforth my spirit shall not (...) with man because
be is flesh: you (...) set your wit to theirs, they are but flesh, and you in
comparison of them are spirit. And ^as a belee^ing husband may sanctify and
(...) an unbelieving wife (...) so discreet man may reform an indiscreet wife,
even as when the body is out of temper, it is in the wisdom of the head to
cure the body, and bring the disordered members into order.

Husbands must give honor unto their wives. There is one honor which the
inferior does owe to his supeririour, 1. Pet. 2.
Fear God, and honor the King. Another which superiors owe to their
inferiors, and all one to another, 1. Cor. 1^*
Honor all men. In giving honor, go before one an other. All members (says
Paul) are not alike, but on those members which we think most dishonest, we
put most honesty on: upon our uncomely parts we put most comelines on, for our
comely parts need it not, but God has tempered the body together, and given
more honor to the member that lacks. And so must husbands do to their wives.

The woman is the weaker vessel, and the man himself is but a vessel, and
notwithstanding his strength he is but weak. He does not say: Give honor to
the ^^man because she is good, but because she is weak: not for her virtue,
but for her fragilitie: for your selves are so, or may be so Brethren says
Paul, Gala* 5. (...).
If a man be suddenly taken in an offense, you which be spiritual, must
restore such an^one with the spirit of meeknes, considering ^est thou also be
tempted, bear one an others burden* (...) fulfill the law of Christ. We have
(...) examples of women which were (...) vessels. Genesis 3.
The woman was the first in the preuarication and not the man. Abraham believed
the Angel when Sara laughed. 3. Tim. ^.
Lots wife did look back toward Sodom, Genesis 18.
Lot did not. Genesis 19.
Moses his wife repined at her childs circumcision, himself did not. Exodus 4.
Sara was so hard h^rted as to turn Agar out of doors, Genesis 21.
Abraham was not. Iezabel could without remorse of conscience set down the
whole plot and project how Naboth should loose his life and his vineyard, 1.
Reg. 21.
Achab could not. Math. 20.
The wife of Zebedeus could audaciously ask of our Savior Christ that her
sons might sit on his right hand and his left, her husb^d could not. Salomons
wives corrupted him, 1. Reg. 21.
he corrupted them not. Judge. 1^. and 16.
Sampsons wife betrayed him, he betrayed not her. Some of these offen^^ were
worse the^ adultery, yet their husband did not nourish hatred against them.

Though they be weak vessels; yet are they heirs of the kingdom of heaven
as well as their husbands. (...)
Christ was borne a man, 1. Tim. 2.
but borne of woman, that he might sanctify both man and woman; through
childbirth the woman shall be saved, if they continue in the faith, and love, and
holiness, with modesty. The word of God has given precepts of godly life
unto women, that living godlily as did Elizabeth, Sara, Anna, Rebecca, they
might be saved, The man and wife are to live together in the life to come, not
as a man and wife, but as the Angels and Saints in heaven, why then shall they
live asunder upon the earth?

If they live not together, their prayers shall be interrupted. This reason alone
is sufficient to compose and qualify all greeuances between man and wife. They
ought to pray together, for prayer is a principal part of Gods service; and if
they will have God to be devoutly served, al grudges and quarrels must be laid
aside. Pro. 18.
God hears not the prayers of them which be sinful: no greater sin then
continual fostering of hatred and inward malice. Joshua.
Joshua says, I and my house will serve the Lord: Luc. 1.
Zachary and his wife with him walked in the ordinances of God without
reproof. And it is the manner of you Citizens when you are dead, to have your
wives and your selves pictured upon your graves, lifting up your hands and
praying together. But it is plain mockery to be pictured praying together upon
your graves when you are dead, if so be that you do not pray together in your
houses while you are alive: and therefore learn by the marble monuments and
pictures of the dead, what ye ought to do while ye are alive. Deuteronomy. ^2.
I end with Moses, beseeching God that my doctrine may be as the rain, and my
speech as the deawe of heaven and the shower upon the herbs, and as the great
rain upon the grass, For I will publish the name of the Lord: give ye glory
unto our God. To this God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be all
power, glory and dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

