A True report of a most famous Victory or Roman fact, achieved by a
certain vessel, called the black Galley of Dort, upon the thirtieth day of
November last, 1600.

Which at that time took the Admiral of the City of Antwerpe, with seven
other ships, all well furnished with munition for war.

Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burby: And are to be sold at his shop
adjoining to the Royal Exchange. 1600.

A true report of a most famous victory, achieved by a certain vessel,
called the black Galley of Dort, upon the 30. day of November last, 1600 which
at that time took the Admiral of the City of Antwerpe, with seven other
ships, all well furnished with munition for war.
COnsidering the Lords the general Estates of Holland and Sealand, have
thought good to cause to be made and appointed a Galley, to the end that
therewith, and with the aid of some ships of war, they may hinder the Galleys
of the Sluice, the which do daily commit great spoil on the sea: so it is, that
by the consent of the Lords the General Estates, there has been made and
appointed at Dort, a certain Galley being well provided, with all manner of
munition serving to the war, and also well furnished with great Ordinance.
This Galley was called the black Galley of Dort, the which being well manned
with men of war of Dort aforesaid, was set forth toward Sealand, to the end
there to conuoy the Merchants ships, which are to pass toward England,
France, Scotland, and East Freesland, or to any other places.

Immediately after, it happened that this aforesaid black Gallie being at sea,
and seeing three Gallyes of the Sluice which had taken a ship, which was
compassed between two Galleys, being determined to carry the same into the
Haven of the Sluice, the said black Galley hindered them of their purpose, and
came presently in all haste to help the same ship, discharging her Ordinance
very vehemently at one of the said Gallyes, so that she did almost utterly
spoil the same, and made her glad to slip away. Then with all haste
following the other two Galleys which had taken the ship, she so discharged
her Ordinance at them, that they were constrained to leave the ship, and save
themselves: so that the said Galley of Dort did release the ship, and the
three Galleys fled away into the Sluice: howbeit, they were very much
endamaged by the shot of the black Galley.

1600. between the nine and twenty, and thirty days of the month of
November, the said black Galley of Dort, with three or 4. Sloopes which were
with her, undertook a worthy fact before the City of Antwerpe, where they
with a stout enterprise seysed on the Admiralles ship, which was well
appointed with Ordinance, having in her sixteen brass pieces, and ten iron
cast pieces of ordinance, with certain stone cast pieces, which Ordinance lay
three rows high: and the said Admiralles ship is of the burden of about
ninety lasts, being so fair a ship, that there is none like the same in all
Holland and Sealand. Likewise they took also the ship of Brussell, in the
which were four brass pieces of Ordinance, with the ship of Mechelen,
containing four brass pieces: and moreover, five conuoy ships, containing
every of them four pieces of Ordinance, which 8. ships appointed as
aforesaid, were taken by the said black Galley, with three or four Sloopes
which were with her, they being in danger of their lives: for when they passed
by Oordam, those of the Sconce thought them to be Sloops, which carried
munition and prouant toward Hulst in Flanders, but they were other Sloops,
which they had not expected: but because they took them to be friends, those
of Oordam did not discharge their Ordinance at them. And our Galley being past
the Sconce, they presently aboarded the Admiral. The Mariners whereof, some
were slain, and some leapt ouer-boord and were drowned, except two boys, which
they brought with them.

Thus happened it with the said ship the Admiral, and with the ship of
Brussell, the ship of Mechelen, and the five other conuoy ships, the which
were brought to Flushing, where they lie together. The Burgars of Antwerpe were
very fearful, and did shut their gates, without opening them again in two
days, keeping careful watch, fearing they were betrayed.

In this worthy victory, they got the said fair ship of the Admiralles,
the ship of Brussell, and the said ship of Mechelen, and the said five
conuoy ships, in which eight ships were fifty four pieces of Ordinance,
besides certain stone pieces, which were in the Admiralles. And this is the
Galley, whereof men did often talk, saying that it would prove lost labor
for this country: but it has appeared to the contrary, by this worthy fact
happened, as is aforesaid.

This worthy victory have those of the black Galley obtained, with small
loss of their men, to wit, there were slain in the winning of these eight
ships four of our men, and six were hurt. Whatsoever they now are doing, with
the help of God, the time will make manifest.

FINIS.
MAny at the first with the Galley did flout,
And said it was a foolish thing without doubt:
But he is a fool that a thing will blame,
E're men have given it any name.
Therefore I have termed this a Roman fact,
Because I esteem it to be a worthy act.
A wise man does pass his judgment after the conclusion:
But the fool will bring us all in confusion.

