skull and crossbones with recumbent human skeleton

A RELATION Sent from ROME, OF THE PROCESS, SENTENCE, AND EXECVTION, Done Upon
the Body, Picture, and Books, Of MARCUS ANTONIUS de Dominis, Archbishop of
Spalato, after his death.

Published by Command.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1624.

A RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS at Rome, Against the late Archb. of SPALATO, And
the burning of his dead Body, etc.
THe late Archbishop of Spalato being dead, his Body was put into a well
pitched Coffin, and that into another greater than it; and so was it carried to
be kept in the Convent of the Holy Apostles, and there committed to the charge
of the Reverend Fathers of that place, until such time as the Cause of the
said Archbishop (still depending) should be determined by the Sacred
Congregation; that according to their Sentence, whatsoever justice did require
might be done upon him.

The Sentence being framed, and ready to be put in execution, the said Body
was first recognized, according to the Form of Law; and was taken the
twentieth of this present Month of December forth from the Convent where it
was kept, and carried to the Church of Minerua, and there laid upon a Table in
an eminent place, together with his Picture, and a little sack full of Books,
which He had printed: where it stood all the night.

The next morning at the time appointed, the most Illustrious, and most
Reverend Lords Cardinals Supreme Inquisitors, with many others, (to the number
of sixteen, or thereabout,) being met together, after they had delivered over
a certain Millanois (who under the feigned name and habit of a Greek,
notwithstanding he had never been made Priest, had presumed to celebrate Mass
both in the Holy House of Loretto, and other where) unto the Secular Powers the
23. of this present Month aforesaid, to be first hanged, and then afterward
burnt, was the Sentence of the said Archbishop read to this effect.

First of all, The Manner of his Escape and going into England was recompted;
and what he had there done in preaching, and in printing; and how that upon
better advice, and bethinking of himself, he preferred a Supplication unto our
Lord the Pope, showing, that he would willingly return again into the bosom
of the Holy Church, if he might be secured of his pardon; and also that he
would abjure all and every heresy which he had heretofore maintained. He came
to Rome, He did all accordingly, He obtained grace, and pardon of his
Holiness, and so continued there for a long time.

But because his Conversion was not sincere, and from his heart, but feigned
only; He began at length in his familiar discourses, to break forth into most
heinous heresies, and would needs maintain, that what he had said before was
true.

Thereupon he was put into the Holy Inquisition; and in the Process which was
framed against him, we find that he held the Heresies here under written.

1 THat the Council of Trent had declared many things to be de fide, which
were not.

2 That all the Sects of Heretics might be reduced unto one Church, if the
Church of Rome would remit some of those things, which in process of time she
had determined to be de fide, instancing in particular in the Article of
Transubstantiation.

3 That there might be made an union between the Church of Rome and the
Protestant Heretics, they both agreeing in articulis fundamentalibus.

4 That it may well be questioned, of some Articles, and of many things defined
in the Council of Trent to be de fide, whether they were sufficiently
discussed, and defined, yea or no.

5 That he who holds and believes the Fundamental Articles, although he
does not hold the Rest, is not therefore separated from the Church, but is
united to it in the Faith. Because that only the Fundamental and Essential
Articles, are necessary to salvation. The rest are matters of controversy.

6 That what the Council of Trent has defined to be de fide in matter of
Justification, of Predestination, of Grace, and of the Sacraments, that they
confer grace ex opere operato, belongs not to the Faith.

7 That he was ready to maintain, even with the loss of his life, that all
men might abound in their own sense (in other matters,) so that they did agree
in Essentialibus fidei.

8 That the Primacie of the Pope of Rome is not de iure diuino, or at least, it
may be disputed whether it be, or be not, until such time as the question may
be decided.

9 That the Anathematismes of the Council of Trent, are no definitions of
Articles of Faith.

10 That the Heretics were not condemned in the Council of Trent for any
Heresies that they taught; but only, because they taxed the Church of Rome of
Heresy.

11 That to deny Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and worshipping of Jmages and
Saints, is not to deny matters that belong to the substance of Faith. That
therefore the Protestants have the true Faith, and the true Church.

12 That the Church of Rome, and the Church of England are one and the same
Church, both the one, and the other, Catholic and Orthodox.

13 That it is not de fide, that a General Council, together with the Pope,
is the Judge of controversies of the Faith.

14 That the bond of Matrimony solemnized and consummated, may be dissolved by
the adultery of either party.

15 That the bond of Matrimony may be dissolved as well for other causes, as
for adultery.

16 That the Secular Prince upon a reasonable cause may ordain, that the bond
of Matrimony solemnized and consummated, may be dissolved.

There were some other Articles besides, but they fall within the compass of
these.

After these false and heretical Propositions were read; it was related how
they that were of the kindred of the said Archbishop, (or whosoever else would
pretend to be willing to undertake the defense of his cause) were cited; And
some of them made their appearance at the time appointed them; but when they saw
the Process, together with the Archbishops own Confessions, they renounced
him, and would do nothing in his behalf. Whereupon the most Illustrious and
most Reverend Lords proceeded unto a definitive Sentence. Which was, to declare
him unworthy of the favor of the Holy Sea Apostolic; to deprive him of all
his honor, benefit, or dignity; to confiscate his goods, and to give him over
to the Secular Powers; as De facto they then gave him over, That He and his
Picture, together with the Books he had written, should be burned.

This Sentence being read, the said Coffin there present, the Picture, and the
Books were delivered over to my Lord the Governor of Rome, who desired, that
the Corpse might be reuiewed, and recognized anew; which was done accordingly.
And presently the said Governor gave order, that the Corpse together with the
other things should be carried into Campo di Fiori, to be there burned.

But because they found no man that was willing of himself to carry him to the
said place; therefore the Serieants took up certain Porters, whom they bound
and constrained to go along with them, and to take up the said Corpse, Picture,
and Books, which being carried into Campo di Fiori, were there instantly burned.

And because the said Archbishop, toward the end of his life, made show as if
he had been penitent for the heresies which he had held de nouo, after his
former abiuration, and asking pardon for them, he had the favor done him to be
made partaker of the most holy Sacraments. But notwithstanding because he had
relapsed, He was therefore given over to the Secular Power. Which was all that
occurred in this action.

INSCRIPTIO.


