Be Wise as serpents but (...) as Dous. LXXX SERMONS PREACHED BY THAT LEARNED
AND REVEREND DIVINE JOHN DONE DR IN DIVINITY LATE DEANE OF YE CATHEDRAL
CHVRCH OF ST PAVLES LONDON.


LXXX SERMONS PREACHED BY THAT LEARNED AND REVEREND DIVINE, JOHN DONE, Dr IN
DIVINITY, Late Deane of the Cathedral Church of S. PAUL'S London.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON, in Ivie-lane, and RICHARD MARRIOT in S.
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. MDCXL.

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT
BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most dread and gracious Sovereign,
IN this rumor of War I am bold to present to your sacred Majesty the
fruits of Peace, first planted by the hand of your most Royal Father, then
ripened by the same gracious influence, and since no less cherisht and
protected by your Majesty's especial favor vouchsafed to the Author in so
many indulgent testimonies of your good acceptance of his service: Which grace
from your Majesty, as he was known to acknowledge with much comfort whilst he
lived, so will it give now some excuse to the presumption of this Dedication,
since those friends of his, who think any thing of his worthy to outlive him,
could not preserve their piety to him, without taking leave to inscribe the
same with your Majesty's sacred Name, that so they may at once give so fair a
hope of a long continuance both to these Works of his, and to his gratitude,
of which they humbly desire this Book may last to be some Monument.

I shall not presume in this place to say much of these Sermons; only this,
They who have been conversant in the Works of the holiest men of all times,
cannot but acknowledge in these the same spirit with which they writ;
reasonable Demonstrations every where in the subjects comprehensible by reason:
as for those things which cannot be comprehended by our reason alone, they are
no where made easier to faith then here; and for the other part of our nature,
which consists in our Passions, and in our Affections, they are here raised,
and laid, and governed, and disposed, in a manner, according to the Will of the
Author. The Doctrine it selse which is taught here, is Primitively Christian;
The Fathers are every where here consulted, with reverence, but Apostolical
Writings only appealed to as the last Rule of Faith. Lastly, such is the
conjuncture here of zeal and discretion, that whilst it is the main scope of
the Author in these Discourses, that Glory be given to God, this is accompanied
every where with a scrupulous care and endeavor, that Peace be likewise settled
amongst men.

The leave and encouragement I have had for the publishing these Sermons from
the Person most entrusted by your Majesty in the government of the Church, and
most highly dignified in it, I think I ought in this place to mention for his
honor, that they who receive any benefit from hence, may know in part to whom
to acknowledge it; and that this, what ever it is, is owing to him to whom they
stand otherwise so deeply engaged for his providence and care (next under your
Majesty) over the Truth, and Peace, and Dignity of the Church of England, for
which he will not want lasting acknowledgments amongst Wise and Good Men.

And now having with all humbleness commended these Sermons to your sacred
Majesty, from the memory of the Author, your Servant, from the nature and
piety of the Work it self, and lastly, from the encouragement I have had to
give it this light, did I not fear to add to my presumption, I should in this
place take leave to express the propriety betwixt your Majesty's royal
Virtues, and the tribute of such an Offering and acknowledgement as this; A
Work of Devotion to the most exemplarily pious Prince; a Work of moderated, and
discreet zeal, to the Person of the most governed affections, in the midst of
the greatest power; a Work of deep-sighted knowledge, to the most discerning
spirit; a Work of a strict doctrine, to the most severe imposer upon himself;
and a Work of a charitable doctrine, to the most indulgent Master of others:
But I dare not enter into this Argument, these excellencies requiring rather
tacit veneration, then admitting any possible equal expression; and therefore
with my prayer for your Majesty's long and happy reign over us, I humbly ask
pardon for this presumption of

Your Majesty's most humble and most dutiful Subject, Jo: DONE.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Dr DONE, LATE DEANE OF St PAUL'S LONDON.
IF that great Master of Language and Art, Sir Henry Wootton, Provost of Eaton
College, (lately deceased) had lived to see the publication of these Sermons,
he had presented the world with the Authors life exactly written. It was a Work
worthy his undertaking, and he fit to undertake it; betwixt whom and our
Author, there was such a friendship contracted in their youths, that nothing
but death could force the separation. And though their bodies were divided,
that learned Knights love followed his friends fame beyond the forgetful
grave, which he testified by entreating me (whom he acquainted with his
design) to inquire of certain particulars that concerned it: Not doubting but
my knowledge of the Author, and love to his memory, would make my diligence
useful. I did prepare them in a readiness to be augmented, and rectified by
his powerful pen; but then death prevented his intentions.

When I heard that sad news, and likewise that these Sermons were to be
published without the Authors life, (which I thought was rare) indignation or
grief (I know not whether) transported me so far, that I re-viewed my forsaken
Collections, and resolved the world should see the best picture of the Author
that my artlesse Pensil (guided by the hand of Truth) could present to it.

If I be demanded, as once Pompeys poor Bondsman was, Plutarch.
(whilst he was alone on the Sea shore gathering the pieces of an old Boat to
burn the body of his dead Master) What art thou that preparest the funerals
of Pompey the great? Who I am that so officiously set the Authors memory on
fire? I hope the question has in it more of wonder then disdain.

Wonder indeed the Reader may, that I (who profess my self artlesse) should
presume with my faint light to show forth his life, whose very name makes it
illustrious; but be this to the disadvantage of the person represented,
certain I am, it is much to the advantage of the beholder; who shall see the
Authors picture in a natural dress, which ought to beget faith in what is
spoken, for he that wants skill to deceive, may safely be trusted.

And though it may be my fortune to fall under some censures for this
undertaking, yet I am pleased in a belief I have, that if the Authors glorious
spirit (which is now in heaven) can have the leisure to look down, and see his
meanest friend in the midst of his officious duty, he will not disdain my well
meaning sacrifice to his memory. For whilst his conversation made me (and many
others) happy below, I know his humility and gentleness was eminent: And I have
heard Divines say, those virtues that are but sparks on earth, become great and
glorious flames in heaven.

He was borne in LONDON, of good and virtuous Parents; And though his own
learning and other multiplied merits, may justly seem sufficient to dignifie
both himself and posterity; yet Reader be pleased to know, that his Father
was masculinely and lineally descended from a very ancient Family in Wales,
where many of his name now live, that have and deserve great reputation in that
Country.

By his Mother he was descended from the Family of the famous Sir Thomas More,
sometimes Lord Chancellor of England; and also from that worthy and laborious
Judge Rastall, who left behind him the vast Statutes of the Laws of this
Kingdom, most exactly abridged.

He had his first breeding in his Fathers house, where a private Tutor had the
care of him, till he was nine years of age; he was then sent to the
Universitie of Oxford, having at that time a command of the French and Latin
Tongues, when others can scarce speak their own.

There he remained in Heart Hall, (having for the advancement of his studies,
Tutors in several Sciences to instruct him) till time made him capable, and
his learning expressed in many public Exercises, declared him fit to receive
his first Degree in the Schools, which he forbore by advise from his friends,
who being of the Romish persuasion, were conscionably averse to some parts of
the Oath, always tendered and taken at those times.

About the fourteenth year of his age, he was transplanted from Oxford to
Cambridge, where (that he might receive nourishment from both soiles) he staid
till his seventeenth year. All which time he was a most laborious Student,
often changing his studies, but endeavoring to take no Degree for the reasons
formerly mentioned.

About his seventeenth year he was removed to London, and entered into
Lincolnes Inn, with an intent to study the Law, where he gave great
testimonies of wit, learning, and improvement in that profession, which never
served him for any use, but only for ornament.

His Father died before his admission into that Society, and (being a Merchant)
left him his Portion in money (which was 3000. li.) His Mother, and those to
whose care he was committed, were watchful to improve his knowledge, and to
that end appointed him there also Tutors in several Sciences, as the
Mathematics and others, to attend and instruct him. But with these Arts they
were advised to instill certain particular principles of the Romish Church, of
which those Tutors (though secretly) professed themselves to be members.

They had almost obliged him to their faith, having for their advantage,
besides their opportunity, the example of his most dear and pious Parents,
which was a powerful persuasion, and did work upon him, as he professes in
his PREFACE to his Pseudo-Martyr.

He was now entered into the nineteenth year of his age, and being unresolved
in his Religion, (though his youth and strength promised him a long life) yet
he thought it necessary to rectify all scruples which concerned that: And
therefore waving the Law, and betrothing himself to no art or profession, that
might justly denominate him, he began to survey the body of Divinity,
controverted between the Reformed and Roman Church. Preface to Pseudo-Martyr.
And as Gods blessed Spirit did then awaken him to the search, and in that
industry did never forsake him, (they be his own words) So he calls the same
Spirit to witness to his Protestation, that in that search and disquisition he
proceeded with humility and diffidence in himself, by the safest way of
frequent Prayers, and indifferent affection to both parties. And indeed, Truth
had too much light about her, to be hid from so sharp an Inquirer; and he had
too much ingenuity, not to acknowledge he had seen her.

Being to undertake this search, he believed the learned Cardinal Bellarmine to
be the best defender of the Roman cause: and therefore undertook the
examination of his reasons. The cause was weighty, and wilful delays had been
inexcusable toward God and his own conscience; he therefore proceeded with all
moderate haste; And before he entered into the twentieth year of his age, did
show the Deane of Gloucester all the Cardinals Works marked with many weighty
Observations under his own hand, which Works were bequeathed by him at his
death as a Legacy to a most dear friend.

About the twentieth year of his age, he resolved to travel; And the Earl of
Essex going to Cales, and after the Island voyages, he took the advantage of
those opportunities, waited upon his Lordship, and saw the expeditions of those
happy and unhappy employments.

But he returned not into England, till he had staid a convenient time, first
in Italy, and then in Spain, where he made many useful Observations of those
Countries, their Laws, and Government, and returned into England perfect in
their Languages.

Not long after his return, that exemplary pattern of gravity and wisdom, the
Lord Elsmore, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and after Chancellor of England,
taking notice of his Learning, Languages, and other abilities, and much
affecting both his person and condition, received him to be his chief
Secretary, supposing it might be an Introduction to some more weighty
employment in the State, for which his Lordship often protested he thought him
very fit.

Nor did his Lordship account him so much to be his servant, as to forget he
had been his friend; and to testify it, he used him always with much
courtesy, appointing him a place at his own Table, unto which he esteemed his
company and discourse a great ornament.

He continued that employment with much love and approbation, being daily
useful (and not mercenary) to his friends, for the space of five years: In
which time, he (I dare not say unfortunately) fell into such a liking, as (with
her approbation) increased into a love with a young Gentlewoman, who lived in
that Family, Niece to the Lady Elsmore, Daughter to Sir George More, Chancellor
of the Garter, and Lieutenant of the Tower.

Sir George had some immation of their increasing love, and the better to
prevent it, did remove his Daughter to his own house, but too late, by reason
of some faithful promises interchangeably past, and inviolably to be kept
between them.

Their love (a passion, which of all other Mankind is least able to command,
and wherein most errors are committed) was in them so powerful, that they
resolved, and did marry without the approbation of those friends that might
justly claim an interest in the advising and disposing of them.

Being married, the news was (in favor to M. Done, and with his allowance)
by the Right Honorable Henry then Earl of Northumberland, secretly and
certainly intimated to Sir George More, to whom it was so immeasurably
unwelcome, that (as though his passion of anger and inconsideration should
exceed theirs of love and error) he engaged his sister the Lady Elsmore to join
with him to procure her Lord to discharge M. Done the place he held under his
Lordship. And although Sir George were remembered that Errors might be
over-punisht, and therefore was desired to forbear, till second considerations
had cleared some scruples, yet he was restless until his suit was granted,
and the punishment executed; The Lord Chancellor then (at M. Donnes dismission)
protesting, he thought him a Secretary fitter for a King then a Subject.

But this physic of M. Donnes dismission was not strong enough to purge out
all Sir George his choler, who was not satisfied, till M. Done, and his
Compupill in Cambridge that married him, M. Samuel Brook, (who was after D. in
D. and Master of Trinity College in that University) and his brother M.
Christopher Brook of Lincolns Inn, (who gave M. Done his Wife, and witnessed
the Marriage) were all committed to several Prisons.

M. Done was first enlarged, who neither gave rest to his body, his brain,
nor any friend, in whom he might hope to have any interest, until he had
procured the enlargement of his two imprisoned friends.

He was now at liberty, but his days were still cloudie, and being past this
trouble, others did still multiply, for his Wife (to her extreme sorrow) was
detained from him. Genes. 29.
And though with Jacob, he endured not a hard service for her, yet he lost a
good one, and was forced to get possession of her by a long suit in Law, which
proved very chargeable, and more troublesome.

It was not long, but that Time and M. Donnes behavior (which when it would
entice, had a strange kind of irresistible art) had so dispassioned his Father
in Law, That as the world had approved his Daughters choice, so he also could
not choose but see a more then ordinary merit in his new Son, which melted
him into so much remorse, that he secretly labored his sons restoration into
his place, using his own, and his sisters power, but with no success; The
Lord Chancellor replying, That although he was unfainedly sorry for what he had
done, yet it stood not with his credit to discharge and re-admit servants, at
the request of passionate Petitioners.

Within a short time, Sir George appeared to be so far reconciled, as to wish
their happiness; (or say so) And being asked for his paternal blessing, did
not deny it; but refused to contribute any means that might conduce to their
livelihood.

M. Donnes Portion was the greatest part spent in many and chargeable travels,
the rest disburst in some few Books, and dear bought experience; he out of all
employment, that might yield a support for himself and Wife, who had been
curiously and plentifully educated; his nature generous, and he accustomed to
confer, not to receive courtesies. These and other considerations, but chiefly
that his dear Wife was to bear a part in his sufferings, surrounded him with
many and sad thoughts, and some apparent apprehensions of want.

But his sorrow was lessened, and his wants prevented by the seasonable
courtesies of their noble Kinsman Sir Francis Wally of Pirford, who entreated
them to a co-habitation with him; where they remained with very much freedom
to themselves, and equal content to him for many years. And as their charge
increased, (she had yearly a child) so did his love and bounty.

With him they continued till his death: a little before which time Sir Francis
was so happy as to make a perfect reconciliation betwixt that good man Sir
George More and his forsaken son and daughter, Sir George then giving Bond to
pay M. Done 800 l. at a certain day as a Portion with his wife, and to pay him
for their maintenance 20. l. quarterly, (as the Interest of it) until the said
Portion were paid.

Most of those years that he lived with Sir Francis, he studied the Civil and
Canon Laws: In which he acquired such a perfection as was judged to hold some
proportion with many, who had made that study the employment of their whole
life.

Sir Francis being dead, and that happy family dissolved, M. Done took a
house at Micham (near unto Croydon in Surrey) where his wife and family
remained constantly: and for himself (having occasions to be often in London)
he took lodgings near unto White Hall, where he was frequently visited by men
of greatest learning and judgment in this Kingdom; his company being loved,
and much desired by many of the Nobility of this Nation, who used him in their
counsels of greatest considerations.

Nor did our own Nobility only favor him, but his acquaintance and
friendship was usually sought for by most Ambassadors of foreign Nations, and
by many other strangers, whose learning or employment occasioned their stay in
this Kingdom.

He was much importuned by friends to make his residence in London, which he
could not do, having settled his dear wife and children at Micham, whither he
often retired himself, and then studied incessantly some Points of
Controversy. But at last the persuasion of friends was so powerful, as to
cause the removal of himself and family to London; where that honorable
Gentleman Sir Robert Drury assigned him a very convenient house rent-free, next
his own in Drury Lane, and was also a daily cherisher of his studies, and such
a friend as sympathiz'd with him and his, in their joy and sorrow.

Diverse of the Nobility were watchful and solicitous to the King for some
preferment for him. His Majesty had formerly both known, and much valued him,
and had given him some hopes of a State employment, being much pleased that M.
Done attended him, especially at his meals, where there was usually many deep
discourses of Learning, and often friendly disputes of Religion betwixt the
King and those Divines whose places required their attendance on his Majesty:
Particularly, the Right Reverend Bishop Montague, then Deane of the Chapel,
(who was the publisher of the eloquent and learned Works of his Majesty) and
the most learned Doctor Andrews, then his Majesty's Almoner, and at his death
Bishop of Winchester.

About this time grew many disputes in England, that concerned the Oath of
Supremacy and Allegiance, in which the King had appeared and engaged himself
by his public writings now extant. And his Majesty occasionally talking with
M. Done concerning many of those Arguments urged by the Romanists, apprehended
such a validity and cleerenesse in his answers, that he commanded him to state
the Points, and bring his Reasons to him in writing; to which he presently
applied himself, and within six weeks brought them to his Majesty fairly
written under his own hand, as they be now printed in his Pseudo-Martyr.

When the King had read and considered that Book, he persuaded M. Done to
enter into the Ministry, to which he appeared (and was) un-inclinable,
apprehending it (such was his mistaking modesty) too weighty for his abilities.
But from that time, though many friends mediated with his Majesty to prefer
him to some civil employment, (to which his education had apted him) yet the
King denied their requests, and (having a discerning spirit) replied, I know M.
Done is a learned man, an excellent Divine, and will prove a powerful
Preacher. After that, as he professes In his Devotions, Expost. 8.
, the King descended almost to a solicitation of him to enter into sacred
Orders, which though he denied not, he deferred for the space of three years:
All which time he applied himself to an incessant study of Textuall Divinity,
and attained a greater perfection in the learned Languages, Greek and Hebrew.

Forwardness and inconsideration could not in him (as in many others) argue an
insufficiency; for he considered long, and had many strifes within himself
concerning the strictness of life, and competencie of learning required in
such as enter into sacred Orders: And doubtless (considering his own
demerits) did with meek Moses humbly ask God, Who am I? And if he had
consulted with flesh and blood, he had not put his hand to that holy plough:
But God who is able to prevail, wrastled with him, as the Angel did with
Jacob, Genesis 32.
and marked him for his own, marked him with a blessing, a blessing of
obedience to the motions of his blessed Spirit; And then as he had formerly
asked God humbly with Moses, Who am I? So now (being inspired with the
apprehension of Gods mercies) he did ask King David's thankful question, Lord
who am I that thou art so mindful of me? So mindful of me as to lead me for
more then forty years through a wilderness of the many temptations and various
turnings of a dangerous life? So mindful as to move the learned of Kings to
descend to move me to serve at thine Altar? So merciful to me as to move my
heart to embrace this holy motion? Thy motions I will embrace, take the cup of
salvation, call upon thy Name, and preach thy Gospel.

Such strifes as these S. Augustine had when S. Ambrose endeavored his
conversion to Christianity, with which he confesses he acquainted his dear
friend Alippius. Our learned Author (a man fit to write after no mean Copy)
did the like; and declaring his intentions to his dear friend D. King the then
worthy Bishop of London, (who was Chaplain to the Lord Chancellor in the time
of his being his Lordships Secretary) That Reverend Bishop most gladly received
the news, and with all convenient speed ordained him Deacon and Priest.

Now the English Church had gained a second S. Augustine, for I think none was
so like him before his conversion, none so like S. Ambrose after it. And if his
youth had the infirmities of the one Father, his age had the excellencies of
the other, the learning and holiness of both.

Now all his studies (which were occasionally diffused) were concentred in
Divinity; Now he had a new calling, new thoughts, new employment for his wit
and eloquence. Now all his earthly affections were changed into divine love,
and all the faculties of his soul were engaged in the conversion of others, in
preaching glad tidings, remission to repenting sinners, and peace to each
troubled soul: To this he applied himself with all care and diligence; and
such a change was wrought in him, Psalm. 84.
that he was gladder to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, then to enjoy
any temporal employment.

Presently after he entered into his holy Profession, the King made him his
Chaplain in Ordinary, and gave him other encouragements, promising to take a
particular care of him.

And though his long familiarity with persons of greatest quality was such as
might have given some men boldness enough to have preached to any eminent
Auditory; yet his modesty was such, that he could not be persuaded to it, but
went usually to preach in some private Churches, in Villages near London, till
his Majesty appointed him a day to preach to him. And though his Majesty and
others expected much from him, yet he was so happy (which few are) as to
satisfy and exceed their expectations: preaching the Word so, as showed he was
possessed with those joys that he labored to distill into others: A Preacher in
earnest, weeping sometimes for his Auditory, sometimes with them, always
preaching to himself, like an Angel from a cloud, though in none: carrying
some (as S. Paul was) to heaven, in holy raptures; enticing others, by a sacred
art and courtship, to amend their lives; and all this with a most particular
grace, and un-imitable fashion of speaking.

That Summer, the same month in which he was ordained Priest, (and made the
Kings Chaplain) his Majesty (going his Progress) was entreated to receive an
entertainment in the University of Cambridge, and M. Done attending his
Majesty there, his Majesty was pleased to recommend him to be made Doctor in
Divinity, Doctor Harsnet (after Archbishop of York) being then their
Vice Chancellor, who knowing him to be the Author of the Pseudo-Martyr, did
propose it to the University, and they presently granted it, expressing a
gladness they had an occasion to entitle and write him Theits.

His abilities and industry in his profession were so eminent, and he so much
loved by many persons of quality, that within one year after his entrance into
Sacred Orders, he had fourteen Advowsons of several Benefices sent unto him;
but they (being in the Country) could not draw him from his long loved friends
and London, to which he had a natural inclination, having received his birth
and breeding in it: desiring rather some preferment that might fix him to an
employment in that place.

Immediately after his return from Cambridge, his wife died, leaving him a man
of an unsettled estate: And (having buried five) the careful father of seven
children then living, to whom he made a voluntary promise (being then but forty
two years of age) never to bring them under the subjection of a Stepmother:
which promise he most faithfully kept, burying with his tears all his
sublunary joys in his most dear and deserving Wives grave, living a most
retired and solitary life.

In this retiredness, he was importuned by the grave Benchers of Lincolns
Inn, (once the friends of his youth) to accept of their Lecture, which (by
reason of M. Gatakers removal) was then void; of which he accepted, being glad
to renew his intermitted friendship with them, whom he so much loved, and where
he had been a Saul, (not so far as to persecute Christianity, yet in his
irregular youth to neglect the practice of it) to become a Paul, and preach
salvation to his brethren.

Nor did he preach only, but as S. Paul advised his Corinthians to be
followers of him as he was of Christ; so he also was an ocular direction to
them by a holy and harmless conversation.

Their love to him was expressed many ways; for (besides the fair lodgings that
were provided and furnished for him) other courtesies were daily accumulated, so
many, and so freely, as though they meant their gratitude (if possible) should
exceed, or at least equal his merit. In this love-strife of desert and
liberality, they continued for the space of three years, he constantly and
faithfully preaching, they liberally requiting him. About which time the
Emperor of Germany died, and the Palsgrave was elected and crowned King of
Bohemia, the unhappy beginning of much trouble in those Kingdoms.

King James, whose Motto, Beati Pacifici, did truly characterize his
disposition, endeavored to compose the differences of that discomposed State,
and to that end sent the Earl of Carlisle, (then Vicount Doncaster) his
Ambassador to those unsettled Princes, and (by a special command from his
Majesty) D. Done was appointed to attend the Embassage of the said Earl to
the Prince of the Union: For which the Earl (that had long known and loved
him) was most glad: So were many of the Doctors friends, who feared his
studies, Genesis 47.
and sadness for his wives death, would as Jacob says, make his days few,
and (respecting his bodily health) evil too.

At his going, he left his friends of Lincolnes Inn, and they him with many
reluctations; For though he could not say, as S. Paul to his Ephesians, Behold,
you to whom I have preached the kingdom of God, shall henceforth see my face no
more; yet he (being in a Consumption) questioned it, and they feared it,
considering his troubled mind, which, with the help of his un-intermitted
studies, hastened the decays of his weak body; But God turned it to the best,
for this employment did not only divert him from those serious studies and sad
thoughts, but gave him a new and true occasion of joy, to be an eyewitness of
the health of his honored Mistress, the Queen of Bohemia, in a foreign Land,
(who having formerly known him a Courtier) was most glad to see him in a
Canonical habit, and more glad to be an eare-witnesse of his most excellent
and powerful preaching.

Within fourteen months he returned to his friends of Lincolnes Inn, with his
sorrows much moderated, and his health improved.

About a year after his return from Germany, Dr Carry was made Bishop of
Exeter, and by his removal, the Deanery of S. Paul's being vacant, the King
appointed Doctor Done to wait on him at dinner the next day; And his Majesty
(being set down) before he eat any meat, said (after his pleasant manner)
Doctor Done, I have invited you to dinner, And though you sit not down with
me, yet I will carve to you of a dish that I know you love; you love London
well, I do therefore make you Deane of Paul's, take your meat home to your
study, say grace, and much good may it do you.

Immediately after he came to his Deanery, he employed workmen to repair the
Chapel belonging to his house; Psalm. 132.
Suffering (as holy David once vowed) his eyes and temples to take no rest,
until he had first beautified the house of God.

The next quarter following, when his Father in Law Sir George More, who now
admired and dearly loved him, came to pay him the conditioned sum of twenty
pound, he denied to receive it, And said to his Father, Genesis 45.
(as good Jacob said when he beard Joseph his son lived) It is enough, you
have been kind to me, and careful of mine, I am, I thank my God, provided
for, and will receive this money no longer; And not long after freely gave up
his bond of eight hundred pound.

Presently after he was settled in his Deanery, the Vicarage of S. Dunstans in
London fell to him by the death of Doctor White, The advowson being formerly
given to him by the right Honorable Richard Earl of Dorset a little before his
death, And confirmed to him by his Brother the right Honorable Edward Earl of
Dorset that now lives.

By these and another Ecclesiastical Endowment (which fell to him about the
same time) he was enabled to be charitable to the poor, and to make such
provision for his Children, that at his death they were not left scandalous to
his profession and quality.

The next Parliament following he was chosen Prolocutor to the Convocation, and
about that time, by the appointment of his Majesty, (his gracious Master) did
preach many occasional Sermons: All which he performed not only with the
approbation, but to the admiration of the representative body of the Clergy of
this Kingdom.

He was once (and but once) clouded with the Kings displeasure; It was about
this time, occasioned by some malicious whisperer, which assured the King
Doctor Done had preached a Sermon that implied a dislike of his government,
particularly of his late Directions that the Evening Lectures on Sundaies,
should be turned into Catechizing, expounding the Commandments, Belief, and
Lords Prayer. His Majesty was the more inclinable to believe this, for that
about the same time a person of the Nobility of great note in the Kingdom, and
favor with the King (whom his Majesty knew Doctor Done loved very much) was
discarded the Court, and presently after committed to prison, which begot many
rumors in the multitude.

The King suffered not the Sun to set, till he had searched out the truth of
this report, but sent presently for Doctor Done, and required his answer to
the accusation: which was so satisfactory, That the King said he was glad he
rested not under that suspicion. Doctor Done protested his answer was
faithful and free from all Collusion. And therefore begged of his Majesty,
that he might not rise (being then kneeling) before he had (as in like cases he
always had from God) some assurance that he stood clear and fair in his
Majesty's opinion. The King with his own hand, did, or offered to raise him
from his knees, and protested he was truly satisfied, that he was an honest
man, and loved him. Presently his Majesty called some Lords of his Council
into his Chamber, and said with much earnestness, My Doctor is an honest man;
And my Lords, I was never more joyed in anything that I have done, then in
making him a Divine.

He was made Deane in the fiftieth year of his age; And in the fifty fourth
year, a dangerous sickness seized him, which turned to a spotted Fever, and
ended in a Cough, that inclined him to a Consumption. But God (as Job
thankfully acknowledges) preserved his spirit, keeping his intellectualls as
clear and perfect, as when that sickness first seized his body. And as his
health increased, so did his thankfulness, testified in his book of
Devotions, A book that may not unfitly be called, A composition of holy
Ecstasies, occasioned, and appliable to the Emergencies of that sickness, which
book (being Meditations in his sickness) he writ on his sick bed; herein
imitating the holy Patriarchs, Genesis 12.7.8. Genesis 28.18.
who were wont in that place to build their Altars where they had received
their blessing.

This sickness brought him to the gates of death, and he saw the grave so
ready to devour him, that he calls his recovery supernatural. But God
restored his health, and continued it until the fifty-ninth year of his life.
And then in August 1630. being with his daughter Mistress Harvy at Abrey-Hatch
in Essex, he fell into a Fever, which with the help of his constant
infirmity, vapors from the spleen, hastened him into so visible a
Consumption, that his beholders might say (as S. Paul of himself) he dies
daily, And he might say with Job, Job 30.15. Job. 7.3.
My welfare passes away as a cloud; The days of affliction have taken hold of
me. And weary nights are appointed for me.

This sickness continued long, not only weakening, but wearing him so much,
that my desire is, he may now take some rest: And that thou judge it no
impertinent digression (before I speak of his death) to look back with me
upon some observations of his life, which (while a gentle slumber seises him)
may (I hope fitly) exercise thy Consideration.

His marriage was the remarkable error of his life, which (though he had a wit
apt enough, and very able to maintain paradoxes; And though his wives
competent years, and other reasons might be justly urged to moderate a severe
censure; yet) he never seemed to justify, and doubtless had repented it, if
God had not blessed them with a mutual, and so cordial an affection, as in the
midst of their sufferings made their bread of sorrow taste more pleasantly then
the banquet of fools.

The recreations of his youth were Poetry, in which he was so happy, as if
nature with all her varieties had been made to exercise his great wit, and high
fancy. And in those pieces which were carelessly scattered in his younger days
(most of them being written before the twentieth year of his age) it may
appear by his choice Metaphors, that all the Arts joined to assist him with
their utmost skill.

It is a truth, that in his penitential years, viewing some of those pieces
loosely scattered in his youth, he wished they had been abortive, or so
short-lived, that he had witnessed their funerals: But though he was no friend
to them, he was not so fallen out with heavenly Poetry, as to forsake it, no not
in his declining age, witnessed then by many divine Sonnets, and other high,
holy, and harmonious composures; yea even on his former sick bed, he wrote this
heavenly Hymn, expressing the great joy he then had in the assurance of Gods
mercy to him.

A Hymn to God the Father.
VVIlt thou forgive that sin where I begun,
Which was my sin, though it were done before?
Will thou forgive that sin through which I run;
And do run still, though still I do deplore?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
Will thou forgive that sin which I have won
Others to sin, and made my sin their door?
Will thou forgive that sin which I did shun
A year or two, but wallowed in, a score?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
I have a sin of fear, that when I have spun
My last thread, I shall perish on the shore;
But swear by thy self, that at my death thy Son
Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;
And, having done that, thou have done,
I fear no more.
And on this (which was his Deathbed) writ another Hymn which bears this
Title, A Hymn to God my God in my sickness.

If these fall under the censure of a soul whose too much mixture with earth
makes it unfit to judge of these high illuminations, let him know, that many
devout and learned men have thought the soul of holy Prudentius was most
refined, when not many days before his death, he charged it to present his God
each morning with a new and spiritual Song; justified by the examples of King
David, and the good King Hezekias, who upon the renovation of his years, paid
his grateful vows to God, in a royal hymn, Esaias 38.
which he concludes in these words, The Lord was ready to save, therefore we
will sing my songs to the stringed instruments, all the days of our life, in
the Temple of my God.

The later part of his life was a continued study, Saturdaies only excepted,
which he usually spent in visiting friends, and resting himself under the
weary burden of his weeks Meditations; And he gave himself this rest, that
thereby he might be refresht and enabled to do the work of the day following,
not negligently, but with courage and cheerfulness.

Nor was his age only so industrious, but in his most unsettled youth he was
(being in health) never known to be in bed after four of the clock in the
morning nor usually out of his chamber till ten; and employed that time
constantly (if not more) in his Study. Which, if it seem strange, may gain
belief by the visible fruits of his labors: some of which remain to testify
what is here written: for he left the resultance of 1400. Authors, most of them
analyzed with his own hand; He left sixscore Sermons also, all writ with his
own hand; A large and laborious Treatise concerning Self-murder, called
Biathanatose, wherein all the Laws violated by that act, are diligently
survayed, and judiciously censured; A Treatise written in his youth, which
alone might declare him then, not only perfect in the Civil and Canon Law, but
in many other such studies and arguments as enter not into the consideration of
many professed Scholars, that labor to be thought learned Clerks, and to know
all things.

Nor were these only found in his Study, but all businesses that past of any
public consequence in this or any of our neighbor Kingdoms, he abbreviated
either in Latin, or in the Language of the Nation, and kept them by him for a
memorial. So he did the Copies of diverse Letters and Cases of Conscience that
had concerned his friends, (with his solutions) and diverse other businesses of
importance, all particularly and methodically digested by himself.

He did prepare to leave the world before life left him, making his Will when
no faculty of his soul was dampt or defective by sickness, or he surprised
by sudden apprehension of death; But with mature deliberation, expressing
himself an impartial Father, by making his Childrens Portions equal; a
constant lover of his friends, by particular Legacies, discreetly chosen, and
fitly bequeathed them; And full of charity to the poor, and many others, who
by his long continued bounty might entitle themselves His almes-people. For all
these he made provision, so largely, as having six children, might to some
appear more then proportionable to his estate. The Reader may think the
particulars tedious, but I hope not impertinent, that I present him with the
beginning and conclusion of his last Will.

IN the name of the blessed and glorious Trinity, Amen. I John Done, by the
mercy of Christ Jesus, and the calling of the Church of England, Priest, being
at this time in good and perfect understanding, (praised be God therefore) do
hereby make my last Will and Testament in manner and form following.

First, I give my gracious God an entire sacrifice of body and soul, with my
most humble thanks for that assurance which his blessed Spirit imprints in me
now of the salvation of the one, and of the resurrection of the other; And for
that constant and cheerful resolution which the same Spirit established in me,
to live and die in the Religion now professed in the Church of England: In
expectation of that Resurrection I desire my body may be buried (in the most
private manner that may be) in that place of S. Paul's Church London, that the
now Residentiaries have at my request assigned for that purpose, etc.

And this my last Will and Testament made in the fear of God, (whose merit I
humbly beg, and constantly rely upon in Jesus Christ) and in perfect love and
charity with all the world, whose pardon I ask from the lowest of my servants
to the highest of my Superiors. Written all with mine own hand, and my name
subscribed to every Page, being five in number.

Nor was his charity expressed only at his death, but in his life, by a
cheerful and frequent visitation of friends, whose minds were dejected, or
fortunes necessitous. And he redeemed many out of Prison that lay for small
debts, or for their fees; He was a continual giver to poor Scholars, both of
this, and foreign Nations; (besides what he gave with his own hand) he
usually sent a servant to all the Prisons in London, to distribute his charity,
at all festival times in the year. He gave 100. l. at one time to a Gentleman
that he had formerly known live plentifully, and was then decayed in his
estate. He was a happy Reconciler of of differences in many Families of his
friends and kindred, who had such faith in his judgment and impartiality, that
he scarce ever advised them to any thing in vain. He was (even to her death) a
most dutiful son to his Mother, careful to provide for her supportation, of
which she had been destitute, but that God raised him up to prevent her
necessities; who having sucked in the Religion of the Roman Church with her
mothers milk, (or presently after it) spent her estate in foreign Countries,
to enjoy a liberty in it, and died in his house but three months before him.

And to the end it may appear how just a Steward he was of his Lord and
Masters Revenue, I have thought fit to let the Reader know, that after his
entrance into his Deanery, as he numbered his years, and (at the foot of a
private account, to which God and Angels only were witnesses with him)
computed first his Revenue, then his expenses, then what was given to the poor
and pious uses, lastly, what rested for him and for his, he blessed each years
poor remainder with a thankful Prayer; which for that they discover a more
then common devotion, the Reader shall partake some of them in his own words.

1624. So all is that remains of these two years

1625. So all is that remains of these two years

Deo Opt. Max. benigno Largitori, a me, and ab iis quibus haec a me
reservantur, gloria, and gratia in aeternum. Amen.

1626. So that this year God has blessed me and mine with

Multiplicatae sunt super nos misericordiae tuae Domine.

Da Domine, ut quae ex immensa bonitate tua nobis elargiri dignatus sis, in
quorumcunque manus devenerint, in tuam semper cedant gloriam. Amen.

1628. In fine horum sex annorum manet

1629.

Quid habeo, quod non accepi a Domino? Largiatur etiam, ut quae largitus est,
sua iterum fiant bono eorum usu, ut quemadmodum, nec officiis hujus mundi, nec
loci, in quo me posuit, dignitati, nec servis, nec egenis, in toto hujus anni
curriculo, mihi conscius sum, me defuisse, ita ut libert, quibus quae
supersunt, supersunt, grato animo ea accipiant, and beneficum Authorem
recognoscant. Amen.

But I return from my digression.

We left the Author sick in Essex, where he was forced to spend most of that
Winter, by reason of his disability to remove from thence. And having never
during almost twenty years, omitted his personal attendance on his Majesty,
in his monthly service. Nor being ever left out of the number of Lent
Preachers. And in January following, there being a general report that he was
dead, that report occasioned this Letter to a familiar friend.

SIR,
THis advantage you and my other friends have by my frequent fevers, that I am
so much the oftener at the gates of heaven; And this advantage by the solitude
and close imprisonment that they reduce me to after, that I am so much the
oftener at my Prayers, in which I shall never leave out your happiness; And I
doubt not but amongst his other blessings, God will add some one to you for my
Prayers.

A man would be almost content to die, (if there were no other benefit in
death) to hear of so much sorrow, and so much good testimony from good men, as
I (God be blessed for it) did upon the report of my death: Yet I perceive it
went not through all; For one writ to me, that some (and he said of my friends)
conceived I was not so ill as I pretended, but withdrew my self to live at
ease, discharged of preaching. It is an unfriendly, and (God knows) an
ungrounded interpretation; for I have always been sorrier when I could not
preach, then any could be they could not hear me. It has been my desire (and
God may be pleased to grant it) that I might die in the Pulpit; If not that,
yet that I might take my death in the Pulpit, that is, die the sooner by
occasion of those labors. Sir, I hope to see you presently after Candlemas,
about which time will fall my Lent Sermon at Court, except my Lord Chamberlain
believe me to be dead, and leave me out: For as long as I live, and am not
speechless, I would not willingly decline that service. I have better leisure
to write, then you to read, yet I would not willingly oppress you with too
much Letter: God bless you and your son, as I wish

January 7. 1630. Your poor friend and servant in Christ Jesus, John Done.


Before that month ended, he was appointed to preach upon his old constant day,
the first Friday in Lent, he had notice of it; and having in his sickness
prepared for the employment as he had long thirsted for it. So resolving his
weakness should not hinder his journey, he came to London some few days
before his day appointed. Being come, many of his friends (who with sorrow saw
his sickness had left him only so much flesh as did cover his bones) doubted
his strength to perform that task: And therefore persuaded him from
undertaking it, assuring him however, it was like to shorten his days: But he
passionately denied their requests, saying, He would not doubt, that God who in
many weaknesses had assisted him with an unexpected strength, would now
withdraw it in his last employment, professing a holy ambition to perform that
sacred Work. And when (to the amazement of some beholders) he appeared in the
Pulpit, many thought he presented himself, not to preach mortification by a
living voice, but mortality by a decayed body, and dying face. And doubtless
many did secretly ask that question in Ezekiel, Do these bones live? Ezekiel.
37.3.
Or can that soul organize that tongue to speak so long time as the sand in
that glass will move toward its center, and measure out an hour of this
dying man's unspent life? Doubtless it cannot. Yet after some faint pauses in
his zealous Prayer, his strong desires enabled his weak body to discharge his
memory of his pre conceived Meditations which were of dying; The Text being, To
God the Lord belong the issues from death. Many that saw his tears, and heard
his hollow voice, professing they thought the Text Prophetically chosen, and
that D. Done had preached his own Funeral Sermon.

Being full of joy that God had enabled him to perform this desired duty, he
hastened to his house, out of which he never moved, until like S. Stephen, Acts
8.
He was carried by devout men to his grave: And the next day after his Sermon,
his spirits being much spent, and he indisposed to discourse, a friend asked
him, Why are you sad? To whom he replied after this manner, I am not sad; I am
in a serious contemplation of the mercies of my God to me; And now I plainly
see, it was his hand that prevented me from all temporal employment. And I see
it was his will that I should never settle nor thrive until I entered into the
Ministry, in which I have now lived almost twenty years, (I hope to his
glory) and by which (I most humbly thank him) I have been enabled to requite
most of those friends that showed me kindness when my fortunes were low. And
(as it has occasioned the expression of my gratitude) I thank God, most of
them have stood in need of my requital. I have been useful and comfortable to
my good Father in Law Sir George More, whose patience God has been pleased to
exercise by many temporal crosses. I have maintained my own Mother, whom it
has pleased God after a plentiful fortune in her former times, to bring to a
great decay in her very old age. I have quieted the consciences of many that
groaned under the burden of a wounded spirit, whose Prayers I hope are
availeable for me. I cannot plead innocence of life, (especially of my youth)
but I am to be judged by a merciful God, who has given me (even at this time)
some testimonies by his holy Spirit, that I am of the number of his Elect. I am
full of joy, and shall die in peace.

Upon Monday following, he took his last leave of his beloved Study, and being
hourly sensible of his decay, retired himself into his bedchamber: and that
week sent (at several times) for many of his most considerable friends, of
whom he took a solemn and deliberate Farewell, commending to their
considerations some sentences particularly useful for the regulation of their
lives, and dismissed them (as Genesis 49.
Jacob did his sons) with a spiritual benediction. The Sunday following, he
appointed his servants, that if there were any worldly business undone, that
concerned them or himself, it should be prepared against Saturday next; for
after that day he would not mix his thoughts with any thing that concerned the
world. Nor ever did.

Now he had nothing to do but die; To do which, he stood in need of no more
time, for he had long studied it, and to such a perfection, that in a former
sickness he called God to witness, Devot. Prayer 23.
he was that minute prepared to deliver his soul into his hands, if that
minute God would accept of his dissolution. In that sickness he begged of his
God, (the God of constancy) to be preserved in that estate for ever. And his
patient expectation to have his immortal soul disrobed from her garment of
mortality, makes me confident he now had a modest assurance, that his prayers
were then heard, and his petition granted. He lay fifteen days earnestly
expecting his hourly change; And in the last hour of his last day, (as his
body melted away, and vapoured into spirit) his soul having (I verily believe)
some revelation of the Beatifical Vision, he said, I were miserable, if I might
not die: And after those words, closed many periods of his faint breath with
these words, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done. His speech which had long
been his faithful servant, remained with him till his last minute; and then
forsook him, not to serve another master, but died before him, for that it was
useless to him, who now conversed with God on earth, (as Angels are said to
do in heaven) only by thoughts and looks. Being speechless, he did (as S.
Stephen) look steadfastly toward heaven, till he saw the Son of God standing
at the right hand of his Father; And being satisfied with this blessed sight,
(as his soul ascended, and his last breath departed from him) he closed his
own eyes, and then disposed his hands and body into such a posture, as
required no alteration by those that came to shroud him.

Thus variable, thus virtuous was the life, thus memorable, thus exemplary was
the death of this most excellent man.

He was buried in S. Paul's Church, in that place which he had appointed for
that use, some years before his death, and by which he passed daily to his
devotions. But not buried privately, though he desired it; For (besides an
unnumbred number of others) many persons of Nobility and eminency, who did love
and honor him in his life, did show it at his Funeral, by a voluntary and
very sad attendance of his body to the grave.

To which (after his burial) some mournful friends repaired: And as Alexander
the Great did to the grave of the famous Achillis, Plutarch.
so they strewed his with curious and costly flowers. Which course they (who
were never yet known) continued each morning and evening for diverse days, not
ceasing till the stones that were taken up in that Church to give his body
admission into the cold earth, (now his bed of rest) were again by the Masons
art levelled and firmed, as they had been formerly, and his place of burial
undistinguishable to common view.

Nor was this (though not usual) all the honor done to his reverend ashes;
for by some good body, (who, it is like thought his memory ought to be
perpetuated) there was 100. marks sent to his two faithful friends D. Henry
King. D. Mountfort.
and Executors, (the person that sent it, not yet known, they look not for a
reward on earth) toward the making of a Monument for him, which I think is as
lively a representation, as in dead marble can be made of him.

HE was of stature moderately tall; of a straight and equally proportioned
body, to which all his words and actions gave an unexpressible addition of
comeliness.

His aspect was cheerful, and such as gave a silent testimony of a clear
knowing soul, and of a conscience at peace with it self.

His melting eye showed he had a soft heart, full of noble pity, of too brave a
spirit to offer injuries, and too much a Christian, not to pardon them in
others.

His fancy was un-imitable high, equalled by his great wit, both being made
useful by a commanding judgment.

His mind was liberal, and unwearied in the search of knowledge, with which
his vigorous soul is now satisfied, and employed in a continual praise of
that God that first breathed it into his active body, which once was a Temple
of the holy Ghost, and is now become a small quantity of Christian dust. But I
shall see it re-inanimated.

Iz: Wa:

JOHANNES DONE SAC: THEOL: PROFESSOR, POST VARIA STUDIA, QVIBUS AB ANNIS
TENERRIMIS FIDELITER, NEC INFELICITER, INCUBUIT, INSTINCTU ET IMPULSU SPIR:
Sti: MONITU ET HORTATU REGIS IACOBI, ORDINES SACROS AMPLEXUS Ao: SUI JESU 1614.
ET SUAE AETATIS 42.

DECANATU HUJUS ECCLESIAE INDUTUS XXVII. NOVEMBRIS 1621.

EXUTUS MORTE ULTIMO DIE MARTII. 1631.

Hic licet in Occiduo Cinere Aspicit Eum Cujus Nomen est ORIENS.

A Table directing to the several Texts of SCRIPTURE, handled by the Author in
this BOOK.
SERMON. I. COLOS. 1.19, 20. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell; And having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by Him,
to reconcile all things to himself, by Him, whether they be things in earth,
or things in heaven. page 1 SERMON. II. ESAIAH. 7.14. Therefore the Lord shall
give you a sign; Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall
call his name Immanuel. pa. 11 SERMON. III. GALAT. 4.4, and 5. But when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons. pa. 20 SERMON. IV. LUKE 2.29. and 30. Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen
thy salvation. pa. 29. SERMON. V. EXODUS 4.13. O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the
hand of him whom thou will send. pa. 39 SERMON. VI. Lord, who has believed our
report? pa. 52 SERMON. VII. JOHN 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly. pa. 62 SERMON. VIII. MAT. 5.16. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven. pa. 77 SERMON. IX. ROMANS 13.7. Render therefore to all
men their dues. pa. 86 SERMON. X. ROMANS 12.20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger
feed him, if he thirst give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap coals of
fire on his head. pa. 96 SERMON. XI. MAT. 9.2. And Jesus seeing their faith, said
unto the sick of the palsy, My son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee. pa. 102 SERMON. XII. MAT. 5.2. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. pa. 112 SERMON. XIII. JOB 16. ver. 17, 18, 19. Not for any
injustice in my hands: Also my prayer is pure. O earth, cover thou not my
blood; and let my cry have no place. Also now behold, my Witness is in heaven,
and my Record is on high. pa. 127 SERMON. XIV. AMOS 5.18. Woe unto you, that
desire the day of the Lord: what have ye to do with it? the day of the Lord is
darkness, and not light. pa. 136 SERMON. XV. 1 COR 15.26. The last Enemy that
shall be destroyed, is Death. pa. 144 SERMON. XVI. JOHN 11.35. Jesus wept. pa.
153 SERMON. XVII. MAT. 19.17. And he said unto him, Why call thou me Good?
There is none Good but One; that is, God. pa. 163 SERMON. XVIII. ACTS 2.36.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, That God has made that
same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. pa. 175 SERMON. XIX.
APOC. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection.
pa. 183 SERMON. XX. JOHN 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming,
in the which, all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice; And shall come
forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life; And they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnation. pa. 192 SERMON. XXI. 1 COR.
15.29. Else what shall they do that are baptized for dead? If the dead rise not
at all, why are they then baptized for dead? pa. 120 SERMON. XXII. HEB. 11.35.
Women received their dead raised to life again: And others were tortured, not
accepting a deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. pa. 213
SERMON. XXIII. 1 COR. 13.12. For now we see through a glass darkly, But then
face to face; Now I know in part, But then I shall know, even as also I am
known. pa. 224 SERMON. XXIV. JOB 4.18. Behold, he put no trust in his Servants,
and his Angels he charged with folly. pa. 233 SERMON. XXV. MAT. 28.6. He is not
here, for he is risen, as he said; Come, See the place where the Lord lay. pa.
242 SERMON. XXVI. 1 THESE. 4.17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and
so shall we be ever with the Lord. pa. 254 SERMON. XXVII. PSALM. 89.47. What man
is he that lives, and shall not see death? pa. 267 SERMON. XXVIII. and XXIX.
JOHN 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. pa. 277. and 286 SERMON. XXX. JOHN
14.20. At that day shall ye know, That I am in my Father, and you in me, and I
in you. pa. 294 SERMON. XXXI. GENESIS 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face
of the waters. pa. 303 SERMON. XXXII. 1 COR. 12.3. Also no man can say, that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. p. 312 SERMON. XXXIII. ACTS. 10.44.
While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them, which heard
the Word. pa. 321 SERMON. XXXIV. ROMANS 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of God. pa. 332 SERMON. XXXV. MAT.
12.31. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; But the Blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men. pa. 341
SERMON. XXXVI. and XXXVII. JOHN 16.8, 9, 10, 11. And when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin,
because ye believe not on me. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father,
and ye see me no more. Of judgment, because the Prince of this world is
judged. pa. 351. and 361

SERMON. XXXVIII. 2 COR. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. pa. 375 SERMON. XXXIX.
1 PET. 1.17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according to every man's works, pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear. pa. 384 SERMON. XL. 1 COR. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. pa. 393 SERMON. XLI. PSALM. 2.12. Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry. pa. 403 SERMON. XLII. GENESIS 18.25. Shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do right? pa. 412 SERMON. XLIII. MAT. 3.17. And lo, A voice came
from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. pa.
423 SERMON. XLIV. REV. 4.8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about
him, and they were full of eyes within; And they rest not day and night,
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
pa. 432 SERMON. XLV. APOC. 7.2, 3. And I saw another Angel ascending from the
East, which had the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to
the four Angels, to whom power was given to hurt the Earth, and the Sea,
saying, Hurt ye not the Earth, neither the Sea, neither the Trees, till we
have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. pa. 445 SERMON. XLVI.
ACTS 9.4. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? pa. 459 SERMON. XLVII. ACTS 20.25. And now, Behold, I know,
that all ye among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my
face no more. pa. 468 SERMON. XLVIII. ACTS 28.6. They changed their minds, and
said, That he was a God. pa. 476
SERMON. XLIX. ACTS 23.6, 7. But when Paul perceived that one part were Sadduces,
and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the Council, Men and Brethren, I am a
Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee; Of the hope and resurrection of the dead I
am called in question. And when he had so said, there arose a dissension
between the Pharisees and the Sadduces, and the multitude was divided. pa. 487

SERMON. L. PSALM. 6.1. O Lord, Rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me
in thy hot displeasure. pa. 499 SERMON. LI. PSALM. 6.2, 3. Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed: My soul is
also sore vexed; But thou, O Lord, how long? pa. 209
SERMON. LII. and LIII. PSALM. 6.4, 5. Return, O Lord; Deliver my soul; O Lord
save me, for thy mercies sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee;
and in the grave, who shall give thee thanks? pa. 522. and pa. 530

SERMON. LIVE. PSALM. 6.6, 7. I am weary with my groaning; All the night make I my
bed to swim, I water my couch with my tears. Mine eye is consumed because of
grief; It waxes old, because of all mine enemies. pa. 535

SERMON. LV. PSALM. 6.8, 9, 10. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for
the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord has heard my
supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer. Let all mine enemies be ashamed
and sore vexed: let them return and be ashamed suddenly. pa. 548

SERMON. LVI. PSALM. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose
sin is covered; Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity,
and in whose spirit there is no guile. pa. 560
SERMON. LVII. PSALM. 32.3, 4. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my
roaring all the day long. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my
moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. Selah. pa. 571

SERMON. LVIII. PSALM. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. pa. 582 SERMON. LIX. PSALM. 32.6. For this
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be
found; surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him.
pa. 592 SERMON. LX. PSALM. 32.7. Thou art my hiding place; Thou shall preserve me
from trouble; Thou shall compass me about with songs of deliverance. pa. 601
SERMON. LXI. PSALM. 32.8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which
thou shall go, I will guide thee with mine eye. pa. 609 SERMON. LXII. PSALM.
32.9. Be not as the Horse, or the Mule, which have no understanding; whose
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee. p.
619
SERMON. LXIII. PSALM. 32.10, 11. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked; But he that
trusts in the Lord, Mercy shall compass him about. Be glad in the Lord, and
rejoice ye righteous; And shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. pa.
629

SERMON. LXIV. PSALM. 51.7. Purge me with Hyssope, and I shall be clean; wash me,
and I shall be whiter then snow. pa. 639 SERMON. LXV. PSALM. 62.9. Surely men of
low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; To be laid in the
balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. pa. 643 SERMON. LXVI. PSALM.
63.7. Because thou have been my help, Therefore in the shadow of thy wings will
I rejoice. pa. 663 SERMON. LXVII. PSALM. 64.10. And all the upright in heart shall
glory. pa. 673 SERMON. LXVIII. PSALM. 65.5. By terrible things in righteousness
will thou answer us, O God of our salvation; who art the confidence of all the
ends of the earth, and of them that are a far off upon the Sea. pa. 683 SERMON.
LXIX. PSALM. 66.3. Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! Through the
greatness of thy Power shall thine Enemies submit themselves unto thee. pa.
695 SERMON. LXX. PROVE. 25.16. Have thou found Honey? eat so much as is sufficient
for thee, lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it. 709
SERMON. LXXI. and LXXII. MAT. 4.18, 19, 20. And Jesus walking by the Sea of
Galile, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a
net into the Sea, (for they were fishers.) And he says unto them, Follow me,
and I will make you fishers of men. And they straightway left their nets and
followed him. pa. 717. and 726

SERMON. LXXIII. JOHN 14.2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions; If it were not
so, I would have told you. pa. 737 SERMON. LXXIV. PSALM. 144.15. Blessed are the
people that be so; Yea blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. pa. 749
SERMON. LXXV. ESAIAS 32.8. But the liberal devises liberal things, and by
liberal things he shall stand. pa. 758 SERMON. LXXVI. MARK 16.16. He that
believes not, shall be damned. pa. 766 SERMON. LXXVII. and LXXVIII. 1 COR.
15.29. Else, what shall they do which are baptized for the dead? if the dead
rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead? pa. 777. and 790
SERMON. LXXIX. PSALM. 90.14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may
rejoice and be glad all our days. pa. 803 SERMON. LXXX. JOHN 11.21. Lord, if
thou had been here, my brother had not dyed. pa. 816
NOVEMBER. 29. 1639.

Imprimatur, THO: BROUN.

SERMONS Preached upon Christmas Day.
SERMON I. PREACHED AT St. PAVLS, upon Christmas day. 1622.
Coloss. 1.19, 20. For, it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell; And, having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by Him, to
reconcile all things to himself, by Him, whether they be things in Earth, or
things in heaven.


THE whole journey of a Christian is in these words; and therefore we were
better set out early, then ride too fast; better enter presently into the
parts, then be forced to pass through them too hastily. First then we consider
the Collation and Reference of the Text, and then the Illation, and Inference
thereof. For, the Text looks back to all that was said from the twelfth verse.
For, the first word of the text, [For] which is a particle of connection, as
well as of argumentation, is a seal of all that was said from that place. And
then, the Text looks forward to the 23 ver. where all these blessings are
sealed to us, with that Condition, If ye continue settled in the Gospel. This
is the Collation, the Reference of the text; for the Illation, and Inference,
the first clause thereof, [For, it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell] presents a double Instruction; First, that we are not bound to
accept matters of Religion, merely without all reason, and probable
inducements; And secondly, with what modesty we are to proceed, and in what
bounds we are to limit that inquisition, that search of Reason in matters of
that nature. When the Apostle presents to us here, the great mystery of our
reconciliation to God, he, in whose power it was not to infuse faith into every
reader of his Epistle, proceeds by reason. He tells us, V. 13.
That the Father has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, the Son
of his love. That were well, if we were sure of it; If our consciences did not
accuse us, and suggest to us our own unworthiness, and thereby an
impossibility of being so translated. Why no, says the Apostle, V. 14.
there is no such impossibility now, For, Now we have Redemption, and
forgiveness of sins. Who should procure us that? If a man sin against God,
who shall plead for him? What man is able to mediate, 1 Samuel 2.25.
and stand in the gap between God and man? You say true, says the Apostle, no
man is able to do it; and therefore, He that is the Image of the invisible
God, V. 15.
he by whom all things were created, and by whom all things consist, he has
done it. Has God reconciled me to God; And reconciled me by way of
satisfaction? (for, that I know his justice requires) What could God pay for
me? What could God suffer? God himself could not; V. 18.
and therefore God has taken a body that could. And as he is the Head of that
body, he is passible, so he may suffer; And, as he is the first born of the
dead, he did suffer; so that he was defective in nothing; not in Power, as God,
not in passibility, as man; for, Complacuit; It pleased the Father, that in
him, All fullness (a full capacity to all purposes) should dwell. Thus far we
are to trace the reason of our redemption, intimated in that first word, For.
And then, we are to limit and determine our reason in the next, Quia
complacuit, because it was his will, his pleasure to proceed so, and no
otherwise. Christ himself goes no farther then so, Mat. 11.25.
in a case of much strangeness, That God had hid his mysteries from the wise,
and revealed them unto babes; This was a strange course, but Ita est, quia,
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. I would feign be able to
prove to my self that my redemption is accomplished; and therefore I search
the Scriptures; and I grow sure that Christ has redeemed the world; and I
search the Scriptures again, to find what marks are upon them, that are of the
participation of that Redemption, and I grow to a religious, and modest
assurance, that those marks are upon me. I find reasons to prove to me, that
God does love my soul; but why God should love men better then his own Son, or
why God should love me better then other men, I must end in the reason of the
text, Quia complacuit, and in the reason of Christ himself, Ita est, quia, It
is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was it should be so.

To pass then from the Collation and Reference, Divisio.
by which, the text has his Cohaerence with the precedent, and subsequent
passages, and the Illation and Inference, by which you have seen the general
doctrine, That reason is not to be excluded in religion, but yet to be tenderly
and modestly pressed, we have here the Person that redeemed us, and his
Qualification for that great office, (That all fullness should dwell in him.)
And then we have the Pacification, and the Means thereof, (Peace was made
through the blood of his Cross) And then, the Effect, the application of all
this, to them, for whom it was wrought, (That all things in earth and heaven,
might be reconciled to God by him.) In the qualification of the person, we
find plenitudinem, fullness, and omnem plenitudinem, all fullness; and omnem
plenitudinem inhabitantem, all fullness dwelling, permanent. And yet, even this
dwelling fullness, even in this person Christ Jesus, by no title of merit in
himself, but only quia complacuit, because it pleased the Father it should be
so. In the pacification, (which is our second part) (Peace was made, by the
blood of his Cross) we shall see first, quod bellum, what the war was, and
then quae pax, what the peace is, and lastly quis modus, how this peace was
made, which was strange; per sanguinem, by blood; to save blood, and yet by
blood. And per sanguinem ejus, by his blood, his, who was victoriously to
triumph in this peace; and per sanguinem Crucis ejus, by the blood of his
Cross, that is his death; the blood of his Circumcision, the blood of his
Agony, the blood of his scourging was not enough; It must be, and so it was the
blood of his Cross; And these pieces constitute our second part, the
Pacification: And then in the third, the Application, (That all things might be
reconciled to God,) we shall see first, what this Reconciliation is, and then
how it extends to all things on earth, (which we might think were not capable
of it;) and all things in heaven, (which we might think stood in no need of
it.) And in these three parts, The person and his qualification, The thing it
self, The Pacification, The effect of this, The Reconciliation, the
Application, we shall determine all.

First, 1. Part. Plenitudo.
In the person that redeemes us we find fullness. And there had need be so;
for, he found our measure full of sin toward God, and Gods measure full of
anger toward us; for our parts, as when a River swells, at first it will find
out all the channels, or lower parts of the bank, and enter there, but after a
while it covers, and overflowes the whole field, and all is water without
distinction; so, though we be naturally channels of concupiscencies, (for there
sin begins, and as water runs naturally in the veins and bowels of the earth,
Genesis 6.5.
so run concupiscencies naturally in our bowels) yet, when every imagination of
the thoughts of our heart, is only evil continually; Then, (as it did there)
it induces a flood, a deluge, our concupiscence swells above all channels, and
actually overflowes all; It has found an issue at the ear, we delight in the
defamation of others; and an issue at the eye, Psalm. 50.18. Psalm. 12.4.
If we see a thief, we run with him; we concur in the plots of supplanting
and destroying other men; It has found an issue in the tongue, Our lips are
our own, who is Lord over us? We speak freely; seditious speeches against
superiors, obscene and scurrile speeches against one another, profane and
blasphemous speeches against God himself, are grown to be good jests, and
marks of wit, and arguments of spirit. It finds an issue at our hands, they
give way to oppression, by giving bribes; and an issue at our feet, They are
swift to shed blood; and so by custom, sin overflowes all, Omnia pontus, all
our ways are sea, all our works are sin. This is our fullness, original sin
filled us, actual sin presses down the measure, and habitual sins heap it up.
And then Gods measure of anger was full too; from the beginning he was a
jealous God, and that should have made us careful of our behavior, that a
jealous eye watched over us. But because we see in the world, that jealous
persons are oftnest deceived, because that distemper disorders them, so as that
they see nothing clearly, and it puts the greater desire in the other, to
deceive, because it is some kind of Victory, and Triumph to deceive a jealous,
and watchful person, therefore we have hoped to go beyond God too, and his
jealousy. But he is jealous of his honor, jealous of his jealousy, he will
not have his jealousy despised, nor forgotten, for therefore he visits upon
the children, to the third and fourth generation; when therefore the spirit of
jealousy was come upon him, Numb. 5.14.
and that he had prepared that water of bitterness, which was to rot our
bowels, that is, when God had bent all his bows, drawn forth, and whetted all
his swords, when he was justly provoked, to execute all the Judgments
denounced in all the Prophets, upon all mankind, when man's measure was full of
sin, and Gods measure full of wrath, then was the fullness of time, and yet
then Complacuit, It pleased the Father, that there should be another fullness
to overflow all these, in Christ Jesus.

But what fullness is that? Omnis plenitudo, all fullness. And this was only
in Christ. Omnis plenitudo. 2 Reg. 2.9. Acts 6.5. Acts 9.36.
Elias had a great portion of the spirit: but, but a portion. Elizaeus sees
that that portion will not serve him, and therefore he asks a double portion of
that spirit; but still but portions. Stephen is full of faith; a blessed
fullness, where there is no corner for Infidelity, nor for doubt, for scruple,
nor irresolution. Dorcas is full of good works; a fullness above faith; for
there must be faith, before there can be good works; so that they are above
faith, as the tree is above the root, and as the fruit is above the tree. The
Virgin Mary is full of Grace; and Grace is a fullness above both; above faith
and works too, for that is the means to preserve both; That we fall not from
our faith, Eccles. 10.1.
and that dead flies corrupt not our ointment, that worldly mixtures do not
vitiate our best works, and the memory of past sins, dead sins, do not beget
new sins in us, is the operation of Grace. The seven Deacons were full of the
Holy Ghost, and of Wisdom; Acts 6.3.
full of Religion toward God, and full of such wisdom as might advance it
toward men; full of zeal, and full of knowledge; full of truth, and full of
discretion too. And these were plenitudines, fulnesses, but they were not all,
Omnis plenitudo, all fullness. I shall be as full as St. Paul, in heaven; I
shall have as full a vessel, but not so full a Cellar; I shall be as full, but
I shall not have so much to fill. Christ only has an infinite content, and
capacity, an infinite room and receipt, and then an infinite fullness; omnem
capacitatem, and omnem plenitudinem; He would receive as much as could be
infused, and there was as much infused, as he could receive.

But what shall we say? Deus adimplendus; was Christ God before, and are these
accessory, supplementary, additionall fulnesses to be put to him? A fullness to
be added to God? To make him a competent person to redeem man, something was
to be added to Christ, though he were God; wherein we see to our inexpressible
confusion of face, and consternation of spirit, the incomprehensiblenesse of
man's sin, that even to God himself, there was required something else then
God, before we could be redeemed; there was a fullness to be added to God, for
this work, to make it omnem plenitudinem, for Christ was God before; there was
that fullness; but God was not Christ before; there lacked that fullness. Not
disputing therefore, what other ways God might have taken for our redemption,
but giving him all possible thanks for that way which his goodness has
chosen, by the way of satisfying his justice, (for, howsoever I would be glad
to be discharged of my debts any way, yet certainly, I should think my self
more beholden to that man, who would be content to pay my debt for me, then to
him that should entreat my creditor to forgive me my debt) for this work, to
make Christ able to pay this debt, there was something to be added to him.
First, he must pay it in such money as was lent; in the nature and flesh of
man; for man had sinned, and man must pay. And then it was lent in such money
as was coined even with the Image of God; man was made according to his Image:
That Image being defaced, in a new Mint, in the womb of the Blessed Virgin,
there was new money coined; The Image of the invisible God, the second person
in the Trinity, was imprinted into the humane nature. And then, that there
might be omnis plenitudo, all fullness, as God, for the payment of this debt,
sent down the Bullion, and the stamp, that is, God to be conceived in man, and
as he provided the Mint, the womb of the Blessed Virgin, so has he provided an
Exchequer, where this money is issued; that is his Church, where his merits
should be applied to the discharge of particular consciences. Coloss. 2.9.
So that here is one fullness, that in this person dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily. Here is another fullness, that this person fulfilled all
righteousness, and satisfied the Justice of God by his suffering; Thren. 1.12.
non est dolor sicut, there was no sorrow like unto his sorrow; It was so full
that it exceeded all others. And then there is a third fullness, the Church,
Ephesians. 1.23.
(which is his body, the fullness of him, that fills all in all) perfect God,
there is the fullness of his dignity; perfect man, there is the fullness of his
passibility; and a perfect Church, there is the fullness of the distribution of
his mercies, and merits to us. And this is omnis plenitudo, all fullness; which
yet is farther extended in the next word, Inhabitavit, It pleased the Father,
that all fullness should dwell in him.

The Holy Ghost appeared in the Dove, Inhabitavit. Remigius.
but he did not dwell in it. The Holy Ghost has dwelt in holy men, but not
thus; So, as that ancient Bishop expresses it, Habitavit in Salomone per
sapientiam, He dwelt in Solomon, in the spirit of wisdom; in Joseph, in the
spirit of chastity; in Moses, in the spirit of meekness; but in Christo, in
plenitudine, in Christ, in all fullness. Now this fullness is not fully
expressed in the Hypostaticall union of the two natures; God and Man in the
person of Christ. For, (concerning the divine Nature) here was not a dram of
glory in this union. This was a strange fullness, for it was a fullness of
emptiness; It was all Humiliation, all exinanition, all evacuation of
himself, by his obedience to the death of the Cross. But when it was done, Ne
evacuaretur Crux Christi, 1 Cor. 1.17.
(as the Apostle speaks in another case) lest the Cross of Christ should be
evacuated, and made of none effect, he came to make this fullness perfect, by
instituting and establishing a Church; Esaias 1. ult.
The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, says the Prophet, of Christ.
There is a fullness in general, for his qualification; The Spirit of the Lord;
but what kind of spirit? It follows, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the Spirit of Counsel, and Power, the Spirit of knowledge and
of the fear of the Lord; we see, the spirit that must rest upon Christ, is the
Spirit in those beams, in those functions, in those operations, (...)
as conduce to government, that is, Wisdom, and Counsel, and Power. So that
this is Christ's fullness, that he is in a continual administration of his
Church; in which he flows over upon us his Ministers; Joh. 1.16.
(for, of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace: that is,
power by his grace, to derive grace upon the Congregation;) And so, of his
fullness, all the Congregation receives too; and receives in that full measure,
That they are filled with all the fullness of God; Ephesians. 3.19.
that is, all the fullness that was in both his natures, united in one person,
when the fullness of the Deity dwelt in him bodily, all the merits of that
person, are derived upon us, in his Word, Sacraments, in his Church; which
Church being to continue to the end, it is most properly said habitavit, in
him, (in him, as head of the Church) all fullness, all means of salvation,
dwell, and are to be had permanently, constantly, infallibly.

Now how came Christ by all this fullness, Complacuit.
this superlative fullness in himself, this derivative fullness upon us? That
his merits should be able to build, and furnish such a house, to raise and
rectify such a Church, acceptable to God, in which all fullness should dwell
to the worlds end? It was only because complacuit, it pleased God (for this
personal name of the Father (It pleased the Father) is but added suppletorily
by our Translators, and is not in the Original) It pleased God to give him
wherewithal, to enable him so far, for, this complacuit, is, (as we say in
the School,) vox beneplaciti, it expresses only the good will and love of
God, without contemplation or foresight of any goodness in man; Catharin.
nam hac posita plenitudine exorta sunt merita: First, we are to consider this
fullness to have been in Christ, and then, from this fullness arose his merits;
we can consider no merit in Christ himself before, whereby he should merit
this fullness; for, this fullness was in him, before he merited any thing; and
but for this fullness, he had not so merited. August.
Ille homo, ut in unitatem filii Dei assumeretur, unde meruit? How did that
man, (says St. Augustine speaking of Christ, as of the son of man) how did
that man merit to be united in one person, with the eternal Son of God? Quid
egit ante? Quid credidit? What had he done? nay, what had he believed? Had he
either faith, or works, before that union of both natures? If then in Christ
Jesus himself, there were no praevisa merita, That Gods foresight, that he
would use this fullness well, did not work in God, as a cause to give him this
fullness, but because he had it of the free gift of God, therefore he did use
it well, and meritoriously, shall any of us be so frivolous, in so important a
matter, as to think that God gave us our measure of grace, or our measure of
Sanctification, because he foresaw that we would heap up that measure, and
employ that talent profitably? What can thou imagine, he could foresee in
thee? A propensnesse, a disposition to goodness, when his grace should come?
Either there is no such propensnesse, no such disposition in thee, or, if there
be, even that propensnesse and disposition to the good use of grace, is grace,
it is an effect of former grace, and his grace wrought, before he saw any such
propensnesse, any such disposition; Grace was first, and his grace is his, it
is none of thine. To end this point, and this part, non est discipulus supra
magistrum; The fullness of Christ himself was rooted in the complacuit, It
pleased the Father; (nothing else wrought in the nature of a Cause) and
therefore that measure of that fullness, which is derived upon us, from him,
(our vocation, our justification, our sanctification) are much more so; we have
them, quia complacuit, because it has pleased him freely to give them; God
himself could see nothing in us, till he of his own goodness, put it into
us. And so we have gone as far, as our first part carries us, in those two
branches, and the fruits which we have gathered from thence; First, those
general doctrines, that reason is not to be excluded in matters of religion;
and then, that reason in all those cases, is to be limited, with the quia
complacuit, merely in the good pleasure of God. In which first part, you have
also had, the qualification of the person, that came this day, to establish
Redemption for us, that in Him there was fullness, (infinite capacity, and
infinite infusion,) and all fullness, defective in nothing, (impassible and yet
passible, perfect God, and perfect man) and this fullness dwelling in Him, in Him
as he is Head of the Church, that is, visible, sensible means of salvation to
every soul in his Church; And so we pass to our second part, from this
Qualification of the person, (It pleased the Father that in him all fullness
should dwell) to the Pacification it self, for which it pleased the Father to
do all this, that Peace might be made through the blood of his Cross.

In this Part, St. Chrysostom has made our steps, our branches. It is much,
says he, 2 Part.
that God would admit any peace; magis, per sanguinem, more, that for peace he
should require effusion of blood; magis, quod per ejus, more, that it must be
His blood, his that was injured, his that was to triumph; Et adhuc magis, quod
per sanguinem Crucis ejus; That it must be by the blood of his Cross, his
heart blood, his death; and yet this was the case; He made Peace through the
blood of his Cross. There was then a war before, and a heavy war; for, the
Lord of hosts was our enemy; and what can all our musters come to, Bellum ante.
if the Lord of Hosts, of all Hosts have raised his forces against us? There
was a heavy war denounced in the Inimicitias ponam, when God raised a war
between the Devil, Genesis 3.15.
and us. For, if we could consider God to stand neutrall in that war, and
meddle with neither side, yet we were in a desperate case, to be put to fight
against Powers and Principalities, against the Devil. How much more, when God,
the Lord of Hosts, is the Lord even of that Host too? when God presses the
Devil, and makes the Devil his Soldier, to fight his battles, and directs his
arrows, and his bullets, and makes his approaches, and his attempts effectual
upon us. That which is fallen upon the Jews now, Basil.
for their sin against Christ, that there is not in all the world, a Soldier
of their race, not a Jew in the world that bears arms, is true of all
mankind for their sin against God; there is not a Soldier amongst them, able
to hurt his spiritual enemy or defend himself. It is a strange war, where
there are not two sides; and yet that is our case; for, God uses the Devil
against us, and the Devil uses us against one another; nay, he uses every one
of us, against our selves; so that God, and the Devil, and we, are all in one
Army, and all for our destruction; we have a war, and yet there is but one
Army, and we only are the Country that is fed upon, and wasted; From God to
the Devil we have not one friend, and yet, as though we lacked enemies, we
fight with one another in inhumane Duels; Vbi morimur homicidae, Ad milites
Templa: Ser. 1. (...)
(as St. Bernard expresses it powerfully and elegantly) that in those Duels and
Combats, he that is murdered dies a murderer, because he would have been one;
Occisor laethaliter peccat, occisus aeternaliter perit; He that comes alive out
of the field comes a dead man, because he comes a deadly sinner, and he that
remains dead in the field, is gone into an everlasting death. So that by this
inhumane effusion of one another blood, we maintain a war against God
himself, and we provoke him to that which he expresses in Esaias, My sword shall
be bathed in heaven; Inebriabitur sanguine, Esaias 34.5.
The sword of the Lord shall be made drunk with blood; Their land shall be
soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness. The same quarrel,
which God has against particular men, and particular Nations, for particular
sins, God has against all Mankind, for Adams sin. And there is the war.
But what is the peace, and how are we included in that? That is our second and
next disquisition, That peace might be made.

A man must not presently think himself included in this peace, Pax.
because he feels no effects of this war. If God draw none of his swords of
war, or famine, or pestilence, upon thee, (no outward war,) If God raise
not a rebellion in thy self, nor fight against thee with thine own
affections, in colluctations between the flesh, and the spirit; The war may
last, Gellius.
for all this. Induciarum tempore, bellum manet, licet pugna cesset; Though
there be no blow stricken, the war remains in the time of Truce. But thy case
is not so good; here is no Truce, no cessation, but a continual preparation to
a fiercer war. All this while that thou enjoyest this imaginary security, the
Enemy digges insensibly under ground, all this while he undermines thee, and
will blow thee up at last more irrecoverably, then if he had battered thee with
outward calamities all that time. So any State may be abused with a false peace
present, or with a fruitless expectation of a future peace. But in this text,
there is true peace, and peace already made; present peace, and and safe peace.
Bernard.
Pax non promissa, sed missa, (says St. Bernard, in his musical and
harmonious cadences,) not promised, but already sent; non dilata, sed data, not
treated, but concluded; Non prophetata, sed praesentata, not prophesied, but
actually established. There is the presentnesse thereof; And then, made by him,
who lacked nothing for the making of a safe peace; Esaias 9.6.
For, after his Names of Counselor, and of the Mighty God; he is called, for
the consummation of all, princeps pacis; A Counselor, There is his wisdom, A
mighty God, There is his Power: and this Counselor, This Mighty God, this
wise, and this powerful Prince, has undertaken to make our peace; But how,
that is next, per sanguinem, Peace being made by blood.

Is effusion of blood the way of peace? Per sanguinem.
effusion of blood may make them from whom blood is so abundantly drawn, glad
of peace, because they are thereby reduced to a weakness. But in our wars,
such a weakness puts us farther off from peace, and puts more fierceness in
the Enemy. But here, mercy and truth are met together; God would be true to his
own Justice, (blood was forfeited, and he would have blood) and God would be
merciful to us, he would make us the stronger by drawing blood, and by drawing
our best blood, Genesis 34.
the blood of Christ Jesus. Simeon and Levi, when they meditated their revenge
for the rape committed upon their sister, when they pretended peace, yet they
required a little blood: They would have the Sichemites circumcised: but when
they had opened a vein, they made them bleed to death; when they were under
the soreness of Circumcision, they slew them all. Gods justice required blood,
but that blood is not spilt, but poured from that head to our hearts, into the
veins, and wounds of our own souls: There was blood shed, but no blood lost.
Before the Law was thoroughly established, when Moses came down from God, and
deprehended the people, in that Idolatry to the Calfe, before he would present
himself as a Mediator between God and them, Exodus 32.28. and 32.
for that sin, he prepares a sacrifice of blood, in the execution of three
thousand of those Idolaters, and after that he came to his vehement prayer, in
their behalf. And in the strength of the Law, Heb. 9 22.
all things were purged with blood, and without blood there is no remission.
Whether we place the reason of this in Gods Justice, which required blood, or
whether we place it in the convenience, that blood being ordinarily received to
be seeds animae, the seat and residence of the soul; The soul, for which,
that expiation was to be, could not be better represented, nor purified, then
in the state, and seat of the soul, in blood; or whether we shut up our selves
in an humble sobriety, to inquire into the reasons of Gods actions, thus we see
it was, no peace, no remission, but in blood. Nor is that so strange, as that
which follows in the next place, per sanguinem ejus, by his blood.

Before, Per sanguinem ejus. Psalm. 50.10.
under the Law, it was in sanguine hircorum, and vitulorum; In the blood of
Goats, and Bullocks; here it is in sanguine ejus, in his blood. Not his, as he
claims all the beasts of the forest, all the cattle upon a thousand hills, and
all the fowls of the mountains to be his; not his, as he says of Gold and
Silver, The Silver is mine, and the Gold is mine; Hag. 2.8.
not his, as he is Lord, and proprietary of all, by Creation; so all blood is
his; no nor his, as the blood of all the Martyrs was his blood, (which is a
near relation and consanguinity) but his so, as it was the precious blood of
his body, the seat of his soul, the matter of his spirits, the knot of his
life, This blood he shed for me; and I have blood to shed for him too, though
he call me not to the trial, nor to the glory of Martyrdom. Sanguis animae
meae voluntas mea, The blood of my soul is my will; Bern.
Scindatur vena ferro compunctionis, open a vein with that knife, remorce,
compunction, ut si non sensus, certe consensus peccati effluat, That though
thou can not bleed out all motions to sin, thou may all consent
thereunto. Noli esse nimium justus; noli sapere plus quam oportet; St. Bernard
makes this use of those Counsels, Be not righteous overmuch, nor be not
overwise, Ecces. 7.16.
Cui putas venae parcendum, si justitia and sapientia egent minutione, what
vein may thou spare, if thou must open those two veins, righteousness, and
wisdom? If they may be superfluously abundant, if thou must bleed out some of
thy Righteousness, and some of thy wisdom, cui venae parcendum, at what
vein must thou not bleed? Tostat. in Levit. fo. 45. D.
Now in all sacrifices, where blood was to be offered, the fat was to be offered
to. If thou will sacrifice the blood of thy soul, (as St. Bernard calls the
will) sacrifice the fat too; If thou give over thy purpose of continuing in thy
sin, give over the memory of it, and give over all that thou possessest
unjustly, and corruptly got by that sin; else thou keep the fat from God,
though thou give him the blood. If God had given over at his second days work,
we had had no sun, no seasons; If at his fifth, we had had no being; If at
the sixth, no Sabbath; but by proceeding to the seventh, we are all, and we have
all. Naaman, 2 Reg. 5.14.
who was out of the covenant, yet, by washing in Jordan seven times, was cured
of his leprosy; seven times did it even in him, but less did not. Tostat. in
Levit. 4. q. 16.
The Priest in the Law used a sevenfold sprinkling of blood upon the Altar;
and we observe a sevenfold shedding of blood in Christ; In his Circumcision,
and in his Agony, in his fulfilling of that Prophecy; gen as vellicantibus, I
gave my cheeks to them, that plucked off the hair, and in his scourging; Esaias
50.6.
in his crowning, and in his nayling, and lastly, in the piercing of his side.
These seven channels has the blood of thy Savior found. Pour out the blood
of thy soul, sacrifice thy stubborn and rebellious will seven times too;
seven times, that is, every day; and seven times every day; for so often a
just man falls; And then, Prove. 24.16.
how low must that man lie at last, if he fall so often, and never rise upon
any fall? and therefore raise thy self as often, and as soon as thou fallest.
Jericho would not fall, Jos. 6.
but by being compassed seven days, and seven times in one day. Compass thy
self, comprehend thy self, seven times, many times, and thou shall have thy
loss of blood supplied with better blood, with a true sense of that peace,
which he has already made, and made by blood, and by his own blood, and by
the blood of his Cross, which is the last branch of this second part.

Greater love has no man, then to lay down his life for his friend, yet he
that said so, Crux. Joh. 15.13.
did more then so, more then lay down his life, (for he exposed it to
violences, and torments) and all that for his enemies. But does not the
necessity diminish the love? where a testament is, there must also of necessity
be the death of the testator: Heb. 9.16.
was there then a necessity in Christ's dying? simply a necessity of coaction
there was not; such as is in the death of other men, natural, or violent by
the hand of Justice. There was nothing more arbitrary, more voluntary, more
spontaneous then all that Christ did for man. And if you could consider a time,
before the contract between the Father, and him, had passed, for the redemption
of man by his death, we might say, that then there was no necessity upon
Christ, that he must dye; But because that contract was from all eternity, Luc.
24.26.
supposing that contract, that this peace was to be made by his death, there
entered the oportuit pati, That Christ ought to suffer all these things, and to
enter into his glory. And so, as for his death, so for the manner of his death,
(by the Cross) it was not of absolute necessity, and yet it was not by
casualty neither, not because he was to suffer in that Nation, which did
ordinarily punish such Malefactors, (such as he was accused to be) seditious
persons, with that manner of death, but all this proceeded ex pacto, thus the
contract led it, to this he was obedient, obedient unto death, and unto the
death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8.
By blood, and not only by coming into this world, and assuming our nature,
(which humiliation was an act of infinite value) and not by the blood of his
Circumcision or Agony, but blood to death, and by no gentler, nor nobler death,
then the death of the Cross, was this peace to be made by him. Though then one
drop of his blood had been enough to have redeemed infinite worlds, if it had
been so contracted, and so applied, yet he gave us, a morning shower of his
blood in his Circumcision, and an evening shower at his passion, and a shower
after Sunset, in the piercing of his side. And though any death had been an
incomprehensible ransom, for the Lord of life to have given, for the children
of death, yet he refused not the death of the Cross; The Cross, to which a
bitter curse was nailed by Moses, Deuteronomy. 21 23.
from the beginning, he that is hanged, is, (not only accursed of God, as our
Translation has it,) but he is the curse of God, (as it is in the Original)
not accursed, but a curse; not a simple curse, but the curse of God. And by the
Cross, which besides the Infamy, was so painful a death, as that many men
languished many days upon it, before they dyed: And by his blood of this
torture, and this shame, this painful, and this ignominious death, was this
peace made. In our great work of crucifying our selves to the world too, it is
not enough to bleed the drops of a Circumcision, that is, to cut off some
excessive, and notorious practice of sin; nor to bleed the drops of an Agony,
to enter into a conflict and colluctation of the flesh and the spirit, whether
we were not better trust in Gods mercy, for our continuance in that sin, then
lose all that pleasure and profit, which that sin brings us; nor enough to
bleed the drops of scourging, to be lashed with viperous, and venomous tongues
by contumelies, and slanders; nor to bleed the drops of Thorns, to have
Thorns and scruples enter into our consciences, with spiritual afflictions;
but we must be content to bleed the streams of naylings to those Crosses, to
continue in them all our lives, if God see that necessary for our confirmation;
and, if men will pierce and wound us after our deaths in our good name, yea, if
they will slander our Resurrection, (as they did Christ's) if they will say,
that it is impossible God should have mercy upon such a man, impossible that a
man of so bad life, and so sad and comfortless a death, should have a joyful
Resurrection, here is our comfort, as that piercing of Christ's side was after
the Consummatum est, after his passion ended, and therefore put him to no
pain, as that slander of his Resurrection, was after that glorious triumph; He
was risen and had showed himself before, and therefore it diminished not his
power: so all these posthume wounds, and slanders after my death, after my God
and my Soul shall have passed that Dialogue, Veni Domine Jesus, and euge bone
serve, That I shall have said upon my deathbed, Come Lord Jesu, come quickly,
and he shall have said, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy
Masters joy, when I shall have said to him, In manus tuas Domine, Into thy
hands O Lord I commend my spirit, And he to me, Hodie mecum eris in paradiso,
This day, this minute thou shall be, now thou art with me in Paradise, when
this shall be my state, God shall hear their slanders and maledictions, and
write them all down, but not in my book, but in theirs, and there they shall
meet them at Judgment, amongst their own sins, to their everlasting
confusion, and find me in possession of that peace, made by blood, made by his
blood, made by the blood of his Cross, which were all the pieces laid out for
this second part, with which we have done; and pass from the qualification of
the person, (It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell) which
was our first part, and the Pacification, and the way thereof, (by the blood of
his Cross to make peace) which was our second, to the Reconciliation it self,
and the Application thereof to all to whom that Reconciliation appertains,
That all things, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven, might be
reconciled unto him.

All this was done; 3. Part.
He, in whom it pleased the Father, that this fullness should dwell, had made
this peace by the blood of his Cross, and yet, after all this, the Apostle
comes upon that Embassage, 2 Cor. 5.20.
We pray ye, in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God; So that this
Reconciliation in the Text, is a subsequent thing to this peace. The general
peace is made by Christ's death, as a general pardon is given at the Kings
coming; The Application of this peace is in the Church, as the suing out of
the pardon, is in the Office. Ioab made Absaloms peace with his Father; Bring
the young man again, says David to Ioab; 2 Samuel 14.22.2.28.24.16.
but yet he was not reconciled to him, so as that he saw his face in two year.
God has sounded a Retreat to the Battle, As I live, says the Lord, I would
not the death of a sinner; He has said to the destroyer, It is enough, stay
now thy hand; He is pacified in Christ; and he has bound the enemy in chains.
Now let us labor for our Reconciliation; for all things are reconciled to him,
in Christ, that is, offered a way of reconciliation. All things in heaven and
earth, says the Apostle. And that is so large, as that Origin needed not to
have extended it to Hell too, Origin.
and conceive out of this place, a possibility, that the Devils themselves
shall come to a Reconciliation with God. But to all in Heaven and Earth it
appertains. Consider we how.

First then, there is a reconciliation of them in heaven to God, In coelis.
and then of them on earth to God, and then of them in heaven, and them in
earth, to one another, by the blood of his Cross. If we consider them in
heaven, to be those who are gone up to heaven from this world by death, they
had the same reconciliation as we; Animae.
either by reaching the hand of faith forward, to lay hold upon Christ before
he came, (which was the case of all under the Law;) or by reaching back that
hand, to lay hold upon all that he had done and suffered, when he was come,
(which is the case of those that are dead before us in the profession of the
Gospel.) All that are in heaven, and were upon earth, are reconciled one way,
by application of Christ in the Church; so that, though they be now in heaven,
yet they had their reconciliation here upon earth. But if we consider those who
are in heaven, and have been so from the first minute of their creation,
Angels, why have they, or how have they any reconciliation? How needed they
any, and then, how is this of Christ applied unto them? They needed a
confirmation; for the Angels were created in blessedness, but not in perfect
blessedness; They might fall, they did fall. To those that fell, can
appertain no reconciliation; no more then to those that die in their sins; for
Quod homini mors, Angelis casus; August.
The fall of the Angels wrought upon them, as the death of a man does upon him;
They are both equally incapable of change to better. But to those Angels that
stood, their standing being of grace, and their confirmation being not one
transient act in God done at once, but a continual succession, and emanation
of daily grace, belongs this reconciliation by Christ, because all matter of
grace, and where any deficiency is to be supplied, whether by way of
reparation, as in man, or by way of confirmation, as in Angels, proceeds from
the Cross, from the Merits of Christ. They are so reconciled then, as that
they are extra lapsus periculum, out of the danger of falling; but yet this
stability, this infallibility is not yet indelibly imprinted in their natures;
yet the Angels might fall, if this reconciler did not sustain them; for, if
those words reperit in Angelis iniquitatem, that God found folly, Job 4.18.
(weakness, infirmity) in his Angels, be to be understood of the good Angels,
that stand confirmed, (as procul dubio de diabolo intelligi non potest, Calvin.
without all doubt they cannot be understood of the ill Angels) the best
service of the best Angels, divested of that successive grace, that supports
them, if God should exacta rigorous account of it, could not be acceptable in
the sight of God; So the Angels have a pacification, and a reconciliation, lest
they should fall.

Thus things in heaven are reconciled to God by Christ; and things on earth
too. In terra.
First the creature, as S. Paul speaks; that is, other creatures then men.
For, at the general resurrection, (which is rooted in the resurrection of
Christ, and so has relation to him) the creature shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, Romans 8.21.
into the glorious liberty of the children of God; for which, the whole
creation groans, and travailes in pain yet. This deliverance then from this
bondage, the whole creature has by Christ, and that is their reconciliation.
And then are we reconciled by the blood of his Cross, when having crucified
our selves by a true repentance, we receive the seal of reconciliation, in his
blood in the Sacrament. But the most proper, and most litterall sense of these
words, is, that all things in heaven and earth, be reconciled to God, (that is,
to his glory, to a fitter disposition to glorify him) by being reconciled to
another, in Christ; that in him, as head of the Church, they in heaven, and we
upon earth, be united together as one body in the Communion of Saints. For,
this text has a conformity, and a harmony with that to the Ephesians, and in
sense, as well as in words, is the same, Ephesians. 1.10.
That God might gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in
heaven, and which are on earth, even in him; where the word which we translate
(to gather) does properly signify recapitulare, to bring all things to their
first head, to Gods first purpose; which was, that Angels, and men, united in
Christ Jesus, might glorify him eternally in the Kingdom of heaven. Then are
things in heaven restored and reconciled, (says S. Augustine) Cum quod ex
Angelis lapsum est, ex hominibus redditur, when good men have repaired the
ruin of the bad Angels, and filled their places. And then are things on earth
restored, and reconciled, Cum praedestinati a corruptionis vetustate
renovantur, when Gods elect children are delivered from the corruptions of this
world, to which, even they are subject here. Gregor.
Cum humiliati homines redeunt, unde Apostatae superbiendo ceciderunt, when men
by humility are exalted, to those places from which Angels fell by pride, then
are all things in heaven and earth reconciled in Christ.

The blood of the sacrifices was brought by the high priest, Tostat. in Levit.
16.
in sanctum sanctorum, into the place of greatest holiness; but it was brought
but once, in festo expiationis, in the feast of expiation; but, in the other
parts of the Temple, it was sprinkled every day. The blood of the Cross of
Christ Jesus has had his effect in sancto sanctorum, even in the highest
heavens, in supplying their places that fell, in confirming them that stood,
and in uniting us and them, in himself, as Head of all. In the other parts of
the Temple it is to be sprinkled daily. Here, in the militant Church upon
earth, there is still a reconciliation to be made; not only toward one another,
in the band of charity, but in our selves. In our selves we may find things in
heaven, and things on earth to reconcile. There is a heavenly zeal, but if it
be not reconciled to discretion, there is a heavenly purity, but if it be not
reconciled to the bearing of one another infirmities, there is a heavenly
liberty, but if it be not reconciled to a care, for the prevention of scandal,
All things in our heaven, and our earth are not reconciled in Christ. In a
word, till the flesh and the spirit be reconciled, this reconciliation is not
accomplished. For, neither spirit, nor flesh must be destroyed in us; a
spiritual man is not all spirit, he is a man still. But then is flesh and
spirit reconciled in Christ, when in all the faculties of the soul, and all
the organs of the body we glorify him in this world; for then, in the next
world we shall be glorified by him, and with him, in soul, and in body too,
where we shall be thoroughly reconciled to one another, no suits, no
controversies; and thoroughly to the Angels; Mat. 22.30. Luc. 20.36.
when we shall not only be sieut Angeli, as the Angels in some one property,
but aequales Angelis, equal to the Angels in all, for, Non erunt duae
societates Angelorum and hominum, Men and Angels shall not make two companies,
sed omnium beatitudo erit, uni adhaerere Deo, August.
this shall be the blessedness of them both, to be united in one head, Christ
Jesus.

And these reconcilings are reconcilings enough; for these are all that are in
heaven and earth. If you will reconcile things in heaven, and earth, with
things in hell, that is a reconciling out of this Text. If you will mingle the
service of God, and the service of this world, there is no reconciling of God
and Mammon in this Text. If you will mingle a true religion, and a false
religion, there is no reconciling of God and Belial in this Text. For the
adhering of persons born within the Church of Rome, to the Church of Rome, our
law says nothing to them if they come; But for reconciling to the Church of
Rome, by persons born within the Allegiance of the King, or for persuading of
men to be so reconciled, our law has called by an infamous and Capital name
of Treason, and yet every Tavern, and Ordinary is full of such Traitors. Every
place from jest to earnest is filled with them; from the very stage to the
deathbed; At a Comedy they will persuade you, as you sit, as you laugh, And in
your sickness they will persuade you, as you lie, as you dye. And not only in
the bed of sickness, but in the bed of wantonness they persuade too; and
there may be examples of women, that have thought it a fit way to gain a soul,
by prostituting themselves, and by entertaining unlawful love, with a purpose
to convert a servant, which is somewhat a strange Topique, to draw arguments of
religion from. Let me see a Dominican and a Jesuit reconciled, in doctrinall
papistry, for freewill and predestination, Let me see a French papist and an
Italian papist reconciled in State-papistry, for the Popes jurisdiction, Let me
see the Jesuits, and the secular priests reconciled in England, and when they
are reconciled to one another, let them press reconciliation to their Church.
To end all, Those men have their bodies from the earth, and they have their
souls from heaven; and so all things in earth and heaven are reconciled: but
they have their Doctrine from the Devil; and for things in hell, there is no
peace made, and with things in hell, there is no reconciliation to be had by
the blood of his Cross, except we will tread that blood under our feet, and
make a mock of Christ Jesus, and crucify the Lord of Life again.

SERMON II. Preached at Paul's, upon Christmas Day, in the Evening. 1624.
ESAIAH. 7.14. Part of the first Lesson, that Evening.

Therefore the Lord shall give you a sign; Behold, a Virgin shall conceive,
and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel.


SAint Bernard spent his consideration upon three remarkable conjunctions, this
Day. First, a Conjunction of God, and Man in one person, Christ Jesus; Then a
conjunction of the incompatible Titles, Maid and Mother, in one blessed woman,
the blessed Virgin Mary: And thirdly a conjunction of Faith, and the Reason of
man, that so believes, and comprehends those two conjunctions. Let us accompany
these three with another strange conjunction, in the first word of this Text,
Propterea, Therefore; for that joins the anger of God, and his mercy together.
God chides and rebukes the King Achaz by the Prophet, he is angry with him, and
Therefore, says the Text, because he is angry he will give him a sign, a
seal of mercy, Therefore the Lord shall give you a sign, Behold, a Virgin,
etc. This Therefore, shall therefore be a first part of this Exercise, That God
takes any occasion to show mercy; And a second shall be, The particular way of
his mercy, declared here, Divisie.
The Lord shall give you a sign; And then a third and last, what this sign
was, Behold, a Virgin, etc.

In these three parts, we shall walk by these steps; Having made our entrance
into the first, with that general consideration, that Gods mercy is always in
season, upon that station, upon that height we shall look into the particular
occasions of Gods mercy here, what this King Achaz had done to alien God, and
to avert his mercy, and in those two branches we shall determine that part. In
the second, we shall also first make this general entrance, That God persists
in his own ways, goes forward with his own purposes, And then what his way,
and his purpose here was, he would give them a sign: and farther we shall not
extend that second part. In the third we have more steps to make; First, what
this sign is in general, it is, that there is a Redeemer given. And then how,
thus; First, Virgo concipiet, a Virgin shall conceive, she shall be a Virgin
then; And Virgo pariet, a Virgin shall bring forth, she shall be a Virgin then;
And Pariet filium, she shall bear a Son, and therefore he is of her substance,
not only man, but man of her; And this Virgin shall call this Son Immanuel, God
with us, that is, God and Man in one person. Though the Angel at the Conception
tell Joseph, That he shall call his name Jesus, Mat. 1.21.
and tell Mary her self, that she shall call his name Jesus, Luc. 1.31.
yet the blessed Virgin her self shall have a further reach, a clearer
illustration, She shall call his name Immanuel, God with us: Others were called
Jesus, Iosuah was so, diverse others were so; but, in the Scriptures there was
never any but Christ called Immanuel. Though Jesus signify a Savior, Joseph
was able to call this child Jesus, upon a more peculiar reason, and way of
salvation then others who had that name, because they had saved the people from
present calamities, and imminent dangers; for, the Angel told Joseph, that he
should therefore be called Jesus, because he should save the people from their
sins; and so, no Iosuah, no other Jesus was a Jesus. But the blessed Virgin saw
more then this; not only that he should be such a Jesus as should save them
from their sins, but she saw the manner how, that he should be Immanuel, God
with us, God and man in one person; That so, being Man, he might suffer, and
being God, that should give an infinite value to his sufferings, according to
the contract passed between the Father and him; and so he should be Jesus, a
Savior, a Savior from sin, and this by this way and means. And then that all
this should be established, and declared by an infallible sign, with this
Ecce, Behold; That whosoever can call upon God by that name Immanuel, that is,
confess Christ to be come in the flesh, that Man shall have an Ecce, a light,
a sign, a token, an assurance that this Immanuel, this Jesus, this Savior
belongs unto him, and he shall be able to say, Ecce, Behold, mine eyes have
seen thy salvation.

We begin with that which is elder then our beginning, 1 Part. Psalm. 101.1.
and shall over-live our end, The mercy of God. I will sing of thy mercy and
judgment, says David; when we fix our selves upon the meditation and
modulation of the mercy of God, even his judgments cannot put us out of tune,
but we shall sing, and be cheerful, even in them. As God made grass for
beasts, before he made beasts, and beasts for man, before he made man: As in
that first generation, the Creation, so in the regeneration, our re-creating,
he begins with that which was necessary for that which follows, Mercy before
Judgment. Nay, to say that mercy was first, is but to post-date mercy; to
prefer mercy but so, is to diminish mercy; The names of first or last
derogate from it, for first and last are but rags of time, and his mercy has
no relation to time, no limitation in time, it is not first, nor last, but
eternal, everlasting; Let the Devil make me so far desperate as to conceive a
time when there was no mercy, and he has made me so far an Atheist, as to
conceive a time when there was no God; if I despoile him of his mercy, any one
minute, and say, now God has no mercy, for that minute I discontinue his very
Godhead, and his being. Later Grammarians have wrung the name of mercy out of
misery; Misericordia praesumit miseriam, say these, there could be no
subsequent mercy, if there were no precedent misery; But the true root of the
word mercy, through all the Prophets, is Racham, and Racham is diligere, to
love; as long as there has been love (and God is love) there has been mercy:
And mercy considered externally, and in the practice and in the effect, began
not at the helping of man, when man was fallen and become miserable, but at the
making of man, when man was nothing. So then, here we consider not mercy as it
is radically in God, and an essential attribute of his, but productively in
us, as it is an action, a working upon us, and that more especially, as God
takes all occasions to exercise that action, and to shed that mercy upon us:
for particular mercies are feathers of his wings, and that prayer, Lord let thy
mercy lighten upon us, as our trust is in thee, is our birdlime; particular
mercies are that cloud of Quails which hovered over the host of Israel, and
that prayer, Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us, is our net to catch, our Gomer
to fill of those Quails. The air is not so full of Moats, of Atoms, as the
Church is of Mercies; and as we can suck in no part of air, but we take in
those Moats, those Atoms; so here in the Congregation we cannot suck in a word
from the preacher, we cannot speak, we cannot sigh a prayer to God, but that
that whole breath and air is made of mercy. But we call not upon you from this
Text, to consider Gods ordinary mercy, that which he exhibites to all in the
ministry of his Church; nor his miraculous mercy, his extraordinary
deliverances of States and Churches; but we call upon particular Consciences,
by occasion of this Text, to call to mind Gods occasional mercies to them;
such mercies as a regenerate man will call mercies, though a natural man would
call them accidents, or occurrences, or contingencies; A man wakes at midnight
full of unclean thoughts, and he hears a passing Bell; this is an occasional
mercy, if he call that his own knell, and consider how unfit he was to be
called out of the world then, how unready to receive that voice, Fool, this
night they shall fetch away thy soul. The adulterer, whose eye waits for the
twy-light, goes forth, and casts his eyes upon forbidden houses, and would
enter, and sees a Lord have mercy upon us upon the door; this is an
occasional mercy, if this bring him to know that they who lie sick of the
plague within, pass through a furnace, but by Gods grace, to heaven; and he
without, carries his own furnace to hell, his lustful loins to everlasting
perdition. What an occasional mercy had Balaam, when his Ass Catechized him?
What an occasional mercy had one Thief, when the other catechized him so, Art
not thou afraid being under the same condemnation? What an occasional mercy
had all they that saw that, when the Devil himself fought for the name of
Jesus, and wounded the sons of Sceva for exorcising in the name of Jesus, Act.
19.14.
with that indignation, with that increpation, Jesus we know, and Paul we know,
but who are ye? If I should declare what God has done (done occasionally) for
my soul, where he instructed me for fear of falling, where he raised me when
I was fallen, perchance you would rather fix your thoughts upon my illness,
and wonder at that, then at Gods goodness, and glorify him in that; rather
wonder at my sins, then at his mercies, rather consider how ill a man I was,
then how good a God he is. If I should inquire upon what occasion God elected
me, and writ my name in the book of Life, I should sooner be afraid that it
were not so, then find a reason why it should be so. God made Sun and Moon to
distinguish seasons, and day, and night, and we cannot have the fruits of the
earth but in their seasons: But God has made no decree to distinguish the
seasons of his mercies; In paradise, the fruits were ripe, the first minute,
and in heaven it is always Autumn, his mercies are ever in their maturity. We
ask panem quetidianum, our daily bread, and God never says you should have
come yesterday, he never says you must again to morrow, but to day if you
will hear his voice, to day he will hear you. If some King of the earth have
so large an extent of Dominion, in North, and South, as that he has Winter and
Summer together in his Dominions, so large an extent East and West, as that he
has day and night together in his Dominions, much more has God mercy and
judgment together: He brought light out of darkness, not out of a lesser
light; he can bring thy Summer out of Winter, though thou have no Spring;
though in the ways of fortune, or understanding, or conscience, thou have been
benighted till now, wintred and frozen, clouded and eclypsed, damped and
benumbed, smothered and stupefied till now, now God comes to thee, not as in
the dawning of the day, not as in the bud of the spring, but as the Sun at noon
to illustrate all shadows, as the sheaves in harvest, to fill all penuries,
all occasions invite his mercies, and all times are his seasons.

If it were not thus in general, it would never have been so in this
particular, in our case, Achaz case.
in the Text, in King Achaz; If God did not seek occasion to do good to all,
he would never have found occasion to do good to King Achaz. Subjects are to
look upon the faults of Princes, with the spectacles of obedience, and
reverence, to their place, and persons; little and dark spectacles, and so
their faults, and errors are to appear little, and excusable to them; Gods
perspective glass, his spectacle is the whole world; he looks not upon the
Sun, in his sphere only, but as he works upon the whole earth: And he looks
upon Kings, not only what harm they do at home, but what harm they occasion
abroad; and through that spectacle, the faults of Princes, in Gods eye, are
multiplied, far above those of private men. Achaz had such faults, and yet
God sought occasion of Mercy. Iotham, his Father, is called a good King, and
yet all Idolatry was not removed in his time, and he was a good King, for all
that. Achaz is called ill, both because himself sacrificed Idolatrously, (And
the King was a commanding person) And because he made the Priest Vriah to do
so, (And the Priest was an exemplar person) And because he made his Son commit
the abominations of the heathen; (And the actions of the Kings Son pierce far
in leading others.) Achaz had these faults, and yet God fought occasion of
mercy. If the evening sky be red, Mat. 16.2.
you promise your selves a fair day, says Christ; you would not do so if the
evening were black and cloudy: when you see the fields white with corn, you
say harvest is ready; Joh. 4.35. Esaias 1.19.
you would not do so if they were white with frost. If ye consent, and obey,
you shall eat the good things of the Land, says God in the Prophet; shall ye
do so if you refuse, and rebel? Achaz did, and yet God sought occasion of
mercy. There arise diseases for which there is no probatum est, in all the
books of Physicians; There is scarce any sin of which we have not had
experiments of Gods mercies; He concludes with no sin, excludes no occasion,
precludes no person: And so we have done with our first part, Gods general
disposition, for the Rule, declared in Achaz case for the example.

Our second part consists of a Rule, and an Example too: 2 Part.
The Rule, That God goes forward in his own ways, proceeds, as he begun, in
mercy; The Example, what his proceeding, what his subsequent mercy to Achaz
was. One of the most convenient Hieroglyphics of God, is a Circle; and a
Circle is endless; whom God loves, he loves to the end: and not only to
their own end, to their death, but to his end, and his end is, that he might
love them still. His hailestones, and his thunderbolts, and his showers of
blood (emblemes and instruments of his Judgments) fall down in a direct line,
and affect and strike some one person, or place: His Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, (Emblemes and Instruments of his Blessings) move circularly, and
communicate themselves to all. His Church is his chariot; in that, he moves
more gloriously, then in the Sun; as much more, as his begotten Son exceeds his
created Sun, and his Son of glory, and of his right hand, the Sun of the
firmament; and this Church, his chariot, moves in that communicable motion,
circularly; It began in the East, it came to us, and is passing now, shining
out now, in the farthest West. As the Sun does not set to any Nation, but
withdraw it self, and return again; God, in the exercise of his mercy, does
not set to thy soul, though he benight it with an affliction. Remember that
our Savior Christ himself, in many actions and passions of our humane nature,
and infirmities, smothered that Divinity, and suffered it not to work, but yet
it was always in him, and wrought most powerfully in the deepest danger; when
he was absolutely dead, it raised him again: If Christ slumbred the Godhead in
himself, The mercy of God may be slumbred, it may be hidden from his servants,
but it cannot be taken away, and in the greatest necessities, it shall break
out. The Blessed Virgin was overshadowed, but it was with the Holy Ghost that
overshadowed her: Thine understanding, thy conscience may be so too, and yet it
may be the work of the Holy Ghost, who moves in thy darkness, and will bring
light even out of that, knowledge out of thine ignorance, clearness out of thy
scruples, and consolation out of thy Dejection of Spirit. God is thy portion,
says David; David does not speak so narrowly, so penuriously, as to say, God
has given thee thy portion, and thou must look for no more; but, God is thy
portion, and as long as he is God, he has more to give, and as long as thou
art his, thou have more to receive. Thou can not have so good a Title, to a
subsequent blessing, as a former blessing; where thou art an ancient tenant,
thou will look to be preferred before a stranger; and that is thy title to Gods
future mercies, if thou have been formerly accustomed to them. The Sun is not
weary with six thousand years shining; God cannot be weary of doing good; And
therefore never say, God has given me these and these temporal things, and I
have scattered them wastfully, surely he will give me no more; These and these
spiritual graces, and I have neglected them, abused them, surely he will give
me no more; For, for things created, we have instruments to measure them; we
know the compass of a Meridian, and the depth of a Diameter of the Earth, and
we know this, even of the uppermost sphere in the heavens: But when we come to
the Throne of God himself, the Orb of the Saints, and Angels that see his
face, and the virtues, and powers that flow from thence, we have no balance to
weigh them, no instruments to measure them, no hearts to conceive them: So, for
temporal things, we know the most that man can have; for we know all the
world; but for Gods mercy, and his spiritual graces, as that language in which
God spoke, the Hebrew, has no superlative, so, that which he promises, in all
that he has spoken, his mercy has no superlative; he shows no mercy, which
you can call his Greatest Mercy, his Mercy is never at the highest; whatsoever
he has done for thy soul, or for any other, in applying himself to it, he
can exceed that. Only he can raise a Tower, whose top shall reach to heaven:
The Basis of the highest building is but the Earth; But though thou be but a
Tabernacle of Earth, God shall raise thee piece by piece, into a spiritual
building; And after one Story of Creation, and another of Vocation, and another
of Sanctification, he shall bring thee up, to meet thy self, in the bosom of
thy God, where thou wast at first, in an eternal election: God is a circle
himself, and he will make thee one; Go not thou about to square either
circle, to bring that which is equal in it self, to Angles, and Corners, into
dark and sad suspicions of God, or of thy self, that God can give, or that
thou can receive no more Mercy, then thou have had already.

This then is the course of Gods mercy, Signum.
He proceeds as he begun, which was the first branch of this second part; It is
always in motion, and always moving toward All, always perpendicular, right
over every one of us, and always circular, always communicable to all; And
then the particular beam of this Mercy, shed upon Achaz here in our Text, is,
Dabit signum, The Lord shall give you a sign. It is a great Degree of Mercy,
that he affords us signs. A natural man is not made of Reason alone, but of
Reason, and Sense: A Regenerate man is not made of Faith alone, but of Faith
and Reason; and Signs, external things, assist us all.

In the Creation, it was part of the office of the Sun and Moon, to be
significative; he created them for signs, as well as for seasons: he directed
the Jews to Christ, by signs, by sacrifices, and Sacraments, and ceremonies;
and he entertaines us with Christ, by the same means to; we know where to
find Christ; In his House, in his Church; And we know at what sign he dwells;
where the Word is rightly Preached, and the Sacraments duly administered. Calvin.
It is truly, and wisely said, Sic habenda fides verbo Dei, ut subsidia minime
contemnamus; We must so far satisfy our selves, with the word of God, as
that we despise not those other subsidiary helps, which God in his Church has
afforded us: which is true (as of Sacraments especially) so of other
Sacramental, and Rituall, and Ceremonial things, which assist the working of
the Sacraments, though they infuse no power into the Sacraments. For, therefore
does the Prophet say, V. 13.
when Achaz refused a sign, Is it a small thing to weary (or disobey) men, but
that you will weary (disobey) God himself? He disobeyes God, in the way of
contumacy, who refuses his signs, his outward assistances, his ceremonies
which are induced by his authority, derived from him, upon men, in his Church,
and so made a part, or a help, of his ordinary service, as Sacraments, and
Sacramental things are.

There are signs of another sort, not fixed by Gods Ordinance, but signs
which particular men, have sometimes desired at Gods hand, for a farther
manifestation of Gods will, in which, it is not, otherwise, already fully
manifested, and revealed. For, to seek such signs, in things which are
sufficiently declared by God, or to seek them, with a resolution, That I will
leave a duty undone, except I receive a sign, this is to tempt God, and to
seek a way to excuse my self, for not doing that, which I was bound to do,
by the strength of an old commandment, and ought not to look for a new sign.
But the greatest fault in this kind, is, that if God, of his abundant
goodness, do give me a sign, for my clearer directions, and I resist that
sign, I dispute against that sign, I turn it another way, upon nature, upon
fortune, upon mistaking, that so I may go mine own way, and not be bound, by
believing that sign to be from God, to go that way, to which God by that
sign calls me. And this was Achaz case; God spoke unto him, and said, V. 11.
Ask a sign (that he would deliver him, from the enemy, that besieged
Jerusalem) and he said, I will not ask a sign, nor tempt God; For, though St.
Augustine, and some with him, ascribe this refusal of Achaz, to a religious
modesty, yet St. Hierome, and with him, the greatest party, justly impute this,
for a fault to Achaz: both because the sign was offered him from God, and not
sought by himself, (which is the case that is most subject to error) And
because the Prophet, who understood Gods mind, and the Kings mind to, takes
knowledge of it, as of a great fault, In this, thou have contemned, and
wearyed, not Man but God. For, though there be but a few cases, in which we may
put God to give a sign, (for Christ calls the Pharisees an evil, and an
adulterous generation, therefore, Mat. 12.39. Exodus 4.
because they sought a sign) yet God gave Moses a sign, of a Rod changed into
a Serpent, and a sign of good flesh changed into leprous, and leprous into
good, unasked: And after, Abraham asks a sign, whereby shall I know, that I
shall inherit the land? Genesis 15.8. Jud. 6.36.
and God gave him a sign. So Gideon, in a modest timorousness asks a sign,
and presses God to a second sign: First, he would have all the dew upon the
fleece, and then, none of the dew upon the fleece. God does give signs, and
when he does so, he gives also irradiations, illustrations of the
understanding, that they may be discerned to be his signs; and when they are
so, it is but a pretended modesty, to say, we will not tempt God to ask a sign,
we will not trouble God to tell us whether this be a sign or no, but against
all significations from God, go on, as though all were but natural accidents.

God gives signs recte petentibus, to them that ask them upon due grounds,
(so to Abraham, so to Gideon) And it is too long for this time, to put cases,
when a man may or may not put God to a sign; He gives signs also Non
petentibus, without being asked, to illustrate the case, and to confirm the
person, and so he did to Moses. Both these are high expressions of his mercy;
for what binds God, to begin with man, and give him a sign before he ask; or
to wait upon man, and give it him, when he asks? But the highest of all, is,
to persever in his mercy so far, as to give a sign, though upon the offer
thereof, it be refused; And that is Achaz case: Ask ye, says God, And, I will
not, says Achaz, and then, It is not Quamvis, for all that, though thou refuse,
but it is Propterea, Therefore, because thou refusest, The Lord himself shall
give thee a sign. His fault is carried thus high: Because he had treasure to
pay an army, because he had contracted with the Assyrians to assist him with
men, therefore he refuses the assistance offered by the Prophet from God, and
would feign go his own ways, and yet would have a religious pretext, He will
not tempt God. Nay his fault is carried thus much higher, That which we read,
Non tentabo, I will not tempt, is in the Original, Nasas; and Nasas is non
Extollam, non glorificabo, I will not glorify God so much, that is, I will not
be beholden to God for this victory, I will not take him into the league for
this action, I will do it of my self: And yet, (and then, who shall doubt of
the largeness of Gods mercy?) God proceeds in his purpose: Ask a sign, will
ye not? Therefore the Lord shall give you a sign: Because you will do nothing
for your self, the Lord shall do all; which is so transcendent a mercy, as
that, howsoever God afforded it to Achaz here, we can promise it to no man
hereafter.

We are come to our third part, 3. Part.
which is more peculiar to this Day: It is, first, what the sign is in
general, And then, some more particular circumstances, Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, etc. In general then, the sign that God gives Achaz and his
company, is, That there shall be a Messiah, a Redeemer given. Now, how is this
future thing, (There shall be a Messiah) a sign of their present deliverance
from that siege? First, In the notion of the Prophet, it was not a future
thing; for, as in Gods own sight, so in their sight, Esaias 3.6.
to whom he opens himself, future things are present. So this Prophet says,
Puer datus, filius natus, unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is given: He
was not given, he was not borne in six hundred years after that; but such is
the clearenesse of a Prophets sight, such is the infallibility of Gods declared
purpose. So then, if the Prophet could have made the King believe, with such an
assuredness, as if he had seen it done, that God would give a deliverance, to
all mankind, by a Messiah, that had been sign enough, evidence enough to
have argued thereupon, That God who had done so much a greater work, would
also give him a deliverance from that enemy, that pressed him then: If I can
fix my self, with the strength of faith, upon that which God has done for
man; I cannot doubt of his mercy, in any distress: If I lack a sign, I seek
no other but this, That God was made man for me; which the Church and
Church-writers, have well expressed by the word Incarnation, for that
acknowledges, and denotes, that God was made my flesh: It were not so strange,
that he who is spirit, should be made my spirit, my soul, but he was made my
flesh: Therefore have the Fathers delighted themselves, in the variation of
that word; so far, as that Hilarie calls it Corporationem, That God assumed my
Body; And Damascen calls it Inhumanationem, That God became this man, soul and
body; And Irenaeus calls it Adunationem, and Nysen Contemperationem, A mingling,
says one, an uniting, says the other, of two, of God and man, in one person.
Shall I ask, what needs all this? what needed God to have put himself to
this? I may say with S. Augustine, Alio modo poterat Deus nos liberare, sed si
aliter faceret, similiter vestrae stultitiae displiceret: What other way soever
God had taken for our salvation, our curiosity would no more have been
satisfied in that way, than in this: But God having chosen the way of
Redemption, which was the way of Justice, God could do no otherwise: Si homo
non vicisset inimicum hominis, non just victus esset inimicus, says Irenaeus;
As, if a man should get a battle by the power of the Devil, without
fighting, this were not a just victory; so, if God, in man's behalf, had
conquered the devil, without man, without dying, it had not been a just
conquest. I must not ask why God took this way, to Incarnate his Son; And
shall I ask how this was done? I do not ask how Rheubarb, or how Aloes came
by this, or this virtue, to purge this, or this humor in my body: In talibus
rebus, tota ratio facti, est potentia facientis: Even in natural things, all
the reason of all that is done, August.
is the power, and the will of him, who infused that virtue into that creature.
And therefore much more, when we come to these supernatural points, such as
this birth of Christ, we embrace S. Basils modesty, and abstinence, Nativitas
ista silentio honoretur, This mystery is not so well celebrated, with our
words, and discourse, as with a holy silence, and meditation: Immo potius ne
cogitationibus permittatur, Nay, (says that Father) there may be danger in
giving our selves leave, to think or study too much of it. Ne dixer is quando,
says he, praeteri hanc interrogationem: Ask not thy self overcuriously, when
this mystery was accomplished; be not over-vehement, over-peremptory, (so far,
as to the perplexing of thine own reason and understanding, or so far, as to
the despising of the reasons of other men) in calculating the time, the day or
hour of this nativity: Praeteri hanc interrogationem, pass over this
question, in good time, and with convenient satisfaction, Quando, when Christ
was borne; But noli inquirere Quomodo, (says S. Basil still) never come to
that question, how it was done, cum ad hoc nihil sit quod responderi possit,
for God has given us no faculties to comprehend it, no way to answer it.
That Is enough, which we have in S. John, Every spirit, that confesses, that
Jesus is come in the flesh, is of God: 1 Ioh. 4.2.
for, since it was a coming of Jesus, Jesus was before; so he was God; and
since he came in the flesh, he is now made man; And, that God and Man, are so
met, is a sign to me, that God, and I, shall never be parted.

This is the sign in general; That God has had such a care of all men, Virgo.
is a sign to me, That he has a care of me: But then there are signs of this
sign; Diverse; All these; A Virgin shall conceive, A Virgin shall bring forth,
Bring forth a Son, And (whatsoever have been prophesied before) she shall call
his name Immanuel.

First, a Virgin shall be a mother, which is a very particular sign, and was
seen but once. That which Gellius, and Pliny say, that a Virgin had a child,
almost 200. years before Christ, that which Genebrard says, that the like
fell out in France, in his time, are not within our faith, and they are without
our reason; our faith stoopes not down to them, and our Reason reaches not up
to them; of this Virgin in our text, If that be true, which Aquinas cites out
of the Roman story, that in the times of Constantine and Irene, upon a dead
body found in a sepulcher, there was found this inscription, in a plate of
gold, Christus nascetur ex Virgin, and ego credo in eum, Christ shall be borne
of a Virgin, and I believe in that Christ, with this addition, in that
inscription, O Sol, sub Irenae, and Constantini temporibus, iterum me videbis,
Though I be now buried from the sight of the sun, yet in Constantines time, the
sun shall see me again; If this be true, yet our ground is not upon such
testimony; If God had not said it, I would never have believed it. And
therefore I must have leave to doubt of that which some of the Roman Casuists
have delivered, That a Virgin may continue a virgin upon earth, and receive the
particular dignity of a Virgin in Heaven, and yet have a child, by the
insinuation and practice of the Devil; so that there shall be a father, and a
mother, and yet both they Virgins. That this Mother, in our text, was a Virgin,
is a peculiar, a singular sign, given, as such, by God; never done but then;
and it is a singular testimony, how acceptable to God, that state of virginity
is; He does not dishonor physic, that magnifies health; nor does he
dishonor marriage, that praises Virginity; let them embrace that state, that
can; and certainly, many more might do it, then do, if they would try whether
they could, or no; and if they would follow S. Cyprians way, Virgo non tantum
esse, sed and intelligi esse debet, and credi: It is not enough for a virgin to
be a virgin in her own knowledge, but she must govern her self so, as that
others may see, that she is one, and see, that she has a desire, and a
disposition, to continue so still; Ita, ut nemo, cum virginem viderit, dubitet
an sit virgo, says that Father, She must appear in such garments, in such
language, and in such motions, (for, as a wife may wear other clothes, so she
may speak other words, then a virgin may do) as they that see her, may not
question, nor dispute, whether she be a maid or no. The word in the Text, is
derived a latendo, from retiring, from privatenesse: And Tertullian, who makes
the note, notes withal, that Ipsa concupiscentia non latendi, non est pudica,
The very concupiscence of conversation, and visits, is not chaste: Studium
placendi, publicatione sui, periclitatur, says the same Author: Curious
dressings are for public eyes; and the Virgin that desires to publish her
self, is weary of that state: It is usefully added by him, Dum percutitur
oculis alienis, frons duratur, and pudor teritur, the eyes of others, that
strike upon her, (if she be willing to stand out that battery) dry up that
blood, that should blush, and wear out that chastity, which should be
preserved. So precious is virginity in Gods eye, as that he looks upon that,
with a more jealous eye, than upon other states.

This blessed Mother of God, in our text, was a Virgin: when? Virgo concipiet,
Contepit.
says our Text, A Virgin shall conceive, when she conceived, she was a Virgin.
There are three Heresies; all noted by S. Augustine that impeach the virginity
of this most blessed Woman: The Cerinthians said she conceived by ordinary
generation; Iovinian said, she was delivered by ordinary means; And Helvidius
said, she had children after: All against all the world besides themselves, and
against one another. For the first, that is enough which S. Basil says, that
if the word Virgin in our text signified no more but adolescentulam, a young
woman (as they pretend) it had been an impertinent, an absurd thing for the
Prophet to have made that a sign, and a wonder, that a young woman should have a
child. This is enough, but that is abundantly enough, that S. Matthew, who
spoke with the same spirit that Esaias did, says in a word, which can admit no
mis-interpretation, That that was fulfilled which Esaias had said, A Virgin shall
conceive; Mat. 1.23.
S. Matthews word without question, is a Virgin, and not a young woman, and S.
Matthew took Esaies word to be so too; and S. Matthew (at least he that spoke
in S. Matthew) did not, could not mistake, and mistake himself, for it was one
and the same Holy Ghost that spoke both. Ps. 21.
Christ says therefore of himself, vermis sum, I am a worm, but says S.
Ambrose, vermis de Manna, a worm out of a pure substance, a holy Man, from a
blessed Virgin; Virgo concepit, she was a Virgin then, then when she had
conceived.

She was so to, In partu.
In partu, then when she was delivered; Iovinian denied that: A better then he
(Tertullian) denied it: Virgo quantum a viro, non quantum a partu, says he, she
was such a Virgin as knew no man, not such a Virgin as needed no midwife: Virgo
concepit, says he, in partu nupsit, a Virgin in her conception, but a wife in
the deliverance of her Son. Let that be wrapped up amongst Tertullians errors,
he had many; The text cleares it, A virgin shall conceive, a virgin shall bear
a Son: The Apostles Creed cleares it, says S. August: when it says, Born of
the Virgin Mary; and S. Ambrose cleares it, when he says, with such
indignation, De via iniquitat is produntur dicere, virgo co^cepit, sed non
virgo generavit, It is said, that there are some men so impious, as to deny
that she remained a Virgin at the birth of her Son: S. Ambrose wondered there
should be, scarce believed it to be any other then a rumor, or a slander, that
there could be any so impious, as to deny that: Cramerus.
And yet there have been some so impious, as to charge Calvin, with that
impiety, with denying her to be a Virgin then; It is true, he makes it not a
matter of faith, to defend her perpetual virginity; but that is not this case,
of her Virginity in her Deliverance: And even of that, (of her perpetual
virginity) he says thus, Nemo unquam quaestionem movebit, nisi curiofus, nemo
pertinaciter insistet, nisi contentiosus rixator; He is overcurious, that will
make any doubt of it; but no man will persist in the denial of it, but a
contentious wrangler; And in that very point, S. Basil says fully as much, as
Calvin. But, at his birth, and after his birth, there is evidence enough in
this text, A Virgin shall conceive, A Virgin shall bring forth, A Virgin shall
call him Immanuel, In all those future, and subsequent Acts, still it is the
same person, and in the same condition.

Pariet, Filium.
and pariet filium, She shall bring forth a Son; If a Son, then of the
substance of his Mother; that the Anabaptists deny; But had it not been so,
Christ had not been true Man, and then, man were yet unredeemed. He is her
Son, but not her ward; his Father cannot dye: Her Son, but yet he asked her no
leave, to stay at Jerusalem, nor to dispute with the Doctors, nor to go about
his Fathers work: His settling of Religion, his governing the Church, his
dispensing of his graces, is not by warrant from her: They that call upon the
Bishop of Rome, in that voice, Impera Regibus, command Kings and Emperors,
admit of that voice, Imperafilio, to her, that she should command her Sonno.
The natural obedience of children to Parents, holds not in such civil things,
as are public; A woman may be a Queen-Dowager, and yet a subject; The blessed
Virgin Mary may be in a high rank, Luke 1.28.
and yet no Sovereign; Blessed art thou amongst women, says the Angel to
her; Amongst women, above women; but not above any person of the Trinity, that
she should command her Son. Luther was awake, and risen, but he was not ready;
He had seen light, and looked toward it, but yet saw not so clearly by it,
then, when he said, That the blessed Virgin was of a middle condition, between
Christ, and man; that man has his conception, and his quickening (by the
infusion of the soul) in original sin; that Christ had it in neither, no sin
in his conception, none in his inanimation, in the infusion of his soul; But,
says Luther, howsoever it were at the conception, certainly at the
inanimation, at the quickening, she was preserved from original sin. Now, what
needs this? may I not say, that I had rather be redeemed by Christ Jesus then
be innocent? rather be beholden to Christ's death, for my salvation, then to
Adams standing in his innocence. Epiphanius said enough, Par detrimentum
afferunt religioni, they hurt Religion as much, that ascribe too little, to the
blessed Virgin, as they who ascribe too much; much is due to her, and this
amongst the rest, That she had so clear notions, above all others, what kind
of person, her Son was, that as Adam gave names, according to natures, so the
Prophet here leaves it to her, to name her Son, according to his office, She
shall call his name Immanuel.

We told you at first, Immanuel.
that both Joseph and Mary, were told by the Angel, that his name was to be
Jesus, and we told you also, that others, besides him, had been called by that
name of Jesus: but, as, though others were called Jesus, (for Iosuah is called
so, Heb. 4.8. If Jesus had given them rest; that is, If Iosuah had etc. And the
son of Iosedech is called so, throughout the Prophet Aggai) yet there is
observed a difference in the pointing, and founding of those names, from this
our Jesus: so though other women were called Mary, as well as the blessed
Virgin, yet the Evangelists, evermore make a difference, between her name, and
the other Mary's; for Her they call Mariam, and the rest Maria. Now this Jesus,
in this person, is a real, an actual Savior, he that has already really,
and actually accomplished our salvation; But the blessed Virgin had a clearer
illustration, then all that; for she only knew, or she knew best, the
capacity, in which he could be a Savior, that is, as he is Immanuel, God with
us; for she, and she only knew, that he was the Son of God, and not of
natural generation by man. How much is enwrapped in this name Immanuel, and
how little time to unfold it? I am afraid none at all; A minute will serve to
repeat that which S. Bernard says, and a day, a life will not serve to
comprehend it; (for to comprehend is not to know a thing, as far as I can know
it, but to know it as far, as that thing can be known; and so only God, can
comprehend God.) Immanuel est verbuminfans, says the Father; He is the ancient
of days, and yet in minority; he is the Word it self, and yet speechless; he
that is All, that all the Prophets spoke of, cannot speak: He adds more, He
is Puer sapiens, but a child, and yet wiser then the elders, wiser in the
Cradle, then they in the Chair: He is more, Deus lactens, God, at whose
breasts all creatures suck, sucking at his Mothers breast, and such a Mother,
as is a maid. Immanuel is God with us; it is not we with God: God seeks us,
comes to us, before we to him: And it is God with us, in that notion, in that
termination, El, which is Deus fortis, The powerful God; not only i^
infirmity, as when he died in our nature, but as he is Deus fortis, able and
ready to assist, and deliver us, in all encumbrances; so he is with us; And
with us, usque ad consummationem, till the end of the world, in his Word, and
in the Sacraments: for, though I may not say, as some have said, That by the
word of Consecration, Cornelius.
in the administration of the Sacrament, Christ is so infallibly produced, as
that, if Christ had never been incarnate before, yet, at the pronouncing of
those words of consecration, he must necessarily be incarnate then, yet I may
say, that God is as effectually present, with every worthy receiver, as that
he is not more effectually present with the Saints in Heaven.

And this is that, which is intimated in that word, which we seposed at first,
Ecce.
for the last of all, Ecce, Behold; Behold, a Virgin shall conceive etc. God
does not furnish a room, and leave it dark; he sets up lights in it; his
first care was, that his benefits should be seen; he made light first, and
then creatures, to be seen by that light: He sheds himself from my mouth,
upon the whole auditory here; he powers himself from my hand, to all the
Communicants at the table; I can say to you all here, The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you, and remain with you all; I can say to them all
there, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for you, preserve you
to everlasting life: I can bring it so near; but only the worthy hearer, and
the worthy receiver, can call this Lord, this Jesus, this Christ, Immanuel, God
with us; only that Virgin soul, devirginated in the blood of Adam, but
restored in the blood of the Lamb, has this Ecce, this testimony, this
assurance, that God is with him; they that have this Ecce, this testimony, in a
rectified conscience, are Godfathers to this child Jesus, and may call him
Immanuel, God with us; for, as no man can deceive God, so God can deceive no
man; God cannot live in the dark himself, neither can he leave those, who are
his, in the dark: If he be with thee, he will make thee see, that he is with
thee; and never go out of thy sight, till he have brought thee, where thou
can never go out of his.

SERMON III. Preached upon Christmas day, at S. Paul's, 1625.
GALAT. 4.4. and 5. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons.


WE are met here to celebrate the generation of Christ Jesus; Esaias 53.8.
but Generationem ejus quis enarrabit, says the Prophet, who shall declare his
generation, his age? For, for his essential generation, be which he is the Son
of God, the Angels, who are almost 6000. years elder then we, are no nearer to
that generation of his, then if they had been made but yesterday: Eternity has
no such distinctions, no limits, no periods, no seasons, no months, no years,
no days; Methusalem, who was so long lived, was no elder in respect of
eternity, then David's son by Berseba, that dyed the first week. The first Fiat
in the Creation of Adam, and the last note of the blowing of the Trumpets to
judgment, (though there be between these (as it is ordinarily received) 2000.
years of nature, between the Creation, and the giving of the Law by Moses, and
2000. years of the Law between that, and the coming of Christ, and 2000.
years of Grace and Gospel between Christ first, and his second coming) yet
this Creation and this Judgment are not a minute asunder in respect of
eternity, which has no minutes. Whence then arises all our vexation and
labor, all our anxieties and anguishes, all our suits and pleadings, for long
leases, for many lives, for many years purchase in this world, when, if we be
in our way to the eternal King of the eternal kingdom, Christ Jesus, all we
are not yet, all the world shall never be a minute old; Generationem ejus quis
enarrabit, what tongue can declare, what heart can conceive his generation
which was so long before any heart or tongue was made? But we come not now to
consider that eternal generation, not Christ merely as the Son of God, but the
Son of Mary too: And that generation the Holy Ghost has told us, was in the
fullness of time: When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth, etc.

In which words, Divisio.
we have these three considerations; First, the time of Christ's coming, and
that was the fullness of time; And then, the manner of his coming, which is
expressed in two degrees of humiliation, one, that he was made of a woman, the
other, that he was made under the Law; And then, the third part is the purpose
of his coming, which also was twofold; for first, he came to redeem them who
were under the Law, All; And secondly he came, that we (we the elect of God in
him) might receive adoption; When the fullness of time was come, etc.

For the full consideration of this fullness of time, (...).
we shall first consider this fullness in respect of the Jews, and then in
respect of all Nations, and lastly in respect of our selves: The Jews might
have seen the fullness of time, the Gentiles did (in some measure) see it, and
we must (if we will have any benefit by it) see it too. It is an observation of
S. Cyril, That none of the Saints of God, nor such as were noted to be
exemplarily religious, and sanctified men did ever celebrate with any festival
solemnity, their own birthday. Pharaoh celebrated his own Nativity, (...)
40.22.
but who would make Pharaoh his example? and besides, he polluted that
festival with the blood of one of his servants. Herod celebrated his Nativity,
but who would think it an honor to be like Herod? and besides, he polluted that
festival with the blood of John Baptist. But the just contemplation of the
miseries and calamities of this life, into which our birthday is the door,
and the entrance, is so far from giving any just occasion of a festival, as it
has often transported the best disposed Saints and servants of God to a
distemper, to a malediction, and cursing of their birthday. (...)
Cursed be the day wherein I was born, and let not that day wherein my mother
bare me be blessed. Let the day perish wherein I was born, let that day be
darkness, Job 3.
and let not God regard it from above. How much misery is presaged to us, when
we come so generally weeping into the world, that, perchance, in the whole body
of history we read but of one child, Zoroaster, that laughed at his birth:
What miserable revolutions and changes, what downfals, what break-necks, and
precipitations may we justly think our selves ordained to, if we consider, that
in our coming into this world out of our mothers womb, we do not make account
that a child comes right, except it come with the head forward, and thereby
prefigure that headlong falling into calamities which it must suffer after?
Though therefore the days of the Martyrs, which are for our example celebrated
in the Christian Church, be ordinarily called natalitia Martyrum, the birthday
of the Martyrs, yet that is not intended of their birth in this world, but of
their birth in the next; when, by death their souls were new delivered of
their prisons here, and they newly born into the kingdom of heaven; that day,
upon that reason, the day of their death was called their birthday, and
celebrated in the Church by that name. Only to Christ Jesus, the fullness of
time was at his birth; not because he also had not a painful life to pass
through, but because the work of our redemption was an entire work, and all
that Christ said, or did, or suffered, concurred to our salvation, as well his
mothers swathing him in little clouts, as Joseph's shrowding him in a funeral
sheet; as well his cold lying in the Manger, as his cold dying upon the
Cross; as well the puer natus, as the consummatum est; as well his birth, as
his death is said to have been the fullness of time.

First we consider it to have been so to the Jews; for this was that fullness,
Indeic.
in which all the prophecies concerning the Messiah, were exactly fulfilled;
Dan. 2. Hagg. 2. Mich. 5. Esaias 7.
That he must come whilst the Monarchy of Rome flourished; And before the
Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed; That he must be born in Bethlem; That he
must be born of a Virgin; His person, his actions, his passion so distinctly
prophesied, so exactly accomplished, as no word being left unfulfilled, this
must necessarily be a fullness of time. So fully was the time of the Messiah
coming, come, that though some of the Jews say now, that there is no certain
time revealed in the Scriptures when the Messiah shall come, and others of them
say, that there was a time determined, and revealed, and that this time was the
time, but by reason of their great sins he did not come at his time, yet when
they examine their own supputations, they are so convinced with that evidence,
that this was that fullness of time, that now they express a kind of
conditional acknowledgement of it, by this barbarous and inhumane custom of
theirs, that they always keep in readiness the blood of some Christian, with
which they anoint the body of any that dies amongst them, with these words, if
Jesus Christ were the Messiah, then may the blood of this Christian avail thee
to salvation: So that by their doubt, and their employed consent, in this
action, this was the fullness of time, when Christ Jesus did come, that the
Messiah should come.

It was so to the Jews, and it was so to the Gentiles too; Gontibus.
It filled those wise men which dwelt so far in the East, that they followed
the star from thence to Jerusalem. Herod was so full of it, that he filled the
Country with streams of innocent blood, and lest he should spare that one
innocent child, killed all. The two Emperors of Rome, Vespasian and Domitian
were so full of it, that in jealousy of a Messiah to come then, from that
race, they took special care for the destruction of all, of the posterity of
David. All the whole people were so full of it, that diverse false-Messiahs,
Barcocab, and Moses of Crete, and others rose up, and drew, and deceived the
people, as if they had been the Messiah, because that was ordinarily known,
and received to be the time of his coming. And the Devil himself was so full
of it, as that in his Oracles he gave that answer, That an Hebrew child should
be God over all gods, and brought the Emperor to erect an Altar, to this
Messiah Christ Jesus, though he knew not what he did. This was the fullness
that filled Jew and Gentile, Kings and Philosophers, strangers and inhabitants,
counterfaits and devils to the expectation of a Messiah; and when comes this
fullness of time to us, that we feel this Messiah born in our selves?

In this fullness, in this coming of our Savior into us, Nobis.
we should find a threefold fulness in our selves; we should find a
fullness of nature (because not only of spiritual, but of natural and
temporal things, all the right which we have in this world, is in, and for,
and by Christ, for so we end all our prayers of all sorts, with that clause,
per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, Grant this O Lord, for our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus sake.) And we should find a fullness of grace, a daily sense of
improvement growth in grace, a filling of all former vacuities, a supplying of
all emptinesses in our souls, till we came to Stephens fullness, Acts 6.3.
ver. 5. and 8.
Full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, and full of the holy Ghost and Faith, and
full of faith and power: And so we should come to find a fullness of glory,
that is an apprehension and inchoation of heaven in this life; for the glory of
the next world, is not in the measure of that glory, but in the measure of my
capacity; it is not that I shall have as much as any soul has, but that I
shall have as much as my soul can receive; it is not in an equality with the
rest, but in a fullness in my self; And so, as I shall have a fullness of
nature, that is, such an ability and such a use of natural faculties, and such
a portion of the natural things of this world as shall serve to fill up Gods
purpose in me: And as I shall have a fullness of grace, that is, such a measure
of grace as shall make me discern a tentation, and resist a tentation, or at
least repent it, if I have not effectually resisted it, so even here, I shall
have a fullness of glory, that is, as much of that glory as a wayfaring soul
is capable of in this world; All these fulnesses I shall have, if I can find
and feel in my self this birth of Christ. His eternal birth in heaven is
unexpressible, where he was born without a mother; His birth on earth is
unexpressible too, where he was born without a father; but thou shall feel the
joy of his third birth in thy soul, most inexpressible this day, where he is
born this day (if thou will) without father or mother; that is, without any
former, or any other reason then his own mere goodness that should beget that
love in him toward thee, and without any matter or merit in thee which should
enable thee to conceive him. He had a heavenly birth, by which he was the
eternal Son of God, and without that he had not been a person able to redeem
thee; He had a humane birth, by which he was the Son of Mary, and without that
he had not been sensible in himself of thine infirmities, and necessities; but,
this day (if thou will) he has a spiritual birth in thy soul, without which,
both his divine, and his humane birth are utterly unprofitable to thee, and
thou art no better then if there had never been Son of God in heaven, nor Son
of Mary upon earth. Even the Stork in the air knows her appointed time, Jer.
8.
and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their
coming, but my people knows not the judgments of the Lord. For, if you do
know your time, you know that now is your fullness of time; This is your
particular Christmas Day; when, if you be but as careful to cleanse your
souls, as you are your houses, if you will but follow that counsel of S.
Augustine, Quicquid non vis inveniri in domo tua, non inveniat Deus in anima
tua, That uncleanness which you would be loath your neighbor should find in
your houses, let not God nor his Angels find in your souls, Christ Jesus is
certainly born. and will as certainly grow up in your souls.

We pass from this, 2 Part.
to our second part, The manner of his coming; where we proposed two degrees
of Christ's humiliation, That he was made of a woman, and made under the Law. In
the first alone, are two degrees too, that he takes the name of the Son of a
woman, and wanes the glorious name of the Son of God; And then, that he takes
the name of the son of a woman, Mulieris non Dei.
and wanes the miraculous name of the son of a Virgin. For the first; Christ
ever refers himself to his Father; As he says, The Father which sent me, Joh.
12.
gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak, so, for all
that which he did or suffered, Joh. 4. Joh. 16.
he says, My meat is to do his will that sent me, and to finish his work:
And so, though he say, I am come out from the Father, and am come into the
world; yet, be where he will, still, Ego and pater unum sumus, He and his
Father were all one. But devesting that glory, or slumbring it in his flesh,
till the Father glorify him again with that glory, which he had with him from
the beginning, in his Ascension, he humbles himself here to that addition, The
Son of a woman, made of a woman.

Christ waned the glorious Name of Son of God, Non Virginis.
and the miraculous Name of Son of a Virgin to; which is not omitted to draw
into doubt, the perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of
Christ; she is not called a woman, as though she were not a Maid; when it is
said, Joseph knew her not, donec peperit, till she brought forth her Son, this
did not imply his knowledge of her after, no more, then when God says to
Christ, donec ponam, sit at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool, that imports, that Christ should remove from his right hand after:
For, here is a perpetual donec in both places; for evermore the ancient
Expositors have understood that place of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 44.2.
to be intended of the perpetual Virginity of Mary, This gate shall be shut,
and shall not be opened, and no man shall enter by it. Solomon has an
exclamation, Is there any thing whereof a man may say, Behold this is new? and
he answers himself immediately before, There is no new thing under the Sun.
But behold here is a greater then Solomon, and he says now in action, by being
borne of a Virgin, as he had said, long before, in Prophecy, The Lord has
created a new thing upon earth, a woman shall compass a man. Jer. 31.
If this had been spoken of such a woman, as were no Maid, this had been no new
thing: As it was, it was without example, and without natural reason; si ratio
reddi posset, (says St. Bernard) non esset mirabile, si exempla haberemus, non
esset singular; If there were reason for it, it were no miracle, if there were
precedents for it, it were not singular; and God intended both, that it should
be a miracle, and that it should be done but once; we see in Nature, trees do
bud out, and there is an emission, and emanation of flowers, and fruits,
without any help of man, or any act done by him, to that tree; we read in
Genesis, That the earth had produced all plants and herbs, before either any
rain fell upon it, or any man tilled it. And these are good helps, and
illustrations to us, after we have believed that a Virgin brought forth a Son;
but nothing deduced out of nature, could prove this at first, to any man,
except he believed it before. And therefore blessed be God, that has given us
that strength, which the Egyptian Mid-wives said the women of Israel had, that
they brought forth children, without the help of Mid-wives: That we can humbly
believe these mysteries of our religion, by faith, without the hand, and help
of Reason; Si nondum men's idonea, abstrusa investigare, sine haesitatione
credantur, says St. Augustine, In things which are not subject to any faculty
of ours, to be discerned by reason, there is a present exercise of our faith.
As we know it to be true, that the bush, in which God spoke to Moses, was full
of fire, and did burn, but not consume, because God has said so, in his
book, but yet we do not know, how that was done: so we know, (by the same
evidence) that the Mother of our Savior, was a Virgin; but for the manner of
this Mystery, we rest upon Epiphanius Rule, Quaecunque dicit Deus, credamus
quod sint; quomodo, Soli Deo cognitum: whatsoever God, in his word, says, was
done, let us believe it to be done; how it was done, as we know that God
knows, so we are content not to inquire more then it has been his pleasure to
communicate to us.

She was then, and she was always a Virgin; but because this Text is of his
Humiliation, he leaves that Name that proceeds from miracle, and descends to
that lower name of nature, Made of a woman. The Spirit of God foresaw, that
the issue between the Church, and the Heretics would not be Virgin or no
Virgin, but whether Christ were made of a woman. Some Heretics did question
the first; The Helvidians denied her perpetual Virginity: But that Heresy,
and some others that opposed her Virginity, vanished in a short time. But the
Manichees, that lasted long, and spread far in the old times, and the
Anabaptists, which abound yet, deny that Christ was made of a woman; They say,
that Christ passed through her, as water through a Pipe, but took nothing of
her substance; and then, if he took not the nature of mankind, he has not
redeemed mankind. And therefore in that Prophecy of Jeremy, that Christ
should be borne, and in this Gospel, in our Text, that Christ was borne, the
Holy Ghost mainttaines and continues that phrase, Made of a woman: And where he
begins to express his Divinity in miracles, Joh. 2.
at the marriage in Cana, there Christ himself calls her, by no other name,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? And when he had drawn all his miracles to
a glorious consummatum est, upon the Cross, he calls her there, by that name
too, Woman, behold thy Son. Joh. 19.
Here then was no such curious insisting upon Styles and Titles, and names of
Dignities, no unkindnesse, no displeasure taken; if one should leave out a
Right Honorable, or Right Worshipful, or an addition of an Office or Dignity;
The powerfulness of Christ's birth, consists in this, That he is made of God;
The miraculousnesse of Christ's birth, consisted in this, that he was made of a
Virgin, and yet the Prophet and the Apostle, two principal Secretaries of the
Holy Ghost, present him with this addition, made of a woman. Christ had one
privilege in his birth, which never any Prince had, or shall have, that is,
that he chose what Mother he would have, and might have been borne of what
woman he would have chosen. And in this large and universal chovce, though he
chose a woman full of grace to be his Mother, yet that he might give spiritual
comfort to all sorts of women, first to those, who should be unjustly
suspected, and insimulated of sin and incontinency, when indeed they were
innocent, he was content to come of a Mother, who should be subject to that
suspicion, and whom her husband should think to be with child, before he
married her, and thereupon purpose to put her away; And then, Mat. 1.
to fill those women, who had been guilty of that sin, with relief in their
consciences against the wrath of God, and with reparation of their reputation
and good name in the world, it was his unsearchable will and pleasure, that in
all that Genealogy, and pedigree, which he, and his spirit has inspired the
Evangelists to record of his Ancestors, there is not one woman named, of whom
Christ is descended, who is not dangerously noted in the Scriptures, to have
had some aspersion of incontinence upon her; as both St. Hierome, and St.
Ambrose, and St. Chrysostom observes, of Thamar, of Berseba, and of Ruth also.

So then, Christ Jesus who came only for the relief of sinners, is content to
be known to have come, not only of poor parents, but of a sinful race; and
though he exempted his Blessed Mother, more then any, from sin, yet he is now
content to be born again of sinful Mothers: In that soul, that accuses it self
most of sin; In that soul, that calls now to mind, (with remorce, and not with
delight) the several times, and places, and ways, wherein she has offended
God; In that soul that acknowledges it self to have bin a sink of
uncleanness, a Tabernacle, a Synagogue of Satan; In that soul, that has been
as it were possessed with Mary Magdalens seven Devils, yea with him, whose name
was Legion, with all Devils; In that sinful soul would Christ Jesus fain be
born, this day, and make that soul, his Mother, that he might be a regeneration
to that soul. We cannot afford Christ, such a birth in us, as he had, to be
born of a Virgin; for every one of us wel-nigh has married himself to some
particular sin, some beloved sin, that he can hardly divorce himself from;
nay, no man keeps his faith, to that one sin, that he has married himself
to, but mingles himself with other sins also. Though Covetousness, whom he
loves, as the wife of his bosom, have made him rich, yet he will commit
adultery with another sin, with Ambition; and he will part, even with those
riches, for Honor: Though Ambition be his wife, his married sin, yet he will
commit adultery with another sin, with Licentiousness, and he will endanger
his Honor, to fulfill his Lust; Ambition may be his wife, but Lust is his
Concubine. We abandon all spiritual chastity; all virginity, we marry our
particular sins, Ezech. 16.
and then we divide our loves with other sins too: Thou have multiplied thy
fornications, and yet art not satisfied, is a complaint, that reaches us all,
in spiritual fornications, and goes very far, in carnal. And yet, for all
this, we are capable of this Conception, Christ may be borne in us, for all
this: As God said unto the Prophet, Take thee a wife of fornications, and
children of fornications; so is Christ Jesus content to take our souls, though
too often mothers of fornications: As long as we are united, and incorporated
in his beloved Spouse, the Church, conform our selves to her, grow up in her,
hearken to his word in her, feed upon his Sacraments in her, acknowledge a
seal of reconciliation, by the absolution of the Minister in her, so long,
(how unclean soever we have bin, if we abhor and forsake our uncleanness
now) we participate of the chastity of that Spouse of his, the Church, and in
her, are made capable of this conception of Christ Jesus, and so, it is as true
this hour of us, as it was when the Apostle spoke these words, This is the
fullness of time, when God sent his Son, etc.

Now you remember, Sub lege.
that in this second part, (the manner of Christ's coming) we proposed two
degrees of humiliation; One which we have handled, in a double respect, as he
is made, filius mulieris, non Dei, the son of a woman, and not the Son of God;
the other, as he is filius mulieris, non Virginis, The son of a woman, and not
called the son of a Virgin.

The second remains, that he was sub lege, under the law; now, this phrase, to
be under the law, is not always so narrowly limited in the Scriptures, as to
signify only the law of Moses; for, so, only the Jews were under the law,
and so, Christ's coming for them, who were under the law, his Death, and Merits
should belong only to the Jews. But St. Augustine observes, that when Christ
sent the message of his birth, to the wise men, in the East, by a star, and
to the shepherds, about Bethlem, by an Angel, In pastoribus, Iudaei; in magis,
Gentes vocatae; The Jews had their calling in that manifestation to the
shepherds, and the Gentiles in that, to the wise men in the East. But besides
that Christ did submit himself, to all the weight even of the Ceremonial law
of Moses, he was under a heavyer law, then that, under that lex decreti, the
contract and covenant with God the Father, under that oportuit pati, This he
ought to suffer, before he could enter into glory. So that his being under the
law, may be accounted not a part of his Humiliation, as his being made of a
woman was, but rather the whole history, and frame of his humiliation, All that
concerns his obedience, even to that law, which the Father had laid upon him;
for, the life and death of Christ, from the Ave Maria, to the consummatum est,
from his coming into this World, in his Conception, to his transmigration upon
the Cross, was all under this law, heavier then any law, that any man is
under, the law of the contract, and covenant between the Father, and him.

Though therefore we may think, judging by the law of reason, that since Christ
came to gather a Church, and to draw the world to him, it would more have
advanced that purpose of his, to have been borne at Rome, where the seat of the
Empire, and the confluence of all Nations, was, then in Jury, and (if he would
offer the Gospel first to the Jews) better to have been borne at Jerusalem,
where all the outward, public, solemn worship of the Jews was, then at
obscure Bethlem, and in Bethlem, in some better place then in an Inn, in a
Stable, in a Manger; though we may think thus, in the law of reason, yet, non
cogitationes meae cogitationes vestrae, says God in the Prophet, Esaias 55.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my laws your laws, for I am sub lege
decreti, under another manner of law, then falls within your reading, under an
obedience to that covenant, which has passed between my Father, and me, and
by those Degrees, and no other way, was my humiliation, for your Redemption, to
be expressed. Though we may think in the law of Reason, that his work of
propagating the Gospel, would have gone better forward, if he had taken for his
Apostles, some Tullies, or Hortensii, or Senecaes, great, and persuading
Orators, in stead of his Peter, and John, and Matthew, and those Fishermen, and
tent-makers, and toll-gatherers; Though we might think in reason, and in piety
too, that when he would humble himself to take our salvation into his care, it
had been enough, to have been under the law of Moses, to live innocently, and
righteously, without shedding of his blood; If he would shed blood, it might
have been enough to have done so in the Circumcision, and scourging, without
dying; If he would die, it might have been enough to have dyed some less
accursed, and less ignominious death, then the death of the Cross; though we
might reasonably enough, and piously enough, think thus, yet, non cogitationes
vestrae, cogitationes meae, says the Lord, your way is not my way, your law is
not my law; for, Christ was sub lege decreti, and thus, as he did, and no other
way, it became him to fulfill all righteousness, that is, all that Decree of
God, which he had accepted, and acknowledged as Righteous. He was so much under
Moses law, as he would be: so much under that law, as that he suffered that
law, to be wrested against him, and to be pretended to be broken by him, and
to be endited, and condemned by that law. The Jews pressed that law, non sines
veneficu^ vivere, Thou shall not suffer a witch to live, Exodus 22.
when they attributed all his glorious miracles, to the power of the devil: and
the Romans were incensed against him, for treason, and sedition, as though he
aliened and withdrew the people from Caesar. But he was under a heavyer law,
then Jews or Romans, the Law of his Father, and his own eternal Decree, so
far, as that he came to that sense of the weight thereof, Eli, Eli, My God,
My God, why have thou forsaken me? and was never delivered from the burden of
this law, till he pleaded the performance of all conditions between his Father,
and him, and delivered up all the evidence thereof, in those words, In manus
tuas, Into thy hands, O Lord I give my spirit, and so presented both the
righteousness of his soul, which had fulfilled the law, and the soul it
self, which was under the law. He dyed in Execution, and so discharged all;
And so we have done with our second part, The manner of his coming.

We are come now, in our Order, to our third part, The purpose of Christ's
coming; 3. Part.
and in that we consider two objects, that Christ had, and two subjects to work
upon, two kinds of work, and two kinds of persons; First, to Redeem, and
then to Adopt; Those are his works, his objects; And then, To redeem those
that were under the law, that is, all, but to Adopt those whom he had chosen,
us; And those are the persons, the subjects, that he works upon, by his coming.

First then, (to begin with the persons) those of the first kind, Sub lege.
those that were under the Law: for them, (as we told you before) the law must
not be so narrowly restrained here, as to be intended only of Moses Law, for
Christ's purpose was not only upon the Jews; for else, Naaman the Syrian, by
whom God fought great battles, 2 Reg. 5.
before he was cured of his leprosy, and who, when he was cured, was so
zealous of the worship of the true God, that he would needs carry holy earth,
to make Altars of, from the place, where the Prophet dwelt: And else, Job, who
though he were of the land of Hus, has good testimony of being an upright and
just man, and one that feared God; And else, the Widow of Sarepta, 1. Reg. 17.
whose meal, and oil God preserved unwasted, and whose dead son, God raised
again, at the prayer of Eliah; All these, and all others, whom the searching
Spirit of God, seals to his service, in all the corners of the earth, because
they are strangers in the land of Israel, should not be under the Law, and so
should have no profit by Christ's being made under the Law, if the Law should be
understood, only of the Law of Moses. And therefore to be under the Law,
signifies here, thus much, To be a debtor to the law of nature, to have a
testimony in our hearts and consciences, that there lies a law upon us, which
we have no power in our selves to perform; that to those laws, To love God
with all our powers, and to love our neighbor as our selves, and to do, as we
would be done to, we find our selves naturally bound, and yet we find our
selves naturally unable to perform them, and so to need the assistance of
another, which must be Christ Jesus, to perform them for us; And so, all men,
Jews and Gentiles are under the Law, because naturally they feel a law upon
them, which they break. And therefore wheresoever our power becomes defective,
in the performance of this law, if our will be not defective too, if we come
not to say, God has given us an impossible Law, and therefore it is lost
labor, to go about to perform it, or God has given us another to perform
this Law for us, and therefore nothing is required at our hands; If we abstain
from these quarrels to the law, and these murmurings at our own infirmity, we
shall find, that the fullness of time is this day come, this day Christ is
come to all that are under the Law, that is, to all mankind; to all, because
all are unable to perform that Law, which they all see, by the light of nature
to lie upon them.

These then be the persons of the first kind, Redemit.
All, all the world; Dilexit mundum, God so loved the world, that he gave his
Son for it, for all the world; And, accordingly, venit salvare mundum, the
obedience of the Son, was as large as the love of the Father, He came to save
all the world, and he did save all the world; God would have all men, and
Christ did save all men. It is therefore fearfully (and scarce allowably said)
that Christ did contrary to his Fathers will, when he called those to grace, of
whom he knew his Fathers pleasure to be, that they should have no grace; It is
fearfully and dangerously said, Absurdum non esse, Deum interdum falsa loqui,
and falsum loquenti credendum, that it is not absurd to say, (that is, that it
may truly be said) that God does sometimes speak untruly, and that we are
bound to believe God, when he does so: for, if we consider the sovereign balm
of our souls, the blood of Christ Jesus, there is enough for all the world, if
we consider the application of this physic, by the Ministers of Christ Jesus
in the Church, he has given us that spreading Commission, To go and preach
to every creature, we are bid to offer, to apply, to minister this to all the
world: Christ has excommunicated no Nation, no shire, no house, no man: He
gives none of his Ministers leave to say to any man, thou art not Redeemed, he
gives no wounded nor afflicted conscience leave, to say to it self, I am not
Redeemed. There may be meat enough brought into the house, for all the house,
though some be so weak, as they cannot, (which is the case of the Gentiles)
some so stubborn, as they will not eat, (which is the case of the carnal
man, though in the Christian Church.)

He came to all, There are the persons, and to Redeem all, there is his
errand; but how to Redeem? S. Hierome says, Gentes non Redimuntur, sed
emuntur: The Gentiles, says he, are not properly Christ's, by way of
Redeeming, but by an absolute purchase: To which purpose those words are also
applied, which the Apostle says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price, S. Hieroms meaning therein, is, that if we compare
the Jews and the Gentiles, though God permitted the Jews, in punishment of
their rebellions, to be captivated by the devil in Idolatries, yet the Jews
were but as in a mortgage, for they had been Gods peculiar people before; But
the Gentiles were as the devils inheritance, for God had never claimed them,
nor owned them for his; and therefore God says to Christ, Ps. 2.8.
Postula a me, Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine
inheritance; as though they were not his yet, or not his by that title, as the
Jews were. So that, in S. Hieromes construction, the Jews, which were Gods
people before, were properly Redeemed, the Gentiles, to whom God made no title
before, are rather bought, then redeemed. But, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi,
against the King of Kings there runs no prescription; no man can divest his
Allegiance to his Prince, and say he will be subject no longer; And therefore,
since the Gentiles, were his by his first title of Creation, (for, it is he
that has made us, and not we our selves, nor the devil neither) when all we,
by our general revolt, and prevarication, (as we were all collectively in
Adams loins) came to be under that law, morte morieris, Thou shall dye the
death, when Christ came in the fullness of time, and delivered us from the
sharpest, and heaviest clause of that Law, which is the second death, then he
Redeemed us properly, because, (though not by the same title of Covenant, as
the Jews were) yet we were his, and sold over to his enemy. These then were the
persons, All, (none can say that he did not need him, none can say, that he may
not have him) And this was his first work, to Redeem, to vindicate them from
the usurper, to deliver them from the intruder, to emancipate them from the
tyran, to cancel the covenant between hell, and them, and restore them so far
to their liberty, as that they might come to their first Master, if they would;
this was Redeeming.

But in his other work, which is Adoption, and where the persons were more
particular, Adoptio.
not all, but we, Christ has taken us to him, in a straiter and more peculiar
title, then Redeeming. For, A servando Servi, men who were, by another man's
valor, saved and redeemed from the enemy, or from present death, they became
thereby, servants to him that saved and redeemed them: Redemption makes us (who
were but subjects before, for all are so, by creation) servants; but it is but
servants; but Adoption makes us, who are thus made servants by Redemption, sons
(...) for, Adoption is verbum forense, though it be a word which the Holy Ghost
takes, yet he takes it from a civil use, and signification, in which, it
expresses in diverse circumstances, our Adoption into the state of Gods
children. First, he that adopted another, must by that law, be a man, who had
no children of his own; And this was Gods case toward us; He had no children
of his own, we were all filii irae, The children of wrath, not one of us
could be said to be the child of God, by nature, if we had not had this
Adoption in Christ. Secondly, he, who, Ephesians. ^.
by that law, might Adopt, must be a Man, who had had, or naturally might have
had children; for an Infant under years, or a man, who by nature was disabled
from having children, could not Adopt another; And this was Gods case toward
us too; for God had had children without Adoption; for by our creation in
Innocence, we were the sons of God till we died all in one transgression, and
lost all right, and all life, and all means of regaining it, but by this way
of Adoption in Christ Jesus. Again, no man might adopt an elder man then
himself; and so, our Father by Adoption, is not only Antiquus dierum, The
ancient of Days, but Antiquior diebus ancienter then any Days, before Time
was; he is (as Damascene forces himself to express it) Super-principale
principium, the Beginning, and the first Beginning, and before the first
beginning; He is, says he, aeternus, and prae-aeternus, Eternal, and elder
then any eternity, that we can take into our imagination. So likewise no man
might adopt a man of better quality then himself, and here, we are so far from
comparing, as that we cannot comprehend his greatness, and his goodness, of
whom, and to whom, S. Augustine says well, Quid mihi es? If I shall go about
to declare thy goodness, not to the world in general, but Quid mihi es, how
good thou art to me, Miserere ut loquar, says he, I must have more of thy
goodness, to be able to tell thy former goodness, Be merciful unto me
again, that I may be thereby able to declare how merciful thou wast to me
before, except thou speak in me, I cannot declare what thou have done for me.
Lastly, no man might be adopted, into any other degree of kindred, but into the
name, and right of a son; he could not be an adopted Brother, nor cousin, nor
nephew: And this is especially our dignity; we have the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, Father. So that, as here is a fullness of time in the
text, so there is a fullness of persons, All, and a fullness of the work
belonging to them, Redeeming, Emancipation, delivering from the chains of
Satan, (we were his by Creation, we sold our selves for nothing, and he
redeemed us, without money, that is, Esa. 52.
without any cost of ours) but because for all this general Redemption, we may
turn from him, and submit our selves to other services, therefore he has
Adopted us, drawn into his family and into his more especial care, those who
are chosen by him, to be his. Now that Redemption reached to all, there was
enough for all; this dispensation of that Redemption, this Adoption reaches
only to us, all this is done, That we might receive the Adoption of Sons.

But who are this We? why, they are the elect of God. But who are they, Nos.
who are these elect? Qui timide rogat, docet negare: If a man ask me with a
diffidence, Can I be the adopted son of God, that have rebelled against him, in
all my affections, that have trodden upon his Commandments, in all mine
actions, that have divorced my self from him, in preferring the love of his
creatures before himself, that have murmured at his corrections, and thought
them too much, that have undervalued his benefits, and thought them too little,
that have abandoned, and prostituted my body, his Temple, to all uncleanness,
and my spirit to indevotion, and contempt of his Ordinances; can I be the
adopted son of God, that have done this? Ne timide roges, ask me not this,
with a diffidence and distrust in Gods mercy, as if thou thoughtst with Cain
thy iniquities were greater then could be forgiven; But ask me with that holy
confidence, which belongs to a true convert, Am not I, who, though I am never
without sin, yet am never without hearty remorce and repentance for my
sins; though the weakness of my flesh sometimes betray me, the strength of
his Spirit still recovers me; though my body be under the paw of that lion,
that seeks whom he may devour, yet the lion of Judah raises again and
upholds my soul; though I wound my Savior with many sins, yet all these,
be they never so many, I strive against, I lament, confess, and forsake as
far as I am able. Am not I the child of God, and his adopted son in this
state? Roga fidenter, ask me with a holy confidence in thine and my God, and
doces affirmare, thy very question gives me mine answer to thee, thou teach
me to say, thou art; God himself teaches me to say so, by his Apostle, The
foundation of God is sure, and this is the Seal, God knows who are his, and
let them that call upon his name, depart from all iniquity: He that departs so
far, as to repent former sins, and shut up the ways, which he knows in his
conscience, do lead him into tentations, he is of this quorum, one of us, one
of them, who are adopted by Christ, to be the sons of God. I am of this
quorum, if I preach the Gospel sincerely, and live thereafter, (for he
preaches twice a day, that follows his own doctrine, and does as he says)
And you are of this quorum, if you preach over the Sermons which you hear, to
your own souls in your meditation, to your families in your relation, to the
world in your conversation. If you come to this place, to meet the Spirit of
God, and not to meet one another, If you have sat in this place, with a
delight in the Word of God, and not in the words of any speaker, If you go out
of this place, in such a disposition, as that, if you should meet the last
Trumpets at the gates, and Christ Jesus in the clouds, you would not entreat
him to go back, and stay another year: To enwrap all in one, if you have a
religious and sober assurance, that you are his, and walk according to your
belief, you are his, and, as the fullness of time, so the fullness of grace is
come upon you, and you are not only within the first commission, of those who
were under the Law, and so Redeemed, but of this quorum who are selected out of
them, the adopted sons of that God, who never disinherits those that forsake
not him.

SERMON IV. Preached at S. Paul's upon Christmas day. 1626.
LUKE. 2.29, and 30. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.


THe whole life of Christ was a continual Passion; others die Martyrs, but
Christ was born a Martyr. He found a Golgatha, (where he was crucified) even in
Bethlem, where he was born; For, to his tenderness then, the strawes were
almost as sharp as the thorns after; and the Manger as uneasy at first, as
his Cross at last. His birth and his death were but one continual act, and
his Christmas Day and his Good Friday, are but the evening and morning of one
and the same day. And as even his birth, is his death, so every action and
passage that manifests Christ to us, is his birth; for, Epiphany is
manifestation; And therefore, though the Church do now call Twelf-day
Epiphany, because upon that day Christ was manifested to the Gentiles, in those
Wise men who came then to worship him, yet the Ancient Church called this day,
(the day of Christ's birth) the Epiphany, because this day Christ was manifested
to the world, by being born this day. Every manifestation of Christ to the
world, to the Church, to a particular soul, is an Epiphany, a Christmas Day.
Now there is no where a more evident manifestation of Christ, then in that
which induced this text, Lord now let thou thy servant, etc.

It had been revealed to Simeon (whose words these are) that he should see
Christ before he dyed; And actually, and really, substantially, essentially,
bodily, presentially, personally he does see him; so it is Simeons Epiphany,
Simeons Christmas Day. So also this day, in which we commemorate and celebrate
the general Epiphany, the manifestation of Christ to the whole world in his
birth, all we, we, who besides our interest in the universal Epiphany and
manifestation employed in the very day, have this day received the Body and
Blood of Christ in his holy and blessed Sacrament, have had another Epiphany,
another Christmas Day, another manifestation and application of Christ to our
selves; And as the Church prepares our devotion before Christmas Day, with
four Sundays in Advent, which brings Christ nearer and nearer unto us, and
remembers us that he is coming, and then continues that remembrance again,
with the celebration of other festivals with it, and after it, as S. Stephen,
S. John, and the rest that follow; so for this birth of Christ, in your
particular souls, for this Epiphany, this Christmas Day, this manifestation of
Christ which you have had in the most blessed Sacrament this day, as you were
prepared before by that which was said before, so it belongs to the through
celebration of the day, and to the dignity of that mysterious act, and to the
blessedness of worthy, and the danger of unworthy Receivers, to press that
evidence in your behalf, and to enable you by a farther examination of your
selves, to depart in peace, because your eyes have seen his salvation.

To be able to conclude to you selves, that because you have had a
Christmas Day, a manifestation of Christ's birth in your souls, by the
Sacrament, you shall have a whole Good Friday, a crucifying, and a consummatum
est, a measure of corrections, and joy in those corrections, tentations, and
the issue with the tentation; And that you shall have a Resurrection, and an
Ascension, an inchoation, and an unremoveable possession of heaven it self in
this world. Make good your Christmas day, that Christ by a worthy receiving of
the Sacrament, be born in you, and he that dyed for you, will live with you all
the year, and all the years of your lives, and inspire into you, and receive
from you at the last gasp, this blessed acclamation, Lord now let thou thy
servant, etc.

The end of all digestions, Divisio.
and concoctions is assimilation, that that meat may become our body. The end
of all consideration of all the actions of such leading and exemplar men, as
Simeon was, is assimilation too; That we may be like that man. Therefore we
shall make it a first part, to take a picture, to give a character of this man,
to consider how Simeon was qualified and prepared, matured and disposed to that
confidence, that he could desire to depart in peace, intimated in that first
word, Now; now, that all that I look for is accomplished; And farther expressed
in the first word of the other clause, For, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation; Now, now the time is fulfilled; For, for mine eyes have seen. And
then enters the second part, what is the greatest happiness that can be well
wished in this world, by a man well prepared, is, that he may depart in peace;
Lord now let thou, etc. And all the way, in every step that we make, in his
light, (in Simeons light) we shall see light; we shall consider, that that
preparation, and disposition, and acquiescence, which Simeon had in his
Epiphany, in his visible seeing of Christ then, is offered to us in this
Epiphany, in this manifestation and application of Christ in the Sacrament; And
that therefore every penitent, and devout, and reverent, and worthy receiver,
has had in that holy action his Now, there are all things accomplished to him,
and his For, for his eyes have seen his salvation; and so may be content, nay
glad to depart in peace.

In the first part then, 1 Part.
in which we collect some marks, and qualities in Simeon which prepared him to
a quiet death, qualities appliable to us in that capacity, as we are ^^tred for
the Sacrament, Praesentatio.
(for in that way only, we shall walk throughout this exercise) we consider
first, the action it self, what was done at this time. At this time our Savior
Christ, according to the Law, by which all the first born were to be presented
to God in the Temple, at a certain time after their birth, was presented to God
in the Temple, and there acknowledged to be his; And then, bought of him again
by his parents, at a certain price prescribed in the Law. A Lord could not
exhibit his Son to his Tenants, and say, this is your Landlord; nor a King
his Son to his Subjects, and say, this is your Prince; but first he was to be
tendered to God; his they were all; He that is not Gods first, is not truly his
Kings, nor his own. And then God does not sell him back again to his parents,
at a racked, at an improved price; He sels a Lord, or a King back again to the
world, as cheap as a Yeoman, he takes one and the same price for all; God made
all Mankind of one blood, and with one blood, the blood of his Son, he bought
all Mankind again: At one price, and upon the same conditions, he has
delivered over all into this world; Tantummodo creed, and then fac hoc, and
vives, is the price of all; Believe, and live well: More he asks not, less he
takes not for any man, upon any pretense of any unconditioned decree.

At the time of this presentation, there were to be offered a pair of Turtles,
or a pair of Pigeons. Columbae.
The Sacrifice was indifferent; Turtles that live solitarily, and Pigeons, that
live sociably, were all one to God. God in Christ may be had in an active, and
sociable life, denoted in the Pigeon, and in the solitary and contemplative
life, denoted in the Turtle; Let not Westminster despise the Church, nor the
Church the Exchange, nor the Exchange and trade despise Arms; God in Christ
may be had in every lawful calling. And then, the Pigeon was an emblem of
fecundity, and fruitfulness in marriage; And the Turtle may be an Emblem of
chaste widowhood; for, I think we find no Bigamy in the Turtle. But in these
Sacrifices we find no Emblem of a natural, or of a vowed barrenness:
Nothing that countenances a vowed virginity, to the dishonor or undervaluing
of marriage. Thus was our Savior presented to God; And in this especially was
that fulfilled, Agg. 2.9.
The glory of the later house shall be greater then the glory of the former;
The later Temple exceeded the former in this, that the Lord, the God of this
house, was in the house bodily, as one of the congregation; And the little body
of a sucking child, was a Chapel in that Temple, infinitely more glorious
then the Temple it self. How was the joy of Noah at the return of the Dove
into the Ark, multiplied upon Simeon at the bringing of this Dove into the
Temple? At how cheap a price was Christ tumbled up and down in this world? It
does almost take off our pious scorn of the low price, at which Judas sold him,
to consider that his Father sold him to the world for nothing; and then, when
he had him again, by this new title of primogeniture and presentation, he sold
him to the world again, if not for a Turtle, or for a Pigeon, yet at most for
5. shekels, which at most is but 10. shillings.

And yet you have had him cheaper then that, to day in the Sacrament: whom has
Christ cost 5. shekels there? As Christ was presented to God in the Temple, so
is he presented to God in the Sacrament; not sucking, but bleeding. And God
gives him back again to thee. And at what price? upon this exchange; Take his
first born, Christ Jesus, and give him thine. Who is thine? Cor primogenitum,
says S. August: The heart is the first part of the body that lives; Give him
that; And then, as it is in nature, it shall be in grace too, the last part
that dies; for it shall never dye; Joh, 6.50.
If a man eat the bread that comes down from heaven, he shall not die, says
Christ. If a man in exchange of his heart receive Christ Jesus himself, he can
no more die then Christ Jesus himself can die. That which Eschines said to
Socrates, admits a fair accommodation here; He saw every body give Socrates
some present, and he said, Because I have nothing else to give, I will give
thee my self. Do so, says Socrates, and I will give thee back again to thy
self, better then when I received thee. If thou have truly given thy self to
him in the Sacrament, God has given thee thy self back, so much mended, as
that thou have received thy self and him too; Thy self, in a holy liberty, to
walk in the world in a calling, and himself, in giving a blessing upon all the
works of thy calling, and imprinting in thee a holy desire to do all those
works to his glory. And so having thus far made this profit of these
circumstances in the action it self, appliable to us as receivers of the
Sacrament, that as the child Jesus was first presented to God in the Temple,
so for your children, (the children of your bodies, and the children of your
minds, and the children of your hands, all your actions, and intentions) that
you direct them first upon God, and God in the Temple, that is, God manifested
in the Church, before you assign them, or determine them upon any other
worldly courses, and then, that as God returned Christ as all other children,
at a certain price, so God delivers man upon certain, and upon the same
conditions: He comes not into the world, nor he comes not to the Sacrament, as
to a Lottery, where perchance he may draw Salvation, but it is ten to one he
misses, but upon these few and easy conditions, Believe, and Love, he may be
sure: And then also, that the Sacrifice, Pigeons, or Turtles was indifferent,
so it were offered to God, for any honest calling, is acceptable to God, if
Gods glory be intended in it; That of marriage and of widowhood we have some
typical intimations in the Law, in the Pigeon, and in the Turtle, but of a vow
of virginity, begun in the parents for their temporal ends, and forced upon
their children, for those ends, we have no shadow at all; That Christ who was
sold after by Judas for a little money, was sold in this presentation by his
Father, for less, and yet for less then that to us, this day in the
Sacrament. Having made these uses of these circumstances in the action it
self, we passeion now, to the consideration of some such qualities, and
dispositions of this person, Simeon, as may be appliable to us in our having
received the Sacrament.

First then, we receive it, though not literally, and expressly in the story,
Senex.
yet by convenient implication there, and by general tradition from all, that
Simeon was now come to a great age, a very old Man. For so S. August. argues,
That God raised up two witnesses for Christ in the Temple; one of each Sex; and
both of much reverence for age; Anna, whose age is expressed, and Simeon, who
is recommended in the same respect, says that Father, for age too. And
Nicephorus, and others with him, make him very old; as it is likely he was, if
he were, as Pet: Galatinus makes him, the son of Rabbi Hillel, Hillel the
master of Gamaliel, the master of S. Paul. So then we accept him; A person in a
reverend age. Even in nature Age was the center of reverence; the channel, the
valley, to which all reverence flowed; temporal jurisdiction, and spiritual
jurisdiction, the Magistracy, and the Priesthood were appropriated to the
eldest; almost in all vulgar languages, the name of a Lord, or magistrate, has
no other derivation then so, an Elder; Senior noster, is a word that passes
freely, through the authors of the middle age, for our Lord, or our King; and
the same derivation has the name of Priest, in a holy language, Presbyter an
Elder. So evermore in the course of the Scripture all counsel, and all
government is placed in the Elders; and all the service of God is expressed so,
even in heaven too, by the four and twenty Elders. Apoc. 4.9.
Thy Creator will be remembered in the days of thy youth; but God has had
longer experience of that man, and longer conversation with that man, who is
come to a holy age. That wise King, who could carry nothing to a higher pitch
in any comparison, then to a Crown, says, Age is a crown of glory, Prove.
16.31.
when it is found in the ways of the righteous; but in the ways of
righteousness, no blessing is a blessing; and in the ways of righteousness,
wealth may be a crown of our labors, and health may be a crown of our
temperance, but age is the crown of glory, of reverence; that crown, the
crown of reverence, the Lord the righteous Judge has reserved to that day,
the day of our age, because our age is the seal of our constancy, and
perseverance. In this blessed age, Simeon was thus dignified, admitted to this
Epiphany, this manifestation of Christ. And, to be admitted to thy Epiphany,
and manifestation of Christ in the Sacrament, thou must put off the young man,
and put on the old. God, to whose Table thou art called, is represented as
Antiquus Dierum, the ancient of Days; and his Guests must be of mortified
affections; He must be crucified to the world, that will receive him, that was
crucified for the world; the lusts of youth, the voluptuousness of youth, the
revengefulnesse of youth, must have a holy damp, and a religious stupidity shed
upon them, that come thither. Nay, it is not enough to be suddenly old, to
have sad, and mortified thoughts then; no, nor to be suddenly dead, to renounce
the world then, that hour, that morning, but quatriduani sitis, you should
have been dead three days, as Lazarus; you should have passed an Examination,
an accusation, a condemnation of your selves, diverse days before ye came to
that Table. God was most glorified in the raising of Lazarus, when he was long
dead, and putrified; God is most glorified in giving a resurrection to him,
that has been longest dead; that is, longest in the Contemplation of his own
sinful and spiritual putrefaction. For, he that stinks most in his own, by
true contrition, is the best perfume to Gods nostrils, and a conscience
troubled in it self, is Odor quietis, as Noah's sacrifice was, a savor of rest
to God.

This assistance we have to the exaltation of our devotion, from that
circumstance, that Simeon was an old man; Sacerdos.
we have another from another, that he was a Priest, and in that notion and
capacity, the better fitted for this Epiphany, this Christmas, this
Manifestation of Christ. We have not this neither in the letter of the story;
no, nor so constantly in Tradition, that he was a Priest, as that he was an old
man: But it is rooted in Antiquity too; In Athanasius, in St. Cyrill, in
Epiphanius, in others, who argue, and infer it fairly and conveniently, out
of some Priestly acts, which Simeon seems to have done in the Temple, (as the
taking of Christ in his arms, which belongs to the Priest, and the blessing of
God, which is the Thanksgiving to God, in the behalf of the congregation, and
then the blessing of the people, in the behalf of God, which are acts peculiar
to the Priest.) Accepting him in that quality, a Priest, we consider, that as
the King takes it worse in his household servants, then in his Subjects at
large, if they go not his ways, so they who dwell in Gods house, whose
livelihood grows out of the revenue of his Church, and whose service lies
within the walls of his Church, are most inexcusable, if they have not a
continual Epiphany, a continual Manifestation of Christ: All men should look
toward God, but the Priest should never look off from God. And, at the
Sacrament every man is a Priest. I had rather that were not said, (which yet a
very Reverend Divine says) That this Simeon might be aliquis plebeius homo,
Calvin.
some ordinary common man, that was in the Temple at that time, when Christ was
brought. He, who is of another sub-division, Chemnicius.
(though in the reformed Church too) collects piously, that God chose
extraordinary men, to give testimony of his Son; Nicodemus a great
Magistrate, Gamaliel a great Doctor, Iairus a Ruler in the Synagogue, and this
Simeon, in probability, pregnant enough, a Priest. But was that any great
Addition to him, if he were so? For holiness, certainly it was; But for
outward dignity, and respect, it was so too, Josephus.
amongst them. In omni Natione, certum aliquod Nobilitatis argumentum. Every
Nation has some particular way of ennobling, and some particular evidence, and
declaration of Nobility: Arms for a great part, is that in Spain; and
Merchandise in some States in Italy; and learning in France, where besides the
very many preferments by the Church, in which, some other Nation may be equal
to them, there are more preferments, by other ways of learning, especially of
Judicature, then in any other Nation. All Nations, says Josephus, had some
peculiar way, and amongst the Jews, says he, Priesthood was that way; A Priest
was, even for civil privileges, a Gentleman. Therefore has the Apostle, not
knighted, nor ennobled, but crowned every good soul, with that style, Regale
Sacerdotium, That they are a Royal Priesthood; To be Royal without
Priesthood, seemed not to him Dignity enough. Consider then, that to come to
the Communion Table, is to take Orders; Every man should come to that Altar, as
holy as the Priest, Erasmus.
for there he is a Priest: And, Sacer dotem nemo agit, qui libenter aliud est,
quam Sacerdos: No man is truly a Priest, which is any thing else besides a
Priest; that is, that entangles himself in any other business, so, as that
that hinders his function in his Priesthood. No man comes to the Sacrament
well, that is sorry he is there; that is, whom the penalty of the law, or
observation of neighbors, or any collateral respect brings thither. There
thou art a Priest, though thou be but a layman at home; And then, no man
that has taken Orders, can deprive himself, or divest his Orders, when he
will: Thou art bound to continue in the same holiness after, in which thou
presentest thy self at that Table. As the sails of a ship when they are
spread and swollen, and the way that the ship makes, shows me the wind, where
it is, though the wind it self be an invisible thing; so thy actions to
morrow, and the life that thou leadest all the year, will show me, with what
mind thou came to the Sacrament, to day, though only God, and not I, can
see thy mind. Live in remembrance, that thou wast a Priest to day; (for no man
has received Christ, that has not sacrificed himself.) And live, as though
thou were a Priest still; and then I say, with Sidonius Apollinaris, Malo
Sacerdotalem virum, quam Sacerdotem, I had rather have one man that lives as a
Priest should do, then a hundred Priests that live not so. A worthy Receiver
shall rise in Judgment against an unworthy Giver: Christ shall be the
Sacrifice still, and thou the Priest, that came but to receive, because thou
have sacrificed thy self; and he the Judas, that pretended to be the Priest,
because he has betrald Christ to himself, and as much as lay in him,
evacuated the Sacrament, and made it of none effect to thee.

It is farther added for his honor, and for his competency, and fitness for
this Epiphany, Iustus. V 25.
to see his Savior, that he was Iustus, a just, and righteous man. This is a
legal Righteousness; a Righteousness, in which St. Paul says, he was
unreproachable; that is, in the sight of all the world. And this
Righteousness, even this outward righteousness, he must bring with him that
comes to this Epiphany, to this Manifestation, and Application of his Savior,
to him, in the Sacrament: It must stand well between him, and all the world.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, says Christ, Mat. 5.23.
(if thou bring thy self to the Altar, says our case) and there remembrest
that thy brother has ought against thee, (it was ill done, not to remember it
before; but if thou remember it then) Go thy way, says Christ, first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift; that is, offer
thy self for that sacrifice: Better come a month after, with a clear, then
kneel it out then with a perplexed conscience. It is, If thy brother have
ought against thee; how little soever: If thou have but scandalized him, though
thou have not injured him, yet venture not upon this holy action, till thou
have satisfied him. Thou may be good; good so, as that thou have intended no
ill to him: He may be good too; good so, as that he wishes no ill to thee. And
yet some negligence and remissness in thee, may have struck upon a weakness
and a tenderness in him, so as that he may be come, to think uncharitably of
thee; and though this uncharitableness be his fault, and not thine, yet the
negligence that occasioned it, was thine: Satisfy him; and that rectifies
both; it redeemes thy negligence, it recovers his weakness. Till that be done,
neither of you are fit for this holy action; God neither accepts that man, that
is negligent of his actions, and cares not what others think, nor him that is
over-easie to be scandalized, and mis-interpret actions, otherwise indifferent:
For, to them who study not this righteousness, to stand upright in the good
opinions of good men, as God says, Why take thou my word into thy mouth, so
Christ shall say, to the shaking of that conscience, why take thou my Body,
and Blood into thy hand?

This must be done; He must be just, righteous in the eyes of men; Timoratus.
though more seem to be employed in his other character, that he was Timoratus,
which we translate Devout: In the former, his object was man, though godly men;
here it is God himself: Man must be respected, but God especially. And this
devotion is well placed in fear; for Basis verbi est timor sanctus, says St.
Augustine; and it is excellently said, if this be his meaning, That whatsoever
I promise my self out of the word of God, yet the Basis upon which that
promise stands, is my fear of God: If my fear of God fall, the word of God,
so far as it is a promise to me, falls to. Tertullian intends the same thing,
when he says, fundamentum salutis timor; Though I have a holy confidence of my
salvation, yet the foundation of this confidence is a modest, and a tender, and
a reverentiall fear, that I am not diligent enough in the performance of those
conditions which are required to the establishing of it; for this Eulabeia,
which St. Hierome translates Timoratum, and we translate Devout, is a middle
disposition between a Pharisaicall superstition, and a negligent irreverence,
and profanation of Gods Ordinance. I come not with this Eulabeia, with Simeons
disposition, to my Epiphany, to my receiving of my Savior; if I think that
Bread, my God, and superstitiously adore it, for that is Pharisaicall, and
carnal; neither do I bring that disposition thither, if I think God no
otherwise present there, then in his own other Ordinances, and so refuse such
postures, and actions of reverence, as are required to testify outwardly mine
inward devotion; for these may well consist together, I am sure I receive him
effectually, when I look upon his Mercy; I am afraid I do not receive him
worthily, when I look upon mine own unworthiness.

We cannot pursue this Anatomy of good old Simeon, this Just, and Devout
Priest, so far, as to show you all his parts, and the use of them all, in
particular. His example, and the characters that are upon him, are our
Alphabet. I shall only have time to name the rest of those characters; you
must spell them, and put them into their syllables; you must form them, and
put them into their words; you must compose them, and put them into their
Syntaxis, and sentences; that is, you must pursue the imitation, that when I
have told you what he was, you may present your selves to God, such as he was.
He was one that had the Holy Ghost upon him, Spiritus Sancius.
says that Story. The testimony given before, that he was Iustus, and
Timoratus, righteous, and fearing God, was evidence enough, that the Holy Ghost
was upon him. This addition is a testimony of a more particular presence, and
operation of the Holy Ghost, in some certain way; and the way is agreed by
all, to be, In dono Prophetiae, the Holy Ghost was upon him, in the spirit of
Prophecy, so, as that he made him, at that time, a Prophet. Thou art a Prophet
upon thy self, when thou come to the Communion; Thou art able to foretell,
and to pronounce upon thy self, what thou shall be for ever; Upon thy
disposition then, thou may conclude thine eternal state; Romans 2.9.
then thou know which part of St. Paul's distribution falls upon thee;
whether that tribulations and anguish upon every soul of man, that does evil;
Or that, But glory, and honor, and peace to every man, that works good. Thou
art this Prophet; silence not this Prophet; do not chide thy conscience for
chiding thee; Stone not this Prophet; do not petrifie, and harden thy
conscience against these holy suggestions: Say not with Ahab to the Prophet,
Have thou found me out, O mine enemy? when an unrepented sin comes to thy
memory then, be not thou sorry that thou remembrest it then, nor do not say, I
would this sin had not troubled me now, I would I had not remembered it till to
morrow; For, in that action, first, in Thesi, for the Rule, thou art a Preacher
to thy self, 1 Cor. 11.20.
and thou have thy. Text in St. Paul, He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself; And then in Hypothesi, for the
application to the particular case, thou art a Prophet to thy self; Thou that
know in thy self, what thou do then, can say to thy self, what thou
shall suffer after, if thou do ill.

There are more Elements in the making up of this man; many more. He waited,
says his story; Expectavit.
He gave God his leisure. Simeon had informed himself, out of Daniel, and the
other Prophets, that the time of the Messiah coming was near: As Daniel had
informed himself out of Jeremy, and the other Prophets, that the time of the
Deliverance from Babylon, was near: Both waited patiently, and yet both prayed
for the accelerating of that, which they waited for; Daniel for the
Deliverance, Simeon for the Epiphany. Those consist well enough, patiently to
attend Gods time, and yet earnestly to solicit the hastening of that time; for
that time is Gods time, to which, our prayers have brought God; as that price
was Gods price for Sodom, to which Abraham's solicitation brought God, Esaias
45.9.
and not the first fifty. That Prophet that says, Woe unto him that striveth
with his Maker, that is, that presses God before his time, says also, for all
that, Oh that thou would rent the heavens, Esaias 64.1.
and come down. When thou come to this seal of thy peace, the Sacrament,
pray that God will give thee that light, that may direct and establish thee, in
necessary and fundamental things; that is, the light of faith to see, that the
Body and Blood of Christ, is applied to thee, in that action; But for the
manner, how the Body and Blood of Christ is there, wait his leisure, if he have
not yet manifested that to thee: Grieve not at that, wonder not at that, press
not for that; for he has not manifested that, not the way, not the manner of
his presence in the Sacrament, to the Church. A peremptory prejudice upon other
men's opinions, that no opinion but thine can be true, in the doctrine of the
Sacrament, and an un charitable condemning of other men, or other Churches that
may be of another persuasion then thou art, in the matter of the Sacrament, may
frustrate and disappoint thee of all that benefit, which thou might have, by
an humble receiving thereof, if thou would exercise thy faith only, here,
and leave thy passion at home, and refer thy reason, and disputation to the
School.

He waited, says the story; And he waited for the consolation of Israel.
Israel.
It is not an appropriating of hopes, or possessions of those hopes, to
himself; but a charitable desire, of a communication of this consolation, upon
all the Israel of God. Therefore is the Sacrament a Communion; Therefore is the
Church, which is built of us, 1. Pet. 2.5. Gregor.
Built of lively stones: And in such buildings, as stones do, Vnusquisque
portat alterum, and portatur ab altero: Every stone is supported by another,
and supports another. As thou would be well interpreted by others, interpret
others well; and, as when thou come to heaven, the joy, and the glory of
every soul, shall be thy glory, and thy joy; so when thou come to the
porch of the Triumphant Church, the door of heaven, the Communion table,
desire that that joy, which thou feel in thy soul then, may then be
communicated to every communicant there.

To this purpose, to testify his devotion to the communion of Saints, Templum.
Simeon came into the Temple, says the story; to do a holy work, in a holy
place. When we say, that God is no accepter of persons, we do not mean, but
that they which are within his Covenant, and they that have preserved the
seals of his grace, are more acceptable to him, then they which are not, or
have not. When we say, that God is not tied to places, we must not mean, but
that God is otherwise present, and works otherwise, in places consecrated to
his service, then in every profane place. When I pray in my chamber, I build a
Temple there, that hour; And, that minute, when I cast out a prayer, in the
street, I build a Temple there; And when my soul prays without any voice, my
very body is then a Temple: And God, who knows what I am doing in these
actions, erecting these Temples, he comes to them and prospers, and blesses my
devotions; and shall not I come to his Temple, where he is always resident? My
chamber were no Temple, my body were no Temple, except God came to it; but
whether I come hither, or no, this will be Gods Temple: I may lose by my
absence; He gains nothing by my coming. He that has a cause to be heard,
will not go to Smithfield, nor he that has cattaile to buy or sell, to
Westminster; He that has bargains to make, or news to tell, should not come
to do that at Church; nor he that has prayers to make, walk in the fields
for his devotions. If I have a great friend, though in cases of necessity, as
sickness, or other restraints, he will vouchsafe to visit me, yet I must make
my fuits to him at home, at his own house. In cases of necessity, Christ in
the Sacrament, vouchsafes to come home to me; And the Court is where the King
is; his blessings are with his Ordinances, wheresoever: But the place to which
he has invited me, is his house. He that made the great Supper in the Gospel,
called in new guests; but he sent out no meat to them, who had been invited,
and might have come, and came not. Chamber-prayers, single, or with your
family, Chamber-Sermons, Sermons read over there, and Chamber-Sacraments,
administered in necessity there, are blessed assistants, and supplements; they
are as the alms at the gate, but the feast is within; they are as a cock of
water without, but the Cistern is within; habenti dabitur; he that has a
handful of devotion at home, shall have his devotion multiplied to a Gomer
here; for when he is become a part of the Congregation, he is joynt-tenant with
them, and the devotion of all the Congregation, and the blessings upon all the
Congregation, are his blessings, and his devotions.

He came to a holy place, and he came by a holy motion, by the Spirit, In
Spiritu.
says his Evidence, without holiness, no man shall see God; not so well,
without holiness of the place; but not there neither, if he trust only to the
holiness of the place, and bring no holiness with him. Between that
fearful occasion of coming to Church, which S. Augustine confesses and
laments, That they came to make wanton bargains with their eyes, and met
there, because they could meet no whereelse; and that more fearful occasion of
coming, when they came only to elude the Law, and proceeding in their
treacherous and traitorous religion in their heart, and yet communicating with
us, draw God himself into their conspiracies, and to mock us, make a mock of
God, and his religion too: between these two, this licencious coming, and
this treacherous coming, there are many commings to Church, commings for
company, for observation, for music: And all these indispositions are ill at
prayers; there they are unwholesome, but at the Sacrament, deadly: He that
brings any collateral respect to prayers, looses the benefit of the prayers of
the Congregation; and he that brings that to a Sermon, looses the blessing of
Gods ordinance in that Sermon; he hears but the Logique, or the Retorique, or
the Ethique, or the poetry of the Sermon, but the Sermon of the Sermon he
hears not; but he that brings this disposition to the Sacrament, ends not in
the loss of a benefit, but he acquires, and procures his own damnation.

All that we consider in Simeon, Viderunt oculi.
and apply from Simeon, to a worthy receiver of the Sacrament, is how he was
fitted to depart in peace. All those pieces, which we have named, conduce to
that: but all those are collected into that one, which remains yet, Viderunt
oculi, that his eyes had seen that salvation; for that was the accomplishment
and fulfilling of Gods Word, According to thy word; All that God had said,
should be done, was done; for, as it is said, v. 26. It was revealed unto him,
by the holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lords
Christ, and now his eyes had seen that Salvation. Abraham saw this before;
but, but with the eye of faith; and yet rejoiced to see it so, he was glad even
of that. Simeon saw it before this time; then, when he was illustrated with
that Revelation, he saw it; but, but with the eye of hope; of such hope Abraham
had no such ground; no particular hope, no promise, that he should see the
Messiah in his time; Simeon had, and yet he waited, he attended Gods leisure;
But hope deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12.
(says Solomon) but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life. His desire
was come; he saw his salvation. Perchance not so, as S. Cyprian seems to take
it, That till this time Simeon was blind, and upon this presentation of Christ
in the Temple, came to his sight again, and so saw this Salvation: for, I
think, no one Author, but S. Cyprian, says so, that Simeon was blind till
now, and now restored to sight; And I may ease S. Cyprian too, of that
singularity; for it is enough, and abundantly evident, that that book in which
that is said (which is, Altercatio Iasonis and papisci de Messia) cannot
possibly be S. Cyprians. But with his bodily eyes, open to other objects
before, he saw the Lords Salvation, and his Salvation; the Lords, as it came
from the Lord, and his, as it was appliable to him. He saw it, according to his
word; that is, so far, as God had promised, he should see it. He saw not, how,
that God, which was in this Child, and which was this child, was the Son of
God; The manner of that eternal Generation he saw not. He saw not how this Son
of God became man in a Virgins womb, whom no man knew; The manner of this
Incarnation he saw not: for this eternal Generation, and this miraculous
Incarnation, fell not within that Secundum verbum, according to thy Word; God
had promised Simeon nothing concerning those mysteries: But Christum Domini,
the Lords Salvation, and his Salvation, that is, the person who was all that
(which was all, that was within the word, and the promise) Simeon saw, and saw
with bodily eyes. Beloved, in the blessed, and glorious, and mysterious
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ Jesus, thou see Christum Domini,
the Lords Salvation, and thy Salvation, and that, thus far with bodily eyes;
That Bread which thou see after the Consecration, is not the same bread,
which was presented before; not that it is Transubstantiated to another
substance, for it is bread still, (which is the heretical Riddle of the Roman
Church, and satan's sophistry, to dishonor miracles, by the assiduity and
frequency, and multiplicity of them) but that it is severed, and appropriated
by God, in that Ordinance to another use; It is other Bread, so, as a Judge is
another man, upon the bench, then he is at home, in his own house. In the
Roman Church, they multiply, and extend miracles, til the miracle it self
crack, and become none, but vanish into nothing, as boys bubbles, (which were
but bubbles before, at best) by an overblowing become nothing: Nay they
constitute such miracles, as do not only destroy the nature of the miracle,
but destroy him, that should do that miracle, even God himself: for, nothing
proceeds farther to the destroying of God, then to make God do contradictory
things; for, contradictions have falsehood, and so imply impotency, and
infirmity in God. There cannot be a deeper Atheism, then to impute
contradictions to God; neither does any one thing so overcharge God with
contradictions, as the Transubstantiation of the Roman Church. There must be a
Body there, and yet no where; In no place, and yet in every place, where there
is a consecration. The Bread and the Wine must nourish the body, nay, the bread
and the wine may poison a body, and yet there is no bread, nor wine there. They
multiply miracles, and they give not over, till they make God unable to do a
miracle, till they make him a contradictory, that is, an impotent God. And
therefore Luther inferres well, that since miracles are so easy and cheap,
and obvious to them, as they have induced a miraculous transubstantiation, they
might have done well to have procured one miracle more, a trans-accidentation,
that since the substance is changed, the accidents might have been changed
too; and since there is no bread, there might be no demensions, no color, no
nourishing, no other qualities of bread neither; for, these remaining, there is
rather an annihilation of God, in making him no God by being a contradictory
God, then an annihilation of the Bread, by making that, which was formerly
bread, God himself, by that way of Transubstantiation.

But yet, though this bread be not so transubstantiated, we refuse not the
words of the Fathers, in which they have expressed themselves in this Mystery:
Not Irenaeus his est corpus, that that bread is his body now; Not Tertullians
fecit corpus, that that bread is made his body, which was not so before; Not S.
Cyprians mutatus, that that bread is changed; Not Damascens supernaturaliter
mutatus, that that bread is not only changed so in the use, as when at the
Kings table certain portions of bread are made bread of Essay, to pass over
every dish, whether for safety or for Majesty; not only so civilly changed, but
changed supernaturally; no nor Theophylacts transformatus est; (which seems to
be the word that goes farthest of all) for this transforming, cannot be
intended of the outward form and fashion, for that is not changed; but be it of
that internal form, which is the very essence and nature of the bread, so it
is transformed, so the bread has received a new form, a new essence, a new
nature, because whereas the nature of bread is but to nourish the body, the
nature of this bread now is to nourish the soul. And therefore, Cum non
dubitavit Dominus dicere, hoc est corpus meum, August.
cum signum daret corporis, Since Christ forbore not to say, This is my body,
when he gave the sign of his body, why should we forbear to say of that bread,
this is Christ's body, which is the Sacrament of his body. You would have said
at noone, this light is the Sun, and you will say now, this light is the
Candle; That light was not the Sun, this light is not the Candle, but it is
that portion of air which the Sun did then, and which the Candle does now
enlighten. We say the Sacramental bread is the body of Christ, because God
has shed his Ordinance upon it, and made it of another nature in the use,
though not in the substance; Almost 600. years ago, the Roman Church made
Berengarius swear, sensualiter tangitur, frangitur, teritur corpus Christ's,
That the body of Christ was sensibly handled, and broken, and chewed. They are
ashamed of that now, and have mollified it with many modifications; and God
knows whether 100. years hence they will not be as much ashamed of their
Transubstantiation, and see as much unnatural absurdity in their Trent Canon,
or Lateran Cano^^, ^s they do in Berengarius oath. As they that deny the body
of Christ to be in the Sacrament, lose their footing in departing from their
ground, the express Scriptures; so they that will assign a particular manner,
how that body is there, have no footing, no ground at all, no Scripture to
Anchor upon: And so, diving in a bottomless sea, they poppe sometimes above
water to take breath, to appear to say something, and then snatch at a loose
preposition, that swims upon the face of the waters; and so the Roman Church
has catched a Trans, and others a Con, and a Sub, and an In, and varied their
poetry into a Transubstantiation, and a Consubstantiation, and the rest, and
rymed themselves beyond reason, into absurdities, and heresies, and by a young
figure of similiter cadens, they are fallen alike into error, though the errors
that they are fallen into, be not of a like nature, nor danger. We offer to go
no farther, then according to his Word; In the Sacrament our eyes see his
salvation, according to that, so far, as that has manifested unto us, and in
that light we depart in peace, without scruple in our own, without offense to
other men's consciences.

Having thus seen Simeon in these his Dimensions, with these holy impressions,
2 Part.
these blessed characters upon him; first, 1 A man in a reverend age, and then,
2 In a holy function and calling, and with that, 3 Righteous in the eyes of
men, and withal, 4 Devout in the eyes of God, 5 And made a Prophet upon
himself by the holy Ghost, 6 still waiting Gods time, and his leisure, 7 And
in that, desiring that his joy might be spread upon the whole Israel of God, 8
Frequenting holy places, the Temple, 9 And that upon holy motions, and there,
10 seeing the salvation of the Lord, that is, Discerning the application of
salvation in the Ordinances of the Church, 11 And lastly, contenting himself
with so much therein, as was according to his word, and not inquiring farther
then God had been pleased to reveal; and having reflected all these several
beams upon every worthy Receiver of the Sacrament, the whole Quire of such
worthy receivers may join with Simeon in this Antiphon, Nunc Dimittis, Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. S. Ambrose reads not this
place as we do, Nunc dimittis, but Nunc dimitte; not, Lord thou do so; but,
Lord do so; and so he gives it the form of a prayer; and implies not only a
patience, and a contentedness, but a desire, and an ambition that he might
die; at least such an indifferency, and equanimity as Israel had, when he had
seen Joseph, Genesis 46.30.
Now let me die, since I have seen thy face; after he had seen his face, the
next face that he desired to see, was the face of God. For, howsoever there may
be some disorder, some irregularity, in S. Paul's Anathema pro fratribus, that
he desired to be separated from Christ, rather then his brethren should, (that
may scarce be drawn into consequence, or made a wish for us to imitate) yet to
S. Paul's Cupio dissolvi, to an express, and to a deliberate desire, to be
dissolved here, and to be united to Christ in heaven, (still with a primary
relation to the glory of God, and a reservation of the will of God) a godly, a
rectified and a well-disposed man may safely come. And so, (I know not upon
what grounds) Nicephorus fayes, Simeon did wish, and had his wish; he prayed
that he might die, and actually he did die then. Neither can a man at any time
be fitter to make and obtain this wish, then when his eyes have seen his
salvation in the Sacrament. At least, make this an argument of your having
been worthy receivers thereof, that you are in Aequilibri^o, in an evennesse,
in an indifferency, in an equanimity, whether ye die this night or no. For,
howsoever S. Ambrose seem to make it a direct prayer, that he might die, he
intends but such an equanimity, such an indifferency; Quasi servus nonrefugit
vitae obsequium, and quasi sapiem lucrum mortis amplectitur, says that Father;
Simeon is so good a servant, as that he is content to serve his old master
still, in his old place, in this world, but yet, he is so good a husband too,
as that he sees what a gainer he might be, if he might be made free by death.
If thou desire not death, (that is the case of very few, to do so in a
rectified conscience, and without distemper) if thou be not equally disposed
toward death (that should be the case of all; and yet we are far from
condemning all that are not come to that equanimity) yet if thou now fear
death inordinately, I should fear that thine eyes have not seen thy salvation
to day; who can fear the darkness of death, that has had the light of this
world, and of the next too? who can fear death this night, that has had the
Lord of life in his hand to day? It is a question of consternation, a question
that should strike him, that should answer it, dumb (as Christ's question,
Amice, quomodo intrasti? Friend, how came in hither? did him to whom that was
said) which Origin asks in this case, When will thou dare to go out of this
world, if thou dare not go now, when Christ Jesus has taken thee by the
hand to lead thee out?

This then is truly to depart in peace, In pace.
by the Gospel of peace, to the God of peace. My body is my prison; and I
would be so obedient to the Law, as not to break prison; I would not hasten my
death by starving, or macerating this body: But if this prison be burnt down by
continual fevers, or blown down with continual vapors, would any man be so
in love with that ground upon which that prison stood, as to desire rather to
stay there, then to go home? Our prisons are fallen, our bodies are dead to
many former uses; Our palate dead in a tastlesnesse; Our stomach dead in an
indigestiblenesse; our feet dead in a lamenesse, and our invention in a
dullness, and our memory in a forgetfulness; and yet, as a man that should
love the ground, where his prison stood, we love this clay, that was a body in
the days of our youth, and but our prison then, when it was at best; we
abhor the graves of our bodies; and the body, which, in the best vigor
thereof, Genesis 40.
was but the grave of the soul, we over-love. Pharaohs Butler, and his Baker
went both out of prison in a day; and in both cases, Joseph, in the
interpretation of their dreams, calls that, (their very discharge out of
prison) a lifting up of their heads, a kind of preferment: Death raises every
man alike, so far, as that it delivers every man from his prison, from the
encumbrances of this body: both Baker and Butler were delivered of their
prison; but they passed into diverse states after, one to the restitution of his
place, the other to an ignominious execution. Of thy prison thou shall be
delivered whether thou will or no; thou must die; Fool, this night thy soul
may be taken from thee; and then, what thou shall be to morrow, prophecy upon
thy self, by that which thou have done to day; If thou did depart from that
Table in peace, thou can depart from this world in peace. And the peace of
that Table is, to come to it in pace desiderii, with a contented mind, and
with an enjoying of those temporal blessings which thou have, without
macerating thy self, without usurping upon others, without murmuring at God;
And to be at that Table, in pace cogitationum, in the peace of the Church,
without the spirit of contradiction, or inquisition, without uncharitableness
toward others, without curiosity in thy self: And then to come from that
Table in pace domestica, with a bosom peace, in thine own Conscience, in that
seal of thy reconciliation, in that Sacrament; that so, riding at that Anchor,
and in that calm whether God enlarge thy voyage, by enlarging thy life, or put
thee into the harbor, by the breath, by the breathlesnesse of Death, either
way, East or West, thou may depart in peace, according to his word, that is,
as he shall be pleased to manifest his pleasure upon thee.

SERMON V. Preached at Paul's, upon Christmas Day. 1627.
EXODUS 4.13. O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will
send.


IT has been suspitiously doubted, more then that, freely disputed, more then
that too, absolutely denied, that Christ was born the five and twentieth of
December, that this is Christmas Day: yet for all these doubts, and
disputations, and denials, we forbear not, with the whole Church of God,
constantly and confidently to celebrate this for his Day. It has been doubted,
and disputed, and denied too, that this Text, O my Lord, send I pray thee, by
the hand of him, whom thou will send, has any relation to the sending of the
Messiah, to the coming of Christ, to Christmas Day; yet we forbear not to
wait upon the ancient Fathers, and as they said, to say, that Moses having
received a commandment from God, to undertake that great employment of
delivering the children of Israel from the oppressions of Pharaoh in Egypt,
and having excused himself by some other modest and pious pretenses, at last,
when God pressed the employment still upon him, he determines all in this, O my
Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him, whom thou will send, or, (as it is
in our Margin) when thou should send. It is a work, next to the great work
of the redemption of the whole world, to redeem Israel out of Egypt; And
therefore do both works at once, put both into one hand, and mitte quem
missurus es, send him, whom I know, thou will send, him, whom pursuing thine
own decree, thou should send, send Christ, send him now, to redeem Israel
from Egypt.

These words then (though some have made that interpretation of them, and
truly, not without a fair appearance, and probability, and verisimilitude) do
not necessarily imply a slacknesse in Moses zeal, that he desired not
affectionately, and earnestly the deliverance of his Nation from the pressures
of Egypt; nor do they imply any diffidence, or distrust, that God could not,
or would not endow him with faculties fit for that employment; But, as a
thoughtfull man, a pensive, a considerative man, that stands still for a while,
with his eyes fixed upon the ground, before his feet, when he casts up his
head, has presently, instantly the Sun, or the heavens for his object, he sees
not a tree, nor a house, nor a steeple by the way, but as soon as his eye is
departed from the earth where it was long fixed, the next thing he sees is the
Sun or the heavens; so when Moses had fixed himself long upon the
consideration of his own insufficiency for this service, when he took his eye
from that low piece of ground, Himself, considered as he was then, he fell
upon no tree, no house, no steeple, no such consideration as this, God may
endow me, improve me, exalt me, enable me, qualify me with faculties fit for
this service, but his first object was that which presented an infallibility
with it, Christ Jesus himself, the Messiah himself, and the first petition
that he offers to God is this, O my Lord send I pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou will send. For me, as I am, I am altogether unfit; when thou shall be
pleased to work upon me, thou will find me but stone, hard to receive thy holy
impressions, and then but snow, easy to melt, and lose those holy forms
again: There must be labor laid, and perchance labor lost upon me; but put
the business into a safe had, and under an infallible instrument, and Mitte
quem missurus es, send him whom, I know, thou will send, him, whom, pursuing
thine own decree, thou should send, send him, send Christ now.

As much as Paradise exceeded all the places of the earth, Divisie.
do the Scriptures of God exceed Paradise. In the midst of Paradise grew the
Tree of knowledge, and the tree of life: In this Paradise, the Scripture, every
word is both those Trees; there is Life and Knowledge in every word of the Word
of God. That Germen Iehovae, as the Prophet Esaias calls Christ, that Offspring
of Jehova, that Bud, that Blossom, that fruit of God himself, the Son of God,
the Messiah, the Redeemer, Christ Jesus, grows upon every tree in this
Paradise, the Scripture; for Christ was the occasion before, and is the
consummation after, 1 John 5.13.
of all Scripture. This have I written (says S. John,) and so say all the
Penmen of the holy Ghost, in all that they have written, This have we written,
that ye may know that ye have eternal life. Knowledge and life grows upon
every tree in this Paradise, upon every word in this Book, because upon every
Tree here, upon every word, grows Christ himself, in some relation.

From this Branch, this Text, O my Lord send, I pray thee by the hand of him,
whom thou will send, we shall not so much stand, to gather here and there an
Apple, that is, to consider some particular words of the Text it self, as
endeavor to shake the whole tree, that is, the Context, and coherence and
dependence of the words: for, since all that passed between God and Moses in
this affair, and negotiation, Gods employing of Moses, and Moses presenting
his excuses to God, and Gods taking of all those excuses, determines in our
Text, in our Text is the whole story, virtually and radically employed; And
therefore, by just occasion thereof, we shall consider first, That though for
the ordinary duties of our callings, arising out of the evidence of express
Scriptures, we are allowed no haesitation, no disputation, whether we will do
them or no; but they require a present, and an exact execution thereof: yet in
extraordinary cases, and in such actions as are not laid upon us, by any former
and permanent notification thereof in Scripture, such as was Moses case here,
to undertake the deliverance of Israel from Egypt; in such cases, not only
some haesitation, some deliberation, some consultation in our selves, but some
expostulation with God himself, may be excusable in us. We shall therefore
see, that Moses did excuse himself four ways; And how God was pleased to join
issue with him in all four, and to cast him, and overcome him in them all: And
when we come to consider his fifth, which is rather a Diversion upon another,
then an Excuse in himself, and yet, is that, which is most literally in our
Text, O my Lord send, I pray thee, by the hand of him, whom thou will send,
because this was a thing which God had reserved wholly to himself, The sending
of Christ: we shall see, that God would not have been pressed for that, but,
(as it follows immediately, and is also a bough of this tree, that is, grows
out of this Text) God was angry; But yet (as we shall see in the due place) it
was but such an anger, as ended in an Instruction, rather then in an
Increpation; and in an Encouragement, rather then in a Desertion, for he
established Moses in a resolution to undertake the work, by joining his
brother Aaron in commission with him. So then, we have shak'd the tree, that
is, resolved and analyz'd the Context, of all which, the Text it self is the
root, and the seal. And, as we have presented to your sight, we shall farther
offer to your taste, and digestion, and rumination, these particular fruits;
First, that ordinary Duties require a present execution; Secondly, that in
Extraordinary, God allows a Deliberation, and requires not an implicit, a
blind obedience: And in a third place, we shall give you those four
circumstances, that accompanied, or constituted Moses deliberation, and Gods
removing of those four impediments: And in a fourth ^oome, that Consultation
or Diversion, The sending of Christ: And in that, How God was affected with it,
He was angry: angry that Moses would offer to look into those things, which he
had locked up in his secret counsels, such as that sending of Christ, which he
intended: But yet, not angry so, as that he left Moses unsatisfied, or
un-accommodated for the maine business, but settled him in a holy and cheerful
readiness to obey his commandment. And through all these particulars, we
shall pass, with as much clearness, as the weight, and as much shortness, as
the number will permit.

First then, our first Consideration constitutes that Proposition, Ordinary
Duties, Ordinary Duties.
arising out of the Evidence of Gods Word, require a present Execution. There
are Duties that bind us semper, and Adsemper, as our Casuists speak; we are
Always bound to do them, and bound to do them Always; that is, Always to
produce Actus elicitos, Determinate acts, Successive and Consecutive acts,
conformable to those Duties; whereas in some other Duties, we are only bound
to an Habitual disposition, to do them in such and such necessary cases; And
those Actions of the later sort, fall in Genere Deliberativo, we may consider
Circumstances, before we fall under a necessity of doing them; that is, of
doing them Then, or doing them Thus: Of which kind, even those great duties of
Praying, and Fasting are; for we are always bound to Pray, and always bound
to Fast; but not bound to fast always, nor always to pray. But for Actions of
the first kind, such as are the worshipping of God, and the not worshipping of
Images; such as are the sanctifying of Gods Sabbaths, and the not blaspheming
of his Name, which arise out of clear and evident commands of God; they admit
no Deliberation, but require a present Execution. Therefore as S. Stephen saw
Christ, standing at the right hand of his Father, (a posture that denotes first
a readiness to survay, and take knowledge of our distresses, and then a
readiness to proceed, and come forth to our assistance) so in our Liturgy, in
our Service, in the Congregation, we stand up at the profession of the Creed,
at the rehearsing the Articles of our Faith, thereby to declare to God, and his
Church, our readiness to stand to, and our readiness to proceed in that
Profession. The commendation which is given of Andrew, and Peter for obeying
Christ's call, Mark 1.18.
lies not so much in the Reliquerunt retia, that they left their nets, as in
the Protinus reliquerunt, that forthwith, immediately, without farther
deliberation, they left their nets, the means of their livelihood, and
followed Christ. The Lord and his Spirit has anointed us to preach, Esaias 61.1.
says the Prophet Esaias: To preach what? Acceptabilem annum, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. All the year long the Lord stands with his arms
open to embrace you, and all the year long we pray you in Christ's stead, that
you would be reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20. Psalm. 95.8.
But yet, God would feign reduce it to a narrower compass of time, H^die si
vocem ejus audieritis, that you would hear his voice to day, and not harden
your hearts to day: And to a narrower compass then that, Dabitur in illa hora,
says Christ, Luke 12.12.
The holy Ghost shall teach you in that hour: In this hour the holy Ghost
offers himself unto you: And to a narrower compass then an hour, Beati qui
nunc esuritis, qui nunc fletis, Luke 6.21.
Blessed are ye that hunger now, and that mourn now, that put not off years,
nor days, nor hours, but come to a sense of your sins, and of the means of
reconciliation to God, now, this minute. And therefore, when ye read, Iusta
pondera, just weights, and Just balances, Levit. 19.36.
and just measures, a just Hin, and a just Ephah shall ye have, I am the Lord
your God, Do not you say, so I will hereafter, I will come to just weights and
measures, and to deal uprightly in the world, as soon as I have made a
fortune, established a state, raised a competency for wife and children, but
yet I must do as other men do; Levit. 23.
when you read Remember that you keep holy the Sabbath day, (and by the way,
remember that God has called his other holy days, and holy convocations,
Sabbaths too) remember that you celebrate his Sabbaths by your presence here,
do not you say, so I will if I can rise time enough, if I can dine soon
enough; when you read, swear not at all, do not you say, Matt. 5.34.
no more I would but that I live amongst men that will not believe me without
swearing, and laugh at me if I did not swear; for duties of this kind,
permanent and constant duties arising out of the evidence of Gods word, such as
just and true dealing with men, such as keeping Gods Sabbaths, such as not
blaspheming his name, have no latitude about them, no conditions in them; they
have no circumstance, but are all substance, no apparel, but are all body, no
body, but are all soul, no matter, but are all form; They are not in Genere
deliberativo, they admit no deliberation, but require an immediate, and an
exact execution.

But then, for extraordinary things, things that have not their evidence in the
word of God formerly revealed unto us, whether we consider matters of Doctrine,
Extraordinary.
and new opinions, or matter of Practice, and new commands, from what depth of
learning soever that new opinion seem to us to rise, or from height of Power
soever that new-Command seem to fall, it is still in genere deliberativo,
still we are allowed, nay still we are commanded to deliberate, Melch. Canus.
to doubt, to consider, before we execute. As a good Author in the Roman
Church, says, Perniciosius est Ecclesiae, It is more dangerous to the Church,
to accept an Apocryphal book for Canonical, then to reject a Canonical book
for Apocryphal: so may it be more dangerous, to do some things, which to a
distempered man may seem to be commanded by God, then to forbear some things,
which are truly commanded by him. God had rather that himself should be
suspected, then that a false god should be admitted. The easiness of admitting
Revelations, and Visions, and Apparitions of spirits, and Purgatory souls in
the Roman Church; And then, the overbending, and super-exaltation of zeal, and
the captivity to the private spirit, which some have fallen into, that have not
been content to consist in moderate, and middle ways in the Reformed Church;
this easiness of admitting imaginary apparitions of spirits in the Papist, and
this easiness of submitting to the private spirit, in the Schismatike, has
produced effects equally mischievous: Melancholy being made the seat of
Religion on the one side, Basil.
by the Papist, and Phrenzy on the other side, by the Schismatic. Multi, prae
studio immoderato intendi in contrarium aberrarunt a medio, was the observation
and the complaint of that Father in his time, and his prophecy of ours; That
many times, an over-vehement bending into some way of our own choosing, does
not only withdraw us from the left hand way, the way of superstition, and
Idolatry, from which we should all draw, but from the middle way too, in which
we should stand, and walk. And then, Leo.
the danger is thus great, facile in omnia flagitia impulit, quos religione
decepit diabolus; As God does, the devil also does make Zeal and Religion his
instrument. And in other tentations, the devil is but a serpent; but in this,
when he makes zeal and religion his instrument, he is a Lion. As long as the
devil does but say, Do this, or thou will live a fool, and dye a beggar; Do
this, or thou can not live in this world, the devil is but a devil, he
plays but a devils part, a liar, a seducer; But when the devil comes to say,
Do this, or thou can not live in the next world, thou can not be saved,
here the devil pretends to be God, here he acts Gods part, and so prevails the
more powerfully upon us. And then, when men are so mis-transported, either in
opinions, or in actions, with this private spirit, and inordinate zeal, Quibus
non potest auferre fidem, aufert charitatem, says the same Father, Though the
devil has not quenched faith in that man himself, yet he has quenched that
man's charity toward other men; Though that man might be saved, in that opinion
which he holds, because (perchance) that opinion destroys no fundamental
point, yet his salvation is shrewdly shaked, and endangered, in his
uncharitable thinking, that no body can be saved that thinks otherwise. And as
it works thus to an uncharitableness in private, so does it to turbulency, and
sedition in the public. Of which, Eusebius.
we have a pregnant, and an aplyable example in the life of Constantine the
Emperor; In his time, there arose some new questions, and new opinions in some
points of Religion; the Emperor writ alike to both parties, thus: De rebus
ejusmodi, nec omnino rogetis, nec rogati respondeatis: Do you move no
questions, in such things, your selves; and if any other do, yet be not you
too forward, to write, so much as against them. What questions does he mean?
That is expressed, Quas nulla lex, Canonve Ecclesiasticus necessario
praescribit; Such questions, as are not evidently declared, and more then
evidently declared, necessarily enjoined by some law, some rule, some Canon of
the Church: Disturb not the peace of the Church, upon Inferences, and
Consequences, but deal only upon those things, which are evidently declared
in the Articles, and necessarily enjoined by the Church. And yet, though that
Emperor declared himself on neither side, nor did any act in favor of either
side, yet because he did not declare himself on their side, those promovers of
these new opinions, Eo pervenere, (says that Author) ut imagines Imperatoris
violarint, They came as far as they could, to violate the person of the
Emperor, for they violated and defaced his statues, his images, his pictures,
the ensigns of his power and honor; And in this insolency they continued
(says that Author) even after the Emperor had silenced both parties; when he,
by his express Edict, had forbidden both sides to write, the promovers of the
new opinions would write. Still such men think, that whatsoever they think, is
not only true in it self, but necessary for salvation to every man; whereas
new opinions, that may vary from the Scriptures; new commands, that may vary
from the Church, are still in Genere deliberativo, they admit, they require
Deliberation. Blind and implicit faith shall not save us in matter of
Doctrine, nor blind and implicit obedience, in matter of practice; neither is
there any faith so blind, and implicit, as to believe those imaginary
apparitions of spirits, nor any obedience so blind and implicit, as to obey
our own private spirit, and distempered zeal. Truly, I should hope better of
their salvation, who in the first darker times, doubted of the Revelations of
St. John, then of theirs, who in these clear and evident times, accept, and
enjoyne, and magnify, so much as they do in the Roman Church, the
Revelations of St. Brigid: And I should rather accompany them, who out of their
charitable moderation, do believe, that some Christians, though possessed with
some errors, may be saved, then them, who out of their passionate severity,
first call every difference from themselves, an error; and then every error,
damnable; and do not only pronounce, that none that holds any such error,
can be saved, but that no man, though he hold none of those errors himself,
can be saved, if he think any man can be saved, that holds them. And so we have
done with those two propofitions, which are the walls upon which our whole
frame is to be laid; That ordinary duties require a present execution, that was
our first: but extraordinary admit deliberation, that was our second
Consideration; And now our third is, to confider Moses case in particular, as
it was an example of both.

As Moses was an example of the present performance of an evident duty, Moses
case.
we carry you back, to the former chapter, where this root, this Text is first
laid, that is, this employment first begun to be notified. There ver. 4. God
calls Moses, and he calls him by name, V. 4.
and by name twice, Moses, Moses. Of this, Moses could not be ignorant; and
therefore he comes to a present discharge of this duty to a present answer,
ecce adsum, Lord, here I am. This is the advantage of innocence above
guiltiness; God called Adam in Paradise, and he called him by name, and with a
particular inquisition, Adam, ubies? Adam, where art thou? And Adam hid
himself; God calls Moses, and Moses answers. He that is used to hear God, at
home, in his conscience, and in his ears, at Church; and used to answer God,
in both places, at home in his private meditations, and in public devotions
at Church; he that is used to hear, and used to answer God thus, shall be glad
to hear him, in his last voice, in his Angels Trumpets, and to that voice,
Surgite qui dormitis, Arise thou that sleep in the dust, and stand up to
Judgment, as he shall have invested the righteousness of Christ Jesus, he
shall answer in the very words of Christ Jesus; I am he that lives, and was
dead, and behold I am alive, for evermore, Amen. Apoc. 1.18.
In this evident duty then, Moses permitted himself no liberty; God called,
and he answered instantly; He answered in action, as well as in words; and,
indeed, that is our loudest, and most musical answer, to answer God, in deed,
in action. So Moses did; He came, V. 5.
he hastened to the place, where God spoke. It is one good argument of piety, to
love the place where God speaks, the house of his presence. But yet Moses
received an inhibition from God there, a ne appropies, Come not too near, too
close to this place. God loves that we should come to him here, in his house;
but God would not have us press too close upon him here; we must not be too
familiar, too fellowly, too homely with God, here at home, in his house, nor
loath to uncover our head, or bow our knee at his name. When God proceeded
farther with Moses, and comes to say, descendi ut liberem, V. 8.
I am come down to deliver Israel from Egypt, (which was the first intimation
that God gave of that purpose) Moses likes that well enough, opposes nothing to
that, that God would be pleased to think of some course for delivering of
Israel, and enable some Instrument for that work; for that is, for the most
part Gods descending, and his coming down, to put his power instrumentally,
ministerially, into the hand of another; General things, and remote things do
not much affect us; Moses says nothing to Gods general proposition; That he
was come down to deliver Israel, but when God comes to that particular, veni
erg^ ut mittamte, Come therefore that I may send thee, him into Egypt, V. 9, 10.
Moses to Pharaoh, this was a Rock in his Sea, and a Remora upon his Ship, a
Hill in his way, and a Snake in his path. Some light, that this was about the
time, when Israel should be delivered, there was before. Moses takes knowledge,
Genesis 15.16.
that God had promised Abraham, that after four generations, they should come
back; and the four generations were come about. Some light, that Moses should
be the man, by whom they should be delivered, it seems there was before; for
upon that history which is in the second chapter of this book, that Moses flew
an Egyptian who oppressed one of his Countrymen, Exodus 2.13.
St. Stephen, Acts 7.25.
in his own Funeral Sermon, says, That Moses, in that act supposed, his
brethren would have understood, how that God, by his hand would deliver them,
but they understood it not. So that it seems some such thing had gone out in
voice, some revelation, some intimation, some emanation of some kind of light
there had been, by which they might have understood it, though they did not.
But when Moses remembers now, that that succeeded not, that they apprehended
not the offer of his service then, and that he was now grown to be eighty
years old, and that forty of that eighty had been spent in an obscure, in a
Shepherds life, and that he must now be sent, not only to work upon that
people, who showed no forwardness toward him then, and might absolutely have
forgotten him now, but upon Pharaoh himself, this created in Moses this
haesitation, this deliberation; perchance not without some tincture of
infirmity, but far from any degree of impiety; perchance not without some
expostulation with God, but far from any reluctation against God. Consider
Abraham; Abraham the Father of the faithful; of whom, as the Apostle says,
that he hoped beyond hope, we may say, that he believed beyond faith, for, (as
he says) he followed God, not knowing whither he led him; Abraham came to
another manner of expostulation with God, Genesis 18.22.
in the behalf of Sodom; He says to God, will thou destroy the righteous
with the wicked? Absit, be that far from thee; and he repeats it Absit, be
that far from thee; and he pleads it with God, Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? Now as St. Paul says of Esaias, Esaias was bold when he said thus
and thus; so we may say of Abraham, Abraham was bold, when he could conceive
such an imagination, that God would destroy the righteous with the wicked, or
that the Judge of all the earth should not do right; yet Abraham is not blamed
for this. Consider St. Peter's proceeding with Christ; Mat. 16.23.
he comes to a rebuking of Christ, and to a more vehement absit, Lord be this
far from thee, this shall not be unto thee, speaking of his going up to
Jerusalem, upon which journey depends the whole work of our redemption. And
though S. Peter incurred an increpation from Christ, yet that which he did, was
rooted in love, and piety, though it were mixed with inconsideration. S. Peter
went farther then Abraham, but Abraham farthen then Moses; As therefore that
first Revelation, which Moses may seem to have received, when he was forty
years before this, in Egypt, did not so bind him, to a present prosecution of
that work of their deliverance, but that, upon occasion he did withdraw
himself from Egypt, and continue from thence, in a forty years absence; so
neither did this intimation, which he received from God now, so bind him up,
but that he might piously present his own unfitness for that emploiment; for
it does not so much imply a denial to undertake the service, as a petition,
that God would super-endow him, with parts, and faculties, fit for that
service; It is far from that stubborn sons non ibo, I will not go to work
in that Vineyard; But it is only this, except God do somewhat for me before
Lgoe, I shall be very unfit to go: And that any Ambassador may say to his
Prince, any Minister of State to his Master, any Messenger of God to God
himself. And therefore good occasion of doctrines of edification offering it
self from that consideration, we shall insist a little, upon each of his
excuses, though they be four.

His first prospect that he looks upon in himself, Quis ego.
his first object, that by way of objection he makes to God, is himself, and
his own unworthiness. To consider others, is but to travail: to be at home,
is to consider our selves: upon others we can look, but in oblique lines;
only upon our selves, in direct. Man is but earth; It Is true; but earth is the
center. That man who dwells upon himself, who is always conversant in himself,
rests in his true center. Man is a celestial creature too, a heavenly
creature; and that man that dwells upon himself, that has his conversation in
himself, has his conversation in heaven, If you weigh any thing in a scale,
the greater it is, the lower it sinkes; as you grow greater and greater in the
eyes of the world, sink lower and lower in your own. If thou ask thy self
Quis ego, what am I? and be able to answer thy self, why now I am a man of
title, of honor, of place, of power, of possessions, a man fit for a
Chronicle, a man considerable in the Heralds Office, go to the Heralds Office,
the sphere and element of Honor, and thou shall find those men as busy
there, about the consideration of Funerals, as about the consideration of
Creations; thou shall find that office to be as well the Grave, as the Cradle
of Honor; And thou shall find in that Office as many Records of attainted
families, and escheated families, and impoverished and forgotten, and
obliterate families, as of families newly erected and presently celebrated. In
what height soever, any of you that sit here, stand at home, there is some
other in some higher station then yours, that weighs you down: And he that
stands in the highest of subordinate heighths, nay in the highest supreme
height in this world, is weighed down, by that, which is nothing; for what is
any Monarch to the whole world? and the whole world is but that; but what? but
nothing. What man amongst us looks Moses way, first upon himself; perchance
enough do so; but who looks Moses way, and by Moses light? first upon himself,
and in himself, first upon his own insufficiencies; what man amongst us, that
is named to any place, by the good opinion of others, or that calls upon others,
and begs, and buys their good opinion for that place, begins at Moses, Quis
ego? What am I? where have I studied and practiced sufficiently before, that I
should fill such or such a place of Judicature? Quis ego? What am I? where have
I served, and labored, and preached in inferior places of the Church, that I
should fill fuch or a such a place of Dignity or prelacy there? Quis ego? What
am I? where have I seen and encountered, and discomfited the enemy, that I
should fill such or such a place of Command in an army? There is not an Abraham
left to say, Pulvis and Cinis, O my Lord, I am but dust and ashes; not a Jacob
left to say, Non sum dignus, O my Lord I am not worthy of the least of these
preferments; not a David left to say, Canis mortuies, and pulex, O my Lord I am
but a dead dog, and a flea; But every man is vapor'd up into air; and, as the
air can, he thinks he can fill any place: Every man is under that
complicated disease, and that ridling distemper, not to be content with the
most, and yet to be proud of the least thing he has; that when he looks upon
men, he dispises them, because he is some kind of Officer, and when he looks
upon God, he murmures at him, because he made him not a King. But if man will
not come to his Quis ego? who am I? to a due consideration of himself, God
will come to his Quis tu? who art thou? and to his Amice quomodo intrasti?
friend how came you in? To every man that comes in by undue means, God shall
say, as first to us, in our profession, what had thou to do, to take my word
into thy mouth? so to others in theirs, what had thou to do, to take my
sword into thy hand? Only to those who are little in their own eyes, shall
God say, as Christ said to his Church, Noli timere, fear not little flock, for
it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. It is not called a
Kingdom, but the Kingdom; that Kingdom, which alone, Luke 12.32.
is worth all the kingdoms that the devil showed Christ, The Kingdom of
Heaven. Be but a worm and no man, as David speaks even in the person of
Christ; Ps. 22.7.
find thy self trodden under foot, and under thine own foot, that is,
depressed in thine own estimation, and God shall raise thee with that
supportation, Fear not thou worm of Jacob, Esaias 41.14.
ye men of Israel. Be but worms and no more, in your own eyes, and God shall
make you men, be but men and no more in your own eyes, and GOD shall make you
the men of his Israel. This was Moses way; not a running away from God, but a
turning into himself; not a reluctation against God, but a consideration of
himself. For, though the lazy man's Quis ego, shall not profit him, when he
shall say, what am I? I am but one man, I can do nothing alone, and so leave
all reformation un-attempted in his place, because others will ^^^orme nothing
in theirs; (for, that which David says, Ps. 50.18.
If thou saw a thief, Currebas, thou did rise and run with him, is not
much worse, then when thou see a lazy man, to lie down and sleep with him)
Though this man's Quis ego, what am I? shall not profit him, for it is but the
voice of prevarication, in the ordinary duties of his calling, yet in Moses
case, in every undertaking of a new action, this examination, this exinanition
of our selves is acceptable in the fight of God. And therefore Calvin says
justly of this particular, in Moses case, Non modo culpa vacare, sed laud
dignum puto, that Moses in this his proceeding with God, was so far from
deserving blame, that he deserved much praise. And so it seems, God himself
interpreted it, and accepted it; for first, for his way, he gives him that
assurance, Certainly I will be with thee; V. 12.
and then for the end, and the effect too, he directs him thus, when thou have
brought forth the people out of Egypt (as, certainly this people thou shall
bring from thence) then shall they serve God upon this Mountain. And further
we may not carry the consideration of Moses first excuse, arising out of the
contemplation of his own insufficiency, in general.

The second doubt and difficulty that Moses makes to himself, and presents to
God, Quod nomeu? V. 13. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 3.
is this, that he was not able to tell them to whom he was sent, his name that
sent him. When I am come to them, says Moses to God, and shall say, thou have
sent me, and they shall say, what is his Name, what shall I say unto them? In
Eusebius his history, A Tyran, a persecutor, asks a martyr, Artalus, in the
midst of his torments, in scorn and contempt, What is your Gods name? you
pretend a necessity of worshipping a new God, your God, but what shall we call
your God, what is your Gods name? And the Martyr answered, Qui plures sunt,
nominibus decernuntur, qui unus est, nomine non indiget: You who worship many
Gods, need many names to distinguish your Gods by; we, who know but one God,
need no other name of God, but God; we who worship the only true God, need
not the semi-gods, nor the sesqui-gods of the Roman Church; not their
semi-gods, their halfe-gods, men beatified, but not sanctified; made private
gods, but not public gods; chamber-gods, but not Church-gods; nor any
sesqui-god, any that must be more then God, and receive appeals from God, and
reverse the decrees of God, which they make the office of the Virgin Mary, whom
no man can honor too much, that makes her not God, and they dishonor most,
that make her so much more. But yet, some names, some notifications of God, no
doubt the Jews had: Moses says here, that he would tell them, that the God of
their Fathers had sent him; which was a name of specification, and distinction
of this GOD, from all the gods of the Gentiles. But in this place, Moses
desires such a name of God, as might not only intimate to them to whom he was
sent, a great power in that Prince that sent him, but might also intimate a
great privacy, and confidence in him that was sent; A name, by which he might
be known, to know more of that God, then other men knew; for, nothing advances
a business more, then when he that is employed, is believed to know the mind,
and to have the heart of him, that sends him. Therefore God gives Moses a
cyphar; God declares to Moses, his bosom name, his viscerall name, his
radical, his fundamental name, the name of his Essence, Qui sum, I am; Go,
and tell them, that he whose name is I am, has sent thee. It is true, that
literally in the Original, this name is conceived in the future; it is there,
Qui ero, I that shall be. But this present acceptance, I am, has passed
through all Translators, and all Commentors, and Fathers, and Councels, and
Schools, and the whole Church of God rests in it. Piscator.
And I know but one, (who is of the Reformation, and of the most rigid
sub-division in the Reformation, and who has many other singularities besides
this) that will needs translate this name, Qui eram, I was. Howsoever, all
intend, that this is a name that denotes Essence, Being: Being is the name of
God, and of God only: for, of every other creature, Plato says well, Ejus
nomen est potius non esse; The name of the Creator is, I am, but of every
creature rather, I am not, I am nothing. He considers it, and concludes it, in
the best, and noblest of creatures, Man; for, he, as well as the rest, plus
habet non entis, quam entis; Man has more privatives, then positives in him;
Man has but his own being; Man has not the being of an Angel, nor the
being of a lion; God has all in a kind of eminence more excellently then the
kinds themselves, only his name is I am. Plato pursues this consideration
usefully; Habuit ante aeternum non esse, Man had an eternal not being before;
that is, before the creation; for those infinite millions of millions of
generations before the Creation, there was a God, whose name was I am; but till
within these six thousand years, Man was not, there was no man. And so says
Plato, Haberet aeternum non esse, (...) Man had an eternal not being before
the Creation; so he would have another eternal not-being after his dissolution
by death, in soul, as well as in body, if God did not preserve that being,
which he has imprinted in both, in both. And jam dum est, says he, As man had
one eternal not being before, and would have another after, so for that
being which he seems to have here now, it is a continual declination into a
not being, because he is in continual change, and mutation, quae desinit in
non esse, as he says well; Every change and mutation bends to a not being,
because in every change, it comes to a not being that which it was before;
only the name of God is I am.

In which name, God gave Moses, and does give us who are also his Ambassadors,
so much knowledge of himself, as that we may tell you, though not what God is,
yet, that God is; God, in the notification of this name, sends us sufficiently
instructed, to establish you in the assurance of an everlasting, and an
ever-ready God, but not to scatter you with unnecessary speculations, and
impertinencies concerning this God. He is no fit messenger between God and his
Church, that knows not Gods name; that is, how God has notified, and
manifested himself to man. God has manifested himself to man in Christ; and
manifested Christ in the Scriptures; and manifested the Scriptures in the
Church; the name of God is the notification of God; how God will be called by
man, and that is, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and how God will be
called upon by man, that is, that all our prayers to God be directed in, and
through, and by, and for Christ Jesus. If we know the name of God, Qui sum, I
am, that is, believe Christ Jesus, whom we worship to have been from all
eternity, to be God; and then for more particular points, believe those
Doctrines, quae sunt, which are, that is, Quae sunt ubique, and semper, as
Lyrinensis says, which have been always believed, and always believed to
have been necessary to be believed as articles of Faith, through the whole
Catholic Church, if we know the name of God thus, we have our Commission, and
our qualification in that Gospel, Go, and teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
and baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost;
that is the name of God to a Christian, the Trinity. And least that Commission
so delivered in the general and fundamental manner, professing the Trinity,
should not seem enough, it is repeated and paraphrased in the verse following,
Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. First there
is a Teaching; good life it self is but a commentary, an exposition upon our
preaching; that which is first laid upon us is preaching; and then teach them
to observe, that is, to practice; breed them not in an opinion that such a
faith as is without works is enough; and teach them to observe All; For, for
matter of practice, He that breaks one Law is guilty of all, and he that
thinks to serve God by way of compensation, that is, to recompense God by
doing one duty, for the omission of another, sins even in that, in which he
thinks he serves God; and for matter of belief, he that believes not all,
solvit Iesum, as S. John speaks, he takes Jesus in pieces, and after the Jews
have crucified him, he dissects him, and makes him an Anatomy. We must
therefore teach all; but then it is but all, which Christ has commanded us;
additionall and traditionall doctrines of the Papist, speculative and dazzling,
riddling and entangling perplexities of the School, passionate, and
uncharitable wranglings of Controverters, these fall not in Moses Commission,
nor ours, who participate of his; we are to deliver to you by the Ordinance of
God, Preaching, The name of God, that is, how God has manifested himself to
man, and how God will be called upon by man, That God is your God in Christ, if
you receive Christ in the Scriptures, applied in the Church. And farther we
carry not our consideration upon this second excuse of Moses, in which (as in
the former, he considered his insufficiency in the general) he considers it in
this, that he had not studied, he had not acquired, he had not sought the
knowledge of those Mysteries which appertained to that calling, employed in
that, that he did not know Gods name.

His third excuse, which induces a great discouragement, Non eloquens.
arises out of a defect in nature, whereas the former is rather of art, and
study, and consideration; and to be naturally defective in those faculties,
which are essential and necessary to that work, which is under our hand, is a
great discouragement. Lamenesse is not always an insupportable calamity; but
for Mephibosheth to have been hindered by lamenesse then, when he should have
received favor from the King, and settled his inheritance, this was a heavy
affliction. Lowness of stature is no insupportable thing; but when Zacheus
came with such a desire to see Christ, then to be disappointed by reason of his
lowness, this might affect him. It is not always insupportable to lack the
assistance of a servant, or a friend; But when the Angel has troubled the
water, and made it medicinal for him that is first put in and no more, then to
have lain many years in expectation, and still to lack a servant, or a friend
to do that office, this is a misery. And this was Moses case; God will send him
upon a service, that consisted much in persuasion, and good speech, and he
says, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have
spoken to thy servant. Ver. 10.
Where we see, there is some degree of eloquence required in the delivery of
Gods Messages. There are not so eloquent Books in the world, as the
Scriptures; neither should a man come to any kind of handling of them with
uncircumcised lips, as Moses speaks, or with an extemporall and irreverent, or
over-homely and vulgar language. Prove. 16.1.
The preparation of the heart is of the Lord, says Solomon; but it is not only
that; The preparation of the heart, and the answer of the tongue is of the
Lord. To conceive good things for the glory of God, and to express them to the
edification of Gods people, is a double blessing of God. Therefore does Hester
form and institute her prayer to God so, Ester 14.12.
Give me boldness, O Lord of all power; but she extends her prayer farther,
And give me eloquent speech in my mouth. And the want of this in a natural
defect, and unreadinesse of speech discouraged Moses. And when God recompenses,
and supplies this defect in Moses, he does it but thus, I will be with thy
mouth, and I will teach thee what thou shall say. Still it is Moses that must
say it; still Moses mouth that must utter it. Beloved, it is the general
Ordinance of God, of whom, as we have received mercy, we have received the
Ministry, and it is the particular grace of God that inanimates our labors,
and makes them effectual upon you; All that is not of our planting, nor
watring, but of God that gives the increase; But yet we must labor to get, and
labor to improve such learning, and such language, and such other abilities as
may best become that service; for the natural want of one of these, retarded
Moses from a present acceptance of Gods employment. And so truly, should put
any man, that puts himself, or puts his son upon this profession, upon that
consideration, whether he have such natural parts as will admit acquisitions,
and superedifications fit for that calling. And farther we carry not Moses
third excuse, raised out of a natural defect, non sum eloquens, I am not
eloquent enough.

The fourth is a shrewd discouragement: Non credent.
In the first verse of this Chapter, He answered and said, but behold, they
will not believe me; when I have told them thy name, how thou have manifested
thy self to them, and in what name they must call upon thee, Behold, they will
not believe me; And this is the saddest discouragement that can fall upon the
Minister and Messenger of God, not to be believed. God found this, and
complained of it at first, Number. 14.11. Esaias 53.1. John 12.38.
Quousque non credent? how long will it be ere this people believe? they will
never believe. The Prophet Esaias foresaw this; Quis credidit? Lord who has
believed our report? No man does, no man will believe us. S. John found this
prophecy of Esaias fulfilled even then, when Christ in person was preaching, and
working of Miracles; then says that Evangelist, Romans 10.16.
was that of Esaias fulfilled, They believed not his report. And S. Paul saw it
performed amongst the Gentiles, as well as S. John amongst the Jews, Lord who
has believed our report? Christ has said himself, and Christ has bidden us
say, Qui non crediderit, damnabitur, He that believes not, shall be damned: And
yet, Lord who has believed our report? There cannot fall a sadder
discouragement upon the Messenger of God, then not to be believed.

How loath we find the blessed Fathers of the Primitive Church, to lack company
at their Sermons? How earnestly Leo, in one of his Anniversary Sermons,
complains of multitudes, and thrusts at Plays, and Masks, and of a thinness,
and scarcity, and solitude at Church? How glad they were to draw men thither?
And then how much they endeavored, to hold them in a disposition of harkening
unto them, when they had them? Sometimes with observing them with phrases of
humiliation; So Damascene professes himself Minimum servum Ecclesiae, Damascen.
the meanest and unworthiest servant to that Congregation. So Leo presents
himself, Leo. August.
Ad vestra paratus obsequia, Ready to do all obsequious service to that
Congregation: And so S. Augustine, In hoc vobis servimus, we shall do this
congregation the best service, in handling this point thus. Sometimes they did
it so, by submitting themselves to the Congregation, in phrases of humiliation;
and sometimes, by taking knowledge of the pious, and devout behavior of the
congregation, even in their Sermons, Leo.
and thanking them for it; As Leo does too, Quod non tacito honorastis affectu,
That they did countenance that which was said, with a holy murmur, with a
religious whispering, and with an ocular applause, with fixing their eyes upon
the Preacher, and with turning their eyes upon one another; for those outward
declarations were much, very much in use in those times. And though in the
excess of such outward declarations, Chrysostom.
S. Chrysostom: complain of them, Non Theatrum Ecclesia, My masters, what mean
you, the Church is not a Theater, Quae mihi istoru^ plausuum utilitas? what get
I by these plaudites, and acclamations? I had rather have one soul, then all
these hands and eyes: yet it is easy to observe, in the general proceeding of
those blessed Fathers, that they had a holy delight to be heard, August.
and to be heard with delight. For, Nemo flectitur, qui moleste audit; No man
profits by a Sermon, that hears with pain, or weariness. Therefore S.
Chrysoslome awakes his drouzie Auditory with that alarm, Chrysostom.
His quae jam dicuntur, etc. Hearken, I pray you now, says he; for, Non rem
vulgarem pollicemur, It is no ordinary matter that I shall tell you: and having
so awakened them, he keeps them awake, with such Doctrines as he thought
fittest for their edification. And to the same purpose, August.
S. Augustine does not only profess of himself, Non praetermitto istos
numeros clausularum, That he studied at home, to make his language sweet, and
harmonious, and acceptable to Gods people, but he believes also, that S. Paul
himself, and all the Apostles, had a delight, and a complacency, and a holy
melting of the bowels, when the congregation liked their preaching: The Fathers
were glad to be heard, glad to be liked, and glad to be understood too; for,
therefore does Damascen repeat, almost verbatim, Damase.
that great Sermon of his De Imaginibus, a second time, because (as he assigns
the reason) he was not thoroughly understood, in the first preaching thereof;
Nehem. 8.
And therefore does Ezra extend himself so far, as to preach from morning (as
it is in the Original, from the light) till noone, that by giving himself
that compass, he might carry every point in a clearness, as he went. Now if
these blessed Fathers, these Angels of the Church, these Archangels of the
Primitive Church, were thus affected, if they were not frequented, but
neglected for other entertainments; or if they were not hearkened to, when they
were heard, but heard perfunctorily, fragmentarily, here and there a rag, a
piece of a sentence; Or if they were not understood, because they that heard
were scattered, and distracted with other thoughts, and so withdrawn from
their observation; or if they were not liked, because the Auditory had some
pre-contracts upon other Preachers, that they liked better; how may we think,
that those holy and blessed spirits were troubled, if they were not believed?
This destroys and demolishes the whole body of our building; this evacuates
the whole function of our Ministry, if we lose our credibility; if we may not
be believed; if the Church conceive a jealousy, that we preach to serve
turns; And therefore vae per quem, and vae per quos; woe unto that man (if any
such man there should ever be) that gives just occasion of such a jealousy,
that he preaches to serve turns; And woe to them (who abound every where) who
entertain such jealousies, where no just occasion is offered, but
mis-interpret the faithful labors of Gods true servants, and think every
thing done to serve turns, that does not agree with their distemper, in the
likeness of zeal. The Fathers were sorry if they were not heard, if they were
not understood, if they were not liked; But the saddest discouragement of all,
is the Non credent, if we be not believed. And farther we carry not our
Consideration upon Moses four excuses; of which the first was, in Contemplation
of his own insufficiency in general; The second, in that particular, of not
having furnished himself with additions necessary for that service; The third,
because he had a defect in natural faculties; and the last, for the
indisposition of them, to whom he was to go.

But then the fifth, which is not so much an excuse, as a petition, (O my Lord,
Mitte quem missurus.
send I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send) tastes of most
vehemence, and, as it may seem, of some passion in Moses. He says first, Quis
ego? I am not worthy of this employment; That Is true; but thou art able to
qualify me for it; and that objection is taken away. Quod nomen? I know not
thy name, how thou will be called, and how thou will be called upon by men; I
have not studied that: But thou have revealed unto me the knowledge of
fundamental doctrines, necessary for salvation, and that objection is removed.
Non facundus, I am not eloquent, not of ready speech, defective in those
natural faculties; But the spirit of eloquence, and the irresistibleness of
persuasion is in that mouth, in which thou speak: and that excuse is taken
away too. Non credent; I know their stubbornness, to whom I go, they will not
believe me; But thou have put the power of Miracles into my hands, as well as
knowledge into my heart; God makes sometimes a plain and simple man's good
life, as powerful, as the eloquentest Sermon. All this I acknowledge, says
Moses; But yet, O Lord, when thou shall have done all this, in me, and in them,
made me worthy by thy power, taught me thy Name by thy grace, infused a
perswasibility into them, and a perswasivenesse into me, by thy Spirit, yet
there is One who is to be sent, One whom I know thou will send, One, whom,
pursuing thine own Decree, thou should send, One, whose shooe-latchet I
shall not be worthy to untie then, when thou shall have multiplied all these
qualifications upon me, and therefore, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by his
hand, send him, send Christ now. So then, with the ancient Fathers, with Justin
Martyr, with S. Basil, with Tertullian, with more, many, very many more, we may
safely take this to be a supplication, That God would be pleased to hasten the
coming of the Messiah.

Of our later writers, Calvin departs from the Ancients herein, so far, as to
say, nimis coacta, it seems somewhat a forced, somewhat an unnatural sense,
to interpret these words of the coming of Christ; but he proceeds no farther.
But another, of the same sub-division, is, (as he uses to be) more assured,
more confident; and he says, Piscator.
est omnimoda and praecisa recusatio; It is an absolute refusal in Moses, to
obey the commandment of God: And that truly, needed not to have been said.
Now, when we consider the exposition in the Roman Church, Tostat.
when their great Bishop, (I mean their great writing Bishop) departs from the
Ancients, and does not understand these words of the coming of Christ,
Pererius.
a Jesuit is so bold with that Bishop, (their order forbids them to be Bishops,
but not to be Controllers over Bishops) as to tell him, levis objectio, that he
departs from a good foundation, Eugubinus.
the Fathers, and that upon a light reason. And when another Author in that
Church proceeds farther, to so much vehemence, so much violence, as to say,
that it is not only an incommodious, but a superstitious sense, to interpret
these words of the coming of Christ, Peterius. Cornelius.
two Jesuits correct him, almost in the same words, (for in the ways of
contumely and defamation, they agree well) and say, audacter obstrepit, he does
but sawcily bark, and kick against the ancient Fathers, quibus ipse, says
Pererius, to whom himself is not to be compared, neither for learning in
himself, nor for place and dignity in the Church, nor for sanctity and
holiness of life in the world. They may be as bold with one another, as they
please; Indeed they are so used to uncharitable phrases toward all others, as
sometimes they cannot spare one another. For our part, we lay no such
imputations upon any of our later men, that accept not that sense of these
words, but yet, we cannot doubt of leave to accompany the Fathers in that
Exposition, that these words, O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him,
whom thou will send, are a petition, and not a reluctation against God. And
that, not as Lyra takes them; Lyra takes them to be a petition, and not a
reluctation; but a petition of Moses, that he would send Aaron; That, if he
would send any, he should send a man of better parts, and abilities, then
himself; and this is a rare modesty, when a man is named for any place, to
become suter for another to that place; Moses was the meekest man upon earth;
but this was not his meaning here. Nor as Rabbi Solomon takes it; he takes it
for a Petition, and no reluctation; but, a Petition, that God would send
Iosuah; For, (says that Rabbi) Moses had had a Revelation, that Iosuah, and
not he, should be the man, that should bring that People into the Land of
Promise; and therefore, since Iosuah was to have the honor of the action,
Moses would have laid the burden upon him too; but this makes Moses a more
fashionall, a more particular, a more selfe-considering man, for his own
estimation, then he was. But, with the Ancients, and later devout men, we
piously believe Moses in these words to have extended his Devotion toward his
Nation, and the whole world together, Ferus.
as far, as one of them has extended the Exposition; quid prodest ex Egypto
exire, and in peccatis manner, says he; what shall they be the better, for
coming out of the pressures of Egypt, if they must remain still, under the
oppression of a sinful conscience? And that must be their case, if thou send
but a Moses, and not a Christ to their succor. Quid Pharaonem essugere, and
non Diabolum, says he; what shall they get, in being delivered from Pharaoh,
if they be not delivered from the Devil? Intrare in terram promissam, and non
in coelum? What preferment is it, to dwell in a good Land, and to be banished
out of heaven? And this will be their case, if thou send but a Moses, and not a
Christ, for their deliverance. He carries it from them, to God himself: Quid
unum populum e servitute temporali liberare, and totum genus humanum relinquere
sub potestate Diaboli? What glory will it be to thee, O God, who studiest
thine own glory, to deliver one Nation from a temporal bondage, and leave all
Mankind under everlasting condemnation? And that must be the case of all, if
thou send but a Moses, and not a Christ; Moses, may, by thine abundant
goodness, do some good; but there is one, one appointed to be sent, that will
do all which Moses should do, better then Moses, and infinitely more then
Moses can do, or, of himself, so much as wish to be done; and therefore send
him, send him now, to do all together: And so these words are a Petition, and
no Reluctation, though some men have taken them so; and a Petition for the
sending of Christ, and no Aaron, no Iosuah, no other man; though some have
taken so too.

Yet we do not deliver Moses from all infirmity herein; Iratus Deus. Exodus
32.32.
no nor from all error, and mistaking; no more then we do in that other
prayer of his, dele me, pardon this people, or blot my name out of thy Book,
where Moses capitulated too narrrowly, and upon too strict conditions with God.
Therefore, in this place, it follows presently upon this prayer, That God was
angry with him. Unseasonable prayers, though because they may be rooted in
piety, they may be, in some sort, excusable in him that makes them, yet may be
unacceptable to God. S. August. prayed for a dead Mother, Monica; and S.
Ambrose prayed for a dead Master, Theodesi^s; God forbid we should condemn
Augustine or Ambrose of impiety in doing so; But God forbid we should make
Augustine or Ambrose his example, our rule to do so still. This sending of
Christ, which Moses solicites here, was de Arcanit Dei; It was one of the
secrets of his State, and of his government; It was one of his bosom Counsels,
and Cabinet Decrees: One of those reserved cases, which he had communicated to
no man; as the day of Christ's second coming, his coming to Judgment, is now;
which God has communicated to no man; as the clear understanding of the state
of the dead, who are departed this life, God has imparted to no man; nor some
circumstances of time, and place, and person in Antichrist; God has revealed
these to no man, not to his whole Church; These are acts of his Regality, and
of his Prerogative; and as Princes say of their Prerogative, nolumus disputari,
we will not have it disputed, nor called into question, so for these Reserved
cases, and unrevealed Counsels of God, such as was the first coming of Christ
in Moses time, and such as is the second coming of Christ, now in our time,
God would not be importuned. God meant to give the children of Israel a King,
from the beginning; we presume he meant it, because it is the best blessing of
all forms of government: And we see he meant it, because long before, he
established Laws, by which, Deuteronomy. 17.
they should govern themselves, in their choosing their King, and by which,
their King should govern them, when he was chosen; yet God was angry, when
they importuned him for a King, at such a time, and upon such terms, as he
intended not to do it. But now, because in Moses case, though there were not a
present obedience, yet there was no disobedience, the fault being no greater,
the anger was not great neither; and therefore we may safely say with Rupertus,
that the iratus fuit, was but non propitius fuit; God was so angry, as that he
did not grant, nor accept Moses petition, nor entertain any farther discourse
with him, concerning the sending of Christ; In Abraham's solicitation, in the
behalf of Sodom, it is said, that God went not away, as long as Abraham had
any thing to say; But here, God was so far angry, as to break off Moses
discourse: But his anger was not so much an Increpation, that he had said any
thing, as an Instruction that he should say no more of Gods unrevealed
purposes.

Therefore God does not continue his anger, so as to discontinue his work.
Tamen consolidat.
It was but a Catechisticall anger, such an anger as S. Bernard begges at Gods
hands, Irascaris mihi Domine, O Lord, be angry with me, and leave me not to my
self; thou have an anger, that instructs in the way; but thou have a heavy
indignation, that confounds, and exterminates in the end. Therefore our prayer
in the Litany, is not, O Lord be never angry with us; but, O Lord, be not
angry with us, for ever. David was a man according to Gods heart; yet, no
doubt, but God was angry with David, for the matter of Vriah, as himself calls
it. God was not angry with Moses so, as that he gave over his purpose of
delivering Israel, or of delivering Israel by him, and him established in a
cheerful assurance to undertake it; for in the same breath, in the same
words, V. 14.
in the same verse, wherein his anger is expressed, his Benignity, and his
Benevolence is expressed also; for there he says, Is not Aaron thy Brother; I
know he can speak well; and also, behold, he comes forth to meet thee: God
had laid it so, that Moses should be settled this way, by having so able a man,
and then, a man in whom he might be so confident, as a brother, joined in
commission with him. Slide we in this note by the way; God loves not
singularity: God binds us to nothing, that was never said but by one: As God
loves Sympathy, God loves Symphony; God loves a compassion and fellow-feeling
of others miseries, that is Sympathy, and God loves Harmony, and fellow
believing of others Doctrines, that is Symphony: No one man alone makes a
Church; no one Church alone makes a Catholic Church. Christ sent his own
Disciples by couples, two and two: And Aquinas says out of his observation,
Monachus solus est Demon solitarius: Though naturally a Monk must love
retiredness, yet a single Monk, a Monk always alone, says he, is plotting
some singular mischief. Deus qui habitat in nobis, etiam nos custodiet ex
nobis, is excellently said by that excellent Father: August.
God that dwells in us, will sustain the building, and repair the building out
of our selves; that is, he will make us Tutelar Angels to one another; and a
holy, and reverentiall respect to one another, in good conversation, shall keep
us from many sinful actions, which we would commit if we were alone. So then,
God was not so angry, nor angry so with Moses, as that he did not pursue his
first purpose upon him, of sending him, and sending him so, as might best
speed, and advance his Negotiation. And therefore, as Moses praying for Christ's
first coming, which was one of Gods reserved cases, and an act of his
regality, and Prerogative, though he had not that prayer granted, yet was not
left unsatisfied, nor unaccommodated by God, so, (which is the end, that we
drive all to) when the calamities; and distresses of this life oppress us, and
we pray for the second coming of Christ, in the consummation of all, in glory,
though, because this second coming of Christ, is one of Gods Reserved cases,
and an act of his Regality, and Prerogative, he do not grant that, that
Christ do not come so; yet, in his blessed Spirit, he will come to us, in an
assurance, that when he shall come so, in judgment, we in his right, shall
stand upright even in that Judgment: And, if in extraordinary distresses, we
pray for extraordinary reliefes, though extraordinary helps, and miracles be
Reserved cases, and acts of his Regality, and Prerogative; yet, as he remembers
his mercies, of old, he will remember his miracles of old too, (and as his
mercies are new every morning, his miracles shall be new every morning too;
and all that he did in eighty eight, in the last Centutry, he shall do (if we
need it) in twenty eight, in this Century;) And though he may be angry with our
prayers, as they are but verbal prayers, and not accompanied with actions of
obedience, yet he will not be angry with us for ever, but re-establish at home,
zeal to our present Religion, and good correspondence, and affections of all
parts to one another, and our power, and our honor, in foreign Nations. Amen.

SERMON VI. Preached at S. Paul's, upon Christmas Day. 1628.
Lord, who has believed our report?
Domine, quis credidit auditui nostro?
I Have named to you no book, no chapter, no verse, where these words are
written: But I forbore not out of forgetfulness, nor out of singularity, but
out of perplexity rather, because these words are written, in more then one, in
more then two places of the Bible. In your ordinary conversation, and
communication with other men, I am sure you have all observed, that many men
have certain forms of speech, certain interjections, certain suppletory
phrases, which fall often upon their tongue, and which they repeat almost in
every sentence; and; for the most part, impertinently; and then, when that
phrase conduces nothing to that which they would say; but rather disorders and
discomposes the sentence, and confounds, or troubles the hearer. And this,
which some do out of slacknesse, and in-observance, and infirmity, many men,
God knows, do out of impiety; many men have certain suppletory Oaths, with
which they fill up their Discourse, then, when they are not only not the
better believed, but the worse understood for those blasphemous interjections.
Now, this, which you may thus observe, in men, sometimes out of infirmity,
sometimes out of impiety, out of an accommodation and communicablenesse of
himself to man, out of desire, and a study, to shed himself the more
familiarly, and to infuse himself the more powerfully into man, you may
observe even in the holy Ghost in himself, in the Scriptures, which are the
discourse and communication of God with man; There are certain idioms,
certain forms of speech, certain propositions, which the holy Ghost repeats
several times, upon several occasions in the Scriptures. It is so in the
isntrumental Authors of the particular Books of the Bible; There are certain
forms of speech, certain characters, upon which I would pronounce, That Is
Moses, and not David, that is Job, and not Solomon, that is Esaias and not Jeremy.
How often does Moses repeat his Vivit Dominus, and Ego vivo, As the Lord
lives, and As I live, says the Lord? How often does Solomon repeat his
vanitas vanitatum, All is vanity? How often does our blessed Savior repeat his
Amen, Amen? and, in another sense, then others had used that word before him;
so often, as that you may reckon it thirty times, in one Evangelist; so often,
as that that may not inconveniently be thought some reason, why S. John called
Christ by that name, Amen, Rev. 3.14.
Thus says Amen, He whose name is Amen. How often does S. Paul, (especiallly
in his Epistles to Timothy, and to Titus) repeat that phrase Fidelis Sermo,
This is a true, and faithful saying? And how often, his juratory caution,
Coram Domino, before the Lord; As God is my witness? And as it is thus for
particular persons, and particular phrases, that they are often repeated; so
are there certain whole sentences, certain entire propositions, which the
holy Ghost does often repeat in the Scripture. And, except we except that
proposition, of which S. Peick makes his use, That God is no accepter of
persons, Act. 10.34.
(for that is repeated in very many places, that every where, upon every
occasion, every man might be remembered of that, that God is no accepter of
persons; Take heed how you presume upon your own knowledge, or your actions,
for God is no accepter of persons; Take heed how you condemn another man for
an Heretic, because he believes not just as you believe; or for a Reprobate,
because he lives not just as you live, for God is no accepter of persons; Take
heed how you rely wholly upon the outward means, that you are wrapped in the
covenant, that you are bred in a reformed Church, for God is no accepter of
persons) except you will except this proposition, I scarce remember any other
that is so often repeated in the Scriptures, as this which is our Text, Lord,
who has believed our report? For, it is first in the Prophet Esaias. There the
Prophet is in holy throws, and pangs, Esaias 53.1.
and agonies, till he be delivered of that prophecy, the coming of the
Messiah; the incarnation of Christ Jesus, and yet is put to this exclamation,
Domine, quis credidit? Lord who has believed our report? And then you have
these words in the Gospel of S. John; John 12.38.
where we are not put upon the consideration of a future Christ in prophecy,
but the Evangelist exhibits Christ in person, actually, really, visibly,
evidently, doing great works, executing great judgments, multiplying great
Miracles; and yet put to the application of this exclamation, Domine, quis
credidit? Lord, who has believed this report? And then you have these words
also in S. Paul, Romans 10.16.
where we do not consider a prophecy of a future Christ, nor a history of a
present Christ, but an application of that whole Christ to every soul, in the
fetling of a Church, in that concatenation of means for the infusion of faith
expressed in that Chapter, sending, and preaching, and hearing; and yet for all
these powerful and familiar assistances, Domine, quis crodidit? Lord, who has
believed that report? So that now beloved, you cannot say that you have a Text
without a place; for you have three places for this Text: you have it in the
great Prophet, in Esaias, in the great Evangelist, in S. John; and in the great
Apostle, in S. Paul. And because in all three places, the words minister
useful doctrine of edification, we shall, by yours and the times leave,
consider the words in all three places.

In all three, the words are a sad and a serious expostulation of the Minister
of God, with God himself, that his Means and his Ordinances powerfully
committed to him, being faithfully transmitted by him to the people, were
nevertheless fruitless, and ineffectuall. I do Lord as thou biddest me,
says the Prophet Esaias; I prophecy, I foretell the coming of the Messiah, the
incarnation of thy Son for the salvation of the world, and I know that none of
them that hear me, can imagine or conceive any other way for the redemption of
the world, by fatisfaction to thy Justice, but this, and yet, Domine quis
credidit? Lord who has believed my report? I do Lord as thou biddest me,
says Christ himself in S. John; I come in person, I glorify thy name, I do
thy will, I preach thy Gospel, I confirm my doctrine with evident Miracles,
and I seal those Seals, I confirm those Miracles with my Blood; and yet, Quis
credidit? Lord who has believed my report? I do Lord as thou biddest me,
says every one of us, who, as we have received mercy, have received the
Ministry; I obey the inward calling of the Spirit, I accept the outward
calling of the Church; furnished, and established with both these, I come into
the world, I preach absolution of sins to every repentant Soul, I offer the
seals of reconciliation to every contrite spirit; and yet, Domine quis
credidit? Lord who has believed my report? Indeed it is a sad contemplation,
and must necessarily produce a serious and a vehement expostulation, when the
predictions of Gods future judgments (so we shall find the case to have been
in the words in Esaias) when the execution of Gods present judgments, (so we
shall find the case to have been in the words in S. John) when the Ordinances
of God, for the relief of any soul, in any judgment, in his Church, are not
believed. To say I believe you not, amounts to a lie; Not to believe Gods
warnings before, not to believe Gods present judgments, not to believe that
God has established a way to come to him in all distresses, this is to give
God the lie; and with this is the world charged in this Text, Lord who has
believed our report?

First then, 1 Part. Esaias 53.1.
where we find these words first, the Prophet reproaches their unbeleefe, and
hardness of heart, in this, that they did not believe future things, future
calamities, future judgments; for that is intended in that place. For, though
this 53. of Esaias be the continuation, and the consummation of that doctrine
which the Prophet began to propose in the Chapter immediately preceding, which
is, the coming of the Messiah (in general, the comfortablest doctrine that
could be proposed) though this Chapter be especially that place, upon which S.
Hierome grounds that Eulogy of Esaias, that Esaias was rather an Evangelist then a
Prophet, because of his particular declaration of Christ in this Chapter;
though upon this Chapter our Expositors sometimes say, that as we cite the
Gospel according to S. Matthew, and the Gospel according to S. John, so here
we may say, the Gospel according to the Prophet Esaias; yet though this be a
prophecy of the coming of Christ, and so, the comfortablest doctrine that can
be proposed in the general, and in the end, and fruit of that coming, yet it
is a prophecy of the exinanition of Christ, of the evacuation of Christ, of the
inglorious and ignominious estate, the calamitous, and contumelious estate of
Christ: Their Messiah they should have; but that Messiah should be reputed a
Malefactor, and as a Malefactor crucified; Which miseries, and calamities being
to fall upon him, for them, they ought to have been as sensible, and as much
affected with those miseries to be endured for them, as if they had been to
have fallen upon themselves. The later Jews and their Rabbis since the
dispersion, do not, will not believe this prophecy of miseries, and calamities
to belong to their Messiah. Ver. 2.
They do not, they will not believe, that that which is said, That there is no
form, no beauty, no comeliness in him, so that men should long for him before,
or desire to look upon him after, should have any reference to their Messiah,
whom they expect in all outward splendour and glory; Nor that that which is
added there, That he should be despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with griefs, should belong to him, in whose proceedings in this
world, they look for continual Victories and Triumphs. But they will needs
understand these miseries, and calamities prophesied here, to be those
calamities, and those miseries, which have fallen, and dwelt upon their Nation,
ever since their dispersion after Christ's death. Now let it be but such a
prophecy as that; take it either way; The Christian way, a prophecy of
calamities upon the Messiah for them; or the Jews way, of calamities upon them
for the Messiah; still it is a prophecy of future calamities, future
judgments, of which they ought to have been sensible, and with which they
ought to have been affected, and were not: And so that is their charge, they did
not believe the Prophets report, they were not moved with Gods judgments
denounced upon them, by those Prophets. Now, was this so heinous, not to
believe a Prophet?

The office and function of a Prophet, Propheta.
in the time of the Law, was not so evident, nor so ordinary an office, as the
office of the Priest and Minister in the Gospel now is; There was not a
constant, an ordinary, a visible calling in the Church, to the office of a
Prophet. Neither the high priest, nor the Ecclesiastical Consistory, the
Synedrium, did by any imposition of hands, or other Collation, or Declaration,
give Orders to any man so, as that thereby that man was made a Prophet. I know
some men, of much industry, and perspicacy too, in searching into those
Scriptures, the sense whereof is not obvious to every man, have thought that
the Prophets had an outward and a constant declaration of their Calling. 1 Reg.
19.15.
And they think it proved, by that which is said to Eliah, when God commands
him to anoint Hazael K. of Syria, and to anoint Iehu K. of Israel, and to
anoint Elisha Prophet in his own room: Therefore, say they, the Prophet had as
much evidence of his Calling, as the Minister has, for that unction was as
evident a thing, as our Imposition of hands is. And it is true, it was so,
where it was actually, and really executed. But then, nothing is more evident,
then that this word Meshiach, which signifies Anointing, is not restrained to
that very action, a real unction, but frequently transferred, and communicated
in a Scripture use, to every kind of Declaration of any Election, any
Institution, any Inauguration, any Investiture of any person to any place; And,
less then that, of any appropriation, any application of any thing to any
particular use. Any appointing was an anointing; As in particular (for many
other places) where S. Hierome reads, Arripite clypeos, buckle your shields;
Esaias 21.5.
To you, which was an alarm to them, to arm, the original has it, and so has
our translation, Anoint your shields; to apply them to their right use, was
called an Anointing. And when God calls Cyrus, the King of Persia, Vnctum suum,
his Anointed; it were weakly, and improperly argued from that word, that Cyrus
King of Persia, was literally, actually, anointed; for that unction was
peculiar to the Kings of Israel; but Cyrus was the anointed of the Lord, that
is, declared and avowed by the Lord, to be his chosen Instrument. Neither could
Eliah, literally execute this commandment, for anointing Hasael King of Syria;
for Hasael the King of Syria could not be anointed by the Prophet of the Lord,
for such unction was peculiar to the Kings of Israel. And for the Kings of
Israel themselves, their own Rabbis tell us, that they were not ordinarily
anointed, but only in those cases, where there arose some question, and
difference, about the succession; as in Solomon's case; there, because Adoniah
pretended to the succession; 1 Reg. 1.
to make all the more sure, David proceeded with a solemnity, and appointed an
anointing of Solomon, which, otherwise, say their Rabbis, had not been done.
But howsoever it may have been for their Kings, there seems to be a plain
distinction between them, and the Prophets in the Psalm, for this evidence of
unction; Touch not mine Anointed, says God there: Ps. 105.15.
They, they that were Anointed, constitute one rank, one classis; and then
follows, And do my Prophets no harm: They, they who were not Anointed, the
Prophets, constitute another classis, another rank. So that then an internal,
a spiritual unction the Prophets had, that is, an application, an
appropriation to that office from God, but a constant, an evident calling to
that function, by any external act of the Church, they had not, but it was an
extraordinary office, and imposed immediately by God; and therefore the people
might seem the more excusable, if they did not believe a Prophet presently,
because the office of the Prophet did not carry with it, such a manifestation
by any thing evidently done upon him, and visible to them, that by that, that
man must be a Prophet. But, as God clothes himself with light, as with a
garment; so God clothes, and apparells his works with light too: for, frustra
fecisset, says S. Ambrose, God had made creatures to no purpose, if he had not
made light to see them by. Therefore when God does any extraordinary work, he
accompanies that work with anextraordinary light, by which, he for whose
instruction God does that work, may know that work to be his. So when he sent
his Prophets to his people, he accompanied their mission, with an effectual
light, and evidence, by which, that people did acknowledge in their own
hearts, that that man was sent by God to them. Therefore they called that man
at first, Roeh, videntem, a Seer, one whom they acknowledged to have been
admitted to the sight of God, in the declaration of his will to them: for so we
have it in Samuel, He that is now called a Prophet, 1 Samuel 9.9.
was before time called a Seer. And then that addition of the name of a
Prophet, gave them a farther qualification; for, Nabi, which is a Prophet, is
from Niba; and Niba, is venire facio, to cause, to make a thing to come to
pass. So that a Prophet was not only praefator, but praefactor; He did not
only presage, but preordain; that is, there was such an infallibility, such an
inevitableness in that which he had said, as that his very saying of it,
seemed to them some kind of cause of the accomplishing thereof. For, hence it
is, that we have that phrase so often in the new Testament, This and this was
thus and thus done, that such and such a Prophecy might be fulfilled: They
never went to that height, that such or such a secret purpose, or unrevealed
Decree of God might be fulfilled; but they rested in the Declaration which God
had made in his Church, and were satisfied in the execution of his Decrees, in
his visible Ordinances. Therefore the increpation which the Prophet lays upon
the people here, (Lord, who has believed our report) is not, that they did not
believe those Prophets to be Prophets, (for though that were an extraordinary
office, yet it was accompanied with an extraordinary light) neither was it,
that they did not believe that those things which were prophesied by them,
should come to pass, (for they believed that man to be Roeh, a Seer, one that
had seen the Counsels of God concerning them; And they believed him to be Nabi,
venire facientem, one upon whose word they might as infallibly rely, as upon a
cause, for an effect;) But this was the sin of this people, this was the
sorrow of this Prophet, that they did not believe these predictions to belong
to them, they did not believe that these judgments would fall out in their
time. In one word, present security was their sin. And was that so heinous?

So heinous, as that that is it, with which God was so highly incensed, Esaias
28.14.
and with which he meant so deeply to affect his people, in that considerable
passage, in that remarkable, and vehement place, where he expostulates thus
with them; Hear ye scornful men, (ye that make a jest, a scorn of future
judgments) Hear ye scornful men, that rule this people, (says God there)
(you that have a power over the affections of the people in the Pulpit, and can
persuade what you will, or a power over the wills of the people in your place,
and can command what you will) you that tell them (says the Prophet there) we
have made a covenant with death, and are at an agreement with hell, (fear you
nothing, let us alone; ambitious Princes shall turn their forces another way,
antichristian plots shall be practiced in other nations) you that tell them
(says he) when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come
to you, (howsoever superstition be established in other places, howsoever
prevailing armies be multiplied elsewhere, yet you shall have your religion,
and your peace still; for we have made a covenant with death, and with hell, we
are at an agreement) Hear ye scornful men, (says God) you that put this
scorn upon my predictions, your covenant with death shall be disanulled, Esaias
28.18.
and your agreement with death shall not stand, (the fair promises of others
to you, your own promises to your selves shall deceive you) and the overflowing
scourge shall pass thorough, Esaias 28.19.
thorough you all, for, you, (you scornful men) shall be trodden down by it;
and, (as it follows there, in an elegant, and a vehement expression) it shall
be a vexation, only to understand the report: You that would not believe the
report of the Prophet, that for these and these sins, such and such Judgments
should fall upon you, shall be confounded even with the report, the noise, the
news, how this overslowing scourge has passed thorough your neighbors round
about you; how much more with the sense, when you your selves shall be trodden
down by it? There is scarce any of the Prophets, in which, God does not drive
home this increpation of their security, Ezekiel. 12.22.
and insensiblenesse of future calamities. As in Esaias, so in Ezechiel God
says, what is that Proverb which ye have in the Land of Israel? (it was, it
seems, in every man's mouth, proverbially spoken by all) what was it? This, The
days are prolonged, and every vision fails; V. 27.
The vision which he says, is for many days to come, and he prophesies of
the times afar off. But, (says God there) In your days, O rebellious house,
will I say the word, and perform it: Not say it in our days, and perform it
upon our children; but God will speak, and strike together, we shall hear
him, and feel him at once, if we be not seriously affected with his
predictions.

The same way God goes in Jeremy, Jer. 7.23.
as in Esaias, and in Ezechiel. I have sent unto you all my servants, the
Prophets, (says God there) God has no other servants, to this purpose, but
his Prophets: If your dangers have been, by Gods appointment, preached to you,
God has done. You must not, as Dives did, in the behalf of his brethren,
look for. Messengers from the state of the dead; you must not stay for
instruction, nor for amendment, till you be Pro mortuis, 1 Cor. 15.
(as the Apostle speaks) as good as dead, ready to dye; you must not stay till
a Judgment fall, and then presume of understanding by that vexation, or of
repentance by that affliction; for, this is to hearken after Messengers, from
the state of the dead, to think of nothing till we be ready to join with them;
But as Abraham says there to Dives, Thy brethren have the Law, and the
Prophets, and that is enough, that is all, so God says here, I have sent them
all my servants, the Prophets; that is enough, that is all: especially, when,
(as God adds there) He has risen early, and sent his Prophets, that is, given
us warning time enough, before the calamity come near our own gates. But when
they rejected, and despised all his Prophesies, and denunciations of future
Judgments, V. 29.
then follows the sentence, the final, and fearful sentence. The Lord has
forsaken, and rejected them; Them; whom? as it follows in the sentence, The
Lord has forsaken, and rejected the generation of his wrath; The generation of
his wrath? There is more horror, more consternation in that manner of
expressing that rejection, then in the rejection it self; There is an
insupportable weight, in that word. His wrath; but even that is infinitely
aggravated in the other, The generation of his wrath. God has forgot that
Israel is his Son, Exodus 4.22.
and his first borne; So he avowed him to be in Moses commission to Pharaoh.
God has forgot that He rebuked Kings for his sake; that he testifies to have
done in his behalf, Psalm. 105.15. Gal. 3.29.
in David; God has forgot that they were heirs according to the promise; that
is their dignification in the Apostle; forgot that they were the apple of his
own eye, Deuteronomy. 32.10. Agg. 2.23. Jer. 31.20.
that they were as the signet upon his own hand; forgot that Ephraim is his
dear Son, that he is a pleasing child, a child for whom his bowels were
troubled; God has forgot all these paternities, all these filiations, all
these incorporatings, all these inviscerations of Israel into his own bosom,
and Israel is become the generation of his wrath. Not the subject of his wrath;
A people upon whom God would exercise some one act of indignation, in a
temporal calamity, as captivity, or so; or multiply acts of indignation, in
one kind, as adding of penury or sickness to their captivity; nor is it only
a multiplying of the kinds of calamity, as the aggravating of temporal
calamities with spiritual, oppression of body and state, with sadness of
heart, and dejection of spirit; for all these, as many as they are, are
determined in this life; but that which God threatens, is, that he will for
their grievous sins, multiply life's upon them, and make them immortal for
immortal torments; They shall be a generation of his wrath; they shall dye in
this world, in his displeasure, and receive a new birth, a new generation in
the world to come, in a new capacity of new miseries; they shall dye in the
next world, every minute, in the privation of the sight of God, and every
minute receive a new generation, a new birth, a new capacity of real and
sensible torments. When God has sent all his servants, the Prophets, and so
done all that is necessary for premonition, and risen early to send those
Prophets, warned them time enough, to avoid the danger, and they are not
affected with the sense of these predictions, God shall make them, us, any
State, any Church, the generation of his wrath, God shall forget his former
paternities, and our former filiations; forget his mercies exhibited to us in
the reformation of Religion, in the preservation of our State, in the
augmenting and adorning of our Church, and after all this, make us the
generation of his wrath. And this may well be conceived to be the lamentable
state deplored in this text, as the words are considered in their first place,
the Prophet Esaias, Lord, who has believed our report. But this is brought
nearer to us, in the second place, as we have the words in S. John; where we
do not consider things in a remote distance, John 12.38.
but Christ was in a personal and actual exercise of his works of power, and
sovereignty, and yet the Evangelist comes to this, Lord, who has believed this
report?

That Is true in a great part, which Irenaeus says, Prophetiae antequam
effectum habent, 2 Part.
aenigmata sunt, and ambiguitates hominibus, That prophecies till they come to
be fulfilled, are but clouds in the eyes, and riddles in the understanding of
men. So, many particulars, concerning the calling of the Jews, concerning the
time, and place, and person, and duration, and actions of Antichrist,
concerning the general Judgment, and other things, that lie yet, as an
Embryon, as a child in the mothers womb, embowelled in the womb of prophecy,
are yet but as clouds in the eyes, as riddles in the understandings of the
learned men. Daniel himself, found that which he found in the Prophet
Jeremy, concerning the deliverance of Israel from Babylon, to be wrapped up in
such a cloud, as that it is fairly collected by some, that Daniel himself at
that time, did not clearly understand the Prophet Jeremy. But these clouds, for
the most part, arise in us, out of our curiosity, that we will needs know the
time, when these prophecies shall be fulfilled; when the Jews shall be called,
when Antichrist shall be fully manifested, when the day of Judgment shall be:
And so, for such questions as these, Christ enwraps not only his Apostles, but
himself in a cloud; for, that cloud which he casts upon them, Non est vestrum,
It belongs not to you, to know times, and seasons, he spreads upon himself
also, Non est meum, It belongs not to me, not to me, as the Son of man, to know
when the day of Judgment shall be. But for that use of a prophecy, that the
prediction of a future Judgment should induce a present repentance, that was
never an enigmaticall, a cloudy doctrine, but manifest to all, in all
prophecies of that kind. But this, this commination of future judgments, for
present repentance, wrought not upon these men; but, Psalm. 55.19. Eccles. 8.11.
because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God: And, because
sentence against an evil work, is not executed speedily, therefore their
hearts are fully set in them, to do evil. But now, in the manifestation of
Christ, they saw evident changes; changes, and revolutions in the highest
sphere; they saw a new King, and they heard strangers proclaim him; foreign
Kings do not send Ambassadors to congratulate, but come in person, to do
their homage, and ask their audience in that style, Where is he that is borne
King of the Jews? not an elective, not an arbitrary, not a conditional, a
provisionall King, but an hereditary, a natural King, Borne King of the Jews.
They hear strangers proclaim him, Mat. 2.2.
and they proclaim him themselves, in that act of Recognition, in that
acclamatory Hosanna, in this Chapter, Blessed is the King of Israel, that
comes in the name of the Lord. v. 13. Mat. 2.3.
They saw changes; changes with which Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him. And they saw sentence executed; for, as soon as Christ manifested
himself, John Baptist says, Now, Mat. 3.10. Mat. 3.12.
now that Christ declares himself, the axe is laid unto the root of the tree,
and now, says he, His fan is in his hand, and he will purge his floor. And
this sentence he executed, this regal power he exercised, not only after that
Recognition of his subjects, in their Hosannaes in this chapter, (for, upon
that, he did go into the Temple, and cast out the buyers, and sellers) but some
years before that, at his first manifestation of himself, and soon after
John Baptists Now, John 2.3.
now is the axe laid to the root of the Tree, did Christ execute this
sentence, not only to drive, but to scourge them out, that profaned the
Temple; which was the second miracle, that we ascribe to Christ. Indeed all his
miracles were so many acts, not only of his regal power over some men, but of
his absolute prerogative, over the whole frame, and body of nature. Nor can we
conceive how the beholders of those miracles, could argue to themselves,
otherwise then thus; The winds and seas obey this man, for when he suffers
them, the winds roar, and when he whispers a silence to them, they are
silenced; The Devils and unclean spirits obey him; for when he suffers it,
they preach his glory, and when he refuses honor from so dishonorable mouths,
they are silent. Death it self obeyes him; for, when he will, death withholds
his hand from closing that man's eye, that lies upon his last gasp, and the
last stroke of his bell, and he does not die; and, when he will, death
withdraws his hand from him, who had been four days in his possession, and
redelivers Lazarus to a new life. This they saw; and could they choose but say,
the wind, and the sea, the devil, and unclean spirits, and death it self
obeyes this man, how shall we stand before this man, this King, this God? yet
for all this voice, this loud voice of miracles, (for when S. Chrysostom
says, Omni tuba clarior per opera demonstratio, Every good work has the
voice of a trumpet, every miracle has the voice of thunder,) for all this loud
voice, (as it is said in the verse before the text, Though he had done so many
miracles before them, yet they believed not on him) it is feign to come to
that, Quis credidit, Lord who has believed this report? The first of those
great names which were given to Christ, Esaias 9.6.
in the Prophet Esaias, was Mirabilis, The wonderful, The supernatural man, the
man that works miracles; for, of the Apostles it is said, by them, great
miracles were wrought, but God wrought those miracles, by them. Christ wrought
his miracles himself; And his Birth, and his Life, and Death, and Refurrection,
and Ascension, were all complicated, and elemented of miracles. If he fasted
himself, he did that miraculously; and it was with a miracle, when he feasted
others. He healed many that were sick of diverse diseases, Mark. 1.34. Mat. 9.35.
and cast out many Devils, says S. Mark; And S. Matthew carries it a great
deal farther, He went about all the Cities, and villages, healing every
sickness, and every disease among the people. Therefore Christ makes that,
(the evidence of his miracles) the issue between them, If these mighty works
had been done in Tire and Sidon, Mat. 11.21. John 15.22.
Tire and Sidon would have repented; And therefore he places their
inexcusablenesse in that, If I had not come, and spoken to them, they had had
no sin; Nay, if I had not spoken to them, in this loud voice, the voice of
miracles, they might have had some cloak for their finne, but now they have
none, says Christ in that place; And, beloved, are not we inexcusable in that
degree? Have not we seen changes, and seen judgments executed, and seen
miraculous deliverances, and yet Domine quis credidit? Lord who has believed
these reports?

I would we could but take aright a mis-taken translation, and make that use
that is offered us in others error. The vulgar Edition, the translation of the
Roman Church, reads that place, in the 77. Psalm and 11. verse thus, Nunc
caepi, says David, Now I have taken out my lesson the right way, now I have
laid hold upon God by the right handle, Nunc caepi, Now I have all that I need
to have; what is it? This; Haec mutatio dextrae Dei, this is to take out my
lesson aright, to understand God truly, and to know, and acknowledge, that this
change which I see, is an act of the right hand of God, and that it is a
judgment, and not an accident. O, beloved, that we would not be afraid of
giving God too much glory; not afraid of putting God into too much heart; or of
making God too imperious over us, by acknowledging, that Haec mutatio dextrae
Dei, that all our changes are acts of the right hand of God, and come from him.
But we are not only subject to the Prophets increpation, Quis credit, that we
do not believe Gods warnings of future judgments, but to the Evangelists
increpation, in the person of Christ, Quis credidit? we do not believe present
judgments to be judgments. An invincible navy has been sent against us, and
defeated, and we sacrifice to a casual storm for that; we say the winds
delivered us. A powder treason has been plotted, and discovered, and we
sacrifice to a casual letter for that; we say, the letter delivered us. A
devouring plague has reigned, and gone out again, and we sacrifice to an
early frost for that; we say, the cold weather delivered us. Domestique
encumbrances, personal infirmities, sadness of heart, dejection of spirit
oppresses us, and then wears out, and passes over, and we sacrifice for that,
to wine, and strong drink, to music, to Comedies, to conversation, and to
all Jobs miserable comforters; we say, it was but a melancholique fit, and
good company has delivered us of it. But when God himself says, There is no
evil done in the City, but I do it, we may be bold to say, there is no good
done in the world but he does it. The very calamities are from him; the
deliverance from those calamities much more. All comes from Gods hand; and from
his hand, by way of handwriting, by way of letter, and instruction to us. And
therefore to ascribe things wholly to nature, to fortune, to power, to second
causes, this is to mistake the hand, not to know Gods hand; But to acknowledge
it to be Gods hand, and not to read it, to say that it is Gods doing, and not
to consider, what God intends in it, is as much a slighting of God, as the
other. Now, in every such letter, in every judgment, God writes to the King;
but it becomes not me to open the Kings letter, nor to prescribe the King his
interpretation of that judgment. In every such letter, in every judgment God
writes to the State; but I will not open their letter, nor prescribe them their
interpretation of that judgment; God, who of his goodness has vouchsafed to
write unto them in these letters, of his abundant goodness interprets himself
to their religious hearts. But then, in every such letter in every judgment,
God writes to me too; and that letter I will open, and read that letter; I will
take knowledge that it is Gods hand to me, and I will study the will of God to
me in that letter; and I will write back again to my God and return him an
answer, in the amendment of my life, and give him my reformation for his
information. Else I am fallen lower then under the Prophets increpation, non
credidi, I have not believed comminations of future judgments, under Christ's
increpation too, non credidi, I do not believe judgments to be judgments, or
(which is as dangerous an ignorance) not to be instructive judgments,
medicinal and catechisticall judgments to me. And this may well be the
explication, at least, the application and accommodation of these words, Lord
who has believed our report, in those places, the Prophet Esaias, and the
Evangelist S. John. There remains only the third place, where we have these
words in the Apostle S. Paul, and in them, there, do not consider, a prophecy
of a future Christ, Romans 10.16.
as in Esaias, nor a history of a present Christ, as in S. John, but we consider
an application of all, prophecy, and history, all that was foretold of Christ,
all that was done and suffered by Christ, in this, that there is a Church
instituted by Christ, endowed with means of reconciling us to God, what
judgments soever our sins have drawn God to threaten against us, or to
inflict upon us; and yet for all these offers, of all these helps, the Minister
is put to this sad expostulation, Domine, quis credidit? Lord, who has
believed our report?

Here then the Apostles expostulation with God, and increpation upon the
people, may usefully be conceived to be thus carried; from the light and
notification of God, 3. Part.
which we have in nature, to a clearer light, which we have in the Law and
Prophets, and then a clearer then that in the Gospel, and a clearer, at least
a nearer then that, in the Church. First then, even the natural man is
inexcusable (says this Apostle) if he do not see the invisible God in the
visible creature; inexcusable, if he do not read the law written in his own
heart. But then, Quis credidit auditui suo? who has believed his own report?
who does read the Law written in his own heart? who does come home to Church
to himself, or hearken to the motions of his own spirit, what he should do, or
what will become of him, if he do still as he has done? or who reads the
history of his own conscience, what he has done, and the judgments that
belong to those former actions? Therefore we have a clearer light then this;
Firmiorem propheticum sermonem, says S. Peter, We have a more sure word of the
Prophets; that is, 2 Pet. 1.19.
as S. Augustine reads that place, clariorem, a more manifest, a more evident
declaration in the Prophets, then in nature, of the will of God toward man,
and his rewarding the obedient, and rejecting the disobedient to that will. But
then, Quis credidit auditui prophetico, who has believed the report of the
Prophet, so far, as to be so moved and affected with a prophecy, as to suspect
himself, and apply that prophecy to himself, and to say this judgment of his
belongs to this sin of mine? Therefore we have a clearer light then this; God,
Heb. 1.1.
who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke to the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoke to us by his Son, says the Apostle;
He spoke personally, and he spoke aloud, in the declaration of Miracles; But,
Quis credidit auditui filii? who believed even his report? did they not call
his preaching sedition, and call his Miracles conjuring? Therefore we have a
clearer, that is, a nearer light then the written Gospel, that is, the Church.
For, the principal intention in Christ's Miracles, even in the purpose of God,
was but thereby to create and constitute, and establish an assurance, that he
that did those Miracles, was the right man, the true Messiah, that Son of God,
who was made man for the redemption and ransom of the whole world. But then,
that which was to give them their best assistance, that that was to supply all,
by that way, to apply this general redemption to every particular soul, that
was the establishing of a Church, of a visible and constant, and permanent
means of salvation, by his Ordinances there, usque ad consummationem, till the
end of the world. And this is done, says this Apostle here; Christ is come,
and gone, and come again; Born, and dead, and risen again; Ascended, and sat
at the right hand of his Father in our nature, and descended again in his
Spirit, the Holy Ghost; that Holy Ghost has sent us, us the Apostles; we have
made Bishops; they have made Priests and Deacons; and so that body, that
family, that household of the faithful, Ver. 14.
by their Ministry is made up. It Is true, says the Apostle here, Men cannot
be saved without calling upon God; nor call upon him acceptably without Faith;
nor believe truly without Hearing; nor hear profitably without Preaching; nor
preach avowably, and with a blessing, without sending; All this is true says
our Apostle in this place; but all this is done; such a sending, such a
preaching, such a hearing is established; For, Ver. 19.
I ask but this, says he, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went
into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world; And, for my
self, says he, I have strived to preach the Gospel, Romans 15.20.
where Christ was not named; that is, to carry the Church farther then the rest
had carried it, and now all is done, says the Apostle. So that here is the
case, if the natural man say, alas they are but dark notions of God which I
have in nature; if the Jew say, alas they are but remote and ambiguous things
which I have of Christ in the Prophets; If the slack and historical Christian
say, alas they are but general things, done for the whole world indifferently,
and not applied to me, which I read in the Gospel, to this natural man, to
this Jew, to this slack Christian, we present an established Church, a Church
endowed with a power, to open the wounds of Christ Jesus to receive every
wounded soul, to spread the balm of his blood upon every bleeding heart; A
Church that makes this general Christ particular to every Christian, that
makes the Savior of the world, thy Savior, and my Savior; that offers the
original sinner Baptism for that; and the actual sinner, the body and blood
of Christ Jesus for that; a Church that mollifies, and entenders, and shivers
the presumptuous sinner with denouncing the judgments of God, and then,
consolidates and establishes the diffident soul with the promises of his
Gospel; a Church, in contemplation whereof, God may say, Quid potui Vineae,
what could I do more for my people then I have done? first to send mine only
Son to die for the whole world, and then to spread a Church over the whole
world, by which that death of his might be life to every soul. This we preach,
this we propose, according to that commission put into our hands, Ite,
praedicate, Go, and preach the Gospel to every creature, and yet, Domine,
quis credidit? Lord, who has believed our report?

In this then, the Apostle and this Text, places the inflexible, the
incorrigible stiffenesse of man's disobedience, in this he seals up his
inexcusablenesse, his irrecoverablenesse, first, that he is not afraid of
future judgments, because they are remote; then, that he does not believe
present judgments to be judgments, because he can make shift to call them by
a milder name, accidents, and not judgments, and can assign some natural, or
moral, or casual reason for them. But especially in this, that he does not
believe a perpetual presence of Christ in his Church, he does not believe an
Ordinance of means, by which, all burdens of bodily infirmities, of crosses in
fortune, of dejection of spirit, and of the primary cause of all these, that
is, sin it self may be taken off, or made easy unto him; he does not believe
a Church.

Now, as in our former part we were bound to know Gods hand, and then bound to
read it, to acknowledge a judgment to be a judgment, and then to consider
what God intended in that judgment, so here we are bound to know the true
Church, and then to know what the true Church proposes to us. The true Church
is that, where the word is truly preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered. But it is the Word, the Word inspired by the holy Ghost; not
Apocryphal, not Decretall, not Traditionall, not Additionall supplements; and
it is the Sacraments, Sacraments instituted by Christ himself, and not those
super-numerary sacraments, those posthume, post-nati sacraments, that have been
multiplied after: and then, that which the true Church proposes, is, all that
is truly necessary to salvation, and nothing but that, in that quality, as
necessary. So that Problematical points, of which, either side may be true, and
in which, neither side is fundamentally necessary to salvation, those marginal
and interlineary notes, that are not of the body of the text, opinions raised
out of singularity, in some one man, and then maintained out of partiality, and
affection to that man, these problematicall things should not be called the
Doctrine of the Church, nor lay obligations upon men's consciences; They should
not disturb the general peace, they should not extinguish particular charity
toward one another.

The Act then, that God requires of us, is to believe: so the words carry it in
all the three places: The Object, the next, the nearest Object of this Belief,
is made the Church; that is, to believe that God has established means for the
application of Christ's death, to all, in all Christian Congregations. All
things are possible to him that believes, Mar. 9 23.
says our Savior; In the Word, and Sacraments, there is Salvation to every
soul, that believes there is so: As on the other side, we have from the same
mouth, and the same pen, He that believes not, is damned. Faith then being the
root of all, Mar. 16.16.
and God having vouchsafed to plant this root, this faith, here in his
terrestrial paradise, and not in heaven; in the manifest ministry of the
Gospel, and not in a secret and unrevealed purpose, (for, faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by preaching, which are things executed and transacted
here in the Church) be thou content with those means which God has ordained,
and take thy faith in those means, and believe it to be influxus suasorius,
that it is an influence from God, but an influence that works in thee by way of
persuasion, and not of compulsion; It convinces thee, but it does not
constrain thee: It is, as S. Augustine says excellently, Vocatio congrua, it
is the voice of God to thee: but, his voice then, when thou art fit to hear,
and answer that voice; not fitted by any exaltation of thine own natural
faculties, before the coming of grace; nor fitted by a good husbanding of Gods
former grace, so as in rigor of justice to merit an increase of grace, but
fitted by his preventing, his auxiliant, his concomitant grace, grace exhibited
to thee, at that time when he calls thee: for, so says that Father, Sic eum
vocat, quo modo seit ei congruere, ut vocante^ non respuat: God calls him then,
when he knows he will not resist his calling; But he does not say, then, when he
cannot resist; that needs not be said. But, as there is podus glcriae, as the
Apostle speaks, an eternal weight of glory, which man's understanding cannot
comprehend; so there is Pondus gratiae, a certain weight of grace, that God
lays upon that soul, which shall be his, under which that soul shall not
easily bend it self any way from God.

This then is the sum of this whole Catechism, which these words, in these
three places do constitute: First, that we be truly affected with Gods
fore-warnings, and say there, Domine credo, Lord I believe that report, I
believe that judgment to be denounced against my sin: And then, that we be
duly affected with present changes, and say there, Domine credo, Lord I
believe that report, I believe this judgment to come from thee, and to be a
letter of thy hand; Lord enlighten others to interpret it aright, for thy more
public glory, and me, for my particular reformation. And then, lastly, to be
sincerely, and seriously affected with the Ordinances of his Church, and to
rest in them, for the means of our salvation; and to say there, Domine credo,
Lord I believe this report, I believe that I cannot be saved without believing,
nor believe without hearing. And therefore, whatsoever thou have decreed to thy
self above in heaven, give me a holy assiduity of endeavor, and peace of
conscience, in the execution of thy Decrees here; And let thy Spirit bear
witness with my spirit, that I am of the number of thine elect, because I love
the beauty of thy house, because I captivate mine understanding to thine
Ordinances, because I subdue my will to obey thine, because I find thy Son
Christ Jesus made mine, in the preaching of thy word, and my self made his, in
the administration of his Sacraments. And keep me ever in the arms, and bosom
of that Church, which without any tincture, any mixture, any leaven of
superstition, or Idolatry, affords me all that is necessary to salvation, and
obtrudes nothing, enforces nothing to be believed, by any Determination, or
Article of hers that is not so. And be this enough for the Explication, and
Application, and Complication of these words, in all these three places.

SERMON VII. Preached upon Christmas day.
JOHN 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it
more abundantly.


THe Church celebrates this day, the Birth of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, blessed for ever; And though it fall amongst the shortest days in the
year, yet of all the Festivals in the year, it is the longest: It is a day
that consists of twelve days; A day not measured by the natural and ordinary
motion of the Sun, but by a supernatural and extraordinary Star, which
appeared to the Wisemen of the East, this day, and brought them to Christ, at
Bethlem, upon Twelfe day. That day, Twelfe day, the Church now calls the
Epiphany; The ancient Church called this day (Christmas day) the Epiphany. Both
days together, and all the days between, This day, when Christ was
manifested to the Jews, in the Shepherds by the Angels, and Twelfe day, when
Christ was manifested to the Gentiles in those Wisemen of the East, make up the
Epiphany, that is, the manifestation of God to man. And as this day is in such
a respect a longer day then others, so, if we make longer hours in this day,
then in other days; if I extend this Sermon, if you extend your Devotion, or
your Patience, beyond the ordinary time, it is but a due, and a just
celebration of the Day, and some accommodation to the Text, for, I am come, as
he, in whose Name and Power I came, came; and he tells you, that He came that
you might have life, and might have it more abundantly.

God, who vouchsafed to be made Man for man, for man vouchsafes also to do all
the offices of man toward man. Mal. 2.10.
He is our Father, for he made us: Of what? Of clay; So God is Figulus, Esaias
45.9. Romans 9.21. Genesis 1.27. Genesis 3.21. Genesis 1.29.
so in the Prophet; so in the Apostle, God is our Potter. God stamped his Image
upon us, and so God is Statuarius, our Minter, our Statuary. God clothed us,
and so is vestiarius; he has opened his wardrobe unto us. God gave us all the
fruits of the earth to eat, and so is oeconomus, our Steward. God poures his
oil, and his wine into our wounds, Luke 10. 1 Cor. 3.6. Acts 20.32. Psalm.
127.1. Mat. 4.19.
and so is Medicus, and Vicinus, that Physician, that Neighbor, that Samaritan
intended in the Parable. God plants us, and waters, and weeds us, and gives the
increase; and so God is Hortulanus, our Gardener. God builds us up into a
Church, and so God is Architectus, our Architect, our Builder; God watches the
City when it is built; and so God is Speculator, our Sentinel. God fishes for
men, (for all his John's, and his Andrews, and his Peter's, are but the nets that
he fishes withal) God is the fisher of men; And here, in this Chapter, God in
Christ is our Shepherd. The book of Job is a representation of God, in a
Tragique-Comedy, lamentable beginnings comfortably ended: The book of the
Canticles is a representation of God in Christ, as a Bridegroom in a
Marriage-song, in an Epithalamion: God in Christ is represented to us, in
diverse forms, in diverse places, and this Chapter is his Pastoral. The Lord is
our Shepherd, and so called, in more places, then by any other name; and in
this Chapter, exhibits some of the offices of a good Shepherd. Be pleased to
taste a few of them. First, he says, The good Shepherd comes in at the door,
Joh. 10.1.
the right way. If he come in at the window, that is, always clamber after
preferment; If he come in at vaults, and cellars, that is, by clandestin, and
secret contracts with his Patron, he comes not the right way: When he is in the
right way, Ver. 3.
His sheep hear his voice: first there is a voice, He is heard; Ignorance does
not silence him, nor laziness, nor abundance of preferment; nor indiscreet,
and distempered zeal does not silence him; (for to induce, or occasion a
silencing upon our selves, is as ill as the ignorant, or the lazy silence)
There is a voice, and (says that Text) is is his voice, not always another in
his room; for (as it is added in the next verse) The sheep know his voice,
which they could not do, if they heard it not often, V. 4.
if they were not used to it. And then, for the best testimony, and
consummation of all, he says, The good Shepherd gives his life for his sheep.
Every good Shepherd gives his life, V. 11.
that is, spends his life, wears out his life for his sheep: of which this may
be one good argument, That there are not so many crazie, so many sickly men;
men that so soon grow old in any profession, as in ours. But in this, Christ is
our Shepherd in a more peculiar, and more incommunicable way, that he is
Pastor humani generis, and esca; first, Maxinus.
that he feeds not one Parish, nor one Diocese, but humanum genus, all
Mankind, the whole world, and then feeds us so, as that he is both our Pastor,
and our Pasture, he feeds us, and feeds us with himself, for, His flesh is
meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. Joh. 6. Lro.
And therefore Honor telebratur totius gregis, per annua festa pastoris: As
often as wecome to celebrate the coming of this Shepherd, in giving that
honor, we receive an honor, because that is a declaration, that we are the
sheep of that pasture, and the body of that head. And so much being not
impertinently said, for the connection of the words, and their complication with
the day, pass we now to the more particular distribution and explication
thereof, I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly.

In these words, our parts will be three; for, first we must consider the
Persons, Divisie.
The Shepherd and the sheep, God and Man, Him and Them, Them indefinitely, all
them, all men, I came, says Christ, I alone, that they, all they might have
life: And secondly we consider the action it self; as it is wrapped up in this
word, veni, I came; for, that is first, that he who was always omnipresent,
every where before, did yet study a new way of coming, and communicating
himself with man, veni, I came, that is, novo modo veni, I came by a new way;
And then, that he, who fed his former stock but with Prophesies, and promises,
that he would come, feeds us now with actual performances, with his real
presence, and the exhibition of himself. And lastly we shall consider the end,
the purpose, the benefit of his coming, which is life: And first, ut daret,
that he might give life, bring life, offer life to the world, (which is one
mercy) and then, ut haberent, that we might have it, embrace it, possess it,
(which is another) and, after both, a greater then both, that we might have
this life abundantius, more abundantly; which is, first, abundantius illis,
more abundantly then other men of this world, and then abundantius ipsis, more
abundantly then we our selves had it in this world, in the world to come; for,
therefore he came, that we might have life, and might have it more abundantly.

First then, in our first part, we consider the Persons, The Shepherd and the
Sheep, 1 Part. Person.
Him and Them, God and Man; of which Persons, the one for his Greatness, God,
the other for his littleness, man, can scarce fall under any consideration.
What eye can fix it self upon East and West at once? And he must see more then
East and West, that sees God, for God spreads infinitely beyond both: God alone
is all; not only all that is, but all that is not, all that might be, if he
would have it be. God is too large, too immense, and then man is too narrow,
too little to be considered; for, who can fix his eye upon an Atome? and he
must see a less thing then an Atome, that sees man, for man is nothing. First,
for the incomprehensiblenesse of God, the understanding of man, Deus.
has a limited, a determined latitude; it is an intelligence able to move that
Sphere which it is fixed to, but could not move a greater: I can comprehend
naturam naturatam, created nature, but for that natura naturans, God himself,
the understanding of man cannot comprehend. I can see the Sun in a
looking-glass, but the nature, and the whole working of the Sun I cannot see
in that glass. I can see God in the creature, but the nature, the essence, the
secret purposes of God, I cannot see there. There is defatigatio in
intellectualibus, says the saddest and soundest of the Hebrew Rabbis, R.
Moses.
the soul may be tired, as well as the body, and the understanding dazeled, as
well as the eye. It is a good note of the same Rabbi, upon those words of
Solomon, fill not thy self with honey, lest thou vomit it, that it is not said,
that if thou be cloyd with it, thou may be distasted, Pro. 25.16.
disaffected toward it after, but thou may vomit it, and a vomit works so,
as that it does not only bring up that which was then, but that also which was
formerly taken. Curious men busy themselves so much upon speculative
subtilties, as that they desert, and abandon the solid foundations of Religion,
and that is a dangerous vomit; To search so far into the nature, and
unrevealed purposes of God, as to forget the nature, and duties of man, this is
a shrewd surfeit, though of honey, and a dangerous vomit. It is not needful for
thee, to see the things that are in secret, says the wife man; nonindiges,
Ecclus. 3.23.
thou need not that knowledge: Thou may do well enough in this world, and
be Gods good servant, and do well enough in the next world, and be a
glorious Saint, and yet never search into Gods secrets. Ps. 65.1.
Te decet Hymnus, (so the vulgar reads that place) To thee, O Lord, belong our
Hymns, our Psalms, our Praises, our cheerful acclamations; and conformably
to that, we translate it, Praise waits for thee, O God in Sion: But if we
will take it according to the Original, it must be, Tibi silentium laus est,
Thy praise, O Lord, consists in silence: That that man praises God best, that
says least of him; of him, that is of his nature, of his essence, of his
unrevealed will, and secret purposes. O that men would praise the Lord, is
David's provocation to us all, but how? O that men would praise the Lord, and
declare his wondrous works to the sons of men! but not to go about to declare
his unrevealed Decrees, or secret purposes, is as good a way of praising him,
as the other. And therefore, O that men would praise the Lord, so, forbear his
Majesty, when he is retired into himself, in his Decrees, and magnify his
Majesty, as he manifests himself to us, in the execution of those Decrees; of
which, this in our Text is a great one, that he that is infinitely more then
all, descended to him, that is infinitely less then nothing; which is the
other person whom we are to consider in this part, ille illis, I to them, God
to us.

The Hebrew Doctors almost every where repeat that adage of theirs, lex
loquitur linguam filiorum hominum, Illis.
God speaks men's language, that is, the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures descends
to the capacity and understanding of man, and so presents God in the faculties
of the mind of man, and in the lineaments of the body of man. But yet, say
they, there is never brain, nor liver, nor spleen; nor any other inward part
ascribed to God, but only the heart. God is all heart, and that whole heart,
that inexhaustible fountain of love, is directed wholly upon man. And then,
though in the Scriptures, those bodily lineaments, head and feet, and hands,
and eyes, and ears be ascribed to God, God is never said to have shoulders;
for, say they, shoulders are the subjects of burdens, and therein the figures
of patience, and so God is all shoulder, all patience; he hears patiently, he
sees patiently, he speaks patiently, he dies patiently: And is there a
patience beyond that? In Christ there is, he suffers patiently a quotidian
Crucifying; we kill the Lord of Life every day, every day we make a mock of
Christ Jesus, and tread the blood of the Covenant under our feet every day: And
as though all his passion, and blood, and wounds, and heart, were spent by our
former oaths, and blasphemies, we crucify him daily by our daily sins, that
we might have new blood, and heart, and wounds to swear by; and all this he
suffers patiently, and after all this, ille illis, to this man, this God comes.

He to us, God to man; all to nothing: for upon that we insist first, as the
first disproportion between us, Illis, qui nihil. Esaias. 40.15.
and so the first exaltation of his mercy toward us. Man is, says the Prophet
Esaias, Quasi stilla situlae, As a drop upon the bucket. Man is not all that, not
so much as that, as a drop upon the bucket, but quasi, something, some little
thing toward it; and what is a drop upon the bucket, to a river, to a sea, to
the waters above the firmament? Man to God? Man is, says the same Prophet in
the same place, Quasi momenntum staterae; we translate it, As small dust upon
the balance: Man is not all that, not that small grain of dust; but quasi,
some little thing toward it: And what can a grain of dust work in governing
the balance? What is man that God should be mindful of him? Vanity seems to
be the lightest thing, that the Holy Ghost could name; and when he had named
that, he says, and says, and says, often, very, very often, All is vanity.
But when he comes to weigh man with vanity it self, he finds man lighter then
vanity: Take, says he, Ps. 62.9.
great men, and mean men altogether, and altogether they are lighter then
vanity. When that great Apostle says of himself, that he was in nothing
behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11.
and yet, for all that, says he was nothing; who can think himself any thing,
for being a Giant in proportion, a Magistrate in power, a Rabbi in learning, an
Oracle in Counsel? Let man be something; how poor, and inconsiderable a ragge
of this world, L. 1. de rerum generatione.
is man? Man, whom Paracelsus would have undertaken to have made, in a Limbeck,
in a Furnace: Man, who, if they were altogether, all the men, that ever were,
and are, and shall be, would not have the power of one Angel in them all,
whereas all the Angels, (who, in the School are conceived to be more in
number, then, not only all the Species, but all the individualls of this lower
world) have not in them all, the power of one finger of Gods hand: Man, of whom
when David had said, (as the lowest diminution that he could put upon him) I am
a worm and no man, He might have gone lower, Ps. 22.6.
and said, I am a man and no worm; for man is so much less then a worm, as
that worms of his own production, shall feed upon his dead body in the grave,
and an immortal worm gnaw his conscience in the torments of hell. And then, if
that which God, and God in the counsel and concurrence, and cooperation of
the whole Trinity has made thee, Man, be nothing, can thou be proud of that,
or think that any thing which the King has made thee, a Lord, or which thy
wife has made thee, Rich, or which thy riches have made thee, an Officer? As
Job says of impertinent comforters, miserable comforters, so I say of these
Creations, miserable creations are they all. Only as thou may be a new
creature in Christ Jesus, thou may be something; for that is a nobler, and a
harder creation then the first; when God had a clod of red earth in his hand,
to make me in Adam, he had more toward his end, then when he has me, an
unregenerate, and rebellious soul, to make a new creature in Christ Jesus. And
yet Ille illis, to this man comes this God, God that is infinitely more then
all, to man that is infinitely less then nothing, which was our first
disproportion, and the first exaltation of his mercy; and the next is, Ille
illis, Illis qui hosts, that this God came to this man, then when this man was
a professed enemy to this God.

Si contrarium Deo quaeras nihilest, says S. Augustine. If thou ask me what
is contrary to God, I cannot say, that any thing is so; for, whatsoever is any
thing, has a being, Illis qui Hosts.
and whatsoever has so, has in that very being some affinity with God, some
assimilation to God; so that nothing is contrary to God. If thou ask me, Quis
hostis, who is an enemy to GOD, I cannot say that of any thing in this World,
but man. That viper that flew at Saint Paul, was not therein an enemy to GOD;
Acts 28.
that viper did not direct it self upon S. Paul, as S. Paul was a useful, and
a necessary instrument of Christ; But S. Paul himself was a direct enemy to
Christ himself, Tu me, thou persecutest me, says Christ himself unto him.
And if we be not all enemies to God in such a direct opposition, as that we
sin therefore because that sin violates the majesty of God, (and yet truly
every habitual, and deliberated sin amounts to almost as much, because in
every such sin, we seem to try conclusions, whether God can see a sin, or
be affected with a sin, or can, or cares to punish a sin, as though we
doubted whether God were a present God, or a pure God, or a powerful God, and
so consequently whether there be any God or no) If we be not all enemies to
God, in this kind, yet in adhering to the enemy we are enemies; In our
prevarications, and easy betrayings, and surrendering of our selves to the
enemy of his kingdom, satan, we are his enemies. For small wages, and ill paid
pensions we serve him; and lest any man should flatter and delude himself, in
saying, I have my wages, and my reward before hand, my pleasures in this life,
the punishment, (if ever) not till the next, The Apostle destroys that dream,
with that question of confusion, What fruit had you then in those things, Rom
6.21.
of which you are now ashamed? Certainly sin is not a gainful way; without
doubt more men are impoverished, and beggered by sinful courses, then enriched;
what fruit had they? says the Apostle, and sin cannot be the way of honor, for
we dare not avow our sins, but are ashamed of them, when they are done;
fruitlesness, unprofitableness before, shame and dishonor after, and yet for
these we are enemies to God; and yet for all this God comes to us; Ille illis,
the Lord of Hosts, to naked and disarmed man, the God of peace to this enemy of
God. Some men will continue kind, where they find a thankful reciver, Luke
6.35.
but God is kind to the unthankful, says Christ himself. There may be found
a man that will dye for his friend, says he; but God dyed for his enemies:
Then when ye were enemies, you were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.
To come so in-gloriously, he that is infinitely more then all, to him that is
infinitely less then nothing, (that was our first disproportion, and the first
axaltatation of his mercy) to come, (shall we venture to say so) so self
proditoriously, as to betray himself and deliver himself to his enemies,
(that was our second) is equalled, at least, in a third, ille illis, he to
them, that is unus omnibus, 2 Cor. 5.14.
he alone for the salvation of all men, as it is expressly said, for this word
in our Text, they, has no limitation, I came, I alone, that they, all they
might be the better.

Some of the ancient Fathers, delivering the mercies of God, so, Illis omnibus.
as the articles of our Church enjoyne them to be delivered, that is,
generally, as they are delivered in the Scriptures, have delivered them so
over-generally, that they have seemed loath to think the devil himself
excluded from all benefit of Christ's coming. Some of the later Authors in the
Roman Church, (who, as pious as they pretend to be toward the Fathers, are
apter to discover the nakedness of the Fathers, then we are) have noted in
Justin Martyr, and in Epiphanius, and in Clement of Alexandria, and in
Oecumenius, (and Oecumenius is no single Father, but Pater patratus, a manifold
Father, a complicated father, a Father that collected Fathers) and even in S.
Jerome himself, and S. Ambrose too, some inclinations toward that opinion,
that the devil retaining still his faculty of free will, is therefore capable
of repentance, and so of benefit by this coming of Christ; And those Authors
of the Roman Church, that modifie the matter, and excuse the Fathers herein,
excuse them no other way but this, that though that opinion and doctrine of
those Fathers, be not true in it self, yet it was never condemned by any
Council, nor by any ancient Father. So very far, did very many go in
enlarging the mercies of God in Christ, to all. But waiving this over-large
extention and profusion thereof, and directing it upon a more possible, and a
more credible object, that is, Man; S. Cyril of Alexandria, speaking of the
possibility of the salvation of all men, says, by way of objection to
himself, Omnes non credunt, How can all be saved since all do not believe?
but, says he, Because actually they do not believe, is it therefore impossible
they should believe? And for actual belief, says he, though all do not, yet
so many do, utfacile qui pereant, superent, that, by Gods goodness, more are
saved, then lost, says that Father of tender and large bowels, Moses.
S. Cyril. And howsoever he may seem too tender, and too large herein, yet it
is a good piece of counsel, which that Rabbi whom I named before, gives, Ne
redarguas ca falsitatis, de quorum contrariis nulla est demonstratio, Be not
aptto call any opinion false, or heretical, or damnable, the contrary whereof
cannot be evidently proved. And for this particular, the general possibility
of salvation, all agree that the merit of Christ Jesus is sufficient for all.
Whether this all sufficiency grow ex intrinseca ratione formali, out of the
very nature of the merit, the dignity of the person being considered, or grow
ex pacto, and acceptatione, out of the acceptance of the Father, and the
contract between him and the Son, for that, let the Thomists, and the
Scotists, in the Roman Church wrangle. All agree, that there is enough done for
all. And would God receive enough for all, and then, exclude some, of himself,
without any relation, any consideration of sin? God forbid. Man is called by
diverse names, names of lowness enough, in the Scriptures; But, by the name of
Enosh, Enosh that signifies mere misery, Man is never called in the
Scriptures, till after the fall of Adam. Only sin after, and not any ill
purpose in God before, made man miserable. The manner of expressing the mercy
of God, in the frame and course of Scriptures, expresses evermore the
largeness of that mercy. Very often, in the Scriptures, you shall find the
person suddenly changed; and when God shall have said in the beginning of a
sentence, I will show mercy unto them, them, as though he spoke of others,
presently, in the same sentence, he will say, my loving kindness will I not
draw from thee; not from thee, not from them, not from any; that so whenever
thou hear of Gods mercy proposed to them, to others, thou might believe
that mercy to be meant to thee, and whenever they, others hear that mercy
proposed to thee, they might believe it to be meant to them. And so much may,
to good purpose, be observed out of some other parts of this Chapter, in
another translation. In the third verse it is said, His sheep hear his voice,
In the Arabique tranflation it is Oves audit, His sheep in the plural, does
hear, in the singular. God is a plural God, and offers himself to all,
collectively; God is a singular God, and offers himself to every man,
distributively. So also is it said there, Nominibus suo, He calls his sheep by
their names; It is names in the plural, and theirs, in the singular:
whatsoever God proposes to any, he intends to all. In which contemplation, S.
Augustine breaks out into that holy exclamation, O bone omnipotens qui sic cur
as unumquemque nostrum, tanquam solum cures, and sic omnes tamquam singulos, O
good and mighty God, who art as loving to every man, as to all mankind, and
meanest as well to all mankind, as to any man. Be pleased to make your use of
this note, for the better imprinting of this largeness of Gods mercy. Moses
desires of God, Exodus 33.13. V. 18. V. 19.
that he would show him Vias suas, His ways, his proceedings, his dealings
with men; that which he calls after, Gloriam suam, His glory, how he glorifies
himself upon man, God promises him in the next verse, that he will show him
Omne bonum, All his goodness, Exodus 346.
God has no way toward man but goodness, God glorifies himself in nothing
upon man, but in his own goodness. And therefore when God comes to the
performance of this promise, in the next Chapter, he shows him his way, and
his glory, and his goodness, in showing him that he is a merciful God, a
gracious God, a long-suffering God, a God that forgives sins and iniquities,
and (as the Hebrew Doctors note) there are thirteen attributes, thirteen
denotations of God specified in that place, and of all those thirteen, there is
but one that tastes of judgment, (That he will punish the sins of Fathers upon
Children.) All the other twelve are merely, wholly mercy; such a proportion
has his mercy above his justice, such a proportion, as that there is no cause
in him, if all men be not partakers of it. Shall we say, (says S. Cyril)
Melius agriculturam non exerceri, si quae nocent tolli non possunt, It were
better there were no tillage, then that weeds should grow, Melius non creasse,
better that God had made no men, then that so many should be damned. God made
none to be damned; And therefore though some would expunge out of our Litany,
that Rogation, that Petition, That thou would have mercy upon all men; as
though it were contrary to Gods purpose to have mercy upon all men; yet S.
Augustine enlarges his charity too far, Libera nos Domine, qui jam invocamus
te, deliver us O Lord, who do now call upon thee, Et libera eos qui nondum
invocant, ut invocent te, and liberes eos, and deliver them who do not yet call
upon thee, that they may call upon thee, and be farther delivered by thee. But
it is time to pass from this first part, the consideration of the Persons,
Ille Illis, that God who is infinitely more then All, would come to man who is
infinitely less then nothing; that God who is the God of peace, would come to
man his professed enemy; that God, the only Son of God, would come to the
relief of man, of all men, to our second general part, the action it self, so
far as it is enwrapped in this word, Veni, I came; I came that they might have
life.

Through this second part, veni, I came, we must pass apace; because, upon the
third, 2 Part.
the end of his coming, (that they might have life) we must necessarily insist
sometime. In this therefore, we make but two steps; And this the first, that
that God who is omnipresent, always every where, in love to man, studied a new
way of coming, of communicating himself to man; veni, I came, novo modo, so
as I was never with man before. The rule is worth the repeating, lex loquitur
linguam filiorum hominum, God speaks man's language, that is, so, as that he
would be understood by man. Therefore to God, who always fills all places, are
there diverse Positions, and Motions, and Transitions ascribed in Scriptures. In
diverse places is God said to sit; Sedet Rex, The Lord sits King for ever.
Howsoever the Kings of the earth be troubled, and raised, Psalm. 29.10.
and thrown down again, and troubled, and raised, and thrown down by him,
yet the Lord sits King for ever. Habitat in Coelis, says David, Psalm.
102.13.
and yet sedet in circulis terrae, says Esaias, The Lord dwells in the
heavens, and yet he sits upon the compass of this earth: Where no earthquake
shakes his seat; Esaias 40.22.
for sedet in confusione (as one Translation reads that place, Psalm. 29.10.)
The Lord sits upon the flood, (so we read it) what confusions soever
disorder the world, what floods soever surround and overflow the world, the
Lord sits safe. Other phrases there are of like denotation. Esaias 26.21.
Exit de loco, Behold the Lord comes out of his place; that is, he produces,
and brings to light, things which he kept secret before. And so, Revertar ad
locum, I will go, Hose. 5.15.
and return to my place; that is, I will withdraw the light of my countenance,
my presence, my providence from them. So that heaven is his place, and then is
he said to come to us, when he manifests himself unto us in any new manner of
working. In such a sense was God come to us, when he said, I lift up my hands
to heaven, and say, I live for ever. Deuteronomy. 52.40.
Where was God when he lifted up his hands to heaven? Here, here upon earth,
with us, in his Church, for our assurance, and our establishment, making that
protestation (denoted in the lifting up of his hands to heaven) that he lived
for ever, that he was the everliving God, and that therefore we need fear
nothing. God is so omnipresent, as that the Ubiquitary will needs have the body
of God every where: so omnipresent, as that the Stancarist will needs have God
not only to be in every thing, but to be every thing, that God is an Angelin an
Angel, and a stone in a stone, and a straw in a straw. But God is truly so
omnipresent, as that he is with us before he comes to us: Q^id peto ut venias
in me, August.
qui non essem, si non esses in me? why do I pray that thou would come into
me, who could not only not pray, but could not be, if thou were not in me
before? But his coming in this Text, is a new act of particular mercy, and
therefore a new way of coming. What way? by assuming our nature in the blessed
Virgin. That that Paradoxa virgo, (as Amelberga the wife of one of the Earls of
Flanders, who lived continently even in marriage, and is therefore called
Paradoxa virgo, a Virgin beyond opinion) that this most blessed Virgin Mary
should not only have a Son, (for Manes, the Patriarch of that great Sect of
Heretics, the Manichees, boasted himself to be the son of a Virgin, and some
casuists in the Roman Church have ventured to say, that by the practice and
intervention of the devil there may be a child, and yet both parents, father
and mother remain Virgins) But that this Son of this blessed Virgin, should
also be the Son of the eternal God, this is such a coming of him who was here
before, as that if it had not arisen in his own goodness, no man would ever
have thought of it, no man might ever have wished, or prayed for such a
coming, that the only Son of God should come to die for all the sons of men.
August.
For Aliud est hic esse, aliud hic tibi esse; It is one thing for God to be
here in the world, another thing to be come hither for thy sake, born of a
woman for thy salvation. And this is the first act of his mercy wrapped up in
this word, Veni, I came, I who was always present, studied a new way of
coming, I who never went from thee, came again to thee.

The other act of his mercy enwrapped in this word, Veni actu.
veni, I came, is this, that he that came to the old world but in promises, and
prophecies, and figures, is actually, really, personally, and presentially come
to us; of which difference, that man will have the best sense, who languishes
under the heavy expectation of a reversion, in office, or inheritance, or has
felt the joy of coming to the actual possession of such a reversion. Christ
was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; appointed for a Sacrifice
from that first promise of a Messiah in Paradise long before that; from all
eternity. For, whenever the election of the elect was, (date it when you
will) Christ was at that election; and not only as the second person in the
Trinity, as God, but Christ considered as man, and as the propitiation and
sacrifice for man; for whosoever was elected, was elected in Christ. Christ was
always come in Gods purpose; and early come in Gods promise; and continually
coming in the succession of the Prophets; with such a confidence, as that one
of them says, Esaias 9.6.
Puer datus, filius natus, A child is given unto us, a Son is born unto us;
Born and given already; because the purpose of God, in which he was born,
cannot be disappointed; the promise of God, by which he was given, cannot be
frustrated; the Prophets of God, by whom he was presented, cannot be mistaken.
But yet, still it was a future thing. Christ is often called the Expectation of
the world; but it was all that while, but an Expectation, but a reversion of a
future thing. So God fed that old world with expectation of future things, as
that that very name by which God notified himself most to that people, Exodus
3.14.
in his commission by Moses to Pharaoh, was a future name; howsoever our
Translations and Expositions run upon the present, as though God had said Qui
sum, my name is I am, yet in truth it is Qui ero, my name is I shall be. They
had evidences enough that God was; but God was pleased to establish in them an
assurance that he would be so still; and not only be so still as he was then;
but that he would be so with them hereafter as he was never yet, he would be
Immanuel, God with us so, as that God and man should be one person. It was then
a fair assurance, and a blessed comfort which the children of Israel had in
that of Zechary, Zech. 9.9.
Ecce venit rex, Rejoice ye daughters of Sion, and shout ye daughters of
Jerusalem, Behold thy King comes riding unto thee, upon an Ass. But yet this
assurance, though delivered as in the present, produced not those acclamations,
Mat. 21.9.
and recognitions, and Hosannaes, and Hosanna in the highest, to the Son of
David, as his personal, and actual, and visible riding into Jerusalem upon
Palme-Sunday did. Amougst the Jews there was light enough to discern this
future blessing, this coming of Christ; but they durst not open it, nor
publish it to others. We see the Jews would dye in defense of any part of their
Law, were it but the Ceremonial; were it but for the not eating of Swines
flesh; what unsufferable torments suffered the seven brothers in the Maccabees,
for that? But yet we never find that any of them dyed, or exposed themselves
to the danger, or to the dignity of Martyrdom for this Doctrine of the
Messiah, this future coming of Christ. Nay, we find that the Septuagint, who
first translated the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek, for King Ptolome, disguised
diverse places thereof, and departed from the Original, rather then propose
this future coming of the Son of God to the interpretation of the world. A
little Candle they had for themselves, but they durst not light another Candle
at it. So also some of the more speculative Philosophers had got some beams of
this light, but because they saw it would not be believed, De verarelg. cap. 4.
they let it alone, they said little of it. Hence is it that S. Augustine
says, si Platonici reviviscerent, if Plato and his Disciples should rise from
the dead, and come now into our streets, and see those great Congregations,
which thrust and throng every Sabbath, and every day of holy convocation, to
the worship of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Hoc fortasse dicerent, This
it is likely they would say, says he, Haec sunt, quae populis persuadere non
ausi, consaetudini cessimus, This is that religion, which because it consisted
so much in future things, we durst not propose to the people, but were fain to
leave them to those present, and sensible, and visible things, to which they
had been accustomed before, lest when we had shaked them in their old religion,
we should not be able to settle, and establish them in the new; And, as in
civil government, a Tyranny is better then an Anarchy, a hard King better then
none, so when we consider religions, Idolatry is better then Atheism, and
superstition better then profaneness. Not that the Idolater shall any more be
saved then the Atheist; but that the Idolater having been accustomed to some
sense and worship of God (of God in his estimation) is therefore apter to
receive religious impressions, then the Atheist is. In this then consists this
second act of Christ's mercy to us in this word veni, I am actually, really,
personally, presentially come, that those types and figures and sacrifices,
which represented Christ to the old world, were not more visible to the eye,
more palpable to the hand, more obvious to the very bodily senses, that Christ
himself has been since to us. Therefore S. John does not only rest in that,
That which was from the beginning, 1 John 1.1.
(Christ was always in purpose, in prophecy, in promise) nor in that, That
which we have heard, (the world heard of Christ long before they saw him) but
he proceeds to that, That which we have seen, and looked upon with our eyes,
and handled with our hands, that declare we unto you. So that we are now
delivered from that jealousy that possessed those Septuagint, those
Translators, that they durst not speak plain, and delivered from that suspicion
that possessed Plato, and his disciples, that the people were incapable of that
doctrine. We know that Christ is come, and we avow it, and we preach it, and
we affirm, that it is not only as impious, and irreligious a thing, but as
senseless, and as absurd a thing to deny that the Son of God has redeemed the
world, as to deny that God has created the world; and that he is as formally,
and as gloriously a Martyr that dies for this Article, The Son of God is come,
as he that dies for this, There is a God. And these two acts of his mercy,
enwrapped in this one word, veni, I came, (first, that he who is always
present, out of an abundant love to man, studied a new way of coming, and
then, that he who was but betrothed to the old world by way of promise, is
married to us by an actual coming) will be farther explicated to us, in that,
which only remains and constitutes our third, and last part, the end and
purpose of his coming, That they might have life, and might have it more
abundantly. And though this last part put forth many handles, we can but take
them by the hand, and shake them by the hand, that is, open them, and so leave
them.

First then in this last part, we consider the gift it self, the treasure,
Life, 3. Part. Vita.
That they might have life. Now life is the character by which Christ
specificates and denominates himself; Life is his very name, and that name by
which he consummates all his other names, I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life; John 14.6.
And therefore does Peter justly and bitterly upbraid the Jews with that, Ye
desired a murderer, (an enemy to life) to be granted unto you, and killed the
Prince of Life. Acts 3.14. It is an honor to any thing that it may be sworn
by; by vulgar and trivial things men might not swear, Jer. 5.7.
How shall I pardon them this? says God, They have sworn by things that are
not gods. And therefore God, who in so many places professes to swear by
himself, and of whom the Apostle says, Heb. 6.13.
That because he could swear by no greater, he swore by himself, because he
could propose no greater thing in himself, no clearer notion of himself then
life, (for his life is his eternity, and his eternity is himself) does
therefore through all the Law and the Prophets still swear in that form, Vivo
ego, vivit Dominus, As I live, says the Lord, and as the Lord lives; still he
swears by his own life; As that solemn Oath which is mentioned in Daniel, is
conceived in that form too, He lift up his right hand and his left hand to
heaven, Dan. 12.7.
and swore by him that lives for ever; that is, by God, and God in that notion
as he is life. All that the Queen and the Council could wish and apprecate to
the King, was but that, Life, In sempiternum vive, vive in aeternum, O King
live for ever. God is life, Dan. 5.
and would not the death of any. We are not sure that stones have not life;
stones may have life; neither (to speak humanely) is it unreasonably thought by
them, that thought the whole world to be inanimated by one soul, and to be one
entire living creature; and in that respect does S. Augustine prefer a fly
before the Sun, 1 Timothy 5.6.
because a fly has life, and the Sun has not. This is the worst that the
Apostle says of the young wanton widow, That if she live in pleasure, she is
dead whilst she lives. So is that Magistrate that studies nothing but his own
honor, and dignity in his place, dead in his place; And that Priest that
studies nothing but his own ease, and profit, dead in his living; And that
Judge that dares not condemn a guilty person, And (which is the bolder
transgression) dares condemn the innocent, deader upon the Bench, then the
Prisoner at the Bar; God has included all that is good, Dcut. 30.15.
in the name of Life, and all that is ill in the name of Death, when he says,
See, I have set before thee Vitam and Bonum, Life and Good, Mortem and Malum,
Death and Evil. This is the reward proposed to our faith, Hab. 2.4.
Iustus fide sua vivit, To live by our faith: And this is the reward proposed
to our works, Fac hoc and vives, to live by our works; All is life. And this
fullness, this consummation of happiness, Life, and the life of life,
spiritual life, and the exaltation of spiritual life, eternal life, is the
end of Christ's coming, I came that they might have life.

And first, Vt daret.
ut daret, that he might give life, bring life into the world, that there might
be life to be had, that the world might be redeemed from that loss, which S.
Augustine says it was fallen into, Perdidimus possibilitatem boni, That we had
all lost all possibility of life. For, the heaven and the earth, and all that
the Poet would call Chaos, was not a deader lump before the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters, then Mankind was, before the influence of Christ's
coming wrought upon it. But now that God so loved the world, as that he gave
his Son, now that the Son so loved the world, as that he gave himself, Psalm.
19.6.
as David says of the Sun of the firmament, the father of nature, Nihit
absconditum, there is nothing hid from the heat thereof; so we say of this Son
of God, the Father of the faithful in a far higher sense, then Abraham was
called so, Nihilabsconditum, there is nothing hid from him, no place, no person
excluded from the benefit of his coming. The Son has paid, the Father has
received enough for all; not in fingle money, for the discharge of thy lesser
debts, thy idle words, thy wanton thoughts, thy unchaste looks, but in massy
talents, to discharge thy crying debts, the clamors of those poor whom thou
have oppressed, and thy thundering debts, those blasphemies by which thou have
torn that Father that made thee, that Son that redeemed thee, that boly
Ghost that would comfort thee. 1 Reg. 5.
There is enough given; but then, as Hiram sent materials sufficient for the
building of the Temple, but there was something else to be done, for the
fitting, and placing thereof; so there is life enough brought into the world,
for all the world, by the death of Christ, but then there is something else to
be done for the application of this life to particular persons, intended in
this word in our Text, ut haberent, I came that they might have life.

There is Air enough in the world, Vt haberent.
to give breath to every thing, though every thing do not breath. If a tree,
or a stone do not breathe, it is not because it wants air, but because it
wants means to receive it, or to return it. All eggs are not hatched that
the hen sits upon; Matt. 23.37.
neither could Christ himself get all the chickens that were hatched, to come,
and to stay under his wings. That man that is blind, or that will wink, shall
see no more sun upon S. Barnabies day, then upon S. Lucies; no more in the
summer, then in the winter solstice. Psalm. 130.7.
And therefore as there is copiosa redemptio, a plentiful redemption brought
into the world by the death of Christ, so (as S. Paul found it in his
particular conversion) there is copiosa lux, Acts 22.6.
a great and a powerful light exhibited to us, that we might see, and lay hold
of this life, in the Ordinances of the Church, in the Confessions, and
Absolutions, and Services, and Sermons, and Sacraments of the Church: Christ
came ut daret, that he might bring life into the world, by his death, and then
he instituted his Church, ut haberent, that by the means thereof this life
might be infused into us, and infused so, as the last word of our Text delivers
it, Abundantius, I came, that they might have life more abundantly.

Dignaris Domine, Abu^dantius. August.
ut eis, quibus debita dimittis, te, promissionibus tuis, debitorem facias;
This, O Lord, is thine abundant proceeding; First thou forgivest me my debt to
thee, and then thou make thy self a debtor to me by thy large promises; and
after all, performest those promises more largely then thou made them.
Indeed, God can do nothing scantly, penuriously, singly. Even his
maledictions, (to which God is ever loath to come) his first commination was
plural, it was death, and death upon death, Morte morieris. Death may be
plural; but this benediction of life cannot admit a singular; Chajim, which is
the word for life, has no singular number. This is the difference between
Gods Mercy, and his Judgments, that sometimes his Judgments may be plural,
complicated, enwrapped in one another, but his Mercies are always so, and
cannot be otherwise; he gives them abundantius, more abundantly.

More abundantly then to whom? Illis, gentibus.
The natural man has the Image of God imprinted in his soul; eternity is God
himself, man has not that, not eternity; but the Image of eternity, that is
Immortality, a post eternity there is in the soul of man. And then, man is all
soul in Moses expression; For, he does not say that man had, Genesis 2.7.
but that man was a living soul. So that the natural man has life more
abundantly then any other creature, (howsoever Oaks, and Crows, and Hearts may
be said to outlive him) because he has a life after this life. But Christ
came to give life more abundantly then this.

That he did, when he came to the Jews in promises, in Types, and Figures, and
Sacrifices: Illis, Iudaeis.
He gave life more abundantly to the Jew, then to the Gentile, because he gave
him better means to preserve that life, better means to illustrate that Image
of God in his soul, that is, to make his Immortality Immortal happiness,
(for otherwise our Immortality were our greatest curse) better means to
conform himself to God, by having a particular Law for the direction of all
his actions, which the Gentiles had not. For, therein especially consisted the
abundant favor of God to the Jews, as it is expressed by Moses, Unto what
Nation are their gods come so near unto them, as the Lord our God is come unto
us? And in what consisted this nearness? In this, What Nation has Laws and
Statutes so righteous as we have? God gave man life more abundantly then other
creatures, because he gave him Immortality; God gave the Jews life more
abundantly then other men, by giving them a Law to make their Immortality
Immortal happiness, and yet there is a further abundantius, Christ came to
give us, us Christians, life more abundantly then Gentile, or Jew.

Justin Martyr denies, that ever any understood the true God, till Christ came.
Illis, Christianis.
He goes upon the same ground that S. Paul does, Whilst you were without
Christ, you were without God; that is, without such an evidence, such a
manifestation, such an assurance of God, as faith requires, or as produces
faith. For, the Ceremonial Laws of the Jews cast as many shadows as it did
lights, and burdened them in easing them. Whereas the Christian Religion, is;
as Greg. Nazianz. says, Simplex and nuda, nisi prave in artem difficilimam
converteretur: It is a plain, an easy, a perspicuous truth, but that the
perverse and uncharitable wranglings of passionate and froward men, have made
Religion a hard, an intricate, and a perplexed art; so that now, that Religion,
which carnal and worldly men, have, by an ill life, discredited, and made hard
to be believed, the passion, and perverseness of Schoolmen, by Controversies,
has made hard to be understood. Whereas the Christian Religion, is of it
self Iugumsuave, a sweet, and an easy yoke, and verbum abbreviatum, an
abridgement and a contracted doctrine; for, where the Jews had all abridged in
december verba (as Moses calls the ten Commandments, ten words) the Christian
has all abridged in duo verba, into two words, love God, love thy neighbor.
So Christ has given us, us Christians life abundantius, more abundantly then
to the Gen tile, or to the Jew; but there is a farther abundance yet; all this
is but abundantius illis, more abundantly then to others, but Christ has given
us life abundantius ipsis, more abundantly then to our selves.

That is, in the Christian Church, Abundantius ipsis.
he has given us means to be better to day then yesterday, and to morrow then
to day. That grace which God offers us in the Church, does not only fill that
capacity, which we have, but give us a greater capacity then we had: And it is
an abuse of Gods grace, not to improve it, or not to procure such farther
grace, as that present grace makes us capable of. As it is an improvident, and
dangerous thing to spend upon the stock, so is it to rely upon that portion of
grace, which I think I had in my election, or that measure of Sanctification,
which I came to in my last sickness. Christ gives us life abundantius illis,
better means of eternal life then to Gentile or Jew, and abundantius ipsis;
better, that is, nearer assurance, in our growth of grace, and increase of
Sanctification every day, then in the consideration of any thing done by God,
in our behalf, heretofore.

Now, with these abundances (in which, we exceed illos, and ipsos, Ecclesta.
others and our selves) Christ comes to us, in this, that he has constituted,
and established a Church; and therefore we consider his abundant proceeding in
that work. From this day, in which, the first stone of that building, the
Church, was laid, (for, though the foundations of the Church were laid in
Eternity, yet, that was under ground, the first stone above ground, that is,
the manifestation of Gods purpose to the world was laid this day, in Christ's
birth) from this day, the Incarnation of Christ, (for, of all those names, by
which the ancients design this day, Christmas day, Athanasius calling it the
Substantiation of Christ; Tertullian, the Incorporation of Christ; Damascen,
the Humanation of Christ; Of all those fifty names, which are collected out of
the Fathers, for this day, most concur in that name, The Incarnation of
Christ) from this day, God proceeded so abundantly in enlarging his Church, as
that, within two hundred years, Tertullian was able to say, Ipsa hospitalia
aegrorum, The very hospitals of the Christians are more and more sumptuously
built, and more richly endowed, then the very Temples of the Idols, or then the
Palaces of Idolatrous Princes. And still abundantius, not to compare only with
Idolaters, but with the Jews themselves, and with them, in that wherein they
magnified themselves most, their Temple. That Church, which Justinian the
Emperor built at Constantinople, and dedicated to Sophia, to the wisdom of
God, (and the wisdom of God is Christ, Christ is the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24) is found by them, who have written that story, in
bigness, and in beauty, to have exceeded Solomon's Temple: Though in that,
there were employed for many years, thirty thousand Carpenters, and forty
thousand Masons, and (other endowments of rich vessel being proportionable to
it) more then twenty thousand Bowls, and Goblets of gold, and silver, yet
Justinians Church at Constantinople exceeded that: Unto the riches of this
wisdom of God, Christ Jesus, flowed all the treasure of the World, and upon
this Wisdom of God, Christ Jesus, waited all the wisdom of the World. For,
at that time, when Christ came into the world, was learning at that height, as
that accounting from Cicero and Virgil, (two great Masters in two great kinds)
to the two Plinies, (which may shut up one age) we may reckon in that one
state, under whose government Christ was born, Rome, Psalm. 118.24.
seven or eight score Authors, more then ever they had before or after. This
is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice, and be glad in it. And as
Constantine ordained, that upon this day, the Church should burn no Oil, but
Balsamum in her Lamps, so let us ever celebrate this day, with a thankful
acknowledgment, that Christ, who is unctus Domini, The Anointed of the Lord,
has anointed us with the Oil of gladness above our fellows, and given us
life more abundantly then others, in making us partakers of these means of
salvation in his Church.

But I bring it closer then so; now, and here, within these walls, and at this
hour, comes Christ unto you, in the offer of this abundance; and with what
penuriousnesse, penuriousnesse of devotion, penuriousnesse of reverence do you
meet him here? Deus stetit, says David, Psalm. 82.1.
God stands in the Congregation; does God stand there, and will thou sit?
sit, and never kneel? I would speak so, as the congregation should not know
whom I mean; but so, as that they whom it concerns, might know I mean them;
I would speak: for, I must say, that there come some persons to this Church,
and persons of example to many that come with them, of whom, (excepting some
few, who must therefore have their praise from us, as, no doubt, they have
their thanks and blessings from God) I never saw Master nor servant kneel, at
his coming into this Church, or at any part of divine service. David had such
a zeal to Gods service, as that he was content to be thought a fool, for his
humility toward the Arc. S. Paul was content to be thought mad; so was our
blessed Savior himself, not only by his enemies, but by his own friends and
kinsfolk. John 10.20. Mar. 3.21.
Indeed, the root of that word Tehillim, which is the name of the Psalms, and
of all cheerful and hearty service of God, is Halal, and Halal is Insanire,
To fall mad; And, if humility in the service of God here, be madness, I would
more of us were more out of our wits, then we are; I would all our Churches
were, to that purpose, Bedlams. S. Hieroms rule is not only frequenter
orandum, to come often to prayers, but Flexo corpore orandum, to declare an
inward humiliation by an outward. As our coming to Church is a testification,
a profession of our religion, to testify our fall in Adam, the Church appoints
us to fall upon our knees; and to testify our Resurrection in Christ Jesus,
Just. Mar.
the Church has appointed certain times, to stand: But no man is so left to
his liberty, as never to kneel. Genuflexio est peccatorum, kneeling is the
sinners posture; if thou come hither in the quality of a sinner, (and, if thou
do not so, what do thou here, the whole need not the Physician) put thy
self into the posture of a sinner, kneel. We are very far from enjoining any
one constant form to be always observed by all men; we only direct you, by
that good rule of S. Bernard, Habe reverentiam Deo, ut quod pluris est ei
tribuas. Do but remember, with what reverence thou came into thy Masters
presence, when thou wast a servant, with what reverence thou came to the
Council table, or to the Kings presence, if thou have been called
occasionally to those high places; and Quod plur is est, such reverence, as
thou gave to them there, be content to afford to God here. That Sacrifice
that struggled at the Altar, the Ancients would not accept for a Sacrifice; But
Caesar would not forbear a sacrifice for struggling, but sacrificed it for all
that. He that struggles, and murmures at this instruction, this increpation, is
the less fit for a sacrifice to God, for that; But the zeal that I bear to
Gods house, puts so much of Caesar's courage into me, as, for all that
struggling, to say now, and to repeat as often as I see that irreverence
continued, to the most impatient struggler, Deus stetit, God stands in the
Congregation, and will thou sit; sit, and never kneel? Venite, says David,
Let us come hither, let us be here; what to do? Venite adoremus, Ps. 95.6.
Let us come and worship; How? will not the heart serve? no; Adoremus and
procidamus, Let us fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
Humiliation is the beginning of sanctification; and as without this, without
holiness, no man shall see God, though he pore whole nights upon the Bible; so
without that, without humility, no man shall hear God speak to his soul,
though he hear three two-houres Sermons every day. But if God bring thee to
that humiliation of soul and body here, he will improve, and advance thy
sanctification abundantius, more abundantly, and when he has brought it to the
best perfection, that this life is capable of, he will provide another
abundantius, another manner of abundance in the life to come; which is the last
beating of the pulse of this text, the last panting of the breath thereof, our
anhelation, and panting after the joys, and glory, and eternity of the
kingdom of Heaven; of which, though, for the most part, I use to dismiss you,
with saying something, yet it is always little that I can say thereof; at this
time, but this, that if all the joys of all the Martyrs, from Abel t^ him that
groans now in the Inquisition, were condensed into one body of joy, (and
certainly the joys that the Martyrs felt at their deaths, would make up a far
greater body, then their sorrows would do,) (for though it be said of our
great Martyr, or great Witness, Apoc. 1.5.
(as S. John calls Christ Jesus) to whom, all other Martyrs are but
sub-martyrs, witnesses that testify his testimony, Non dolor sicut dolor ejus,
there was never sorrow like unto his sorrow, Lam. 3.12. Heb. 12.2.
it is also true, Non gaudium sicut gaudium ejus, There was never joy like unto
that joy which was set before him, when he endured the cross;) If I had all
this joy of all these Martyrs, (which would, no doubt, be such a joy, as would
work a liquefaction, a melting of my bowels) yet I shall have it abundantius,
a joy more abundant, then even this superlative joy, in the world to come. What
a dim vespers of a glorious festival, what a poor halfe-holyday, is
Methusalems nine hundred years, to eternity? what a poor account has that
man made, that says, this land has been in my name, and in my Ancestors from
the Conquest? what a yesterday is that? not six hundred years. If I could
believe the transmigration of souls, and think that my soul had been
successively in some creature or other, since the Creation, what a yesterday is
that? not six thousand years. What a yesterday for the past, what a to morrow
for the future, is any term, that can be comprehendred in Cyphar or Counters?
But as, how abundant a life soever any man has in this world for temporal
abundances, I have life more abundantly then he, if I have the spiritual life
of grace, so what measure soever I have of this spiritual life of grace, in
this world, I shall have that more abundantly in Heaven, for there, my term
shall be a term for three lives; for those three, that as long as the Father,
and the Son, and the holy Ghost live, I shall not dye. And to this glorious Son
of God, and the most almighty Father, etc.

SERMONS Preached upon Candlemas-day.
SERMON VIII. Preached upon Candlemas Day.
MAT. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.


EIther of the names of this day, were Text enough for a Sermon, Purification,
or Candlemas. Join we them together, and raise we only this one note from
both, that all true purification is in the light; corner purity, clandestine
purity, conventicle purity is not purity. Christ gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
says the Apostle, that he might purify to himself a peculiar people. How
shall this purification appear? It follows; They shall be zealous of good
works; They shall not wrangle about faith and works, but be actually zealous of
goods works. For, purification was accompanied with an oblation, something was
to be given; A Lamb, a Dove, Levit. 12.6.
a Turtle; All, emblemes of mildness; true purity is mild, meek, humble, and
to despise and undervalue others, is an inseparable mark of false purity. The
oblation of this days purification is light: so the day names it,
Candlemas-day, so your custom celebrates it, with many lights. Now, when God
received lights into his Tabernacle, he received none of Tallow, (the Ox has
horns) he received none of Wax, (the Be has his sting) but he received only
lamps of oil. And, though from many fruits and berries they pressed oil, yet
God admitted no oil into the service of the Church, but only of the Olive; the
Olive, the emblem of peace. Our purification is with an oblation, our oblation
is light, our light is good works; our peace is rather to exhort you to them,
then to institute any solemn, or other then occasional comparison between
faith and them. Every good work has faith for the root; but every faith has
not good works for the fruit thereof. And it is observable, that in all this
great Sermon of our Saviors in the Mount, (which possesses this, and the two
next Chapters) there is no mention of faith, by way of persuasion or
exhortation thereunto, but the whole Sermon is spent upon good works. For, good
works presuppose faith; Mat. 6.30.
and therefore he concludes that they had but little faith, because they were
so solicitous about the things of this world, O ye of little faith. And as
Christ concludes an unstedfastnesse in their faith, out of their solicitude for
this world, so may the world justly conclude an establishment in their faith,
if they see them exercise themselves in the works of mercy, and so let their
light shine before men, that they may see their good works, and glorify their
Father which is in heaven.

These are words spoken by our Savior to his Disciples in the Mount; Divisio.
a treasure deposited in those disciples, but in those disciples, as
depositaries for us; an Oracle uttered to those disciples, but through those
disciples to us; Paradise convayed to those disciples, but to those disciples,
as feoffees in trust for us; to every one of us, in them (from him, that rides
with his hundreds of Torches, to him that crawles with his rush-candle) our
Savior says, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, etc. The words have two parts; so must our explication of them; first a
precept, Sic luceat, (Let your light so shine before men) and then the reason,
the purpose, the end, the effect, ut videant, (that men may see your good
works, and etc.) From the first bough will diverse branches spring, and diverse
from the other; all of good taste and nourishment, if we might stay to press
the fruits thereof. We cannot; yet, in the first we shall insist a while upon
each of these three; First, the light it self, what that is, Sic luceat lux,
Let your light so shine; And then, secondly, what this propriety is, lux
vestra, (let your light shine, yours;) And lastly what this emanation of this
light upon others is, coram hominibus, (let your light shine before men.) The
second part, which is the reason, or the effect of this precept, ut videant,
(that men may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven)
abounds in particular considerations; and I should weary you, if I should make
you stand all the while under so heavy a load, as to charge your memories with
all those particulars, so long before I come to handle them. Reserving them
therefore to their due time, anon, proceed we now to the three branches of our
first part, first the light in it self, then the propriety in us, lastly, the
emanation upon others, Let your light so shine before men.

First, 1 Part. Lux. John 1.9.
for the light it self, There is a light that lightneth every man that comes
into the world. And, even this universal light is Christ, says S. John, (He
was that light that lights every man that comes into the world.) And this
universal enunciation, (He lightneth every man) moved S. Cyril to take this
light for the light of nature, and natural reason. John 1.3. Colos. 1.16.
For even nature and natural reason is from Christ. All things were made by
him, says S. John, even nature it self. And, By him, and for him, all things
visible, and invisible were created, says the Apostle. And therefore our
latter men of the Reformation, are not to be blamed, who for the most part,
pursuing S. Cyrils interpretation, interpret this universal light, that
lightneth every man, to be the light of nature. Diverse others of the Fathers
take this universal light (because Christ is said to be this light) to be
Baptism. For, in the primitive Church, as the Nativity of Christ was called
the Epiphany, Manifestation, so Baptism was called Illumination. And so,
Christ lightens every man that comes into the world, (that is, into the
Christian world) by that Sacrament of Illumination, Baptism. S. Augustine
brought the exposition of that universal proposition into a narrow room; That
he enlightened all that came into the world, that is, all that were enlightened
in the world, were enlightened by him; there was no other light; and so he makes
this light to be the light of faith, and the light of effectual grace, which
all have not, but they that have, have it from Christ. Now which of these
lights is intended in our Text, Let you light shine out? is it of the light of
nature, at our coming into the world, or the light of Baptism, and that
general grace that accompanies all Gods Ordinances, at our coming into the
Church, or the light of faith, and particular grace, sealing our adoption, and
spiritual filiation there? Properly, our light is none of these three; and yet
it is truly, all; for our light is the light of good works; and that light
proceeds from all the other three, and so is all those, and then it goes beyond
all three, and so is none of them. It proceeds from all; for, if we consider
the first light, the light of nature, Ephesians. 2.10.
in our creation, We are (says the Apostle) his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works. So that we were all made for that, for good works; even
the natural man, by that first light. Consider it in the second light, in
baptism; there we dye in Christ, and are buried in Christ, and rise in Christ,
and in him we are new creatures, and with him we make a covenant in baptism,
for holiness of life, which is the body of good works. Consider the third,
that of faith, and as every thing in nature is, so faith is perfected by
working; Jam. 2.26.
for, faith is dead, without breath, without spirit, if it be without works.
So, this light is in all those lights; we are created, we are baptized, we are
adopted for good works; and it is beyond them all, even that of faith; for,
though faith have a pre-eminence, because works grow out of it, and so faith
(as the root) is first, yet works have the pre-eminence thus, both that they
include faith in them, and that they dilate, and diffuse, and spread themselves
more declaratorily, then faith does. Therefore, as our Savior said to some
that asked him, John 6.28.
What shall we do that we might work the work of God? (you see their mind was
upon works, something they were sure was to be done) This is the work of God,
that ye believe in him whom he has sent, and so refers them to faith, so to
another that asks him, What shall I do, that I may have eternal life? Mat.
19.16.
(all go upon that, that something there must be done, works there must be)
Christ says, Keep the Commandments, and so refers him to works. He has
showed thee O man, what is good, Mic. 6.8.
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to show mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God? This then is the light that lights every man
that goes out of the world, good works; for, their works follow them. Their
works; they shall be theirs, Apoc. 14.13.
even after their death; which is our second branch in this first part, the
propriety, lux vestra, let your light shine.

I cannot always call the works that I do, my works; for sometimes God works
them, Proprietas vestra. Esaias 28.21.
and sometimes the devil: Sometimes God works his own work, The Lord will do
his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act.
Sometimes he works my works, Thou Lord have wrought all our works in us. In
us, and in all things else, Esaias 26.12. 1 Cor. 12.6. Ephesians. 1.11. Esaias 43.13.
Romans 7.15.
Operatur omnia in omnibus, he works all in all. And all this in all these,
Secundum consilium voluntatis suae, After the counsel of his own will; for,
I will work, and who shall let it? But for all this his general working, his
enemy works in us too. That which I do, I allow not, says the Apostle; nay, I
know it not; for, says he, what I hate, that I do. And, if I do that I would
not do, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Yet, ver. 20.
for all this diverse, this contrary working, as S. Augustine says of the
faculty of the will, Nihil tam nostrum, quam voluntas, there is nothing so much
our own, as our will before we work, August.
so there is nothing so much our own, as our works, after they are done. They
stick to us, they cleave to us; whether as fomentations to nourish us, or as
corrasives, to gnaw upon us, that lies in the nature of the work; but ours
they are; and upon us our works work. Our good works are more ours, then our
faith is ours. Our faith is ours as we have received it, our work is ours, as
we have done it. Faith is ours, as we are possessors of it, the work ours, as
we are doers, actors in it. Faith is ours, as our goods are ours, works, as our
children are ours. And therefore when the Prophet Habakkuk says, Fide sua,
Hab. 2.4.
The just shall live by his faith, that particle His, is a word of possession,
not a word of Acquisition; That God has infused that faith into him, and so it
is his, not that he has produced that faith in himself. His faith must save
him, his own, and not another, not his parents faith, though he be the son of
holy parents, not the Churches faith, (if he be of years) though he be within
the covenant, but his own personal faith; yet not his so, as that it grew in
him, or was produced in him, by him, by any plantation, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11.
Heb. 10.36.
or semination of his own. And therefore S. Paul in citing that place of
Habakkuk (as he does cite it three several times) in all those places leaves
out that particle of propriety; and acquisition, his, and still says, The just
shall live by faith, and he says no more. And when our blessed Savior says
to the woman with the bloody issue, Fides tua, Daughter, Mar. 5.34.
thy faith has made thee whole, it was said then, when he had seen that woman
come trembling and fall down at his feet; he saw outward declarations of her
faith, he saw works. And so, in diverse of those places, where Christ repeats
that, fides tua, thy faith, we find it added, Jesus videns fidem, Jesus seeing
their faith. With what eyes? he looked upon them with his humane eyes, not his
divine; he saw not (that is, considered not at that time) their hearts, but
their outward declarations, and proceeding as a good man would, out of their
good works concludes faith. Velle and nolle nostrum est, to assent or to
dis-assent is our own; Hieron.
we may choose which we will do; Ipsumque quod nostrum est, sine Dei
miseratione nostrum non est; But though this faculty be ours, it is ours, but
because God has imprinted it in us. So that still to will, as well as to do,
to believe, as well as to work, is all from God; but yet they are from God in a
diverse manner, and a diverse respect; and certainly our works are more ours
then our faith is, and man concurres otherwise in the acting and perpetration
of a good work, then he does in the reception and admission of faith. Sed quae
non fecimus ipsi, says the Poet; and he was Vates, a Prophet in saying so, Vix
ea nostra voco; nothing is ours, but that which we have done our selves; and
all that is ours. And though Christ refer us often to belief, in this life,
because he would be sure to plant, and fasten safely that which is the only
true root of all, that is, faith, yet when he comes to Judgment, in the next
life, all his proceeding is grounded upon works, and he judges us by our
fruits. So then, God gives us faith, immediately from himself, and out of that
faith, he produces good works, instrumentally, by us, so, as that those works
are otherwise ours, then that faith is. And this the propriety, lux vestra, let
your light shine, which we proposed for the second branch in this first part,
that God vouchsafes to afford us an interest, in the working of our salvation;
And then our third branch is, the emanation of this light, from us, to others,
Coram hominibus, let your light shine before men.

There was a particular Holy Day amongst the heathen, Luceat, Emanatio.
that bore the name of this day, Accensio luminum, Candlemas day; A
superstitious multiplying of Lamps, and Torches in Divine Service. Lactant.
This superstition Lactantius reproves, elegantly, and bitterly. Number mentis
suae compos putandus est? can we think that man in his wits, that offers to
God, the Father, and Fountain, the Author and Giver of all light, a Candle for
an Oblation, for a Sacrifice, for a New-yeares gift? Solemn contempletur, says
he; Let that man but consider seriously the Sun, and he will see, that that God
who could spare him so glorious a light as the Sun, Tertul.
needs not his Candle. And therefore says Tertullian, (reprehending the same
superstition) Lucernis diem non infringimus, we do not cut off, we do not
shorten our days, by setting up lights at noone, nor induce, nor force, nor
make night before it comes.

I would not be understood to condemn all use of candles by day, in Divine
Service, nor all Churches that have or do use them; For, so, I might condemn
even the Primitive Church, in her pure and innocent estate. And therefore, that
which Lactantius, almost three hundred years after Christ, says of those
Lights, and that which Tertullian, almost a hundred years before Lactantius,
says, in reprehension thereof, must necessarily be understood of the abuse,
and imitation of the Gentiles therein; for, that the thing it self, was in
use, before either of their times, I think, admits little question. About
Lactantius time, fell the Eliberitan Council; and then the use, and the abuse
was evident. For, in the thirty fourth Canon of that Council, it is forbidden
to set up Candles in the Churchyard: And, the reason that is added, declares
the abuse, Non sunt enim inquietandi spiritus sidelium, That the souls of the
Saints departed should not be troubled. Now the setting up of lights could not
trouble them; but these lights were accompanied with superstitious Invocations,
with magical Incantations, and with howlings and ejulations, which they had
learnt from the Gentiles, and with these, the souls of the dead, were, in
those times, thought to be affected, and disquieted. It is in this Ceremony of
lights, as it is in other Ceremonies: They may be good in their Institution,
and grow ill in their practice. So did many things, which the Christian Church
received from the Gentiles, in a harmless innocence, degenerate after, into as
pestilent superstition there, as amongst the Gentiles themselves. For,
ceremonies, which were received, but for the instruction, and edification of
the weaker sort of people, were made real parts of the service of God, and
meritorious sacrifices. To those ceremonies, which were received as signa
commonefacientia, helps to excite, and awaken devotion, was attributed an
operation, and an effectual power, even to the ceremony it self; and they
were not practiced, as they should, significative, but effective, not as things
which should signify to the people higher mysteries, but as things as
powerful, and effectual in themselves, as the greatest Mysteries of all, the
Sacraments themselves. So lights were received in the Primitive Church, to
signify to the people, that God, the Father of lights, was otherwise present
in that place, then in any other, and then, men came to offer lights by way of
sacrifice to God; And so, that which was providently intended for man, who
indeed needed such helps, was turned upon God, as though he were to be supplied
by us. But what then? Because things good in their institution, may be depraved
in their practice, Ergone nihil ceremoniarum rudioribus dabitur, Calv. Instit.
l. 4. c. 10. 14.
ad juvandam eorum imperitiam? Shall therefore the people be denied all
ceremonies, for the assistance of their weakness? Id ego non dico; I say not
so, says he. Omnino illis utile esse sentio hoc genus adminiculi; I think
these kinds of helps to be very behoovefull for them; Tantum hic contendo, all
that I strive for, is but Moderation; and that Moderation he places very
discreetly in this, That these ceremonies may be few in number; That they may
be easy for observation; That they may be clearly understood in their
signification; we must not therefore be hasty in condemning particular
ceremonies: For, in so doing, in this ceremony of lights, we may condemn the
Primitive Church, that did use them, and we condemn a great and Noble part of
the reformed Church, which does use them at this day.

These superstitious lights, are not the lights we call for here, sic luceat,
let your light shine out; but lux vestra, your light, the light of good works;
let that shine out. Truly, this carrying, and diffusing of light to others is
so blessed a thing, as that though Lucifer, (whose name signifies the carrying
of light) be now an odious name, an infamous name, applied only to the Devil,
yet a great Bishop in the Primitive Church abstained not from that name,
forbore not that name, Lucifer Talaritanus; that he might carry about him, in
his name, a remembrancer, far lucem, to carry light to others, he was content
with that name, Lucifer. God had made light the first day, and yet he made many
lights after. One light of thine shines out in our eyes, thy profession of
Christ; let us see more lights, works worthy of that profession. God calls the
Sun, and the Moon too, Genesis 1.16.
Great lights, because though there be greater in the Firmament, they appear
greatest to us; those works of ours are greatest in the sight of God, that are
greatest in the sight of men, that are most beneficial, most exemplary, and
conduce most to the promoving of others to glorify God. To such rich men, as
produce no light at all, August.
(no works) that of S. Angustine is appliable, cimices sunt, they are as these
worms, or flies, the cimices, qui vivi mordent, mortui foetent, They bite, and
suck a man, whilst they live, and they stink pestilently, and offend so, when
they are dead. The actions of such rich men are mischievous whilst they live,
and their memory odious when they are dead. But all rich men are not such, to
be absolutely without all light. But then they may have light, (a determined
purpose to do some good works) and yet this light not shine out. No man can
more properly be said to hide his light under a bushel, (which because Christ
says, (in the verse before our Text) no man does, certainly no man should do)
then he, who has disposed some part of his estate to pious uses, but hides it
in his will, and locks up that will in his cabinet; For, in this case, though
there be light, yet it does not shine out. Your gold, and your silver is
cankered, says S. James, and the rust of them shall be a witness, James 5.3.
and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire. He does not say the gold and the
silver it self, as reproving the ill getting of it, but the rust, the hiding,
the concealing thereof, shall be this witness against thee, this executioner
upon thee. That man dies in an ill state, of whose faith we have had no
evidence, till, after his death, his executors meet, and open his Will, and
then publish some Legacies to pious uses: And we had no evidence before, if he
had done no good before. For, show me thy faith without thy works, James. 2.18
says the Apostle; and he proposes it, as an impossible thing, impossible to
show it, impossible to have it. And therefore, as good works are our own, so
are they never so properly our own, as when they are done with our own hands;
for this is the true shining of our light, the emanation from us, upon others.
And so have you the three pieces, which constitute our first part, the precept,
Let your light shine before men; The light it self, not the light of nature,
nor of Baptism, nor of Adoption, but the light of good works; And then the
Appropriation of this light, how these works are ours, though the goodness
thereof be only from God; And lastly the emanation of this light upon others;
which cannot well be said to be an emanation of our light, of light from us,
except it be whilst we are we, that is, alive. And so we pass to those many
particulars, which frame our second part, the reason, and the end of this, That
men may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

In this end, our beginning is, ut videant, that men may see it. The
apparitions in old times, were evermore accompanied with lights; but they were
private lights; 2. Part. Vt videant.
such an old woman, or such a child saw a light; but non videbant homines, it
did not shine out, so that men might see this light. We have a story delivered
by a very pious man, Cantiprat. l. 1. c. 9.
and of the truth whereof he seems to be very well assured, that one Conradus
a devout Priest, had such an illustration, such an irradiation, such a
coruscation, such a light at the tops of those fingers, which he used in the
consecration of the Sacrament, as that by that light of his fingers ends, he
could have read in the night, as well as by so many Candles; But this was but
a private light, and non viderunt homines, It did not shine out, Epist. 205. ad
Cyrill: Jerosolym.
so that men might see it. Blessed S. Augustine reports, (if that Epistle be S.
Augustines) that when himself was writing to S. Hierome, to know his opinion
of the measure and quality of the Joy, and Glory of Heaven, suddenly in his
Chamber there appeared ineffabile lumen, says he, an unspeakable, an
unexpressible light, nostr is invisum temporibus, such a light as our times
never saw, and out of that light issued this voice, Hieronymi anima sum, I am
the soul of that Hierome to whom thou art writing, who this hour dyed at
Bethlem, and am come from thence to thee, etc. But this was but a private
light, and whatsoever S. Augustine saw, (who was not easily deceived, nor would
deceive others) non videbant homines, this light did not shine so, as that men
might see it. Here, in our Text, there is a light required that men may see.
Those lights of their apparitions we cannot see; There is a light of ours,
which our adversaries may see, and will not; which is truly the light of this
Text, the light of good works. Though our zeal to good works shine out
assiduously, day by day in our Sermons, and shine out powerfully in the
Homilies of our Church, composed expressly to that purpose, and shine out
actually in our many sumptuous buildings, and rich endowments, (in which works,
we of this Kingdom, in this last Century, since the Reformation of Religion,
have perhaps exceeded our Fathers, in any one hundred of years, whilst they
lived under the Roman persuasion) yet still they cry out, we are enemies of
this light, and abhor good works. As I have heard them, in some obscure
places abroad, Preach, that here in England, we had not only no true Church,
no true Priesthood, no true Sacraments, but that we have no material Churches,
no holy Convocations, no observing of Sundays, or Holy days, no places to
serve God in; so I have heard them Preach, that we do not only not advance,
but that we cry down, and discredit, and dissuade, and discountenance the
doctrine of good works. It is enough to say to them, as the Angel said to the
Devil, Increpet te Dominus, The Lord rebuke thee. Jude 9.
And the Lord does rebuke them, in enabling us to proceed in these pious works,
which, with so notorious falsehood they deny; And we do rebuke them, Heb. 10.24.
the best and most powerful way, in that, (as the Apostle says) we consider
one another, (consider the necessities of others) and provoke one another to
love, and good works.

But then, if this be Gods end in our good works, ut videant homines, that men
may see them, Mat. 6.1.
why is Christ so earnest, in this very sermon as to say, Take heed you do not
your alms before men, to be seen of them? Is there no contradiction in these?
far from it; The intent of both precepts together make up this doctrine, That
we do them not therefore, not to that end, that men may see them. So far we
must come, that men must see them, but we must not rest there; for, it is but
Sic luceat, Let your light shine out so, it is not, let it shine out therefore;
Our doing of good works must have a farther end, then the knowledge of men, as
we shall see, toward our end, anon.

Men must see them then, Opera.
and see them to be works, Vt videant opera, That they may see your works:
which is a word that implies difficulty, and pain, and labor, and is
accompanied with some loathnesse, with some colluctation. Do such works, for
Gods sake, as are hard for thee to do. In such a word does God deliver his
Commandment of the Sabbath; not that word, which in that language signifies
ordinary and eafie works, but servile and laborious works, toylesome and
gainefull works, those works thou may not do upon the Sabbath. But those
works, in the virtue of the precept of this text, thou must do in the sight
of men; those that are hard for thee to do. David would not consecrate nor
offer unto God, 2. Sam. 24.24.
that which cost him nothing; first he would buy Araunahs threshing floare at a
valuable price, and then he would dedicate it to God. To give old clothes,
past wearing, to the poor, is not so good a work as to make new for them.
Mar. 12.42.
To give a little of your superfluities, not so acceptable as the widows gift,
that gave all. To give a poor soul a farthing at that door, where you give a
Player a shilling, is not equal dealing; Amos 8.6.
for, this is to give God quisquilias frumenti, The refuse of the wheat. But
do thou some such things, as are truly works in our sense, such as are against
the nature, and ordinary practice of worldly men to do; some things, by which
they may see, that thou do prefer God before honor, and wife, and children,
and had rather build, and endow some place, for Gods service, then pour out
money to multiply titles of honor upon thy self, or enlarge joyntures, and
portions, to an unnecessary, and unmeasurable proportion, when there is enough
done before.

Let men see that that thou do, Opera Bona.
to be a work, qualified with some difficulty in the doing, and then those
works, to be good works, Videant opera bona, that they may see your good
works. They are not good works how magnificent soever, if they be not directed
to good ends. A superstitious end, or a seditious end vitiates the best work.
Great contributions have been raised, and great sums given, to build, and
endow Seminaries, and schools, and Colleges in foreign parts; but that has
a superstitious end. Great contributions have been raised, and great sums
given at home, for the maintenance of such refractary persons, as by opposing
the government and discipline of the Church, have drawn upon themselves,
silencings, and suspensions, and deprivations; but that has a seditious end.
But, give so, as in a rectified conscience, and not a distempered zeal, (a
rectified conscience is that, that has the restimony and approbation of most
good men, in a succession of times, and not to rely occasionally upon one or a
few men of the separation, for the present) give so, as thou may sincerely
say, God gave me this, to give thus, and so it is a good work. So it must be,
A work (something of some importance) and a good work, (not depraved with an
ill end) and then your work, Vt videant opera vestra, That they may see your
good works.

They are not your works, if that that you give be not your own. Nor is it
your own, Opera bona v^stra.
if it were ill gotten at first. How long soever it have been possessed, or
how often soever it have been transformed, from money to ware, from ware to
land, from land to office, from office to honor, the money, the ware, the
land, the office, the honor is none of thine, if, in thy knowledge, it were ill
gotten at first. Zacheus, in S. Luke, Luke 19.8.
gives half his goods to the poor; but it is half of his, his own; for
there might be goods in his house, which were none of his. Therefore in the
same instrument, he passes that scrutiny, If I have taken any thing unjustly, I
restore him fourfold. First let that that was ill gotten, be deducted, and
restored, and then, of the rest, which is truly thine own, give cheerfully.
When Moses says, that our years are three score and ten, Psalm. 90.20.
if we deduct from that term, all the hours of our unnecessary sleep, of
superfluous sittings at feasts, of curiosity in dressing, of largeness in
recreations, of plotting, and compassing of vanities, or sins, scarce any man
of chreescore and ten, would be ten years old, when he dies. If we should deal
so with worldly men's estates, (defalse unjust gettings) it would abridge and
attenuate many a swelling Inventory. Till this defalcation, this scrutiny be
made, that you know what is your own, what is other men's, as your Tomb shall be
but a monument of your rotten bones, how much gold or marble soever be bestowed
upon it, so that Hospital, that free-schoole, that College that you shall
build, and endow, will be but a monument of your bribery, your extortion, your
oppression; and God, who will not be in debt, (though he owe you nothing that
built it) may be pleased to give the reward of all that, to them, from whom
that which was spent upon it, was unjustly taken; for, Prove. 13.22.
The wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous, says Solomon. The
sinner may do pious works, and the righteous may be rewarded for them; the
world may think of one founder, and God knows another. That which is enjoined
in the name of light here, is works, (not trifles) and good works, (made good
by the good ends they are directed to) and then your works (done out of that
which is truly your own) and by seeing this light, men will be moved to
glorify your Father which is in Heaven; which is the true end of all; that men
may see them, but see them therefore, To glorisie your Father which is in
Heaven.

He does not say, that by seeing your good works, Patrem, non Filios.
men shall glorify your sons upon earth. And yet truly, even that part of
the reward, and retribution is worth a great deal of your cost, and your
alms; that God shall establish your posterity in the world, and in the good
opinion of good men. As you have your estates, you have your children from God
too. As it is David's recognition, Dominus pars haereditatis meae, Psalm. 16.5.
Genesis 4.1.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, so the Possedi virum a Domino,
was Eves Recognition upon the birth of her first son, Cain, I have gotten, I
possess a man from the Lord. Now that that man that thou possessest from the
Lord, thy son, may possess that land that thou possessest from the Lord, it
behooves thee to be righteous; for so, (by that righteousness) thou becomest a
foundation for posterity, Prove. 10.25. Prove. 13.9. Prove. 14.23.
(The righteous is an everlasting foundation) his light, (his good works)
shall be a cheerful light unto him; (for, The light of the righteous
rejoices him.) They shall be so in this life, and, He shall have hope in his
death, says Solomon; that is, hope for himself in another world, and hope of
his posterity in this world; for, says he, He leaves an inheritance to his
childrens children; that is, an inheritance, Prove. 23.22.
out of which he has taken, and restored all that was unjustly got from men,
and taken a bountiful part, which he has offered to God in pious uses, that
the rest may descend free from all claims, and encumbrances upon his childrens
children. Psalm. 37.26.
The righteous is merciful, and lends, says David. Merciful as his Father
in Heaven is merciful; that is, in perpetual, not transitory endowments,
(for, God did not set up his lights, his Sun, and his Moon for a day, but for
ever, and such should our light, or good works be too.) He is merciful, and
he lends; to whom? for to the poor he gives; he looks for no return from
them, for they are the waters upon which he casts his bread. Yet he lends;
Eccles. 11.1. Prove. 19.17.
He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord. The righteous is
merciful and lends, and then, (as David adds there) His seed is blessed.
Blessed in this (which follows there) that he shall inherit the land, Psalm.
37.29. Psalm. 112.4.
and dwell therein for ever, (which he ratifies again, Surely he shall not be
moved for ever; that is, he shall never be moved, in his posterity) And as he
is blessed that way, blessed in the establishment of his possession upon his
childrens children, so is he blessed in this, that his honor, and good name
shall be poured out as a fragrant oil upon his posterity, Ibid.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Their memory shall be
always alive, Prove. 10.7. Prove. 11.30.
and always fresh in their posterity, when The name of the wicked shall rot.
So then, the fruit of the righteous is the tree of life, says Solomon; that
is, the righteous shall produce plants, that shall grow up, and flourish; so
his posterity shall be a tree of life to many generations; Prove. 17.6.
and then, The glory of children are their Fathers, says that wise King; As
Fathers receive comfort from good children, so children receive glory from good
parents; in this are children glorified, that they had righteous Fathers, that
lent unto the Lord. So that, (to recollect these pieces) it is no small reward
that God affords you, if men, seeing your good works, glorify, that is,
esteem, and respect, and love, and honor your children upon earth. But it is
not only that; your good works shall be an occasion of carrying glory upon
the right object, They shall glorify your Father, which is in heaven.

It is not the Father which is in Heaven; Non Patrem.
that they should glorify God, as the common Father of all, by creation. For,
for that they need not your light, your good works; The Heavens declare the
glory of God, Psalm. 19.1.
says David; that is, glorify him in an acknowledgement, that he is the
Father of them, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
and of all other things by creation. Is not he thy Father? has he not made
thee? is an interrogatory ministered by Moses, to which all things must answer
with the Prophet Malachie, Malac. 2.10.
yes, He is our Father, for he has made us. But that is not the paternity of
this text, as God is Father of us all by creation. Nor as he is a Father of
some in a more particular consideration, in giving them large portions, great
patrimonies in this world; for, thus, he may be my Father and yet disinherit
me; he may give me plenty of temporal blessings, and withhold from me
spiritual, and eternal blessings. Now, to see this, men need not your light,
your good works; for, they see daily, That he makes his sun to shine on the
evil, Mat. 5.45.
and on the good; and causes it to rain on the just, and the unjust; He feeds
Goats as well as Sheep, he gives the wicked temporal blessings, as well as
the righteous. These then are not the paternities of our text, that men, by
this occasion, glorify God as the Father of all men by creation, nor as the
Father of all rich men, by their large patrimonies, not as he is the Father,
not as he is a Father, but as he is your Father, as he is made yours, as he is
become yours, by that particular grace of using the temporal blessings which
he has given you, to his glory, in letting your light shine before men. For,
it were better God disinherited us so, as to give us nothing, then that he gave
us not the grace to use that that he gave us, well: without this, all his bread
were stone, Mat. 7.9.
and all his fishes serpents, all his temporal liberality malediction. How
much happier had that man been, that has wasted thousands in play, in riot,
in wantonness, in sinful excesses, if his parents had left him no more at
first, then he has left himself at last? How much nearer to a kingdom in
Heaven had he been, if he had been borne a beggar here? Nay, though he have
done no ill, (of such excessive kinds) how much happier had he been, if he had
had nothing left him, if he have done no good? There cannot be a more fearful
commination upon man, nor a more dangerous dereliction from God, Ps. 50.8. and
12.
then when God says, I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices; Though thou
offer none, I care not, I Will never tell thee of it, nor reprove thee for it, I
will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices. And when he says, (as he does there)
If I be hungry I will not tell thee; I will not awake thy charity, I will not
excite thee, not provoke thee, with any occasion of feeding me, in feeding the
poor. When God shall say to me, I care not whether you come to Church or no,
whether you pray or no, repent or no, confess, receive or no, this is a
fearful dereliction; so is it, when he says to a rich man, I care not whether
your light shine out, or no; whether men see your good works or no; I can
provide for my glory other ways. For, certainly God has not determined his
purpose, and his glory so much in that, to make some men rich that the poor
might be relieved, (for, that ends in bodily relief) as in this, that he has
made some men poor, whereby the rich might have occasion to exercise their
charity; for, that reaches to spiritual happiness; for which use, the poor
do not so much need the rich, as the rich need the poor; the poor may better
be saved without the rich, then the rich without the poor. But when men shall
see, that that God, who is the Father of us all, by creating us, and the father
of all the rich, by enriching them, is also become your father, yours by
adoption, yours by infusion of that particular grace, to do good with your
goods, then are you made blessed instruments of that which God seeks here, his
glory, They shall glorify your father which is in heaven.

Glory is so inseparable to God, as that God himself is called Glory, They
changed their Glory into the similitude of an Ox; Their glory, their true God
into an inglorious Idol. Gloria. Psalm. 106.20. Psalm. 85.10.
That glory may dwell in our land, says he; that is, that God may dwell
therein. The first end of letting our light to shine before men, is, that they
may know Gods proceedings; but, the last end to which all conduces, is, that
God may have glory. Whatsoever God did first in his own bosom, in his own
decree, (what that was, contentious men will needs wrangle) whatsoever that
first act was, Gods last end in that first act of his was his own glory. And
therefore to impute any inglorious or ignoble thing to God, comes too near
blasphemy. And be any man who has any sense or taste of nobleness, or honor,
judge, whether there be any glory in the destruction of those creatures whom
they have raised, till those persons have deserved ill at their hands, and in
some way have damnified them, or dishonored them. Nor can God propose that for
glory, to destroy man till he find cause in man. Now, this glory, to which
Christ bends all in this Text, (that men by seeing your good works, might
glorify your Father) consists especially in these two declarations,
Commemoration, and Imitation; a due celebration of former founders and
benefactors, and a pious proceeding according to such precedents, is this
glorifying of God.

When God calls himself so often, The God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,
Gloria ex Commemoratione. Ezech. 14.14.
God would have the world remember, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were
extraordinary men, memorable men. When God says, Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job were here, they should not deliver this people, God would have
it known, that Noah, Daniel, and Job were memorable men, and able to do much
with him. When the Holy Ghost is so careful to give men their additions, Genesis
4.20.
That Iabal was the father of such as dwell in Tents, and keep Cattle, and
Iubal the father of Harpers, and Organists, and Tubal-Cain of all Gravers in
Brass and Iron. And when he presents with so many particularities every piece
of work, that Hiram of Tire wrought in Brass for the furnishing of Solomon's
Temple, 1 Reg. 7.13.
God certainly is not afraid that his honor will be diminished, in the
honorable mentioning of such men as have benefited the world by public good
works. The wise man seems to settle himself upon that meditation; let us now
praise famous men, says he, Ecclus. 44.1.
and our fathers that begot us; and so he institutes a solemn commemoration,
and gives a catalogue of Enoch, and Abraham, and Moses, and Aaron, and so many
more, as possess six Chapters; nor does he ever end the meditation till he end
his book; so was he fixed upon the commemoration of good men; Heb. 11.
as S. Paul likewise feeds and delights himself in the like meditation, even
from Abel. It is therefore a wretched impotency, not to endure the
commemoration, and honorable mentioning of our Founders and Benefactors. God
has delivered us, and our Church, from those straights, in which, some
Churches of the Reformation have thought themselves to be, when they have made
Canons, That there should be no Bell rung, no dole given, no mention made of
the dead at any Funeral, lest that should savor of superstition. The Holy
Ghost has taught us the difference between praising the dead, and praying for
the dead, between commemorating of Saints, and invocating of Saints. We
understand what David means, when he says, This honor have all his Saints,
and what S. Paul means, Psalm. 149.9. 1 Timothy 1.17.
when he says, Unto the only wise God be honor, and glory, for ever and ever.
God is honored in due honor given to his Saints, and glorified in the
commemoration of those good men whose light has so shined out before men, that
they have seen their good works. But then he is glorified more, in our
imitation, then in our commemoration.

Herein is my Father glorified, (says Christ) that ye bear much fruit. Gloria
ex Imitatione. John 15.8. Mar. 4.20.
The seed sowed in good ground, bore some an hundred fold, the least thirty.
The seed (in this case) is the example that is before you, of those good men,
whose light has shined out so, that you have seen their good works. Let this
seed, these good examples bring forth hundreds, and sixties, and thirties in
you, much fruit; for herein is your Father glorified, that you bear much
fruit. Of which plentiful increase, I am afraid there is one great hinderance
that passes through many of you, that is, that when your Will lies by you, in
which some little lamp of this light is set up, something given to God in pious
uses, if a Ship miscarry, if a Debtor break, if your state be any way empaired,
the first that suffers, the first that is blotted out of the Will, is God and
his Legacy; and if your estates increase, portions increase, and perchance
other legacies, but Gods portion and legacy stands at a stay. Christ left two
uses of his passion; application and imitation. He suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.22.
says the Apostle; for us, that is, that we might make his death ours, apply
his death, and then (as it follows there) he left us an example. So Christ
gives us two uses of the Reformation of Religion; first, the doctrine, how to
do good works without relying upon them, as meritorious; and then example,
many, very many men (and more by much, in some kinds of charity since the
Reformation of Religion, then before) even in this City, whose light has
shined out before you, and you have seen their good works. That as this noble
City has justly acquired the reputation and the testimony of all who have had
occasion to consider their dealings in that kind, that they deal most
faithfully, most justly, most providently, in all things which are committed to
their trust for pious uses, from others, not only in a full employment of that
which was given, but in an improvement thereof, and then an employment of that
emprovement to the same pious use, so every man in his particular may propose
to himself, some of those blessed examples which have risen amongst your
selves, and follow that, and exceed that; That as your lights are Torches, and
not petty Candles, and your Torches better then others Torches, so he also may
be a larger example to others, then others have been to him, for, Herein is
your Father glorified, if you bear much fruit, and that is the end of all,
that we all do, That men seeing it, may glorify our Father which is in heaven.

SERMON IX. Preached upon Candlemas day.
ROMANS 13.7. Render therefore to all men their dues.

The Text being part of the Epistle of that day, that year.


THe largeness of this short Text consists in that word, Therefore; therefore
because you have been so particularly taught your particular duties, therefore
perform them, therefore practice them, Reddite omnibus debita, Render therefore
to every man his due. The Philosopher might seem to have contracted as large a
law, into a few words, in his suum cuique, as the Holy Ghost had done in his
Reddite omnibus, if it were not for this, Therefore; for that carries our
consideration over the whole Epistle. This Epistle particularizing all duties,
which appertain ad pietatem erga Deum, to our religious worship of God, ad
charitatem erga proximum, to charitable offices toward one another, and ad
sanctimoniam propriam, to a sanctification and holiness of life in our selves.
You have seen a list of your debts, says the Apostle, (and that men deeply
endebted are loath to do) you have seen what you owe God, what you owe your
selves, and what you owe the world, Reddite ergo omnibus debita, be therefore
behind hand with none of these, but render unto all their dues: For, our debts
here are not restrained to those that are mentioned in the following part of
this verse, Tribute, and Custom, and Fear, and Honor, but it is the knot
that ties up all, and this Text in this verse, is the same that begins the next
verse also; Reddite debita omnibus, Render to all men their dues, and Nemini
quicquam debeas, Owe nothing to any man, is all one: It is farther then many
use to come, to know what they owe; since I have brought you so far, says our
Apostle, Render to all men their dues.

It is one degree of thrift, Divisio.
(but for the most part it comes late) to bring our debts into as few hands as
we can. Our debt here we cannot bring into fewer then these three, to God, to
our Neighbor, to our selves. Consider our debts to God, to be our sins, and so
we dare not come to a reckoning with him, but we discharge our selves entirely
upon our surety, our Savior Christ Jesus: but yet of that debt we must pay an
acknowledgement, an interest (as it were) of praise, for all that we have, and
of prayer for all that we would have, and these are our debts to God. Consider
our debts to man, and our creditors are persons above us, and persons below us,
superiors, and inferiors; and to superiors (who are the persons of whom this
Text, or this verse, is most literally intended) we are debtors first in matter
of substance, expressed here, in those words Tribute, and Custom; and in
matter of ceremony, expressed here, in those words, Fear, and Honor. And to
our inferiors, we are debtors for counsel to direct them, and for relief in
compassion of their sufferings. And then to come to our third sort of
creditors, to our selves, we owe our selves some debts which are to be tendered
at noone, which are to be paid in our best strength and prosperity, in the
course of our lives; and some which are to be tendered at night, at our Sunset,
at our deaths: Reddite ergo omnibus, Render therefore to all their dues. For
your first debt, to God, we bring you to Church; this is no place to arrest in;
but yet the Spirit of God calls upon you for those debts, praise him in his
holy place, and pray to him in his house, which is the house of prayer. For
your debts of the second kind, to other men, for those to superiors, we send
you to Court; for those to inferiors, we send you to Hospitals, and prisons;
and though Courts and prisons be ill paying places, yet pay you your debts of
substance, and of ceremony, of tribute, and of honor, at Court; and your debt
of counsel and relief to those that need them, in the darkest corners. And for
you third kind of debts, debts to your selves, make eaven with your selves all
the way in your lives, lest your payment prove too heavy, and you break, and
your hearts break, when you come to see that you cannot do that upon your
deathbed: Reddite omnibus, Render to all, to God, to man, to your selves,
their dues.

To begin then with our beginning, our debts to God; 1 Part. Deo.
if we take that definition of of debts, which arises out of the sound of the
word, Debere est de alio habere, a man owes all that which he has received of
another, we are debtors of all that we have, and all that we are, to God; our
well being, and our very being is from him. If we take that definition of debt,
Debere est Iure aliquo teneri ad dandum aut faciendum aliquid, To owe, is to be
bound by some Law, to give something, or to do something to some person; The
Law of Nature in our hearts, the Law of the Creature in our eyes, the Law of
the Word in our ears, provokes us to give and to do something to that God,
who has given and done all to us; and more then giving or doing, has suffered
so much for us. What then is the payment which we are to make? First, Glory,
Praise: For, in all his works, Laus.
God still proposed to himself, his Glory. Those men who will needs be of Gods
Cabinet Counsel, and pronounce what God did first, what was his first Decree,
and the first clause in that Decree, those men who will needs know, and then
publish Gods secrets, (And, by the way, that, which sometimes it may concern
us to know, yet it may be a Libell to publish it) Those mysteries, which, for
the opposing and countermining stubborn, and perverse Heresies, it may
concern us, in Councels and Synods, and other fit places, to argue, and to
clear, it may be an injury to God, and against his Crown, and Dignity, in
breaking the peace of the Church, to publish and divulge to every popular
auditory, and every itching ear, and thereby perplexe the consciences of weak
men, or offer contentious men, that which is their food, and delight,
disputation; These men, I say, though they differ, in their order, whether Gods
Decree of Reprobation and Salvation, were before his Decree of Creation, (for
some place it before, and some after) yet all, on all sides agree in this, That
Gods first purpose was his own glory; that was his first Decree, by what
degrees soever he proceeded to the execution of that Decree. And so in the
great and incomprehensible work of our Salvation, when that was uttered in the
mouth of Angels to the Shepherds, that Embassage began with a Gloria in
excelsis, There was Peace upon earth, and there was good will toward men, but
first there was Glory to God on high. And though to correct Heretical and
Schismatic men, amongst whom, some would express themselves in Gods
service, in one manner, and some in another, to the endangering of Doctrine,
and to the confusion of Order, and thereupon some would say, in the
Church Service, Gloria Patri, in Filio, per Spiritum Sanctum, Glory be to the
Father, in the Son, by the Holy Ghost; And some Gloria Patri per Filium, Glory
be to the Father by the Son; And some Gloria Patri, and Filio, per Spiritum
Sanctum, Glory be to the Father, and the Son, by the Holy Ghost; Though to
prevent the danger of these diverse forms of service, the Church came to
determine all, in that one, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, yet we see out of the forms of the Heretics themselves, still so
far as they conceived the Godhead to extend, so far they extended Glory, in
that holy acclamation; those who believed not the Son to be God, or the Holy
Ghost not to be God, left out Glory, when they came to their Persons; but to
him that is God, in all confessions, Glory appertains. Now Glory is, Clara cum
laud notitia, says S. Ambrose: It is an evident knowledge, and
acknowledgement of God, by which, others come to know him too; which
acknowledgement is well called a recognition, for it is a second, a ruminated,
a reflected knowledge: Beasts do remember, but they do not remember that they
remember; they do not reflect upon it, which is that that constitutes memory:
Every carnal and natural man knows God, but the acknowledgement, the
recognition, the manifestation of the greatness and goodness of God,
accompanied with praise of him for that, this appertains to the godly man, and
this constitutes glory. If God have delivered me from a sickness, and I do
not glorify him for that, that is, make others know his goodness to me, my
sickness is but changed to a spiritual apoplexy, to a lethargy, to a
stupefaction. If God have delivered us from destruction in the bowels of the
Sea, in an Invasion, and from destruction in the bowels of the earth, in the
Powder Treason, and we grow faint in the publication of our thanks for this
deliverance, our punishment is but aggravated, for we shall be destroyed both
for those old sins which induced those attempts of those destructions, and for
this later and greater sin, of forgetting those deliverances; God requires
nothing else; but he requires that, Glory and Praise. And that book of the
Scriptures, of which, S. Basil says, That if all the other parts of Scripture
could perish, yet out of that book alone, we might have enough for all uses,
for Catechizing, for Preaching, for Disputing; That whole Book, which
contains all subjects that appertain to Religion, is called altogether Sepher
Tehillim, The Book of praises, for all our Religion is Praise. And of that
Book every particular Psalm is appointed by the Church, and continued at least
for a thousand and two hundred years, to be shut up with that humble and
glorious acclamation. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost; O that men would therefore praise the Lord, and declare the wonderful
works that he does for the sons of men! Nil quisquam debet nisi quod turpe est,
non reddere, says the Law: It is Turpe, an infamous and ignominious thing, not
to pay debt; And, infamous and ignominious, are heavy and reproachful words in
the Law; and the Gospel would add to that Turpe, Impium: It is not only an
infamous but an impious, an irreligious thing, not to pay debts. As in debts,
the State, and the Judge is my security, they undertake I shall be paid, or
they execute Judgment; so, consider our selves as Christians, God is my
security, and he will punish where I am defrauded. Either thou owe God
nothing, (And then, if thou owe him nothing, from whom, or from what has
shestollen that face, that is fair; or he that estate, that is rich; or that
office, that commands others; or that learning, and those orders and
commission, that preaches to others; or they their souls, that understand me
now? If you owe nothing, from whom had you all these, all this?) Or if thou
do owe, Turpe est, Impium est, It is an unworthy, it is an unhonest, it is an
irreligious thing, not to pay him, in that money, which his own Spirit mints,
and coins in thee, and of his own bullion too, praise and thanksgiving. Not
to pay him then, when he himself gives thee the money that must pay him, the
Spirit of Thankfulness, falls under all the reproaches, that Law or Gospel
can inflict in any names. How many men have we seen molder and crumble away
great estates, and yet pay no debts? It is all our cases: What Poems, and what
Orations we make, how industrious, and witty we are, to over-praise men, and
never give God his due praise? Nay how often is the Pulpit it self, made the
shop, and the Theater of praise upon present men, and God left out? How often
is that called a Sermon, that speaks more of Great men, Psalm. 148.2.
then of our great God? Laudate eum omnes Augeli ejus, laudate eum omnes
virtutes ejus; David calls upon the Angels, and all the Host of Heaven, to
praise God, and in the Roman Church, they will employ willingly all their
praise upon the Angels, and the Host of Heaven it self; and this is not
reddere debitum; here is money enough spent, but no debt paid; praise enough
given, but not to the true God. Ver. 10.
Laudate eum ligna fructifera, and universa pecora, and volucres pennatae,
says David there; David calls upon fruits, and foul, and cattle to praise
God, and we praise, and set forth our lands, and fruits, and foul, and cattle,
with all Hyperbolicall praises; and this is not reddere debitum, no payment of
a debt, where it is due. Laudate eum juvenes, and senes, and virgins, says
David too; He calls upon old men, and young men, and virgins, to praise the
Lord, and we spend all our praises, upon young men, which are growing up in
favor, or upon old men, who have the government in their hands, or upon
maidens, toward whom our affections have transported us, and all this is no
payment of the debt of praise. Laudate eum Reges terrae, Principes and omnes
Iudices; V. 11.
He calls upon Kings, and Judges, and Magistrates to praise God, and we employ
all our praise upon the actions of those persons themselves. Beloved, God
cannot be flattered, he cannot be over-praised, we can speak nothing
Hyperbolically of God: But he cannot be mocked neither; He will not be told, I
have praised thee, in praising thy creature, which is thine Image; would that
discharge any of my debt to a Merchant, to tell him, that I had bestowed as
much, or more money then my debt, upon his picture? Though Princes, and Judges,
and Magistrates be pictures, and Images of God, though beauty, and riches, and
honor, and power, and favor, be, in a proportion, so too, yet, as I bought
not that Merchants picture, because it was his, or for love of him, but because
it was a good piece, and of a good Masters hand, and a good house-ornament; so
though I spend my nights, and days, and thoughts, and spirits, and words, and
preaching, and writing, upon Princes, and Judges, and Magistrates, and persons
of estimation, and their praise, yet my intention determines in that use which
I have of their favor, and respects not the glory of God in them; and when I
have spent my self to the last farthing, my lungs to the last breath, my wit
to the last Metaphore, my tongue to the last syllable, I have not paid a
farthing of my debt to God; I have not praised him, but I have praised them,
till not only my self, but even they, whom I have so mispraised, are the worse
in the sight of God, for my over-praising; I have flattered them, and they have
taken occasion by that, to think that their faults are not discerned, and so
they have proceeded in them.

This is then our first debt to God, glory and praise, which is, (as we said
out of S. Ambrose) a manifestation of Gods blessing to us: for it is not
toward God as it is toward great persons, under whom we have risen, that we
should be afraid to let the world know, how rich we are, lest they that raised
us, should borrow of us, or draw us into bands for them: God requires nothing
but the glory, the manifestation, that by knowing what he has done for thee,
others may know what to hope, and what to pray for, at his hands: In our debts
to God, the noverint universi, is the quietus est, our publishing of them, to
his praise and glory, is his acquittance and discharge for them.

Our other debt to God is Prayer, for that also is due to him, and him only;
For, Oration. August.
Si quod petendum est petis, sed non a quo petendum est, impius es: If we
direct our prayers to any, even for temporal things, as to the Authors of
those benefits, we may pour out as many prayers, as would have paid that debt,
if they had been rightly placed, but yet by such a payment, our debt is grown
a debt of a higher nature, a sin. This is a circumstance, nay, an essential
difference peculiar to our debts to God, that we do not pay them, except we
contract more; we grow best out of debt, by growing farther in debt; by praying
for more, we pay our former debt. Domus med Domus Orationis, my house, says
God, is a house of prayer; for this use, and purpose, he built himself a house
upon earth; He had praise and glory in heaven before, but for Prayer he erected
a house here, his Church. All the world is his Exchequer, he gives in all; from
every creature, from Heaven, and Sea, and Land, and all the inhabitants of all
them, wereceive benefits; But the Church is his Court of Requests, there he
receives our petitions, there we receive his answers.

It is true that neither is that house only for prayer, nor prayer only for
that house: Christ, in his person, consecrated that place, the Temple, by
Preaching too: And for prayer elsewhere, Christ did much accustom himself to
private prayer: But in him, who was truly Head of the Church, the whole Church
was; Christ alone, was a Congregation, he was the Catholic Church. But when
we meet in Gods house, though, by occasion, there be no Sermon, yet if we meet
to pray, we pay our debt, we do our duty; so do we not, if we meet at a
Sermon, without prayer. The Church is the house of prayer, so, as that upon
occasion, preaching may be left out, but never a house of preaching, so, as
that Prayer may be left out. And for the debt of prayer, God will not be paid,
with money of our own coining, (with sudden, extemporall, inconsiderate
prayer) but with current money, that bears the Kings Image, and inscription;
The Church of God, by his Ordinance, has fet his stamp, upon a Liturgy and
Service, for his house. Audit Deus in cord cogitantis, quod nec ipse audit,
qui cogitat, says S. Bernard: God hears the very first motions of a man's
heart, which, that man, till he proceed to a farther consideration, does not
hear, not feel, not deprehend in himself.

That soul, that is accustomed to direct her self to God, upon every
occasion, that, as a flower at Sunrising, conceives a sense of God, in every
beam of his, and spreads and dilates it self toward him, in a thankfulness,
in every small blessing that he sheds upon her; that soul, that as a flower at
the Suns declining, contracts and gathers in, and shuts up her self, as though
she had received a blow, when soever she hears her Savior wounded by a oath,
or blasphemy, or execration; that soul, who, whatsoever string be stricken in
her, base or treble, her high or her low estate, is ever tuned toward God, that
soul prays sometimes when it does not know that it prays. I hear that man
name God, and ask him what said you, and perchance he cannot tell; but I
remember, that he casts forth some of those ejaculationes animae, (as S.
August: calls them) some of those darts of a devout soul, which, though they
have not particular deliberations, and be not formal prayers, yet they are the
indicia, pregnant evidences and blessed fruits of a religious custom; much
more is it true, which S. Bernard says there, of them, Deus audit, God hears
that voice of the heart, which the heart it self hears not, that is, at first
considers not. Those occasional and transitory prayers, and those fixed and
stationary prayers, for which, many times, we bind our selves to private
prayer at such a time, are payments of this debt, in such pieces, and in such
sums, as God, no doubt, accepts at our hands. But yet the solemn days of
payment, are the Sabbaths of the Lord, and the place of this payment, is the
house of the Lord, where, as Tertullian expresses it, Agmine facto, we muster
our forces together, and besiege God; that is, not taking up every tattered
fellow, every sudden ragge or fragment of speech, that rises from our tongue,
or our affections, but mustering up those words, which the Church has levied
for that service, in the Confessions, and Absolutions, and Collects, and
Litanies of the Church, we pay this debt, and we receive our acquittance.
First, we must be sure to pray, where we may be sure to speed, and only God
can give. It is a strange thing, says Justin Martyr, to pray to Esculapius or
to Apollo for health, as Gods thereof, Qui apud Chironem medicina^ didicerunt;
when they who pray to them, may know, to whom those gods were beholden for all
their medicines, and of whom they learnt all their physic: why should they not
rather pray to their Masters, then to them? why should Apollo, Chiroes scholar,
and not Chiro, Apollo's Master, be the god of physic? why should I pray to S.
George for victory, when I may go to the Lord of Hosts, Almighty God himself;
or consult with a Seargeant, or Corporal, when I may go to the General? Or
to another Saint for peace, when I may go to the Prince of peace Christ Jesus?
Why should I pray to Saint Nicolas for a fair passage at Sea, when he that
rebuked the storm, is nearer me then S. Nicolas? why should I pray to S.
Antony for my hoggs, when he that gave the devil leave to drown the Gergesens
whole heard of hoggs, did not do that by S. Antonies leave, nor by putting a
caveat or prae-non-obstante in his monopoly of preserving hoggs? I know not
where to find S. Petronilla when I have an ague, nor S. Apollonia, when I have
the toothache, nor S. Liberius, when I have the stone: I know not whether they
can hear me in Heaven, or no; Our Adversaries will not say, that all Saints in
Heaven hear all that is said on earth: I know not whether they be in Heaven,
or no: our Adversaries will not say, that the Pope may not err, in a matter of
fact, and so may canonize a Traitor for a Saint: I know not whether those
Saints were ever upon earth or no; our Adversaries will not say, that all their
Legends were really, historically true, but that many of them, are holy, but
yet symbolicall inventions, to figure out not what was truly done before, but
what we should endeavor to do now. I know my Redeemer lives, and I know
where he is; and no man knows, where he is not. He is our Creditor, to him we
must pray. But for what? we may find in some respects a better model of
prayer in heathen, and unchristian Rome, then in superstitious Rome. There we
find their prayer to have been, Aut innocentiam des nobis, aut maturam
poenitentiam; preserve us O Lord, in an innocence, or afford us a speedy
repentance: And as we find that there was in that State a public Officer,
Conditor precum, that made their Collects, and prayers for public use, so we
find in their prayers, that which may make us ashamed; At first, for many
years, their prayer was, Vt res populi Romani ampliores facerent, that their
Gods would enlarge their State; after that, it was, Vt res perpetuo incolumes
servarent, that their Gods would preserve, and establish them, in that State;
And after, Vota nuncupata, si res eo stetissent statu; They vowed their
service, and their sacrifice to God, upon condition that he should keep them
always in that State, and not otherwise. So far therefore they may be our
example, that they contented themselves with a competency, but not, that they
made themselves Judges of that competency. We come to Gods house to pay a debt,
and our debt is, to confess that we can have from none but him, nor desire
from him any more, then he is pleased to give.

We come now to our second sort of Creditors, 2 Part.
to whom we are commanded to render their dues; to men: And of them, to our
Superiors first, and then to our Inferiors. For, that with which, the Apostle
enters into this Chapter, Omnis anima, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, S. Chrysostom applies Ad Prophetam, and Euangelistam, though he were a
Prophet; or an Evangelist; S. Bernard, Ad Episcopum, and Archiepiscopum, though
a Bishop, or Archbishop, (for, though they be as spiritual meteors between
Heaven, and earth, and stand between God and us, yet they are subject to that
jurisdiction, which God has given man over man, though they were in an
extraordinary calling, (the Prophets were so) yet they were subject to an
ordinary jurisdiction;) And Theophylact, and Theodoret both, apply it ad
Monachum and Fratrem, to Monks and Friars; though they seem to be gone out of
the world, yet to this entendment, of being subject to higher powers, they are
all within the world, no Cloister, no Cathedral Church, no profession, no
dignity is a sanctuary, a privileged place from the payment of this debt. Here
is a Quo warranto to be brought against all, and what exception can be pleaded
to this Omnis anima, let every soul be subject? The Anabaptist would not pay
this debt, he acknowledges no Magistrate, and yet John Baptist did, who
submitted himself to Herod; The Jesuit will not pay this debt, he acknowledges
no secular Magistrate, and yet Christ Jesus did, who submitted himself to
Pilate; Nemo secularior Pilato, cui adstitit Dominus judicandus, says S.
Bernard, there was never a more secular Judge then Pilate, and yet the Lord of
life was judged to death by him.

We cannot enlarge this consideration to all our Creditors, in these debts,
Princeps.
not to all Superiors, natural, as Parents, and civil, as Magistrates, and
Ecclesiastical, as Prelates, and that which is mixed of all, matrimonial, from
the wife to the husband, and therefore we contract it to the root of all, the
Sovereign; And to him we consider first a Real, Realis.
and substantial, and then a circumstantiall and ceremonial debt. The
substantial debt is paid in a faithful, in a ready and cheerful paying of
those debts, those Tributes, and Customs, (as the Apostle calls them here)
which belong to the King, and he that makes no conscience in defrauding the
public, he that withholds part of this debt, whenever he can, he would pay
that which he pays, in counterfeit money, if he durst: he that deceives,
because he sees he can escape with that deceit, he would coin too, if he saw
too, that he could escape for that coining. A principal reason that makes
coining and adulterating of money capital in all states, is not so much
because he that coins usurpes the Princes authority, (for every coyner is not
a pretender to the Crown) nor because he diminishes the Princes majesty, (for
what is the Prince the worse in that his face is stamped by another in base
metal, then when that is done by himself, or when his face is graved in any
stone that is not precious?) as because he that coins, injuries the public:
and no man injuries the public more, then he, who defrauds him, who is Gods
steward for the public, the King. In matter of clothes and apparel, God
wrought a miracle in private men's cases, in continuing and enlarging the
children of Isreal's clothes in the wilderness: In matter of meat he wrought a
miracle in private men's behalf too, in feeding so many, with so few loafes,
and fishes; and so he did for drink too, in a miraculous providing of wine at
the Marriage; for, meat, and drink, and clothes are things necessary for every
man: But because money is not so, if these other things may otherwise be had,
(as some nations have lived, by permutation of commodities, without money)
therefore God never wrought a miracle in matter of money, in any private man's
case; But because money is the most necessary of all, to the public, to the
Prince, therefore he wrought a miracle for that; and for that, only then, when
that money was to be employed upon tribute to Caesar; Mat. 17.27.
no miracle in matter of money but for tribute. As it is a sign of subjection
to see a man stand bare headed, so it may be a declination toward a worse
condition, to see a State bare headed, to see the Prince, the Head, kept bare,
by being either defrauded of that which is ordinarily due to him, or denied
that which becomes also due in the payment, though it were extraordinarily
given in the grant. But I am not here, to deal upon affections, but
consciences, and but so far upon them, in this point, as they find themselves
in a rectified, and well examined conscience, to have been enemies to the
public, by having defrauded that, by any means, of that which was truly due
to it. And to bring that into consideration, which is little considered, that
as it is a greater sin to defraud the public, then to defraud any private
person, so does the assisting of the public lay a greater obligation upon us,
then the assisting of any other, by private alms.

The other debt from us to men, Ceremonialis.
and of them to Superiors, and of them principally to the Sovereign, we
called ceremonial; And the Apostle, in that which follows in this verse,
referres chiefly to that, in those words, Fear, and Honor, for it consists
especially in those things, wherein, by outward reverence, we contribute to the
maintenance, and upholding of the dignity of the Prince; and of these outward
ceremonial things has God always professed himself to be most jealous. And,
(if I mistake not, as I may easily do, in things so far removed out of my way)
when in your judicial proceedings in criminal causes, you make the greatest
offenses to be against the Crown and Dignity, in the first, (the Crown) you
intend the essential part, and in the other, (the Dignity) the ceremonial,
the Honor, and Reverence, and Reputation of the Prince. God gave his very
Essence to his Son, he was very God of very God; But when this Son of his
became man, that which God says in general, my Honor will I give to no man,
reaches so far to the Son of God himself, as that the honor due to God, is
not to be given to the body, not to the manhood of Christ Jesus himself. How
very great a part of the Law of God was ceremonial? and how very heavy
punishments were ordained for the breakers even of those Ceremonies? Colos.
2.17. Melancton.
The Sabbaths themselves, S. Paul puts amongst Ceremonies: And that man, who
assisted the Reformation of Religion, with as much learning, and modesty, as
any, defines the Commandment of the Sabbath well, to be Morale praeceptum, de
Ceremoniali, That though the Commandment be moral, and bind all men for ever,
yet that which is commanded in that moral Commandment, is in it self
Ceremonial; for, indeed, all that which we call by the general name of
Religion, as it is the outward worship of God, is Ceremonial, and there is
nothing more moral, then that some ceremonial things there must be. Now, as
these Ceremonial things are due to God himself, so are they to them, to whom
God has imparted his name, in saying they are Gods. We shall not read in any
secular or profane story, of greater humility and reverence in subjects to
their Princes, then in the book of God, to the Kings there. What phrases of
abjecting themselves, in respect of the Prince, can exceed David's humble
expressing of himself to Saul? Or Daniels magnifying the King, when he calls
him King of Kings? And certainly some of the best, and most religious of
Christian Emperors took to themselves so great Titles, in their style, as can
be excused no other way, but because their Predecessors had done so, there lay
a necessity upon them, to keep this ceremonial respect and dignity, at the
same height, because upon the Ceremonial, much of the Essential depends too.
And therefore God pierces to the root, to the heart, when he forbids an
irreverent, or unrespective thought of the Prince, Eccles. 10.20.
for, says he, Those that have wings, shall declare the matter; God imployes
so many Informers, as Angels; It is not an office unworthy of the Angels of
Heaven, much less of any other Angels of the Church, (no, not though it be
delivered by way of confession) to discover any disloyal purposes; though in
other cases, by our own Canons, that seal of Confession lay justly a strong
obligation upon us, and God gives Angels an ability, a faculty, which in their
nature they have not, that is, to know thoughts, for this purpose, for the
discovery of such irreverent, and disloyal hearts. Angels do not know
thoughts naturally, yet to this purpose they shall know thoughts, says God.
Moral men should not discover the secrets of friends, we should not discover
the things we receive in confession; but when it comes to matter of disloyalty,
all moral seals, and all Ecclesiastical seals lose their obligation.

The foot of this account, the total sum of this Ceremonial debt to
Superiors, is, that due respect be given to every man, in his place; for when
young men think it the only argument of a good spirit, to behave themselves
fellowly, and frowardly to great persons, those greater persons in time, take
away their respect from Princes, and at last, (for in the chain of order, every
link depends upon one another) God loses the respect and honor due to him;
private men lessen their respect of Magistrates, and Magistrates of Princes,
and Princes and all, of God. And therefore, that which S. Chrysostom says of
the highest rank, Non putes Christian a philosophiae dignitatem laedi, reaches
to all sorts, Let no man think that he departs from the dignity of a Christian,
in attributing to every man that which appertains to the dignity of his place.
I speak not all this, as though a man should lose the substance for the
ceremony, that that man, whose place it is to advise and counsel, should be so
ceremonious with his superior, as to concur with him in the allowance of all
his errors. Caput meum conquassatum est (it is an expostulation of S. Bernards)
My head is bruised, corrupted, putrified, (he speaks it of his head, his
superior, a Bishop) Et jam sanguine ebulliente, putaverim esse tegendum, now
my head runs down with blood, can I think to cover it? Quicquid apposuero,
cruentabitur, whatsoever I lay to it will be bloody too; if I dissemble, or
cover his faults, his blood will fall upon me, and I shall have part of his
sins. Every wife has a superior at home, so has every child, and every
servant, and every man a superjour some where, in some respect, that is, in a
spiritual respect: for so, not only the King, but the highest spiritual
person has a superior for absolution. And to this superior respectively,
every man owes a ceremonial respect, as a debt, though this debt be not so
far, as to accompany him, or to encourage him in his ill purposes, for that is
too high a ceremony, and too transcendent a complement, to be damned for his
sake, by concurring with my superior in his sins. And then, they whose office
it is to direct, even their superiors, by their counsel, (as that office may
in cases belong to a wife, to a child, to a servant, as Job professes it was
in his family) have also a ceremonial duty in that duty, which is, to do even
that, with sweetness, with respect, with reverence. It was a better rule in so
high a business, then a man would look for at a Friars hands, which S. Bernard
has, Absque prudentia and benevolentia, non sunt perfecta consilia: No man is
a good Counselor, for all his wisdom, and for all his liberty of speech,
except he love the person whom he counsels: If he do not wish him well, as well
as tell him his faults, he is rather a Satyrist, and a Calumniator, and seeks
to vent his own wisdom, and to exercise his authority, then a good Counselor.
And therefore, says that Father, before Christ took Peter into that high
place, he asked him, and asked him thrice, Amas me? Love thou me? He would be
sure of his love to him first, before he preferred him; Vix in multitudine
hominum, unum reperio, in utraque gratia consummatum, says he still: Not one
man amongst a thousand, that is both able to give counsel to great persons,
and then does that office out of love to that person, but rather to let others
see his ability in himself, or his authority and power over that person, and so
upon pretense of counselling, opens his weaknesses to the knowledge, and to the
contempt of other men; as David's wife, when he had danced (as she thought)
undecently before the Ark, spoke freely enough, with liberty enough, but it was
with scorn, and contempt: And this is in no sort any payment of this
ceremonial debt, which is, (that the foundations, and the substance being
preserved, that is, the glory of God, and moral, and religious truths being
kept inviolate) to think, and say, and do, those things which may conduce to
the estimation, and dignity of his superior.

Now this has led us to our other list of humane creditors, that is, our
inferiors, Inferiores.
and to render to them also their dues; for, to them we said at beginning,
there was due, counsel, if they were weak in understanding; and there was due,
relief, if they were weak in their fortunes. For the first, there are some
persons in so high place in this world, as that they can owe nothing to any
temporal superior, for they have none: But there is none so low in this
world, but he has some lower then he is, to pay this debt of counsel and
advise to: at least the debt of prayer for him, if he will not receive the debt
of counsel to him. But in this place (for haste) we contract our selves to the
debt of relief to the poor: Amongst whom, we may consider one sort of poor
whom we our selves have made poor, and damnified, and then our debt is
Restitution, and another sort, whom God, for reasons unknown to us has made
poor, and there our debt is Alms. For the first of these (those whom thou
have damnified and made poor) thou needst not come to the Apostles question of
the blind man, Did this man sin or his parents, that he is born blind? Did
this man waste himself in housekeeping, or in play, or in wantonness, that
he is become poor? Neither he sinned, nor his parents, says Christ; neither
excess, nor play, nor wantonness has undone this man, but thy prevarication
in his cause, thy extortion, thy oppression: And now he starves, and thou
huntest after a popular reputation of a good housekeeper with his meat; now
he freezes in nakedness, and thy train shines in liveries out of his Wardrobe;
every Constable is ready to lay hold upon him for a rogue, and thy son is
Knighted with his money. Sileat licet fama, non silet fames, says good and holy
Bernard, fame may be silent, but famine will not: perchance the world knows
not this, or is weary of speaking of it, but those poor wretches that starve
by thy oppression, know it, and cry out in his hearing, where thine own
conscience accompanies them, and cries out with them against thee. Pay this
debt, this debt of restitution, and pay it quickly; for nothing perishes,
nothing decays an estate more, nothing consumes, nothing enfeebles a soul
more, then to let a great debt run on long.

But if they be poor of Gods making, Eleemosyna.
and not of thine (as they are to thee, if thou know not why, or how they are
become poor) (for though God have inflicted poverty upon them for their sins,
that is a secret between God and them, that which God has revealed to thee, is
their poverty, and not their sins) then thou owe them a debt of alms, though
not restitution: though thou have nothing in thy hands which was theirs, yet
thou have something which should be theirs; nothing perchance which thou have
taken from them, but something certainly which thou have received from God for
them; and in that sense S. Bernard says truly, in the behalf, and in the
person of the poor, to wastfull men, Nostrum est quod effunditis, you are
prodigal, there is one fault; but then you are prodigal of that which is not
your own, but ours, and that is a greater; and then we whose goods you wast,
are poor and miserable, and that is the greatest fault of all. Nobis
crudeliter subtrahitur, quod inaniter expenditis, whatsoever you spend wantonly
and vainly upon your selves, or sinfully upon others, is cruelly and bloodily
drawn out of our bowels, and worse then so, sacrilegiously too, because we are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost: If not properly taken away because we had it
not, yet unjustly and cruelly withheld and kept away, because we should have
it, say those poor souls to these wastfull prodigalls in that devout and
persuasive mouth of S. Bernard. Here is a double misery, of which you, you that
are prodigals are authors, Vos vanitando peritis, nos spoliando perimitis, In
this prodigality you waste your selves, even your souls, and you rob us; you
leave us naked in the cold, and you cast your selves into dark and tormenting
fire. So that whether they be poor of Gods making, or poor of your making,
Reddite debitum, pay the debt you owe, to the one by alms, to the other by
restitution.

We descend now to our last creditors, 3. Part. Nos.
our selves. It is a good rule of S. Bernard, Qui ad sui mensuram proximum
diligit, seipsum diligere norit, since we are commanded to love our neighbor,
as our selves, we must be sure to love our selves so as we should do, or else
we proceed by a wrong, and a crooked rule. So to give some guess of our
ability, and of our willingness, to pay our debts to God, and our debts to
man, we must consider what we owe, Romans 1.14.
and how we pay our selves. Thou art a debtor (as S. Paul says of himself) to
the Greek, and to the Barbarian, to the wise, and to the unwise; And thou thy
self art amongst some of these; wise and learned in the best art, though thou
know not a letter, rich and mighty in the best treasure, though thou possess
not a penny, if thou pay these debts duly, (for as God tells us we may buy
without money, so we may pay debts without money) and then ignorant and
unlettered, in the midst of thy library and languages, and poor and beggarly
in the midst of thy coffers and rentals, if thou call not thy self to this
account, for his debt to himself alone, is debt enough to oppress any man.
Solus mihi servandus, says S. Bernard, I am Bishop over no man but my self, I
have no larger Diocese then mine own person, no man's debts to pay but mine
own, nor any man to pay them to, but to my self, Solus tamen mihi sum
scandalo, yet I am scandalized in my self, I have brought an ill name upon my
self, to be an ill pay master to mine own soul; Solus taedio, though I have no
creditor to disappoint but my self, yet I am grown a gedious, and dilatory
man to my self, I have taken longer and longer days with my self, and still
put off my repentances, from sickness to sickness, Solus taedio; solus oneri,
I am a burden to my self, I have over-burdened my self even with collateral
security, with entering into new bands, with new vows upon my repentances, new
contracts, new stipulations, new protestations to my God, which I have
forfeited also, solus oneri; and solus periculo, I am become a dangerous man to
my self, I dare not trust my self alone, though I abstain from my former
sinful company, yet custom of sin has made me a tentation to my self, and
I sin where no tentation offers it self: Solus mihi servandus, I have no body
to save, says S. Bernard in his Cloister, but my self, and I cannot do that,
but I damn my self alone.

Begin therefore to pay these debts to thy self betimes; for, as we told you
at beginning, some you are to tender at noone, some at evening. Even at your
noon and warmest Sunshine of prosperity, you owe your selves a true
information, how you came by that prosperity, who gave it you, and why he gave
it. Judge. 9.7.
Let not the Olive boast of her own fatness, nor the Fig Tree of her own
sweetness, nor the Vine of her own fruitfulness, for we were all but
Brambles. Let no man say, I could not miss a fortune, for I have studied all
my youth; How many men have studied more nights, then he has done hours, and
studied themselves blind, and mad in the Mathematiques, and yet withers in
beggary in a corner? Let him never add, But I studied in a useful and
gainful profession; How many have done so too, and yet never compassed the
favor of a Judge? And how many that have had all that, have struck upon a
Rock, even at full Sea, and perished there? In their Grandfathers and great
Grandfathers, in a few generations, whosoever is greatest now, must say, With
this staff came I over Jordan; nay, without any staff came I over Jordan, for
he had in them at first, a beginning of nothing. As for spiritual happiness,
Non volentis, nec currentis, sed miserentis Dei, It is not in him that would
run, nor in him that does, but only in God that prospers his course; so for the
things of this world, it is in vain to rise early, and to lie down late, and to
eat the bread of sorrow, for, nisi Dominus aedificaverit, nisi Dominus
custodierit, except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain; except the
Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. Come not therefore to say,
I studied more then my fellows, and therefore am richer then my fellows, but
say, God that gave me my contemplations at first, gave me my practice after,
and has given me his blessing now. How many men have worn their brains upon
other studies, and spent their time and themselves therein? how many men have
studied more in thine own profession, and yet, for diffidence in themselves, or
some disfavour from others, have not had thy practice? How many men have been
equal to thee, in study, in practice, and in getting too, and yet upon a
wanton confidence, that that world would always last, or upon the burden of
many children, and an expensive breeding of them, or for other reasons, which
God has found in his ways, are left upon the sand at last, in a low fortune?
whilst the Sun shines upon thee in all these, pay thy self the debt, of
knowing whence, and why all this came, for else thou can not know how much,
or how little is thine, nor thou can not come to restore that which is none
of thine, but unjustly wrung from others. Pay therefore this debt of surveying
thine estate, and then pay thy self thine own too, by a cheerful enjoying and
using that which is truly thine, and do not deny nor defraud thy self of
those things which are thine, and so become a wretched debtor, to thy back, or
to thy belly, as though the world had not enough, or God knew not what were
enough for thee.

Pay this debt to thy self of looking into thy debts, of surveying, of
severing, of serving thy self with that which is truly thine, at thy noone, in
the best of thy fortune, and in the strength of thine understanding; that when
thou come to pay thy other, thy last debt to thy self, which is, to open a
door out of this world, by the dissolution of body and soul, thou have not
all thy money to tell over when the Sun is ready to set, all the account to
make of every bag of money, and of every quillet of land, whose it is, and
whether it be his that looks for it from thee, or his from whom it was taken by
thee; whether it belong to thine heir, that weeps joyful tears behind the
curtain, or belong to him that weeps true, and bloody tears, in the hole in a
prison. There will come a time, when that land that thou leavest shall not be
his land, when it shall be no bodies land, when it shall be no land, for the
earth must perish; there will be a time when there shall be no Manors; no
Acres in the world, and yet there shall lie Manors and Acres upon thy soul,
when land shall be no more, when time shall be no more, and thou pass away,
not into the land of the living, but of eternal death. Then the Accuser will
be ready to interline the schedules of thy debts, thy sins, and infert false
debts, by abusing an over-tendernesse, which may be in thy conscience then, in
thy last sickness, in thy deathbed: Then he will be ready to add a cyphar
more to thy debts, and make hundreds thousands, and abuse the faintness which
may be in thy conscience then, in thy last sickness, in thy deathbed. Then he
will be ready to abuse even thy confidence in God, and bring thee to think,
that as a Pirate ventures boldly home, though all that he has be stolen, if he
be rich enough to bribe for a pardon; so, howsoever those families perish whom
thou have ruined, and those whole parishes whom thou have depopulated, thy
soul may go confidently home too, if thou bribe God then, with an Hospital
or a Fellowship in a College, or a Legacy to any pious use in appearance, and
in the eye of the world.

Pay thy self therefore this debt, that is, make up thine account all the way,
for when that voice comes, Luke 16.2.
Read rationem, Give up an account of thy Stewardship, it is not, go home
now, and make up thy account perfect; but now, now deliver up thine account; if
it be perfect, it is well, if it be not, here is no longer day, for Iam non
poteris villicare, now thou can be no longer Steward, Esaias 38.1.
now thou have no more to do with thy self. Here the voice is not in the word
to Ezekiah, Dispone domui, put thy house in order, for, morieris, thou shall
die; For, there God had a gracious purpose, to give him a longer term, but
here it is, fool, this night, repetunt, not they shall, but they do fetch
away thy soul, and then what is become of that To morrow, which thou had
imagined and promised to thy self, for the payment of this debt, of this
repentance? Be just therefore to thy self all the way, pay thy self, and take
acquittances of thy self, all the way, which is only done under the seal,
and in the testimony of a rectified conscience. Let thine own conscience be
thine evidence, and thy Rolls, and not the opinion of others: Non tutum plane,
sed stultum, ibi thesaurum tuum recondere, ubi non vales resumere, cum
volueris, says Saint Bernard. It is not providently done, to lock thy treasure
in a chest, of which thou have no key, and to which thou have no access: Si
ponis in os meum jam non in tua, sed mea potestate est, ut te laudare, vel tibi
derogare possim: If thou build thy reputation upon my report, it is now in my
power, not in thine, whether thou shall be good or bad, honorable or infamous:
Sanum vas, and inconcussum, conscientia, a good conscience is a sweet vessel,
and a strong; Quicquid in ea reposueris, servabit vivo, and defuncto restituet:
Whatsoever thou laiest up in that, shall serve thee all thy life, and after;
and that shall be thine acquittance, and discharge, atthy last payment, in
manustuas, when thou returnest thy spirit, into his hands that gave it: And
then reddidisti debita omnibus, thou shall have rendered to all their dues, when
thou have given the King, Honor; the poor, alms; thy self, peace; and God
thy soul.

SERMON X. Preached upon Candlemas Day.
ROMANS 12.20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him
drink; for, in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head.


IT falls out, I know not how, but, I take it from the instinct of the Holy
Ghost, and from the Prophetical spirit residing in the Church of God, that
those Scriptures which are appointed to be read in the Church, all these days,
(for I take no other this Term) do evermore afford, and offer us Texts, that
direct us to patience, as though these times had especial need of those
instructions. And truly so they have; for though God have so far spared us as
yet, as to give us no exercise of patience in any afflictions, inflicted upon
our selves, yet, as the heart aches if the head do, nay, if the foot ache, the
heart aches too; so all that profess the name of Christ Jesus aright, making up
but one body, we are but dead members of that body, if we be not affected with
the distempers of the most remote parts thereof. That man says but faintly,
that he is heart-whole, that is macerated with the Gout, or lacerated with the
Stone; It is not a heart, but a stone grown into that form, that feels no
pain, till the pain seize the very substance thereof. How much and how often
S. Paul delights himself with that sociable syllable, Syn, Con, Conregnare,
and Convificare, and Consedere, of Reigning together, 2 Timothy 2.12. Ephesians. 2.1, 6.
and living, and quickening together: As much also does God delight in it, from
us, when we express it in a Conformity, and Compunction, and Compassion, and
Condolency, and (as it is but a little before the Text) in weeping with them
that weep. Our patience therefore being actually exercised in the miseries of
our brethren round about us, and probably threatened in the aims and plots of
our adversaries upon us, though I hunt not after them, yet I decline not such
Texts, as may direct our thoughts upon duties of that kind.

This Text does so; for the circle of this Epistle of S. Paul, this precious
ring, being made of that golden Doctrine, That Justification is by faith, and
being enameled with that beautiful Doctrine of good works too, in which
enameled Ring, as a precious stone in the midst thereof, there is set, the
glorious Doctrine of our Election, by Gods eternal Predestination, our Text
falls in that part, which concerns obedience, holy life, good works; which,
when both the Doctrines, that of Justification by faith, and that of
Predestination have suffered controversy, has been by all sides embraced, and
accepted; that there is no faith, which the Angels in heaven, or the Church
upon earth, or our own consciences can take knowledge of, without good works.
Of which good works, and the degrees of obedience, of patience, it is a great
one; and a hard one that is enjoined in this Text; for whereas S. Augustine
observes six degrees, six steps in our behavior toward our enemies, whereof
the first is nolle laedere, to be loath to hurt any man by way of provocation,
not to begin; And a second, nolle amplius quam laesus laedere, That if another
provoke him, yet what power soever he have, he would return no more upon his
enemy, then his enemy had cast upon him, he would not exceed in his revenge;
And a third, velle minus, not to do so much as he suffered, but in a less
proportion, only to show some sense of the injury; And then another is, nolle
laedere licet laesus, to return no revenge at all, though he have been
provoked by an injury; And a higher then that, par atum se exhibere ut amplius
laedatur, to turn the other cheek, when he is smitten, and open himself to
farther injuries; That which is in this Text, is the sixth step, and the highest
of all, laedenti benefacere, to do good to him, of whom we have received
evil, If thine enemy hunger, to feed him, if he thirst, to give him drink;
for in so, etc.

The Text is a building of stone, and that bound in with bars of Iron:
Divisio.
fundamental Doctrine, in point of manners, in it self, and yet buttressed,
and established with reasons too, therefore, and for; Therefore feed thine
enemy; For, in so doing, thou shall heap coals. This therefore, confirms the
precedent Doctrine, and this For, confirms that confirmation.

But all the words of God are Yea, and Amen, and therefore we need not insist
upon reasons, to ratify or establish them. Our parts shall be but two;
Mandatum, and Emolumentum; first the Commandment, (for we dare not call it by
so indifferent a name, as an Evangelical Counsel that we may choose whether
we will do or no; It is a Commandment, do good to thine enemy) And secondly,
the benefit that we receive by that benefit, we heap coals upon his head. Each
part will have diverse branches: for, in the Commandment, we shall first look
upon the person, to which God directs us, inimicus, though he be an enemy, and
inimicus tuus, though he be thine enemy; but yet it is but tuus, thine enemy;
It is not simply inimicus homo, the Devil, nor inimicus vester, a spreading
enemy, an enemy to the State, nor inimicus Dei, an enemy to Religion; And from
the person, we shall pass to the duty, Ciba, and Da aquam, feed, and give
drink, in which, all kinds of reliefes are employed: But that is, si esurierit,
if he be hungry; There is no wanton nor superfluous pampering of our enemy
required, but so much as may preserve the man, and not nourish the enmity. In
these considerations we shall determine our first part; and our second in
these; First, that God takes nothing from us, without recompense; nothing for
nothing; he seals his Commandment with a powerful reason, promise of reward:
And then, the reward specified here, arises from the enemy himself; And that
reward is, That thou shall cast coals of fire upon his head; and congeres,
accumulabis, Thou shall heap coals of fire upon him.

It is not ill said by a Jesuit, of these words, Sententia magis Euangelica,
quam Mosaica; 1. Part. Mandatum. Peltanus.
This Text, that enjoynes benefits upon our enemies, is fitter for the Gospel,
then for the Law, fitter for the new, then for the old Testament; and yet it is
tam Mosaica, quam Euangelica, to show that it is Universal, Catholic, Moral
Doctrine, appertaining to Jew, Prove. 25.21.
and Christian, and all, this Text is in the old Testament, as well as in the
new. In the mouth of two witnesses is this truth established, in the mouth of a
Prophet, and in the mouth of an Apostle, Solomon had said it before, and S.
Paul says it here, If thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, etc.

Your Senecaes and your Plutarchs have taught you an art, how to make profit of
enemies, because as flatterers dilate a man, and make him live the more
negligently, because he is sure of good interpretations of his worst actions;
So a man's enemies contract him, and shut him up, and make him live the more
watchfully, because he is sure to be calumniated even in his best actions: But
this is a lesson above Seneca, and Plutarch, reserved for Solomon, and Saint
Paul, to make profit by conferring and placing benefits upon enemies: And that
is our first branch, Though he be an enemy.

S. Augustine cites, Et si inimieus.
and approves that saying of the moral Philosopher, Omnes odit, qui malos
odit, he that hates ill men, hates all men, for if a man will love none but
honest men, where shall he find any exercise, any object of his love? So if a
man will hold friendship with none, nor do offices of society to none, but to
good natured, and gentle, and souple, and sociable men, he shall leave very
necessary businesses undone. The frowardest and perversest man may be good ad
hoc, for such or such a particular use. By good company and good usage, that
is, by being mingled with other simples, and ingredients, the very flesh of a
Viper, is made an Antidote: A Viper loses not his place in Physic, because he
is poison; a Magistrate ceases not to be a Magistrate, because he is an ill
man; much less does a man cease to be a man, and so to have a title to those
duties, which are rooted in nature, because he is of an ill disposition. God
makes his Sun to shine upon the good, Mat. 5.45.
and upon the bad, and sends rain upon the just, and upon the unjust. God
has made of one blood all mankind: how unkindly then, how unmanly is it to
draw blood? We come too soon to the name of enemy, and we carry it too far:
Plaintiff and Defendant in a matter of Trespass, must be enemies: Disputers in
a Problematicall matter of Controversy, that concerns not foundations, must
be enemies; And then all enmity must imply an irreconcileablenesse, once
enemies may never be friends again: we come too soon to the name, and we
stand too long upon the thing; for there are offices and duties even to an
enemy; and that, though an enemy in as high a Degree, as the word imports here,
osor, a hater, and osor tuus, such an enemy as hates thee, which is our next
Branch.

We use to say, Tuus.
that those benefits are longest remembered, which are public, and common; and
those injuries, which are private, and personal: But truly in both, the
private, and personal makes the greatest impression. For, if a man have
benefitted the public, with a College, with an Hospital, with any
perpetual endowment, yet he that comes after to receive the benefit of any
such place, for the most part determines his thankfulness upon that person,
who brought him thither, and reflects little upon the founder, or those that
are descended from him. And so it is in injuries, and violences too, we hate
men more for personal, then for national injuries; more, if he have taken my
Ship, then if he have attempted my Country. We should be more sensible of the
public, but because private and personal things do affect us most, the
Commandment here goes to the particular.; Though he be thine enemy, and hate
thee. If you love them that love you, Luke 6.34.
and lend to them that pay you, what thanks have you? Truly not much: Publicans
do the same, says S. Matthew; Sinners do the same, says S. Luke: But love
you your enemies; Mat. 5.22.
For, in the same place, where Christ puts all those cases, If a man have been
angry with his Brother, If a man have said Racha to his Brother, if he have
called his Brother Fool, he ends all with that, Agree with thine adversary;
Though he be thine adversary, yet he is thy Brother. If he have damnified thee,
calumniated thee, pardon him. If he have done that to another, thou have no
power to pardon him; Herein only thou have exercise of greatness and
goodness too, If he be thine enemy, thou and thou only can pardon him; and
herein only thou have a Supremacy, and a Prerogative to show.

So far then, Non vester.
the text goes literally, do good to an enemy; to thine enemy; and literally,
no farther: It does not say to a State, Si Inimicus vester, It does not bind
us to favor, or further a public enemy; It does not bind the Magistrate to
favor Thieves and Murderers at land, nor Pirates at Sea, who are truly Inimici
nostri, our enemies even as we are men, enemies to mankind. It does not bind
Societies and Corporations Ecclesiastical or Civil, to sink under such
enemies, as would dissolve them or impair them in their privileges; for such
are not only Inimici vestri, but Vestrorum, enemies of you, and yours, of
those that succeed you: And all men are bound to transfer their jurisdictions
and privileges, in the same integrity, in which they received them, without
any prevarication. In such cases it is true, that Corporations have no souls,
that is, they are not bound to such a tenderness of conscience; for there are
diverse laws in this doctrine of patience, that bind particular men, that do
not bind States and Societies, under those penalties.

Much less does the Commandment bind us to the Inimicus homo, which is the
devil, Inimicus homo.
to farther him, by fuelling and advancing his tentations, by high diet, wanton
company, or licencious discourse; and so, upon pretense of maintaining our
health, Luke 10.19.
or our cheerfulness, invite occasions of sin. S. Hierome tells us of one
sense, in which we should favor that enemy, the devil, and that in this
text, we are commanded to do so: Benevolus est erga Diabolum, says he, he is
the devils best friend, that resists him; for by our yielding to the devils
tentations, wesubmit him to greater torments, then, if he mist of his purpose
upon us, he should suffer. But between this enemy and us, God himself has
set such an enmity, that, as no man may separate those whom God has joined,
Genesis 3.15.
so no man may join those whom God has separated; God created not this enmity
in the devil; he began it in himself; but God created an enmity in us,
against him; and, upon no collateral conditions, may we be reconciled to
him, in admitting any of his superstitions.

It is not then Inimicus vester, the common enemy, the enemy of the State;
less, Inimicus homo, the spiritual enemy of Mankind, the devil; least of
all, Inimicus Dei, they who oppose God, (so, as God can be opposed) in his
servants who profess his truth. David durst not have put himself upon that
issue with God, ( Do not I hate them, Psalm. 139.21.
that hate thee) if he had been subject to that increpation, which the
Prophet Iehu laid upon Iehoshaphat, Should thou help the ungodly, and love
them, that hate the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
But David had the testimony of his conscience, that he hated them, with a
perfect hatred: which, though it may admit that interpretation, that it is De
perfectione virtutis, that his perfect hatred, was a hatred becoming a perfect
man, a charitable hatred; yet it is De perfectione intentionis, a perfect
hatred is a vehement hatred, and so the Chalde paraphrase expresses it, Odio
consummato, a hatred to which nothing can be added; Hilar.
Odio religioso, with a religious hatred; not only that religion may consist
with it, but that Religion cannot subsist without it; a hatred that gives the
tincture, and the stamp to Religion it self. The imputation that lies upon
them, who do not hate those that hate God, is sufficiently expressed in S.
Gregory; He saw how little temporisers and worldly men, were moved with the
word Impiety, and ungodliness, and therefore he waves that; He saw they
preferred the estimation of wisdom before and above piety, and therefore he
says not Impium est, but stultum est, si illis placere quaerimus, quos non
placere domino scimus: It is a foolish thing, to endeavor to be acceptable to
them, who, in our own knowledge, do not endeavor to be acceptable to God.

But yet, Beloved, even in those enemies, that thus hate God, Solomon's rule
has place, There is a time to hate, and a time to love. Though the person be
the same, Eccles. 3.8. De singularit. Cleric.
the affection may vary. As S. Cyprian says, (if that book be not rather
Origens, then Cyprians, for it is attributed to both) Ama foeminas inter Sacra
solennia, Love a woman at Church, (that is, love her coming to Church,)
(though, as S. Augustine in his time did, we, in our times may complain of
wanton meetings there) But Odio habe in communione privata, Hate, that is,
forbear women in private conversation; so, for those that hate God in the
truth of his Gospel, and content themselves with an Idolatrous Religion, we
love them at Church, we would be glad to see them here, and though they come
not hither, we love them so far, as that we pray for them; and we love them in
our studies so far, as we may rectify them by our labors; But we hate them
in our Convocations, where we oppose Canons against their Doctrines, and we
hate them in our Consultations, where we make laws to defend us from their
malice, and we hate them in our bed-chambers, where they make children
Idolaters, and perchance make the children themselves. We acknowledge with S.
Augustine, Perfectio odii est in charitate, the perfect hatred consists with
charity, Cum nec propter vitia homines oderimus, nec vitia propter homines
amemut; when the greatness of the men brings us not to love their religion,
nor the illness of their Religion, to hate the men. Moses, in that place, is
S. Augustines example, whom he proposes, Orabat and occidebat, he prayed for
the Idolaters, and he slew them; he hated, says he, Iniquitatem, quam
puniebat, that sin which he punished, and he loved Humanitatem, pro qua or
abat, that nature, as they were men, for whom he prayed: for, that, says he,
is perfectum odium, quod facti sunt diligere, quod fecerunt, odiisse, to love
them as they are creatures, to hate them as they are Traitors. Thus much love
is due to any enemy, that if God be pleased to advance him, De ejus profectu
non dejiciamur, says S. Gregory, His advancement do not deject us, to a
murmuring against God, or to a diffidence in God; And that when God, in his
time, shall cast him down again, Congaudeamus justitiae Iudicis, condoleamus
miseriae pereuntis, We may both congratulate the justice of God, and yet
condole the misery of that person, upon whom that judgment is justly fallen:
for, though Inimicus vester, the enemy that malignes the State, and Inimicus
Dei, the enemy that opposes our religion, be not so far within this text, as
that we are bound to feed them, or to do them good; yet there are scarce any
enemies, with whom we may not live peaceably, and to whom we may not wish
charitably.

We have done with all, Ciba.
which was intended and proposed of the person; we come to the duty expressed
in this text, Ciba, feed him, and give him drink. Here, there might be use in
noting the largeness, the fullness, the abundance of the Gospel, above the
law: Not only in that the blessings of God are presented in the Old Testament,
in the name of Milk and Honey, and Oil, and Wine, (all temporal things) and
in the New Testament, in the name of Joy, and Glory, (things, in a manner
spiritual,) But that also, in the Old Testament, the best things are limited,
and measured unto them; a Gomer of Manna, and no more, Mat. 25.21. Heb. 12.2.
John 15.11. John 16.21.
for the best man, whereas for the joy of the Gospel, we shall enter In
Gandium Domini, Into our Masters Joy, and be made partakers with Christ Jesus,
of that Joy, for which he endured the Cross; And here, in this world, Gaudium
meum erit, says Christ, My Joy shall be in you; in what measure? Implebitar,
says he, Your Joy shall be full; How long? for ever; Nemo tollet, your Joy
shall no man take from you. And such as the Joy is, such is the glory too: Ephesians.
1.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. 1 Pet. 5.4.
How precious? Divitiae Gloria, The Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance; How
much? Pondus gloriae, A weight of glory; How long? Immarcescibilis Corona, A
crown of Glory, that never fades: We might, I say, take occasion of making
this comparison, between the Old, and the New Testament, out of this Text,
because this charity, enjoined here, in this text, to our enemy, in that place,
from whence this text is taken, in the Proverbs, is but Lachem, and Maiim,
Bread, and Water; But here, in S. Paul, it is in words of better signification,
feed him, give him drink. But indeed, the words, at the narrowest, (as it is
but bread and water) signify whatsoever is necessary for the relief of him,
that stands in need. And if we be enjoined so much to our enemy, how
inexcusable are those Datores cyminibiles (as the Canonists call them) that
give Mint, and Cummin for alms, a root that their Hogs will not, a broth that
their Dogs will not eat. Remember in thy charity, the times, and the
proportions of thy Savior; After his Death, in the wound in his side, he
poured out water, and blood, which represented both Sacraments, and so was a
bountiful Dole: provide in thy life, to do good after thy death, and it shall
be welcome, even in the eyes of God, then: But remember too, that this dole at
his death, was not the first alms that he gave; his water was his white money,
and his blood was his gold, and he poured out both together in his agony, and
severally in his weeping, and being scourged for thee. What proportion of
relief is due to him, that is thy brother in Nature, thy brother in Nation,
thy brother in Religion, if meat and drink, and in that, whatsoever is
necessary to his sustentation, be due to thine enemy?

But all this bountiful charity, Si esurierit.
is Si esurierit, si sitit, If he be hungry, if he be thirsty. To the King, who
bears the care and the charge of the public, we are bound to give, Antequam
esuriat, Antequam sitias, before he be overtaken with dangerous, and
dishonorable, and less remediable necessities: not only substantial wants,
upon which our safety depends, but circumstantiall and ceremonial wants, upon
which his Dignity, and Majesty depends, are always to be, not only supplied,
but prevented. But our enemy must be in hunger, and thirst, that is, reduced to
the state, as he may not become our enemy again, by that which we give,
before we are bound, by this text, to give any thing. No doubt but the Church
of Rome hungers still for the money of this land, upon which they fed so
luxuriantly heretofore: and no doubt but those men, whom they shall at any time
animate, will thirst for the blood of this land, which they have sought before;
but this is not the hunger, and the thirst of the enemy, which we must feed:
The Commandment goes not so far, as to feed that enemy, that may thereby be a
more powerful enemy; But yet, thus far, truly, it does go, deny no office of
civility, of peace, of commerce, of charity to any, only therefore, because
he has been heretofore an enemy.

There remains nothing of those two branches, which constitute our first part,
2. Part.
the person, that is, an en^^^ reduced to a better disposition; and the duty,
that is, to relieve him, with things necessary for that state: And for the
second part, we must stop upon those steps laid down at first, of which the
first was, That God takes nothing for nothing, he gives a Reward. When God
took that great proportion of Sheep and Oxen out of his subjects goods in the
State of Israel, for Sacrifice, that proportion, which would have kept diverse
Kings houses, and would have victualed diverse navies, perchance no man could
say, I have this, or this benefit, for this, or this Sacrifice; but yet could
any man say, God has taken a Sacrifice for nothing? Where we have Peace, and
Justice, and Protection, can any man say, he gives any thing for nothing? When
God says, If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, that is not intended, which
Tertullian says, Psalm. 50.12.
Scriptum est, Deus non esuriet nec sitiet, It is written, God shall neither
hunger nor thirst, (for, first, Tertullians memory failed him, there is no such
sentence in all the Scripture, as he cites there; And then God does hunger and
thirst, in this sense, in the members of his mystical body,) neither is that
only intended in that place of the Psalm (though Cassiodore take it so) That
if God in his poor Saints, were hungry, he could provide them, without telling
thee; but it is, If I were hungry, I need not tell thee; for, Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and they that dwell therein.
God does not always bind himself to declare his hunger, his thirst, his
pressing occasions, to use the goods of his subjects, but as the Lord gives, so
the Lord takes, where and when he will: But yet, as God transfuses a measure of
this Right and power of taking, into them, of whom he has said, you are Gods,
so he transfuses this goodness too, which is in himself, that he takes
nothing for nothing; He promises here a reward, and a reward arising from the
enemy, which puts a greater encouragement upon us, to do it; Super caput ejus,
In so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire on his head.

God is the Lord of Hosts, and in this Text, Ex Inimicis.
he makes the seat of the war in the enemies Country, and enriches his
servants Ex manubiis, out of the spoil of the enemy; In caput ejus, It shall
fall upon his head. Though all men that go to the war, go not upon those just
reasons deliberated before in themselves, which are (...) defense of a just
cause, the obedience to a lawful Commandment, yet of those that do go without
those conscientiense deliberations, none goes therefore, because he may have
room in an Hospital, or relief by a pension, when he comes home lame, but
because he may get something, by going into a fat country, and against a rich
enemy; Though honor may seem to feed upon blows, and dangers, men go
cheerfully against an enemy, from whom something is to be got; for, profit is
a good salve to knocks, a good Cere-cloth to bruises, and a good Balsamum to
wounds. God therefore here raises the reward out of the enemy, feed him, and
thou shall gain by it. But yet the profit that God promises by the enemy here,
is rather that we shall gain a soul, then any temporal gain; rather that we
shall make that enemy a better man, then that we shall make him a weaker enemy:
God respects his spiritual good, as we shall see in that phrase, which is our
last branch, Congeres carbones, Thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head.

It is true that S. Chrysostom (and not he alone) takes this phrase to imply a
Revenge: Carbones.
that Gods judgments shall be the more vehement upon such ungrateful persons,
Et terrebuntur beneficiis, the good turns that thou have done to them, shall
be a scourge and a terror to their consciences. This sense is not inconvenient;
but it is too narrow: The Holy Ghost has taken so large a Metaphor, as implies
more then that. It implies the diverse offices, and effects of fire; all this;
That if he have any gold, any pure metal in him, this fire of this kindness
will purge out the dross, and there is a friend made. If he be nothing but
straw and stubble, combustible still, still ready to take fire against thee,
this fire which Gods breath shall blow, will consume him, and burn him out, and
there is an enemy marred: If he have any tenderness any way, this fire will
mollify him toward thee; Nimis durus animus, says S. Augustine, he is a very
hard hearted man, Qui si ultro dilectionem non vult impendere, etiam nolit
rependere, Who, though he will not requite thy love, yet will not acknowledge
it. If he be wax, he melts with this fire; and if he be clay, he hardens with
it, and then thou will arm thy self against that pellet. Thus much good,
Origin.
God intends to the enemy, in this phrase, that it is pia vindicta si
resipiscant, we have taken a blessed revenge upon our enemies, if our
charitable applying of our selves to them, may bring them to apply themselves
to God, and to glorify him: si benefaciendo cicuremus, says S. Hierome, if we
can tame a wild beast by sitting up with him, and reduce an enemy by offices
of friendship, it is well. (...) much good God intends him in this phrase, and
so much good he intends us, that, si non incendant, if these coals do not
purge him, Aben Ezra. Levi Gherson.
si non injiciant pudorem, if they do not kindle a shame in him, to have
offended one that has deserved so well, yet this fire gives thee light to see
him clearly, and to run away from him, and to assure thee, that he, whom so
many benefits cannot reconcile, is irreconcilable.

SERMON XI. Preached upon Candlemas day.
MAT. 9.2. And Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick of the palsy, My
son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee.


IN these words, Divisio.
and by occasion of them, we shall present to you these two general
considerations; first upon what occasion Christ did that which he did, and then
what it was that he did. And in the first, we shall see first some occasions
that were remote, but yet conduce to the Miracle it self; some circumstances
of time, and place, and some such dispositions, and then the more immediate
occasion, the disposition of those persons who presented this sick man to
Christ; and there we shall see first, that Faith was the occasion of all, for
without faith it is impossible to please God, and without pleasing of God, it
is impossible to have remission of sins. It was fides, and fides illorum, their
faith, all their faith; for, though in the faith of others there be an
assistance, yet without a personal faith in himself, no man of ripe age comes
so far, as to the forgiveness of sins; And then, this faith of them all, was
fides visa, a faith that was seen; Christ saw their faith, and he saw it as
man, it was a faith expressed, and declared in actions: And yet, when all was
done, it is but cum vidit, it is not quia vidit, Christ did it When he saw, not
Because he saw their faith, that was not the principle and primary cause of his
mercy, for the mercy of God is all, and above all; it is the effect and it is
the cause too, there is no cause of his mercy, but his mercy. And when we come
in the second part, to consider what in his mercy he did, we shall see first,
that he establishes him, and comforts him with a gracious acceptance, with
that gracious appellation, Fili, Son: He does not disavow him, he does not
disinherite him; and then, he does not wound him, whom God had stricken; he does
not flea him, whom God had scourged; he does not salt him, whom God had flead;
he does not add affliction to affliction, he does not shake, but settle that
faith which he had with more, Confide fili, My son be of good cheer; and then
he seals all with that assurance, Dimittuntur peccata, Thy sins are forgiven
thee; In which, first he catechises this patient, and gives him all these
lessons, first that he gives before we ask, for he that was brought, they who
brought him had asked nothing in his behalf, when Christ unasked, enlarged
himself toward them, Dat prius, God gives before we ask, that is first; And
then Dat meliora, God gives better things then we ask, All that all they meant
to ask, was but bodily health, and Christ gave him spiritual; and the third
lesson was, that sin was the cause of bodily sickness, and that therefore he
ought to have sought his spiritual recovery before his bodily health: and
then, after he had thus rectified him, by this Catechism, employed in those few
words, Thy sins are forgiven thee, he takes occasion by this act, to rectify
the bystanders too, which were the Pharisees, who did not believe Christ to be
God: For, for proof of that, first he takes knowledge of their inward
thoughts, not expressed by any act or word, which none but God could do; And
then he restores the patient to bodily health, only by his word, without any
natural means applied, which none but God could do neither. And into fewer
particulars then these, this pregnant and abundant Text is not easily
contracted.

First then to begin with the Branches of the first part, of which the first
was, 1 Part.
to consider some, somewhat more remote circumstances, and occasions conducing
to this miracle, we cannot avoid the making of some use of the Time, when it
was done: It was done, when Christ had dispossessed those two men of furious,
and raging Devils, amongst the Gergesens; at what time, Mar. 8. ult.
because Christ had been an occasion of drowning their heard of swine, the
whole City came out to meet him, but not with a thankful reverence, and
acclamation, but their procession was, to beseech him to depart out of their
coasts: They had rather have had their Legion of Devils still, then have lost
their hogs; and since Christ's presence was an occasion of impairing their
temporal substance, they were glad to be rid of him.

We need not put on spectacles to search Maps for this Land of the Gergesens;
God knows we dwell in it; Non quaerimus Iesum propter Iesum, (which was a
Prophetical complaint by S. August.) we love the profession of Christ only so
far, as that profession conduces to our temporal ends. We seek him not at the
Cross; there most of his friends left him; but we are content to embrace him,
where the Kings of the East bring him presents of Gold, and Myrrh, and
Frankincense, that we may participate of those: we seek him not in the hundred
and thirtieth Psalm, where, though there be plenty, yet it is but copiosa
redemtio, plentiful redemption, plenty of that that comes not yet; but in the
twenty fourth Psalm we are glad to meet him, where he proclaims Domini terra,
and plenitudo ejus, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, that our
portion therein may be plenteous: We care not for him in S. Peter's Hospital,
where he excuses himself, Aurum and argentum non habeo, Silver and gold have I
none; but in the Prophet Haggais Exchequer we do, where he makes that claim,
Aurum meum, All the gold and all the silver is mine. Scarce any Son is
Protestant enough, to stand out a rebuke of his Father, or any Servant of his
Master, or any Officer of his Prince, if that Father, or Master, or Prince
would be, or would have him be a Papist; But, as though the different forms of
Religion, were but the fashions of the garment, and not the stuff, we put on,
and we put off Religion, as we would do a Livery, to testify our respect to
him, whom we serve, and (miserable Gergesens) had rather take in that Devil
again, of which we have been dispossessed three or fourscore years since,
then lose another hog, in departing with any part of our pleasures or
profits; Non quaerimus Iesum propter Iesum, we profess not Jesus, for his, but
for our own sakes.

But we pass from the circumstance of the time, to a second, that though
Christ thus despised by the Gergesens, did, in his Justice, depart from them;
yet, as the Sea gains in one place, what it loses in another, his abundant
mercy builds up more in Capernaum, then his Justice throws down amongst the
Gergesens: Because they drove him away, in Judgment he went from them, but in
Mercy he went to the others, who had not entreated him to come.

Apply this also; And, wretched Gergesen, if thou have entreated Christ to go
from thee, for loss of thy hogs, that when thou have found the Preaching of
Christ, or the sting of thy conscience whet thereby, to hinder thee in growing
rich so hastily as thou would, or trouble thee, in following thy pleasures so
fully as thou would, thou have made shift to divest, and put off Christ, and
sear up thy conscience, yet Chirst comes into his Capernaum now, that sent not
for him; he comes into thy soul now, who came not hither to meet him, but to
celebrate the day, by this ordinary, and fashionall meeting; to thee he comes,
as into Capernaum, to preach his own Gospel, and to work his miracles upon
thee. And it is a high mercy in Christ, that he will thus surprise thy soul,
that he will thus way-lay thy conscience, that what collateral respect soever
brought thee hither, yet when he has thee here, he will make thee see that
thou art in his house, and he will speak to thee, and he will be heard by
thee, and he will be answered from thee; and though thou thoughtest not of him,
when thou came hither, yet he will send thee away, full of the love of him,
full of comforts from him.

But we pass also from this, Mat 9.1.
to a third circumstance, that when he came to Capernaum, he is said to have
come into his own City; not Nazareth, where he was borne, but Capernaum where
he dwelt, and preached, is called his own City. Thou art not a Christian,
because thou wast borne in a Christian Kingdom, and borne within the Covenant,
and borne of Christian Parents, but because thou have dwelt in the Christian
Church, and performed the duties presented to thee there.

Again, Capernaum was his own City, but yet Christ went forth of Capernaum,
to many other places. I take the application of this, from you, to our selves;
Christ fixes no man by his example so to one Church, as that no occasion may
make his absence from thence excusable. But yet when Christ did go from
Capernaum, he went to do his Fathers will, and that, which he was sent for.
Nothing but preaching the Gospel, and edifying Gods Church, is an excuse for
such an absence; for, Vaesi non Euangelizaverit, if he neither preach at
Capernaum, nor to the Gergesens, neither at home, nor abroad, woe be unto him:
If I be at home, but to take my tithes; If I be abroad, but to take the air,
woe be unto me.

But we must not stop long upon these circumstances; we end all of this kind,
in this one, that when Christ had undertaken that great work of the Conversion
of the world, by the Word, and Sacraments, to show that the word was at that
time the more powerful means of those two, (for Sacraments were instituted by
Christ, as subsidiary things, in a great part, for our infirmity, who stand in
need of such visible and sensible assistances) Christ preached the Christian
Doctrine, long before he instituted the Sacraments; But yet, though these two
permanent Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper were not so soon instituted,
Christ always descended so much to man's infirmity, as to accompany the
preaching of the Word, with certain transitory, and occasional Sacraments; for
miracles are transitory and occasional Sacraments, as they are visible signs
of invisible grace, though not seals thereof; Christ's purpose in every miracle
was, that by that work, they should see Grace to be offered unto them. Now this
history, from whence this Text is taken, begins, and ends with the principal
means, with preaching; for, as S. Mark relates it, Mark 2.2.
he was in the act of preaching, when this cure was done; And in S. Matthew,
Mat. 9.35.
after all was done, he went about the Cities, and Villages, preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom: And then between, S. Matthew here, records five of
his transitory and occasional Sacraments, five miracles, of which every one,
well considered, (as the petitions of Abraham did upon God) may justly be
thought to have gained more and more, upon his Auditory.

First, this paralytique man in our Text, who is Sarcinasibi, over-loaded with
himself, he cannot stand under his own burden, he is cadaver animatum; It is
true, he has a soul, but a soul in a sack, it has no Lims, no Organs to
move, this Paralytique, this living dead man, this dead and buried man, buried
in himself, is instantly cured, and recovered. But the Palsy was a sudden
sickness; what could he do, upon an inveterate disease? He cured the woman
that had had the bloody issue twelve years, V. 20.
by only touching the hem of his garment. After, he extends his miraculous
power to two at once, he cures two blind men. V. 27.
But all these, though not by such means merely, yet in nature, and in art
might be possible, Palsies, and Issues, and Blindnesses have been cured: but he
went farther then ever art pretended to go; V. 24.
He raised the Rulers Daughter to life, then when he was laughed to scorn, for
going about to do it. And lastly to show his Power, as over sickness, and
over death, so over hell it self, he cast out the Devil out of the dumb man,
in some such extraordinary manner, as that the multitude marvailed, V. 33.
and said, It was never so seen in Israel. This then was his way, and this
must be ours, and it must be your way too. Christ preached, and he wrought
great works, and he preached again; It is not enough in us to preach, and in
you to hear, except both do and practice, that which is said, and heard;
Neither may we, though we have done all this, give over, for every day produces
new tentations, and therefore needs new assistances. And so we pass from these
more remote, to that which is our second Branch of this first part, the
immediate occasion of Christ's doing this miracle, When Jesus saw their faith.

Here then, the occasion of all that ensued, was faith; for, without faith,
Fides. Heb. 11.6.
it is impossible to please God; Where you may be pleased to admit some use of
this note, (for it is not a mere Grammatical curiosity to note it) that it is
not said in those words of S. Paul, It is impossible to please God, or
impossible to please him, (which is with relation to God, as our Translation
has it,) but it is merely, simply, only, impossible to please, and no more,
impossible to please any worth pleasing; but if we take away our faith in God,
God will take away the protection of Angels, the favor of Princes, the
obedience of children, the respect of servants, the assistance of friends, the
society of neighbors; God shall make us unpleasing to all; without faith it is
impossible to please any, but such, as we shall repent to have made our selves
pleasing companions unto. When our Savior Christ perfected the Apostles
Commission, and set his last seal to it, after his Resurrection, he never
modifies, never mollifies their instructions, with any milder phrase then this,
He that believes not, shall be damned. It is not, that he shall be in danger
of a Council; Mark 16.16.
no, nor in danger of hell fire: It is not, that it were better a Millstone
were tied about his neck, and he cast into the Sea: It is not, that it will go
hard with him at the last day: It is not, that it shall be easier to Tire, and
Sidon, then to him; For he is not bound to believe, but that Tire, and Sidon,
and he too, may do well enough: Here is no modification, no mollification, no
reservation; roundly, and irrevocably, Christ Jesus himself, after his
Resurrection, says, Qui non crediderit, he that believes not, shall be damned.

If the Judge must come to a sentence of condemnation, upon any person of great
quality in the Kingdom, that Judge must not say, Your Lordship must pass out
of this world, nor, your Lordship must be beheaded; but he must tell them
plainly, You must be carried to the place of execution and there hanged. Christ
Jesus has given us the Commission and the sentence there; Go into all the
world, preach the Gospel to every creature; And then, the sentence follows
upon those that will not receive it, He that believes not, shall be damned.
These men then, who prevailed so far upon Christ, brought faith; though not
an explicit faith of all those articles, which we, who from the beginning have
been Catechized in all those points, are bound to have, yet a constant
assurance that Christ could, and that he would relieve this distressed person,
in which assurance, there was enwrapped an implicit faith even of the Messiah,
that could remove all occasions of sickness, even sin it self.

There was faith in the case; but in whom? Whose faith was it, Illorum.
that Christ had respect to? To whom has that Illorum in the Text, their
faith, reference? There can be no question, but that it has reference to those
four friends, that brought this sick man in his bed, to Christ: For, else it
could not have been spoken in the plural, and called their faith. And
certainly S. Ambrose does not inconveniently make that particular an argument
of Gods greatness and goodness, of his magnificence, and munificence, Magnus
Dominus, qui aliorum meritis, aliis ignostit; This is the large and plentiful
mercy of God, that for one man's sake, he forgives another. This Ioash
acknowledged in the person of Elisha; when Elisha was sick, the King came down
to him, and wept over his face, 2 Reg. 13.14.
and said, O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horse men
thereof. Here were all the forces of Israel mustred upon one sick bed, the
whole strength of Israel consisted in the goodness of that one man. The Angel
said to Paul, when they were in an evident and imminent danger of shipwreck,
Act. 27.24.
God has given thee all them that sail with thee; He spared them, not for
their own sakes, but for Paul's. God gave those passengers to Paul so, as he
had given Paul himself before to Stephen; Si Stephanus non sic orasset, Paulum
hodie Ecclesia non haberet, says S. Augustine; If Paul had not been enwrapped
in those prayers, which Stephen made for his persecutors, the Church had lost
the benefit of all Paul's labors; and if God had not given Paul the lives of
all those passengers in that Ship, they had all perished. For the
righteousness of a few, (if those few could have been found) God would have
spared the whole City of Sodom: Genesis 18.
And when Gods fury was kindled upon the Cities of that Country, God remembered
Abraham, Genesis 19.29.
says that story, and he delivered Lot: And when he delivered Jerusalem from
Sennacherib, he takes his servant David by the hand, he puts his servant David
into Commission with himself, and he says, I will defend this City, and save
it, for mine own sake, 2 Reg. 19.34.
and for my servant David's sake. Quantus murus Patriae vir justus, is a holy
exclamation of S. Ambrose, What a Wall to any Town, what a Sea to any Island,
what a Navy to any Sea, what an Admiral to any Navy, is a good man! Apply thy
self therefore, and make thy conversation with good men, and get their love,
and that shall be an armor of proof to thee.

When Saint Augustines Mother lamented the ill courses that her son took in
his youth, still that Priest, to whom she imparted her sorrows, said, Filius
istarum lacrymarum, non potest perire; That Son, for whom so good a Mother has
shed so many tears, cannot perish: He put it not upon that issue, filius Dci,
the elect child of God, the son of predestination cannot perish, for at that
time, that name was either no name, or would scarce have seemed to have
belonged to S. Augustine, but the child of these tears, of this devotion
cannot be lost. Mat. 8.13.
Christ said to the Centurion, fiat sicut credidisti, Go thy way, and as thou
beleevest, so be it done unto thee, and his servant was healed in the
selfsame hour: The master believed, and the servant was healed. Little
know thou, what thou have received at Gods hands, by the prayers of the
Saints in heaven, that enwrap thee in their general prayers for the Militant
Church. Little know thou, what the public prayers of the Congregation,
what the private prayers of particular devout friends, that lament thy
carelessness, and negligence in praying for thy self, have wrung and extorted
out of Gods hands, in their charitable importunity for thee. And therefore, at
last, make thy self fit to do for others, that which others, when thou wast
unfit to do thy self that office, have done for thee, in assisting thee with
their prayers. If thou meet thine enemies Ox, Exodus 23 4, 5.
or Ass going astray, (says the Law) thou shall surely bring it back to him
again: If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden,
and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help him. Estne Deo cura
de Bobus, is the Apostles question, Has God care of Oxen? of other men's Oxen?
How much more of his own Sheep? And therefore if thon see one of his Sheep,
one of thy fellow Christians, strayed into sins of infirmity, and negligent of
himself, join him with thine own soul, in thy prayers to God. Relieve him,
(if that be that which he needs) with thy prayers for him, and relieve him, (if
his wants be of another kind) according to his prayers to thee. Cur apud te
homo Collega non valeat, says S. Ambrose, why should not he that is thy
Colleague, thy fellow-man, as good a man, that is as much a man as thou, made
of the same blood, and redeemed with the same blood as thou art, why should not
he prevail with thee, so far as to the obtaining of an alms, Cum apud Deum,
servus, and interveniendi meritum, and jus habe at impetrandi, when some
fellow servants of thine, has had that interest in God, as by his intercession,
and prayers to advance thy salvation? wilt not thou save the life of another
man that prays to thee, when perchance thy soul has been saved by another
man, that prayed for thee?

Well then; Ejus.
Christ had respect to their faith, that brought this sick man to him.
Consuetudo est miserecordis Dei, It is Gods ordinary way, (says S. Chysost.)
hunc honorem dare servis suis, ut propter eos salventur and alii, to afford
this honor to his servants, that for their sakes he saves others. But neither
this which we say now out of S. Crhysostome, nor that which we said before out
of S. Ambrose, nor all that we might multiply out of the other Fathers, does
exclude the faith of that particular man, who is to be saved. It is true, that
in this particular case, S. Hierome says, Non vidit fidem ejus qui offer
ebatur, sed little qui offerebant, That Christ did not respect his faith that
was brought, but only theirs that brought him; but except S. Hierome be to be
understood so, that Christ did not first respect his faith, but theirs, we must
depart from him, to S. Chrysostom, Neque enim se portari sustinuisset, He
would neither have put himself, nor them, to so many difficulties, as he did,
if he had not had a faith, that is, a constant assurance in this means of his
recovery. And therefore the Rule may be best given thus; That God gives worldly
blessings, bodily health, deliverance from dangers, and the like, to some men,
in contemplation of others, though themselves never thought of it, all the
examples which we have touched upon, convince abundantly.

That God gives spiritual blessings to Infants, presented according to his
Ordinance, in Baptism, in Contemplation of the faith of their Parents, or of
the Church, or of their sureties, without any actual faith in the Infant, is
probable enough, credible enough. But take it as our case is, de adultis, in a
man who is come to the use of his own reason, and discretion, so God never
saves any man, for the faith of another, otherwise then thus, that the
faithful man may pray for the conversion of an unfaithful, who does not know,
nor, if he did, would be content to be prayed for, and God, for his sake that
prays, may be pleased to work upon the other; but before that man comes to the
Dimittuntur peccata, that his sins are forgiven, that man comes to have faith
in himself. Iustus in fide sua vivit; there is no life without faith, nor In
fide aliena, Habak. 2.4.
no such life as constitutes Righteousness, without a personal faith of our
own. So that this fides illorum, in our Text, this that is called their faith,
has reference to the sick man himself, as well as to them that brought him.

And then, in Him, and in Them, it was fides visa, faith, which, by an ouvert
act, Visae.
was declared, and made evident. For, Christ, who was now to convay into that
company the knowledge that he was the Messiah, which Messiah was to be God, and
Man, as afterward for their conviction, who would not believe him to be God,
he showed that he knew their inward thoughts, and did some other things, which
none but God could do; so here, for the better edification of men, he required
such a faith, as might be evident to men. For, though Christ could have seen
their faith, by looking into their hearts, yet to think, that here he saw it by
that power of his Divinity, nimis coactum videtur, It is too narrow, and too
forced an interpretation of the place, says Calvin. They then, that is, all
they declared their faith, their assurance, that Christ could, and would help
him. It was good evidence of a strength of faith in him, that in a disease,
very little capable of cure, then when he had so far resolved, and slackned
his sinews, that he could endure no posture but his bed, he suffered himself
to be put to so many incommodities. It was good evidence of a strength of faith
in them, that they could believe that Christ would not reject them for that
importunity of troubling him, and the congregation, in the midst of a Sermon;
That when they saw, that they who came only to hear, could not get near the
door, they should think to get in, with that load, that offensive spectacle;
That they should ever conceive, or go about to execute, or be suffered to
execute such a plot, as without the leave of Christ, (if Christ preached this
Sermon in his own house, as some take it to have been done) or without the
Masters leave, in whose house soever it was, they should first untile or open,
and then break through the floor, and so let down, their miserable burden:
That they should have an apprehension, that it was not fit for them to stay,
till the Sermon were done, and the company parted, but that it was likeliest to
conduce to the glory of God, that Preaching, and working might go together,
this was evidence, this was argument of strength of faith in them. Take
therefore their example, not to defer that assistance, which thou art able to
give to another. Ne dic as assistam cr as, says S. Gregory, do not say, I
will help thee to morrow; Ne quid inter propositum, and beneficium intercedat;
Perchance that poor soul may not need thee to morrow, perchance thou may
have nothing to give to morrow, perchance there shall be no such day, as to
morrow, and so thou have lost that opportunity of thy charity, which God
offered thee, to day: Vnica beneficentia est, quae moram non admittit, only
that is charity, that is given presently.

But yet, when all was done, when there was faith, and faith in them all, Cum,
non quiae.
and faith declared in their outward works, yet Christ is not said to have done
this miracle, quia sides, but cum fides, not Because he saw, but only When he
saw their faith. Let us transfer none of that, which belongs to God, to our
selves: when we do our duties, (but when do we go about to begin to do any
part of any of them?) we are unprofitable servants: When God does work in us,
are we saved by that work, as by the cause, when there is another cause of the
work it self? When the ground brings forth good corn, yet that ground becomes
not fit for our food: When a man has brought forth good fruits, yet that man
is not thereby made worthy of heaven. Not faith it self (and yet faith is of
somewhat a deeper dye, and tincture, then any works) is any such cause of our
salvation. A beggars believing that I will give him an alms, is no cause of my
charity: My believing that Christ will have mercy upon me, is no cause of
Christ's mercy; for what proportion has my temporary faith, with my everlasting
salvation? But yet, though it work not as a cause, though it be not qui a
vidit, because he saw it, yet cum videt, when Christ finds this faith,
according to that gracious Covenant, and Contract which he has made with us,
that wheresoever, and whenever he finds faith, he will enlarge his mercy,
finding that in this patient, he expressed his mercy, in that which constitutes
our second part, Fili confide, my son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee.

Where we see first, 2 Part.
our Savior. Christ opening the bowels of compassion to him, and receiving him
so, as if he had issued out of his bowels, and from his loins, in that
gracious appellation, Fili, my Son. He does not call him brother; for greater
enmity can be no where, then is often expressed to have been between
brethren; for in that degree, and distance, enmity amongst men began in Cain,
and Abel, and was pursued in many paires of brethren after, in Sacred and in
secular story. He does not call him friend; that name, even in Christ's own
mouth, is not always accompanied with good entertainment: Amice, Mat. 22.12.
quomodo intrasti, says he, Friend, how came you in? and he bound him hand and
foot, and cast him into outer darkness. He does not call him son of Abraham,
which might give him an interest in all the promises, but he gives him a
present Adoption, and so a present fruition of all, Fili, my Son. His Son, and
not his Son in law; he loads him not with the encumbrances, and
halfe-impossibilities of the Law, but he seals to him the whole Gospel, in
the remission of sins. His Son, and not his dis-inherited son, as the Jews
were, but his Son, upon whom he settled his ancient Inheritance, his eternal
election, and his new purchase, which he came now into the world to make with
his blood. His Son, and not his prodigal son, to whom Christ imputes no
wastfulnesse of his former graces, but gives him a general release, and
Quietus est, in the forgiveness of sins. All that Christ asks of his Sons,
is, Fili da mihi cor, My Son give me thy heart; and till God give us that, we
cannot give it him; and therefore in this Son he creates a new heart, he
infuses a new courage, he establishes a new confidence, in the next word, Fili
confide, My Son be of good cheer.

Christ then does not stay so long wrestling with this man's faith, Confide.
and shaking it, and trying whether it were fast rooted, as he did with that
Woman in the Gospel, who came after him, Mat. 15.22.
in her daughters behalf, crying, Have mercy upon me O Lord, thou Son of
David, for Christ gave not that woman one word; when her importunity made his
Disciples speak to him, he said no more, but that he was not sent to such as
she; This was far, very far from a Confide filia, Daughter be of good cheer:
But yet, this put her not often, but (as it follows) She followed, and
worshipped him, and said, O Lord help me: And all this prevailed no farther
with him, but to give such an answer, as was more discomfortable, then a
silence, It is not fit to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs. She
denies not that, she contradicts him not; she says, Truth Lord, It is not fit
to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto dogs, and Truth Lord, I am one
of those dogs; but yet she persevers in her holy importunity, and in her good
ill-manners, and says, Yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from the
Masters table: And then, and not till then comes Jesus to that, O Woman, great
is thy faith, be it unto thee, even as thou will; and her Daughter was healed.
But all this, at last, was but a bodily restitution, here was no Dimittuntur
peccata in the case, no declaration of forgiveness of sins: But with this
man in our Text, Christ goes farther, and comes sooner to an end; He exercises
him with no disputation, he leaves no room for any diffidence, but at first
word establishes him, and then builds upon him. Now beloved, which way soever
of these two God have taken with thee, whether the longer, or the shorter way,
bless thou the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for that. If God have settled
and strengthened thy faith early, early in thy youth heretofore, early at the
beginning of a Sermon now, A day is as a thousand years with God, a minute is
as six thousand years with God, that which God has not done upon the
Nations, upon the Gentiles, in six thousand years, never since the Creation,
which is, to reduce them to the knowledge, and application of the Messiah,
Christ Jesus, that he has done upon thee, in an instant. If he have carried
thee about the longer way, if he have exposed thee to scruples, and
perplexities, and storms in thine understanding, or conscience, yet in the
midst of the tempest, the soft air, that he is said to come in, shall breath
into thee; in the midst of those clouds, his Son shall shine upon thee; In the
midst of that flood he shall put out his Rainbow, his seal that thou shall not
drown, his Sacrament of fair weather to come, and as it was to the Thief,
thy Cross shall be thine Altar, and thy Faith shall be thy Sacrifice. Whether
he accomplish his worke-upon thee soon or late, he shall never leave thee all
the way, without this Confide fili, a holy confidence, that thou art his, which
shall carry thee to the Dimittuntur peccata, to the peace of conscience, in the
remission of sins.

In which two words, we noted unto you, that Christ has instituted a
Catechism, an Instruction for this new Convertite, and adopted Son of his; in
which, the first lesson that is therein employed, is, Antequam rogetur, That God
is more forward to give, Antequam rogetur.
then man to ask: It is not said that the sick man, or his company in his
behalf, said any thing to Christ, but Christ speaks first to them. If God
have touched thee here, did thou ask that at his hands? Did thou pray
before thou came hither, that he would touch thy heart here? perchance thou
did: But when thou wast brought to thy Baptism, did thou ask any thing at
Gods hands then? But those that brought thee, that presented thee, did; They
did in thy Baptism; but at thine election, then when God writing down the
names of all the Elect, in the book of Life, how came thou in? who brought
thee in then? Did thou ask any thing at Gods hands then, when thou thy self
wast not at all?

Dat prius, that is the first lesson in this Catechism, God gives before we
ask, Meliora.
and then Dat meliora rogatis, God gives better things, then we ask; They
intended to ask but bodily health, and Christ gave spiritual, he gave
Remission of sins. And what gained he by that? why, Beati quorum remissae
iniquitates, Blessed are they, whose sins are forgiven. But what is
Blessedness? Any more then a consident expectation of a good state in the next
world? Yes; Blessedness includes all that can be asked or conceived in the
next world, and in this too. Christ in his Sermon of blessedness, says first,
Blessed are they, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; and after, Blessed are
they, Mat. 5.3. and 5.
for they shall in her it the earth; Again, Blessed, for they shall obtain
mercy; and, Blessed for they shall be filled: Remission of sins is
blessedness, and as Godliness has the promise of this world, and the next,
so blessedness has the performance of both: He that has peace in the
remission of sins, is blessed already, and shall have those blessings
infinitely multiplied in the world to come. The farthest that Christ goes in
the expressing of the affections of a natural Father here, is, That if his Son
ask bread, he will not give him a stone; Luke 11.12.
and if he ask a Fish, he will not give him a Scorpion; He will not give him
worse then he asked; But it is the peculiar bounty of this Father, who adopted
this Son, to give more, and better, spiritual for temporal.

Another lesson, which Christ was pleased to propose to this new Convertite,
Causa morborum.
in this Catechism, was, to inform him, That sins were the true causes of all
bodily diseases. Diseases and bodily afflictions are sometimes inflicted by God
Ad poenam, non ad purgationem, Not to purge or purify the soul of that man,
by that affliction, but to bring him by the rack to the gallows, through
temporary afflictions here, to everlasting torments hereafter; As Judas his
hanging, and Herod's being eaten with worms, Acts 12.
was their entrance into that place, where they are yet. Sometimes diseases and
afflictions are inflicted only, or principally to manifest the glory of God,
in the removing thereof; So Christ says of that man, that was borne blind,
that neither he himself had sinned, John 5.
nor bore the sins of his parents, but he was borne blind to present an
occasion of doing a miracle. Sometimes they are inflicted Ad humiliationem, for
our future humiliation; So S. Paul says of himself, That least he should be
exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7.
by the abundance of Revelations, he had that Stimulum carnis, That vexation of
the flesh, that messenger of Satan, to humble him. And then, sometimes they are
inflicted for trial, and farther declaration of your conformity to Gods will,
as upon Job. But howsoever there be diverse particular causes, for the diseases
and afflictions of particular men, the first cause of death, and sickness, and
all infirmities upon mankind in general, was sin; and it would not be hard
for every particular man, almost, to find it in his own case too, to assign
his fever to such a surfeit, or his consumption to such an intemperance. And
therefore to break that circle, in which we compass, and immure, and imprison
our selves, That as sin begot diseases, so diseases begot more sins,
impatience and murmuring at Gods corrections, Christ begins to shake this
circle, in the right way to break it, in the right link, that is, first to
remove the sin, which occasioned the disease; for, till that be done, a man is
in no better case, then, (as the Prophet expresses it) If he should fly from a
Lion, Amos 5.19.
and a Bear met him, or if he should lean upon a wall, and a Serpent bit him.
What ease were it, to be delivered of a palsy, of slack and dissolved sinews,
and remain under the tyranny of a lustful heart, of licentious eyes, of
slack and dissolute speech and conversation? What ease to be delivered of the
putrefaction of a wound in my body, and meet a murder in my conscience, done,
or intended, or desired upon my neighbor? To be delivered of a fever in my
spirits, and to have my spirit troubled with the guiltiness of an adultery? To
be delivered of Cramps, and Coliques, and Convulsions in my joints and sinews,
and suffer in my soul all these, from my oppressions, and extortions, by which
I have ground the face of the poor. It is but lost labor, and cost, to give a
man a precious cordial, when he has a thorn in his foot, or an arrow in his
flesh; for, as long as the sin, which is the cause of the sickness,
remains, Deterius sequetur, A worse thing will follow; we may be rid of a
Fever, and the Pestilence will follow, rid of the Cramp, and a Gout will
follow, rid of sickness, and Death, eternal death will follow. That which our
Savior prescribes is, Noli peccare amplius, sin no more; first, non amplius,
sin no more sins, take heed of gravid sins, of pregnant sins, of sins of
concomitance, and concatentation, that chain and induce more sins after, as
David's idleness did adultery, and that murder, and the loss of the Lords
Army, and Honor, in the blaspheming of his name, Noli amplius, sin no more, no
such sin as induces more; And Noli amplius, sin no more, that is, sin thy
own sin, thy beloved sin, no more times over; And still Noli amplius, sin not
that sin which thou have given over in thy practice, in thy memory, by a
sinful delight in remembering it; And again, Noli amplius, sin not over thy
former sins, by holding in thy possession; such things as were corruptly
gotten, by any such former practices: for, Deterius sequetur, a worse thing
will follow, A Tertian will be a Quartan, and a Quartan a Hectique, and a
Hectique a Consumption, and a Consumption without a consummation, that shall
never consume it self, nor consume thee to an unsensiblenesse of torment.

And then after these three lessons in this Catechism, Sanitas spiritualis.
That God gives before we ask, That he gives better then we ask, That he
informs us in the true cause of sickness, sin, He involves a tacit, nay he
expresses an express rebuke, and increpation, and in beginning at the
Dimittuntur peccata, at the forgiveness of sins, tells him in his ear, that
his spiritual health should have been preferred before his bodily, and the
cure of his soul before his Palsy; that first the Priest should have been,
and then the Physician might be consulted. That which Christ does to his new
adopted Son here, the Wiseman says to his Son, Ecclus. 38.9.
My Son, in thy sickness be not negligent; But wherein is his diligence
required, or to be expressed? in that, which follows, Pray unto the Lord, and
he will make thee whole; But upon what conditions, or what preparations? Leave
off from sin, order thy hands aright, and cleanse thy heart from all
wickedness. Is this all? needs there no declaration, no testimony of this?
Yes, Give a sweet savor, and a memorial of fine flower, and make a fat
offering, as not being; that is, as though thou were dead: Give, and give that
which thou give in thy life time, as not being. And when all this is
piously, and religiously done, thou have repented, restored, amended, and given
to pious uses, Then, says he there, give place to the Physician, for the Lord
has created him. For if we proceed otherwise, if we begin with the Physician,
Physic is a curse; He that sins before his Maker, V. 15.
let him fall into the hands of the Physician, says the Wiseman there: It is
not, Let him come into the hands of the Physician, as though that were a curse,
but let him fall, let him cast and throw himself into his hands, and rely upon
natural means, and leave out all consideration of his other, and worse
disease, and the supernatural Physic for that. 2. Chron. 16.
Asa had had a great deliverance from God, when the Prophet Hanani asked him,
Were not the Ethiopians, and the Lubins a huge Host? but because after this
deliverance, he relied upon the King of Syria, and not upon God, the Judgment
is, From henceforth thou shall have wars: That was a sickness upon the State,
and then he fell sick in his own person, and in that sickness, says that
story, He sought not to the Lord, but to the Physician, and then he dyed. To
the Lord and then to the Physician had been the right way; If to the Physician
and then to the Lord, though this had been out of the right way, yet he might
have returned to it: But it was to the Physician, and not to the Lord, and then
he died. Omnipotenti medico nullus languor insanabilis, says S. Ambrose, there
is but one Almighty; and none but the Almighty can cure all diseases, because
he only can cure diseases in the root, that is, in the forgiveness of sins.

We are almost at an end; when we had thus Catechized his Convertite, thus
rectified his patient, Scribae and Pharisci.
he turns upon them, who beheld all this, and were scandalized with his
words, the Scribes and Pharisees; And because they were scandalized only in
this, that he being but man, undertook the office of God, to forgive sins, he
declares himself to them, to be God. Christ would not leave, even malice it
self unsatisfied; And therefore do not thou think thy self Christian enough,
for having an innocence in thy self, but be content to descend to the
infirmities, and to the very malice of other men, and to give the world
satisfaction; Nec paratum habeas illud etrivio, (says S. Hierome) do not arm
thy self with that vulgar, and trivial saying, Sufficit mihi conscientia mea,
nec curo quid loquantur homines, It suffices me, that mine own conscience is
clear, and I care not what all the world says; thou must care what the world
says, and thinks; Christ himself had that respect even toward the Scribes,
and Pharisees. For, first he declared himself to be God, in that he took
knowledge of their thoughts; for they had said nothing, and he says to them,
why reason you thus in your hearts? and they themselves did not, could not
deny, but that those words of Solomon appertained only to God, 2 Chronicles. 6.30.
Thou only know the hearts of the children of men, And those of Jeremy, The
heart is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9.
and desperately wicked, who can know it? I the Lord search the heart, and I
try the reins. Let the School dispute infinitely, (for he that will not
content himself with means of salvation, till all School points be reconciled,
will come too late) let Scotus and his Heard think, That Angels, and separate
souls have a natural power to understand thoughts, though God for his
particular glory restrain the exercise of that power in them, (as in the
Roman Church, Priests have a power to forgive all sins, though the Pope
restrain that power in reserved cases; And the Cardinals by their Creation,
have a voice in the Consistory, but that the Pope for a certain time inhibites
them to give voice) And let Aquinas present his arguments to the contrary, That
those spirits have no natural power to know thoughts; we seek no farther, but
that Christ Jesus himself thought it argument enough to convince the Scribes
and Pharisees, and prove himself God, by knowing their thoughts. Eadem
Majestate and potentia, says S. Hierome, Since you see I proceed as God, in
knowing your thoughts, why believe you not, that I may forgive his sins as God
too?

And then, in the last act he joins both together; he satisfies the patient,
Dat sanitatem.
and he satisfies the beholders too: he gives him his first desire, bodily
health; He bids him take up his bed and walk, and he does it; and he shows
them that he is God, by doing that, which (as it appears in the Story) was
harder in their opinion, then remission of sins, which was, to cure and recover
a diseased man, only by his word, without any natural, or second means. And
therefore since all the world shakes in a palsy of wars, and rumors of wars,
since we are sure, that Christ's Vicar in this case will come to his
Dimitmittuntur peccata, to send his Bulls, and Indulgences, and Crociatars for
the maintenance of his part, in that cause, let us also, who are to do the
duties of private men, to obey and not to direct, by presenting our diseased
and paralytique souls to Christ Jesus, now, when he in the Ministry of his
unworthiest servant is preaching unto you, by untiling the house, by removing
all disguises, and palliations of our former sins, by true confession, and
hearty detestation, let us endeavor to bring him to his Dimittuntur peccata,
to forgive us all those sins, which are the true causes of all our palsies, and
slacknesses in his service; and so, without limiting him, or his great
Vicegerents, and Lieutenants, the way, or the time to beg of him, that he will
imprint in them, such counsels and such resolutions, as his wisdom knows best
to conduce to his glory, and the maintenance of his Gospel. Amen.

SERMON XII. Preached upon Candlemas day.
MAT. 5.2. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.


THe Church, which is the Daughter of God, and Spouse of Christ, celebrates
this day, the Purification of the blessed Virgin, the Mother of God: And she
celebrates this day by the name, vulgarly, of Candlemas day. It is dies
luminarium, the day of lights; The Church took the occasion of doing so, from
the Gentiles; At this time of the year, about the beginning of February, they
celebrated the feast of Februus, which is their Pluto; And, because that was
the God of darkness, they solemnized it, with a multiplicity of Lights. The
Church of God, in the outward and ceremonial part of his worship, did not
disdain the ceremonies of the Gentiles; Men who are so severe, as to condemn,
and to remove from the Church, whatsoever was in use amongst the Gentiles
before, may, before they are aware, become Surveyors, and Controllers upon
Christ himself, in the institution of his greatest seals: for Baptism, which
is the Sacrament of purification by washing in water, and the very Sacrament of
the Supper it self, religious eating, and drinking in the Temple, were in use
amongst the Gentiles too. It is a perverse way, rather to abolish Things and
Names, (for vehement zeal will work upon Names as well as Things) because they
have been abused, then to reduce them to their right use. We dealt in the
reformation of Religion, as Christ did in the institution thereof; He found
ceremonies amongst the Gentiles, and he took them in, not because he found them
there, but because the Gentiles had received them from the Jews, as they had
their washings, and their religious meetings to eat and drink in the Temple,
from the Jews Passover. Christ borrowed nothing of the Gentiles, but he took
his own where he found it: Those ceremonies, which himself had instituted in
the first Church of the Jews, and the Gentiles had purloined, and profaned,
and corrupted after, he returned to a good use again. And so did we in the
Reformation, in some ceremonies which had been of use in the Primitive Church,
and depraved and corrupted in the Roman. For the solemnizing of this Day,
Candlemas-day, when the Church did admit Candles into the Church, as the
Gentiles did, it was not upon the reason of the Gentiles, who worshipped
therein the God of darkness, Februus, Pluto; but because he who was the light
of the world, was this day presented and brought into the Temple, the Church
admitted lights. The Church would signify, that as we are to walk in the
light, so we are to receive our light from the Church, and to receive Christ,
and our knowledge of him, so as Christ has notified himself to us. So it is a
day of purification to us, and a day of lights, and so our Text fits the Day,
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

In these words we shall consider first, Divisie.
Qui sint, who they are, that are brought into consideration, that are put into
the balance, and they are mundi cord, such as are pure of heart; And secondly,
Quid sint, what they come to be, and it is Beati, blessed are the pure in
heart; And lastly, Vnde, from whence this blessedness accrews and arises unto
them, and in what it consists, and that is, Videbunt Deum, blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. Genesis 6.5.
Ask me wherein these men differ from other men, and it is in this main
difference, Mundi cord, that whereas every imagination of the thought of man's
heart, is only evil continually, They are pure of heart. Ask me what they get
by that, They get this main purchase, Beati, That which all the books of all
the Philosophers could never teach them so much as what it was, that is true
Blessedness; That their pocket book, their Manual, their bosom book, their
conscience, does not only show them, but give them, not only declare it to
them, but possess them of it. Ask me how long this Blessedness shall last,
because all those Blessednesses which Philosophers have imagined, as honor,
and health, and profit, and pleasure, and the like, have evaporated and
vanished away, this shall last for ever; Videbunt Deum, they shall see God, and
they shall no more see an end of their seeing God, then an end of his being
God: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

These then are our three parts; first the Price, mundities cordis, cleanness,
and cleanness of heart; Secondly, the Purchase, Beati, Blessedness, and
present possession of blessedness, Blessed are they; And then thirdly, the
Habendum, the term, Everlastingnesse, because it consists in the enjoying of
him who is everlasting, They shall see God. These arise out of the Text; but
from whence arises the Text it self? The Text it self is a piece of a Sermon,
of that blessed Sermon of our Saviors, which is called the Sermon of
Beatitudes. So that we shall make it a part apart, to consider the Sermon from
which this Text is taken, before we dilate the Text it self into a Sermon: for
there will arise some useful observations, out of these three doubts, first
Quae concio, what this Sermon it self was; and then Quibus, to what Auditory it
was preached; And lastly, Quomodo, in what manner Christ preached this Sermon:
And these three, the Sermon, the Auditory, the disposition of the Preacher,
will also be three branches of this, which we shall make our first part, before
we come to the other three of the Text it self.

First then, there is this doubt made of this Sermon altogether, 1 Part.
whether this Sermon which S. Matthew records here, be the same Sermon which S.
Luke mentions in his sixth Chapter, or whether they were preached at several
times; The greater part of the ancients (but yet not all) take them to be
several Sermons; The greater part of the later men (and yet not all neither)
take them to be but one and the same Sermon. If it be so, if both be but one
Sermon, this may be justly considered, that since S. Luke remembers but a few
passages, and a few parts of that Sermon, in respect of S. Matthew, (for S.
Matthews relation is large and particular, and S. Lukes more brief and
summary) they that come to hear Sermons, and would make benefit by them, by a
subsequent meditation, must not think themselves frustrated of their purposes,
if they do not understand all, or not remember all the Sermon. Scarce any
Sermon is so preached, or so intended, as that all works upon all, or all
belongs unto all. The Lord and his Spirit puts into the Preachers mouth, a
judgment against oppression, against extortion, against usury, and he utters
that judgment. But perchance thou have no lands to rack tenants, no office to
grind suitors, no money to devour a debtor by usury, and so that passage of
the Sermon, bent against oppression, or extortion, or usury, concerns not
thee, affects not thee. But next to thee there may sit an oppressor, or
extortioner, or usurer, and he needed that, and by Gods grace receives benefit
by that, which found nothing to work upon in thee. And then thy turn comes
after, and God speaks to thy soul, in a discovery of those sins to which thou
art inclined; and then he gives thy neighbor (who was pinched, and brought to
a remorse before) that refreshing which thou had before, that is, a thankful
acknowledgement, that though he be subject to other sins, yet God has
preserved him from that particular.

God directs the tongue of his Ministers, as he does his showers of rain: They
fall upon the face of a large compass of earth, when as all that earth did not
need that rain. The whole Congregation is, oftentimes, in common entendment,
conformable, and well settled in all matters of Doctrine, and all matters of
Discipline. And yet God directs us sometimes to extend our discourse (perchance
with a zeal and a vehemence, which may seem unnecessary, and impertinent,
because all in the Church are presumed to be of one mind) in the proof of our
doctrine against Papists, or of our discipline against Nonconformitans. For,
Gods eye sees, in what seat there sits, or in what corner there stands some one
man that wavers in matters of Doctrine, and enclines to hearken after a
Seducer, a Jesuit, or a Semi-Jesuit, a practicing Papist, or a Sesqui-Jesuit, a
Jesuited Lady; And Gods eye sees in what seat there sits, or in what corner
there stands some weak soul that is scandalized, with some Ceremony, or part of
our Discipline, and in danger of falling from the unity of the Church: And for
the refreshing of that one span of ground, God lets fall a whole shower of
rain; for the rectifying of that one soul, God poures out the Meditations of
the Preacher, into such a subject, as perchance does little concern the rest of
the Congregation. S. Matthew relates Christ's Sermon at large, and S. Luke but
briefly, and yet S. Luke remembers some things that S. Matthew had left out. If
thou remember not all that was presented to thy faith, all the Citations of
places of Scriptures, nor all that was presented to thy reason, all the
deducements, and inferences of the Schools, nor all that was presented to thy
spiritual delight, all the sentences of ornament produced out of the Fathers,
yet if thou remember that which concerned thy sin, and thy soul, if thou
meditate upon that, apply that, thou have brought away all the Sermon, all that
was intended by the Holy Ghost to be preached to thee. And if thou have done
so, as at a donative at a Coronation, or other solemnity, when money is thrown
among the people, though thou light but upon one shilling of that money, thou
can not think that all the rest is lost, but that some others are the richer
for it, though thou be not; so if thou remember, or apply, or understand but
one part of the Sermon, do not think all the rest to have been idly, or
unnecessarily, or impertinently spoken, for thou broughtest a fever, and have
had thy Julips, another brought a fainting, and a diffident spirit, and must
have his Cordials.

Thus then, if S. Lukes Sermon be the same that S. Matthews was, we see by S.
Lukes manner of repeating it, That a Sermon may be well remembered, and well
applied, though all the parts thereof be not so. And then, if these were diverse
Sermons, and so preached by Christ, at several times, there arises also this
consideration, That Christ did not, and therefore we need not forbear to
preach the same particular Doctrines, or to handle the same particular points,
which we, or others, in that place, have handled before: A preachers end is not
a gathering of fame to himself, but a gathering of souls to God; and his way
is not novelty, but edification. If we consider the Sermon in Saint Matthew,
and the Sermon in S. Luke, the purpose and the scope of both, the matter and
the form of both, the body and the parts of both, the phrase and the language
of both, is for the most part the same, and yet Christ forbore not to preach it
twice.

This excuses no man's ignorance, that is not able to preach seasonably, and to
break, and distribute the bread of life according to the emergent necessities
of that Congregation, at that time; Nor it excuses no man's laziness, that will
not employ his whole time upon his calling; Nor any man's vainglory, and
ostentation, who having made a Pie of Plums, without meat, offers it to sale in
every Market, and having made an Oration of Flowers, and Figures, and Phrases
without strength, sings it over in every Pulpit: It excuses no man's ignorance,
nor laziness, nor vainglory, but yet it reproaches their itching and curious
ears, to whom any repetition of the same things is irk some and fastidious.
You may have heard an answer of an Epigrammatist applyable to this purpose;
When he read his Epigrams in an Auditory, one of the hearers stopped him, and
said, Did not I hear an Epigram to this purpose from you, last year? Yes,
says he, it is like you did; but is not that vice still in you this year,
which last years Epigram reprehended? If your curiosity bring you to say to
any Preacher, Did not I hear this Point thus handled in your Sermon, last
year? Yes, must he say, and so you must next year again, till it appear in
your amendment, that you did hear it. The Devil maintains a War good
cheap, if he may fight with the same sword, and we may not defend with the same
buckler; If he can tempt a Son with his Fathers covetousness, and a Daughter
with her Mothers wantonness, if he need not vary the sin, nor the tentation,
must we vary our Doctrine? This is indeed to put new Wine into old vessels,
new Doctrine into ears, Cant. 7.13.
and hearts not disburdened of old sins. We say, as the Spouse says, Vetera
and nova, we prepare old and new, all that may any way serve your holy taste,
and conduce to your spiritual nourishment; And he is not a Preacher
sufficiently learned, that must of necessity preach the same things again, but
he is not a Preacher sufficiently discreet neither, that for bears any thing
therefore, because himself, or another in that place, has handled that
before. Christ himself varied his Sermon very little, if this in S. Matthew,
and that in S. Luke, were diverse Sermons.

The second doubt which is made about this Sermon, and which ministers to us
occasion of another kind of observations, Quibus.
is the Auditory, to whom Christ preached this Sermon. For first, as this
Evangelist reports it, it seems to have been Concio ad Clerum, a Sermon
Preached to them who had taken Degrees in Christ's School, and followed him, V.
1.
and not ad populum, to the promiscuous, and vulgar people; for he says, That
Christ seeing the multitude, went up into a mountain, and thither his
Disciples came, and to them he Preached. And then, as S. Luke reports, though
the Sermon seem principally to be directed to the Disciples, yet it was in the
presence and hearing of all; for he says, Christ came down, and stood in the
plain, and a great multitude of people about him. Luke 6.17.
Both must be done; we must preach in the Mountain, and preach in the plain
too; preach to the learned, and preach to the simple too; preach to the Court,
and preach to the Country too. Only when we preach in the mountain, they in
the plain must not calumniate us, and say, This man goes up to Jerusalem, he
will be heard by none but Princes, and great persons, as though it were out of
affectation, and not in discharge of our duty, that we do preach there: And
when we preach on the plain, they of the mountain must not say, This man may
serve for a mean Auditory, for a simple Congregation, for a Country Church, as
though the sitting of our selves to the capacity, and the edification of such
persons, were out of ignorance, or laziness, and not a performance of our
duties, as well as the other. Christ preached on the mountain, and he preached
in the plain; he has his Church in both; and they that preach in both, or
either, for his glory, and not their own vainglory, have his Example for
their Action.

To make the like use of the other difficulty, Quomedo.
arising out of the several relation of this Sermon, which is Quomodo, in what
manner, in what position of body Christ preached this Sermon, by this
Evangelist it seems that Christ preached sitting, and by the other, V. 1. Luke
6.17.
that he preached standing. Now, for the most part, Christ did preach sitting.
When he preached in the Synagogue of Nazareth, and took that Text, out of Esaias,
Luke 4.16.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. He stood up to read, (says the
story) and then he closed the Book, and sat down to preach. So also when he
came down from the Mount of Olives into the Temple, he sat down there and
taught them. And so Christ himself professes, John 8.2.
that it was his ordinary custom to do; For, when they came to apprehend him,
he said, Are ye come out, as against a Thief? I sat daily with you, teaching
in the Temple, Mat. 26.55.
and ye laid no hold on me. And according to this custom of his, they who came
to great place, and dignity in ^^e Church, did ordinarily preach sitting too;
and therefore their Churches were called Cathedral, because they preached
sitting in chaires.

Why then will such men, as in all actious of Divine Service, pretend to limit
every thing precisely to the pattern of Christ himself, to do just as he did,
and no otherwise, why will they admit any other position of the body, in
preaching, then sitting, since, ut plurimum, at least, for the most part,
Christ did preach sitting? Or if Christ did both sit, and stand, why will they
not acknowledge, that all positions of the body, that are reverent, are
indifferent in themselves, in the service of God; and being so, why will they
not admit that position of the body, which being indifferent in it self, is by
the just command of lawful authority, made necessary to them, that is,
kneeling at the Sacrament? They who resuse it, pretend but two Reasons; First,
because Christ at the institution thereof, did not use that position of
kneeling, but sitting; Secondly, because they might scandalize others, or enter
a false belief into others, who should see them kneel, that they kneeled in
such adoration thereof, as the Papists do.

But for the first, who refer all (in their desire) to the practice of Christ
himself herein, it cannot be a clear case, In what position of body Christ
did institute this Sacrament. There was at that time, a civil Supper, the
ordinary household Supper, and there was a legal Supper, the eating of the
Passover, and then this Sacramental Supper, of a new institution; And it is
clear, that Christ did not continue one position all this while, but he arose
and did some actions between; Neither could that position of body, which they
used at the Table, for their civil Supper, and natural refection, be properly
called a sitting, for it was rather a lying, a reclining, a leaning upon a bed;
And let it be exactly a sitting, and let that sitting run through all the three
Suppers, yet how will that position of sitting, justify that Canon, which has
passed in a Synod amongst out neighbors, Liberum est stando, sedendo, eundo,
coenam celebrare, non autem geniculando? Harmoma Synod. Belg. de Coena. Art. 8.
How will standing, or walking, be any more maintainable then kneeling, by
Christ's example? and yet they say, sitting, or walking, or standing, they may
receive, but kneeling they must not: But this, I presume that particular Synod
did not declare by way of Doctrine, to bind other Churches, but enjoined a
Discipline for their own.

Now, for the danger of scandalizing others, all that come to Church, and are
of our profession in Religion, are sufficiently catechized, and informed of the
reason of our kneeling, and that we are therein far from the Adoration of the
Roman Practice. It is a complaint often made, and often to be repeated, that
one of the greatest illusions, and impostures of the Roman Church, is, That
the Book-Doctrine, of their learned men, and the ordinary practice of their
people agree not. They know the people do commit Idolatry, in their manner of
adoring the Bread in the Sacrament, and they never preach against this error of
the people, nor tell them wherein that Idolatry lies; It is true, that in their
Books of Controversies, which the people could not understand, if they might
read them, nor may read them, if they could understand them, in those books
they proceed upon safer grounds; There they say, that when a man adores the
Sacrament, he must be sure, that he carry not his thoughts upon any thing that
he sees, not only not upon Bread and Wine, (for, that they must not believe to
be there, whatsoever they see or taste) but not upon those species and
apparences of Bread and Wine, which they seem to see, but he must carry all his
thoughts upon the person of Christ, who is there, though he see him not; for,
otherwise, say they, if he should adore that which he sees, he should commit
Idolatry. Now, if the people were acquainted with this Doctrine, and could
possibly observe it, the danger were not so great, in that Adoration of the
Sacrament. Much less is there in our kneeling, who, as we acknowledge, that
God is present every where, yet otherwise present to us, when we throw our
selves down before him in devotion, and prayer in our Chamber, then he is in
the Market, or in the street, and otherwise in the Congregation, at Public
prayer, then at private prayer in our Chamber; so weacknowledge, that he is
otherwise present at the Sacrament, then at any other act of Divine Service.
That which Christ's Example left indifferent, the Authority of that Church, in
which God has given thee thy station, may make necessary to thee; Though not
absolutely necessary, and Ratione medii, that none can be saved that do not
kneel at the Sacrament, therefore because they do not kneel, yet necessary
Ratione praecepti, as it is enjoined by lawful authority, and to resist
lawful authority, is a disobedience, that may endanger any man's salvation.

Now from this Sermon, 2. Part.
which gave us our Text, we pass to the Text, which must give us our Sermon,
the particular Branches of the Text it self, which we proposed at first, for
our second part. And there, our first is, Qui sint, who they be, that are
brought into consideration, Mundi cord, those that are pure of heart; first
pure, and then, pure of heart. In the purest times of the Primitive Church,
there crept in false opinions of purity; we find two sorts of Puritanes then;
The Catharists, and the Cathari; the Catharists were purifying Puritanes, and
the Cathari were purified Puritanes: The first thought no creatures pure for
man's use, till they were sanctified by them; and thereupon they induced certain
charms, and forms of Purification, too detestable to be named amongst
Christians. And then the Cathari, the purified Puritanes thought no men pure
but themselves, and themselves so pure, as that they left out that petition out
of the Lords prayer, Dimitte nobis, forgive us our trespasses, for they thought
they had trespassed in nothing.

They have a third state of Puritanes above these, in the Roman Church; where
they say that a man come to such a state of purity in this life, as that he
shall be abstracted, not only a passionibus, from all inordinatenesse of
affections and passions, but a phantasmatibus, from apprehending any thing by
those lazy degrees of the senses, and the fantasy, and discourse, and
reading, and meditation, and conversation, but they shall come to such a
familiarity with God, as that they shall know all by immediate Revelation; They
mean, (and, indeed, some of them say) that a man come to that purity in this
life, as that in this life, he shall be in possession of that very
Beatificall vision, which is the state of glory in heaven; In which purity,
they say also, that a man may not only be empty of all sin, but he may be too
full of Gods presence, overfraighted with his grace, so far, that (as they
make Philip Nerius, the Founder of their last Order, their example) they shall
be put to that exclamation, Recede a me Domine, O Lord depart farther from me,
and withdraw some of this grace, which thou pourest upon me.

And then besides these three imaginary and illusory purities, The Catharists
that think no things pure, The Cathari that think no men pure but themselves,
and the Super-cathari, in the Roman Church, that think these men as pure, as
the Saints, who are in possession of the sight of God in heaven, there is a
true purity, which will not serve our turns, which is a partial purity, that
pureness, that cleanness, that innocence, to which David so often referres
himself, in his religious and humble expostulations with God, Judge me, and
deal with me, according to my righteousness, and mine innocence, and
cleanness of heart, and hands, says David; that is, as I am innocent, and
guiltless, in that particular, which Saul imputes to me, and persecutes me
for. For, this pureness, which is this mark of the Saints of God, is not
partial, but universal; it is not a fig-leafe, that covers one spot of
nakedness, but an entire garment, a cleanness in all our actions.

We say sometimes, and not altogether improperly, that a man walks clean, if
in a foul way, he contract but a few spots of dirt; but yet this is not an
absolute cleanness. A house is not clean, except Cobwebs be swept down; A
man is not clean, except he remove the lightest and slightest occasions of
provocation. It is the speech of the greatest to the greatest, of Christ to the
Church, Capite vulpeculas, Take us the little Foxes, for they devour the Vine.
It is not a cropping, a pilling, a retarding of the growth of the Vine that is
threatened, but a devouring, though but from little Foxes. It is not so
desperate a state, to have thy soul attempted by that Lion, that seeks whom
he may devour, (for then, in great and apparent sins, thou will be
occasioned to call upon the Lion of the tribe of Juda, to thine assistance) as
it is to have thy soul eaten up by vermin, by the custom and habit of small
sins. God punished the Egyptians with little things, with Hailestones, and
Froggs, and Grasshoppers; and Pharaohs Conjurers, that counterfaited all Moses
greater works, failed in the least, in the making of lice. A man may stand a
great tentation, and satisfy himself in that, and think he has done enough
in the way of spiritual valor, and then fall as irrecoverably under the
custom of small. I were as good lie under a millstone, as under a hill of sand;
for howsoever I might have blown away every grain of sand, if I had watched
it, as it fell, yet when it is a hill, I cannot blow it, nor shove it away: and
when I shall think to say to God, I have done no great sins, God shall not
proceed with me, by weight, but by measure, nor ask how much, but how long I
have sinned.

And though I may have done thus much toward this purity, as that, for a good
time, I have discontinued my sin, yet if my heart be still set upon the
delight, and enjoying of that which was got by my former sins, though I be not
that dog that returns to his vomit, yet I am still that Sow, that wallowes in
her mire; though I do not thrust my hands into new dirt, yet the old dirt is
still baked upon my hands; though mine own clothes do not defile me again,
as Job speaks, Job. 2.22.
(though I do not relapse to the practice of mine old sin) yet I have none of
Ieremies Nitre, and Soap, none of Jobs Snow-water, to wash me clean, except I
come to Restitution. As long as the heart is set upon things sinfully got, thou
sinnest over those years sins, every day: thou art not come to the purity of
this text, for it is pure, and pure in heart.

But can any man come to that pureness? to have a heart pure from all
foulness? Cord. Job 14.4. Prove. 20.
can a man be borne so? Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness, is
Jobs unanswerable question? can any man make it clean, of himself? Who can
say, I have made clean my heart? is Solomon's unanswerable question. Beloved,
when such questions as these, are asked in the Scriptures, How can? who can do
this? Sometimes they import an absolute impossibility, It cannot be done by any
means; And sometimes they import but a difficulty, It can hardly be done, it
can be done but some one way. When the Prophet says, Quid proderit sculptile?
What good can an Idol, or an Idolatrous Religion do us? Habak. 2.
It shall not help us in soul, in reputation, in preferment, it will deceive
us every way, it is absolutely impossible, that an Idol, or an Idolatrous
Religion should do us any good. But then when David says, Domine quis
habitabit, Lord who shall ascend to thy Tabernacle, Psalm. 15.2.
and dwell in thy holy hill? David does not mean that there is no possibility of
ascending thither, or dwelling there, though it be hard clambring thither, and
hard holding there; And therefore when the Prophet says, Quis sapiens, and
intelliget haec, Hos. 14.8.
Who is so wise as to find out this way, he places this cleanness, which we
inquire after, in Wisdom. What is Wisdom? we may content our selves, with
that old definition of Wisdom, that it is Rerum humanarum, and divinarum
scientia; The Wisdom that accomplishes this cleanness, is the knowledge, the
right valuation of this world, and of the next; To be able to compare the joys
of heaven, and the pleasures of this world, and the gain of the one, with the
loss of the other, this is the way to this cleanenesse of the heart; because
that heart that considers, and examines, what it takes in, will take in no
foul, no infectious thing. 1 These. 4.7.
God has not called us to uncleanness, but to holiness, says the Apostle.
If we be in the ways of uncleanness, God has not called us thither: We may
slip into them, by the infirmity of our nature; or we may run into them by a
custom of sin; we may be drawn into them, by the inordinatenesse of our
affections; or we may be driven into them, by fear of losing the favor of
those great Persons, upon whom we depend, and so accompany, or assist them in
their sins.

So we may slip, and run, and be drawn, and be driven, but we are not called,
not called by God, into any sin; not called by any Decree of God; not by any
profession or calling; not by any complexion, or constitution, to a necessity
of committing any sin; All sin is from our selves: But if we be in the ways of
holiness, it is God that called us thither, we have not brought our selves.
God calls us by his Ordinance, and Ministry in the Church; But when God has
called us thither, we may see, what he expects from us, by that which the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness; that is, let us employ that
faculty, that is in our selves, let us be appliable and supple, easy and
ductile, in those ways, to which God has called us. Since God, by breeding us
in the Christian Church, and in the knowledge of his word, by putting that
balance into our hand, to try heavenly, and earthly things, by which we may
distinguish Lepram a non lepra, what is a leprous and sinful, what is an
indifferent, and clean action, let us be content to put the ware, and the
waights into the balance, that is, to bring all objects, and all actions to a
consideration, and to an examination, by that trial, before we set our hearts
upon them: for God leaves no man, with whom he has proceeded so far, as to
breed him in the Christian Church, without a power to do that, to discern his
own actions, if he do not wink.

Upon those word, Genesis 26.18.
Isaac dug the Wels of water, which they had dug in the days of Abraham,
Homil. 13. in Genesis
and the Philistims had stopped, Origin extends this power far, though not very
confidently; Forte in uniuscuiusque nostrum anima, says he; perchance in every
one of our souls, there is this Well of the water of Life, and this power to
open it: whether Origens Nostrum, our soul, be intended by him of us, as we
are men, or of us, as we are Christians, I pronounce not; but divide it; In
all us, as we are natural men, there is this Well of water of Life, Abraham
dug it at first, The Father of the faithful our heavenly Abraham, infused
it into us all at first in Adam, from whom, as we have the Image of God,
though defaced, so we have this Well of water though stopped up; But then the
Philistims having stopped this well, (Satan by sin having barred it up) the
power of opening it again is not in the natural man; but Isaac diggs them
again, Isaac who is Filius laetitiae, the Son of Joy, our Isaac, our Jesus, he
opens them again, to all that receive him according to his Ordinance in his
Church, he has given this power, of keeping open in themselves, this Well of
Life, these means of Salvation: Peccata tua alios inducunt colores, says
Origin in the same place; Thy sins cover the Image of God with other Images,
Images of Beauty, of Honor, of Pleasure, so that sometimes thou do not
discern the Image of God, in thy soul, but yet there it is: sometimes thou
fillest this Well with other waters, with tears of hypocrisy, to deceive, or
tears of lamentation for worldly crosses, but yet such a Well, such a power to
assist thine own salvation, there is in thee: Mulier drachmam invenit, non
extrinsecus, sed in dome; The Woman who had lost her piece of silver, found it
not without doors, but within; It was In domo mundata, when her house was made
clean, but it was within the house, and within her own house. Make clean thy
house, by the assistances, which Christ affords thee in his Church, and thou
shall never fail finding of that within thee, which shall save thee: Not that
it grows in thee naturally, or that thou can produce it of thy self, but
that God has bound himself by his holy Covenant, to perfect his work, in
every man, that works with him. So then in repenting of former sins, in
breaking off the practice of those sins, in restoring whatsoever was gotten by
those sins, in precluding all relapses, by a diligent survay and examination of
particular actions, this is this cleanness, this purity of heart, which
constitutes our first branch of this part; And the second is the Purchase, what
we get by it, which is Blessedness, Blessed are the pure in heart.

In this, Beatue.
we make two steps, Blessedness, and the present possession of this
Blessedness. Now, to this purpose, it is a good Rule that S. Bernard gives,
and a good way that he goes: Cui quaeque res sapiunt prout sunt, is sapiens
est, says he: He that tastes, and apprehends all things in their proper and
natural taste, he that takes all things aright as they are, Is sapiens est,
nothing distasts him, nothing alters him, he is wise. If he take the riches of
this world to be in their nature, indifferent, neither good, nor bad in
themselves, but to receive their denomination in their use, If he take long
life to be naturally an effect of a good constitution, and temperament of the
body, and a good husbanding of that temper by temperance, If he take sickness
to be a declination and disorder thereof, and so other calamities to be the
declination of their power, or their favor, in whose protection he trusted,
then he takes all these things, prout sunt, as they are, in their right taste,
and Is sapiens est, he that takes things so, is morally wise. But thus far, S.
Bernard does but tell us, Quis sapiens, who is wise; but then, Cui ipsa
sapientia sapit, prout est, is beatus, He that tastes this Wisdom it self
aright, he only is Blessed. Now to taste this moral Wisdom aright, to make
the right use of that, is to direct all that knowledge upon heavenly things. To
understand the wretchedness of this world, is to be wise, but to make this
wisdom apprehend a happiness in the next world, that is to be blessed. If I
can digest the want of Riches, the want of Health, the want of Reputation, out
of this consideration, that good men want these, as well as bad, this is moral
Wisdom, and a natural man may be as wise, herein, as I. But if I can make
this Wisdom carry me to a higher contemplation, That God has cast these
wants upon me, to draw me the more easily to him, and to see, that in all
likelihood, my disposition being considered, more wealth, more health, more
preferment would have retarded me, and slackned my pace in his service, then
this Wisdom, that is, this use of this moral Wisdom, has made me blessed;
and to this Blessedness, a natural man cannot come.

This Blessedness then, is Congeries bonorum, A concurrence, a confluence, an
accumulation of all that is Good; And he that is Mundus cord, pure of heart,
safe in a rectified conscience, has that. Not that every thing, that has
Aliquam rationem boni, any tincture, or name of Good in it, (as Riches, and
Health, and Honor) must necessarily fall upon every man, that is, good, and
pure of heart; (for, for the most part, such men want these more then any other
men.) But because even those things, which have in them, Aliquam rationem mali,
some tincture, and name of ill, (as sickness of body, or vexation of spirit)
shall be good to them, because they shall advance them in their way to God;
therefore are they blessed, as Blessedness is Congeries bonorum, the
accumulation of all that is good, because nothing can put on the nature of ill,
to them. And though Blessedness seem to be but an expectative, a reversion
reserved to the next life, yet so blessed are they in this testimony of a
rectified conscience, which is this purity of heart, as that they have this
blessedness in a present possession, Blessed are the pure in heart; they are
now, they are already Blessed.

The farthest that any of the Philosophers went in the discovery of
Blessedness, Nunc.
was but to come to that, Nemo ante obitum, to pronounce that no man could be
called Blessed before his death; not that they had found what kind of better
Blessedness they went to after their death, but that still till death they
were shure, every man was subject to new miseries, and interruptions of any
thing which they could have called Blessedness. The Christian Philosophy goes
farther; It shows us a perfecter Blessedness then they conceived for the next
life, and it imparts that Blessedness to this life also: The pure in heart are
blessed already, not only comparatively, that they are in a better way of
Blessedness, then others are, but actually in a present possession of it: for
this world and the next world, are not, to the pure in heart, two houses, but
two rooms, a Gallery to pass thorough, and a Lodging to rest in, in the same
House, which are both under one roof, Christ Jesus; The Militant and the
Triumphant, are not two Churches, but this the Porch, and that the Chancell of
the same Church, which are under one Head, Christ Jesus; so the Joy, and the
sense of Salvation, which the pure in heart have here, is not a joy severed
from the Joy of Heaven, but a Joy that begins in us here, and continues, and
accompanies us thither, and there flows on, and dilates it self to an
infinite expansion, (so, as if you should touch one corn of powder in a
train, and that train should carry fire into a whole City, from the beginning
it was one and the same fire) though the fullness of the glory thereof be
reserved to that which is expressed in the last branch, Videbunt Deum, They
shall see God; for, as S. Bernard notes, when the Church is highliest extolled
for her Beauty, yet it is but Pulcherrima inter mulieres, The fairest amongst
women, that is, says he, Inter animas terrenas, non autem inter Angelicas
beatitudines, She is not compared with her own state in Heaven, she shall have
a better state in that State, then she has here; So when John Baptists Office
is highliest extolled, that he is called The greatest Prophet, it is but Inter
natos mulierum, Amongst the sons of women, he is not compared with the Son of
God. So this Blessedness appropriated to the pure in heart, gives a present
assurance of future joy, and a present inchoation of that now, though the
plenary consummation thereof be respited, till we see God.

And first videbunt and non contremiscent; Videbunt Deum.
This is a Blessedness, they shall see God, and be glad to see him; see him in
Judgment, and be able to stand in Judgment in his sight; They shall see him,
and never trouble the hills to fall upon them, nor call the mountains to cover
them; upon them he shall not steal as a thief in the night, but because he
has used to stand at their door, and knock, and enter, they shall look for
his coming, and be glad of it. First they come to a true valuation of this
world, in S. Paul's Omnia stercora, Phil. 3.8.
I count all things but Dung, but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord; When they have found the true value of worldly things,
they will come to something worth the getting, they will come to S. Paul's way
of Gain, Mors lucrum, that to die is gain and advantage: Phil. 1.21.
When they know that, they will conceive a religious covetousness of that, and
so come to S. Paul's Cupio dissolvi, to desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ: When they have entertained that Desire, they will declare it, make a
petition, a suite for it, with a Veni Domine Jesus, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; and they shall have a holy and modest, but yet an infallible assurance
of this answer to their petition; Venite benedicti, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the
world; Mat. 26.34.
So Videbunt and non contremiscent, by this acquainting themselves, and
accustoming themselves to his presence, in all their actions, and meditations
in this life, they shall see him, and be glad to see him, even in Judgment, in
the next.

But the seeing of God principally intended in this place, is that Visio
beatifica, to see God so, as that that very seeing makes the seer Blessed, They
are Blessed therefore, because they see him; And that is videre Essentiam, to
see the very Essence and nature of God. For, that we shall see God in his
Essence, is evident enough by that place of the Apostle, 1 John 3.2.
Now we are the Sons of God, (that is, now by this purity of heart, and
testimony of a rectified conscience, we are so) And it does not yet appear
what we shall be, (that is, there are degrees of glory reserved for us, that
yet do not appear to our understanding, we cannot conceive them) But we know,
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, (that is, receive
incorruption and glory in our bodies, as he has done) And then the reason
given there, of that, is, For we shall see him, sicuti est, as he is, in his
Essence; All our Beatification, and Glorification in our bodies consists in
this, that we shall see him sicuti est, 1 Cor. 13.12.
as he is, in his Essence. Then says S. Paul, I shall know, even as I am
known, Essentially. But whether then, in the resurrection, and glorification
of the body, God in his Essence be to be seen with those eyes which the body
shall then have, is yet, and has been long a question. The Scripture goes no
farther, then to S. John's Sicuti est, I shall see him as he is, and to S. Paul's
Cognoscam, I shall know him as I am known; but with what eyes I shall see him,
(without any perplexing curiosities) we will look a little into the Fathers,
and into the School, and conclude so, as may best advance our edification.

For the Fathers, it may be sufficient to insist upon S. Augustine; not because
he is always to be preferred before all, but because in this point, he has
best collected all that were before him, and is best followed of all that come
after. S. Augustine had written against a Bishop who was of the Sect of the
Anthropomorphits, whose Heresy was that God had a Body; and in opposition of
him, S. Augustine had said, Istius corporis oculos nec videre Deum, nec
visuros, That God was so far from having a Body, that our bodily eyes,
howsoever glorified, should never see God. In that Treatise S. Augustine had
been very bitter against that Bishop, and being warned of it, in another
Epistle to another Bishop, Fortunatianus, he repents, and retracts his
bitterness, but his opinion, his doctrine, That our bodily eyes should never
see God, S. Augustine never retracted. He professes ingenuously, Long
tolerabilius corpori arrogare, quam Deo derogare, That he could be more easily
brought to attribute so much too much to the body of man, as to say that with
these bodily eyes he should see God, then to derogate so much from God, as to
say that he had a body that might be seen; but because he saw that one might
follow on the other, he denied both, and did no more believe that man's eyes
should see God, then that God had a body to be seen.

And this negative opinion of his, S. Augustine builds upon S. Ambrose, and
upon S. Hierome too, who seem to deny that the Angels themselves see the
Essence of God; and upon Athanasius, who, against the Arrians opinion, That God
the Father only was invisible, but the Son, (who was not equal to the Father)
and the Holy Ghost, (who was not equal to the Son) might be seen, argues and
maintains, that the whole Trinity is equal in it self, and equally invisible
to us. So does he also assist himself with that of Nazianzen, Quando Deus
visus, salva sua invisibilitate visus, howsoever God be said to have been seen,
it is said in some such sense, as that even then when he was seen, he was
invisible. He might have added Chrysostomes testimony too, Ipsum quod Deus est,
nec Angeli viderunt, nec Archangeli; Neither Angel nor Archangel did ever see
that Nature, which is the very Essence of God: And he might have added
Areopagita too, who expresses it with equal elegancy and vehemence, Dei nec
sententia est, nec ratio, nec opinio, nec sensus, nec phantasia: If we bring
the very Nature and Essence of God into question, we can give no judgment upon
it, (non sententia) we can make no probable discourse of it, (non ratio) we can
frame no likely opinion, or conjecture in it, (non opinio) we cannot prepare
our selves with any thing which has fallen under our senses, (non sensus) nor
with any thing which we can bring studiously, or which can fall casually into
our fancy, or imagination, (non phantasia.) And upon the whole matter, and all
the evidence, he joins in this verdict with S. Hierome, Tunc cernitur, cum
invisibilis creditur; God is best seen by us, when we confess that he cannot
be seen of us. S. Augustine denies not, That our eyes shall be spiritual eyes,
but in what proportion spiritual, or to what particular use spiritual, he
will not pretend to know: Vtrum in simplicitatem spiritus cedat, it a ut totus
homo jam sit spiritus, whether the body of man shall be so attenuated and
rarefied, as that the whole man shall become spirit, Aut animam adjuvet corpus
ad videndum, whether the body shall contribute and assist the faculties of the
soul, as in this life it does, Fateor me non alicubi legisse, quod existimarem
sufficere, ad docendum, aut ad discendum, says that blessed and sober Father,
I confess I never read any thing that I thought sufficient to rectify mine
own judgment, much less to change another: But to all those places of
Scripture, which are to this purpose, That the Angels see the face of God, and
that we shall be like the Angels, and see God face to face, he answers well,
Facies Dei ea est, qua Deus innotescit nobis, That is the face of God to us
all, by which God is known and manifested to us; in which sense, Reason is the
face of God to the natural man, the Law to the Jew, and the Gospel to us; and
such a sight of God, does no more put such a power of seeing in our bodily
eyes, then it puts a face upon God: We shall see God face to face, and yet God
shall have no face to be seen, nor we bodily eyes to see him by: For, Non legi,
That, I have not read, says he; This, says he, I have read, Regi
incorruptibili, and invisibili, Unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible,
etc. Neither dare I, says S. Augustine, 1 Timothy 1.17.
sever those things which the Spirit of God has joined, Vt dicam
incorruptibilem quidem in saecula saeculorum, invisibilem autem in hoc saeculo,
I dare not say that God is immortal in this world, and in the next world too,
but invisible in this world only, and visible in the next, for the Holy Ghost
has pronounced him invisible, as far as immortal.

Si rogas, says he, if you press me, Cannot God then be seen? Yes, I confess
he can. If you ask me, how? Cum vult, and sicuti vult, He may be seen when he
will, and how he will. If you pursue it, can he not be seen in his Essence?
yes, he can; If you proceed farther, and ask me how again? I can say no more,
says he, then Christ says, Erimus sicut Angeli, we shall be like the Angels,
and we shall see God, so as the Angels do, but they see him not with bodily
eyes, nor as an object, which is that that S. Ambrose, and S. Hicrome, and S.
Chrysostom intend, when they deny that the Angels see the Essence of God, that
is, they see him not otherwise then by understanding him. All agree in this
resolution, Solus Deus videt cor, and solum cor videt Deum, Only God can see
the heart of man and only the heart of man can see God: For, in this world, our
bodily eyes do not see bodies, they see but colors and dimensions, they see
not bodies; much less shall our eyes, though spiritual, see spirits in
heaven; least of all, that Spirit, in comparison of of whom, Angels, and our
spirits are but gross bodies.

So far the Fathers lead us toward a determination herein; and thus far the
School; Nulla visio naturalis in terris; Here, in this life, neither the eyes,
nor the mind of the most subtle, and most sanctified man can see the Essence
of God: Nulla visio corporalis in coelis, The bodily eyes of no man, in the
highest stare of glorification in heaven, can see the Essence of God: Nulla
visio comprehensiva omnino, That faculty of man, which shall see the Essence of
God in heaven, yet shall not comprehend that Essence; for to comprehend, is not
to know a thing, as well as I can know it, but to know it as well as that thing
can be known; and so only God himself can see, and know, that is, comprehend
God.

To end all, in the whole body of the Scriptures we have no light, that our
bodily eyes shall be so enlightened in the Resurrection, Job 19.26.
as to see the Essence of God; For, when Job says, In carne mea, In my flesh I
shall see God, and Oculi mei videbunt, Mine eyes shall see God, (if these words
must necessarily be understood of the last Resurrection, which some Expositors
deny, and Calvin in particular, understands them of a particular resurrection
from that calamity which lay upon Job at that time, and of his confidence that
God would raise him again, even in this life) yet howsoever, and to which
resurrection soever you refer them, the words must be understood thus, In my
flesh, that is, when my soul shall reassume this flesh in the Resurrection,
In that flesh I shall see God; he does not say, That flesh shall, but He, in
that flesh, shall. So when he adds Oculi mei, Mine eyes shall do it, he
intends Oculos internos, of which the Apostle speaks, The eyes of your
understanding being enlightened. Ephesians. 1.18.
So then, a faculty to see him so, in his Essence, with bodily eyes, we find
not in Scripture; But yet in the Scriptures we do find, that we shall see him
so, Sicuti est, As he is, in his Essence; How? It is a safe answer which S.
Augustine gives in all such questions, Melius affirmamus, de quibus minime
dubitamus, Only those things are safely affirmed, and resolved, which admit no
doubt: This has never admitted any doubt, but that our soul, and her
faculties shall be so exalted in that state of glory, as that in those
internal faculties of the soul, so exalted, we shall see the very Essence of
God, which no measure of the light of grace, communicated to any, the most
fanctified man here, does effect, but only the light of glory there shall. And
therefore this being clear, that in the faculties of our souls we shall see
him, Restat ut de illa visione secundum interiorem hominem certissimi simus,
says that blessed and sober Father, As our reason is satisfied that the Saints
in heaven shall see God so, so let our consciences be satisfied, that we have
an interest in that state, and that we in particular shall come to that sight
of God; Et cor mundum ad illam visionem praeparemus, Let us not abuse our
selves with false assurances, nor rest in any other, then this, that we have
made clean, and pure our very hearts, for only such shall see God. Omnis
meridies diluculum habuit, (as the same Father continues this Meditation) The
brightest non had a faint twilight, and break of day; The sight of God which
we shall have in heaven, must have a Diluculum, a break of day here; If we will
see his face there, we must see it in some beams here: And to that purpose,
Visus per omnes sensus recurrit, (as S. Augustine has collected out of
several places of Scripture) Every sense is called sight, for there is Odora
and vide, and Gusta and vide, Taste and See how sweet, and Smell and See what a
savor of life the Lord is; Apoc. 1.12. Luke 24.39.
So S. John turned about, To see a voice, There Hearing was Sight; And so our
Savior Christ says, Palpate and videte, and there Feeling is Seeing. All
things concur to this Seeing, and therefore in all the works of your senses,
and in all your other faculties, See ye the Lord; Hear him in his word, and so
see him; Speak to him in your prayers, and so see him; Touch him in his
Sacrament, and so see him; Present holy and religious actions unto him, and so
see him.

David's heart was toward Absalon, 2 Samuel 14.
says that Story: Ioab saw that, and, as every man will be forward to further
persons growing in favor, (for so it should be done to him, whom the King will
honor) Ioah plotted and effected Absalons return, but yet Absalon saw not the
Kings face in two years. Beloved in Christ Jesus, the heart of your gracious
God is set upon you; and we his servants have told you so, and brought you thus
near him, into his Court, into his house, into the Church, but yet we cannot
get you to see his face, to come to that tenderness of conscience, as to
remember and consider, that all your most secret actions are done in his sight
and his presence; Caesar's face, and Caesar's inscription you can see; The face
of the Prince in his coin you can rise before the Sun to see, and sit up till
midnight to see; but if you do not see the face of God upon every piece of
that money too, all that money is counterfeit; If Christ have not brought that
fish to the hook, Mat. 17.25.
that brings the money in the mouth, (as he did to Peter) that money is ill
fished for; If nourishing of suits, and love of contention amongst others, for
your own gain have brought it, (...) 12.14. (...) 24.3.
it is out of the way of that counsel, Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see God. This is the generation of them
that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob; Innocens manibus, and mundus
cord, either such an innocence, as never fouled the hands, or such an
innocence as has washed them clean again, such an innocence as has kept you
from corrupt getting, or such an innocence as has restored us, by restoring
that, which was corruptly got. It is testified of Solomon, 1 King. 10.24.
That he exceeded all the Kings of the Earth, for Wisdom, and for Riches, and
all the Earth sought the face of Solomon; A greater then Solomon is here, for
Wisdom, and Riches; your wisdom is foolishness, and your riches beggary,
if you see not the face of this Solomon; If either you have studied, or
practiced, or judged, when his back is toward you, that is, if you have not
done all, as in his presence. You are in his presence now; go not out of it,
when you go from hence. Amor rerum terrenarum, viscus pennarum spiritualium;
August.
God has given you the wings of Doves, and the eyes of Eagles to see him now,
in this place; If in returning from this place, you return to your former
ways of pleasure or profit, this is a breaking of those Doves wings, and a
cieling of those Eagles eyes. Coge cor tuum cogitare divina, compelle, urge,
says that Father; Here, in the Church, thou can not choose but see God, and
raise thy heart toward him: But when thou art returned to thy several
distractions, that vanities shall pull thine eyes, and obtrectation, and
libellous defamation of others shall pull thine ears, and profit shall pull
thy hands, then Coge, compelle, urge. force and compel thy heart, and press,
even in that thrust of tentations, to see God. What God is in his Essence, or
what our sight of the Essence of God shall be in the next world, dispute not
too curiously, determine nor too peremptorily; Cogitans de Deo, si finivisti,
Deus non est, is excellently said by S. Augustine: If thou begin to think, what
the Essence of God is, and can bring that thought to an end, thou have
mistaken it; whenever thou can say, Deus est, this is God, or God is this,
non est Deus, that is not God, God is not that, for he is more, infinitely more
then that. But, non potes dicere, Deus est, thou art not able to say, This is
God, God is this; Saltem dicas, hoc Deus non est; Be able to say, This is not
God, God is not this: The belly is not God; Mammon is not God; Mauzzim, the God
of Forces, Oppression, is not God; Belphegor, Licentiousness, is not God:
Howsoever God sees me, to my confusion, yet I do not see God, when I am
sacrificing to these, which are not Gods.

Let us begin at that which is nearest us, within us, pureness of heart, and
from thence receive the testimony of Gods Privy Seal, the impression of his
Spirit, that we are Blessed; and that leads us to the Great Seal, the full
fruition of all; we shall see God, there, where he shall make us drink of the
Rivers of his pleasures; There is fullness, plenty; Psalm. 36.8.
but lest it should be a Feast of one day, or of a few, as it is said, they are
rivers, so it is added, with thee is the Fountain of life; An abundant river,
to convay, and a perpetual spring, to feed, and continue that river: And then,
wherein appears all this? In this, for in thy light we shall see light; In
seeing God, we shall see all that concerns us, and see it always; No night to
determine that day, no cloud to overcast it. We end all, with S. Augustines
devout exclamation, Deus bone, qui erunt illi oculi! Glorious God, what kind
of eyes shall they be! Quam decori! quam sereni! How bright eyes, and how well
set! Quam valentes! quam constantes! How strong eyes, and how durable! Quid
arbitremur? quid aestimemus? quid loquemur? What quality, what value, what name
shall we give to those eyes? Occurrunt verba quotidiana and sordidata
vilissimis rebus; I would say something of the beauty and glory of these eyes,
and can find no words, but such, as I my self have mis-used in lower things.
Our best expressing of it, is to express a desire to come to it, for there
only we shall learn what to call it. That so, we may go the Apostles way, to
his end, That being made free from sin, Romans 6.22
and become servants to God, we may have our fruit unto holiness, and then,
the End, life everlasting.

SERMONS Preached in LENT.
SERMON XIII. Preached in Lent, To the KING. April 20. 1630.
JOB 16. v. 17, 18, 19. Not for any injustice in my hands: Also my prayer is
pure. O earth cover not thou my blood; and let my cry have no place. Also now
behold, my Witness is in heaven, and my Record is on high.


Jobs friends (as, in civility we are feign to call them, because they came
upon a civil pretense, to visit him, and to comfort him) had now done
speaking. It was long before they would have done. Andivi frequenter talia,
says Job to them, v. 2.
I have often heard such things as you say, they are not new to me; and
therefore, Onerosi consolatores, Miserable comforters, troublesome comforters
are ye all, old and new. But, Numquid finem habebunt verba ventosa, says he,
Shall your windy words, your empty, your aerie, v. 3.
your frothy words have any end? Now they have an end. Eliphas ends his charge
in the last, and in this Chapter Job begins to answer for himself. But how? By
a middle way. Job does not justify himself; but yet he does not prevaricate,
he does not betray his Innocence neither. For there may be a pusillanimity even
toward God; A man may over-clog his own conscience, and belie himself in his
confessions, out of a distempered jealousy, and suspicion of Gods purposes
upon him; Job does not so. Many men have troubled themselves more, how the
soul comes into man, then how it goes out; They wrangle, whether it comes in
by Infusion from God, or by Propagation from parents, and never consider,
whether it shall return to Him that made it, or to him that marred it, to Him
that gave it, or to him that corrupted it. So, many of our Expositors upon this
Book of Job, have spent themselves upon the Person, and the Place, and the
Time, who Job was, when Job was, where Job was, and whether there were ever any
such person as Job, or no; and have passed over too slightly the senses, and
doctrines of the Book. S. Gregory has, (to good use) given us many Morals,
(as he calls them) upon this Book, but, truly, not many Literals, for, for the
most part, he bends all the sufferings of Job figuratively, mystically upon
Christ. Origin, who (except S. Gregory) has written most of this Book; and
yet gone but a little way into the book neither, does never pretend much
literalnesse in his expositions, so that we are not to look for that at
Origens hands. We must not therefore refuse the assistance of later men, in the
exposition of this Text, Not for any Injustice in my hands, etc.

In this Chapter, and before this text, we have Jobs Anatomy, Jobs Sceleton,
the ruins to which he was reduced. In the eighth verse he takes knowledge, That
God had filled him with leanness and wrinckles, and that those wrinckles, and
that leanness were witnesses against him, and, That they that hated him, had
torn him in pieces, in the ninth verse. In the eleventh verse, That God had
delivered him over to the ungodly, and, That God himself had shaked him in
pieces, and set him up as a mark to shoot at, in the twelfe verse, That God
had cleft his reins, and poured out his gall upon the ground, in the thirteenth
verse, and in the fourteenth, That he broke him, breach after breach, and run
over him as a Giant, and at last, in the sixteenth verse, That foulness was
upon his face, and the shadow of death upon his eyelids. Now, let me ask in
Jobs behalf Gods question to Ezekiel, Putasne vivent ossaista? Do thou
belceve that these bones can live? Ezekiel. 37.2.
Can this Anatomy, this Sceleton, these ruins, this rubbidge of Job speak? It
can, it does in this Text, Not for any Injustice in my hands, etc.

And, in these words, it delivers us, first, The confidence of a godly man; Do
God what he will, say ye what ye will, That because I am more afflicted then
other men, therefore I am guilty of more heinous sins then other men, yet I
know, that whatsoever Gods end be in this proceeding, It is not for any
Injustice in my hands, Also my prayer is pure. Secondly, it delivers us that
kind of infirm anguish, and indignation, that halfedistemper, that
expostulation with God, which sometimes comes to an excess even in good and
godly men, O earth cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place; I
desire not that any thing should be concealed or disguised, let all that ever I
have done be written in my forehead, and read by all men. And then thirdly and
lastly, it delivers us the foundation of his confidence, and the recovery from
this his infirmity, and from his excess in the manner of expressing it, if he
have been over-bold therein, My Witness is in heaven, and my Record is on
high; God is his Witness, that that which they charge him with, is false, That
that which he says in his own discharge (in that sense that he says it) is
true; And in these three, Jobs Protestation, Not guilty, Jobs Manifest, I would
all the world knew all, Jobs Establishment, and consolidation, My Witness is
in Heaven; in these three branches, and in some fruits, which, in passing, we
shall gather from them, we shall determine all that appertains to these words.

I remember S. Gregory, 1. Part.
in handling one text, professes, that he will endeavor to handle it so, Vt
ejus altitudo non sic fieret nescientibus cognita, ut esset scientibus onerosa;
So, as that the weakest understanding might comprehend the highest points, and
the highest understanding not be weary to hear ordinary doctrines so
delivered. Indeed it is a good art, to deliver deep points in a holy
plainness, and plain points in a holy delightfulness: for, many times, one
part of our auditory understands us not, when we have done, and so they are
weary; and another part understands us before we begun, and so they are weary.
To day, my humble petition must be, That you will be content to hear plain
things plainly delivered. Of which, be this the first, That Job found himself
under the oppression, and calumny of that mis-interpretation, that Kings
themselves, and States, and Churches have not escaped.

The tower of Siloe fell and slew them, Luke 13.4.
therefore they were the greater sinners in Jerusalem; this man prospers not in
the world, Therefore he proceeds not in the fear of God; the heir wastes the
estate, therefore the estate was ill gotten, are hasty conclusions in private
affairs. Treasures are empty, therefore there are unnecessary wastes;
Discontented persons murmr, therefore things are ill carried; our neigbours
prosper by Action, therefore we perish by not appearing, are hasty conclusions
in State affairs. This man is affected when he hears a blasphemous oath; and
when he looks upon the general liberty of sinning; therefore he is a Puritan;
That man loves the ancient forms, and Doctrines, and Disciplines of the
Church, and retains, and delights in the reverend names of Priest, and Altar,
and Sacrifice, therefore he is a Papist, are hasty conclusions in Church
affairs. When we do fall under these mis-interpretations, and ill
applications of Gods proceedings, V. 4.
we may say with Job, I also could speak, as you do; if your soul were in my
souls stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake my head at you,
conclude desperately, speak scornefully of you. But I will not; yet I will not
betray my self, I will make my protestation, what end soever God propose to
himself in this his proceeding, It is not for any injustice in my hands, Also
my prayer is pure.

In these two, Manus.
cleanness of hands, pureness of Prayer, are all religious duties
comprehended: for clean hands denote justice and righteousness toward men,
and pure prayer Devotion, and the service and worship of God. Job protests for
both. Therefore does Origin say of Job, Certe puto, quod and audeo dicere, I
do verily believe, and therefore may be bold to say, that for constancy and
fidelity toward God, Job did exceed, Non solum homines, sed and ipsos Angelos,
Not only men, but Angels themselves; for, says Origin, Job did not only
suffer Absque culpa, without being guilty of those things to which his
afflictions were imputed, but he suffered Cum gratiarum actionibus, he said
grace when he had no meat, when God gave him Stones for Bread, and Scorpions
for Fish; he praised God as much for the affliction it self, as for his former,
or his subsequent benefits and blessings. Not that Job was merely innocent, but
that he was guilty of no such things, as might confer those conclusions, which,
from his afflictions, his enemies raised. Job 9.20.
If I justify my self, says Job, Mine own mouth shall condemn me; Every
self-justification is a self-condemnation; when I give judgment for my self, I
am therein a witness against my self. If I say I am perfect, says he in the
same place, even that proves me perverse; If I say I never go out of the way,
I am out then, and therefore because I say so: I have sinned, says he, What
shall I do unto thee O thou preserver of men? Job 7.2.
Job felt the hand of destruction upon him, and he felt the hand of
preservation too; and it was all one hand; This is Gods Method, and his alone,
to preserve by destroying. Men of this world do sometimes repair, and
recompense those men whom they have oppressed before, but this is an after
recompense; Gods first intention even when he destroys is to preserve, as a
Physicians first intention, in the most distasteful physic, is health; even
Gods demolitions are super-edifications, his Anatomies, his dissections are so
many re-compactings, so many resurrections; God winds us off the Skein, that
he may weave us up into the whole piece, and he cuts us out of the whole piece
into pieces, that he may make us up into a whole garment.

But for all these humiliations, and confessions, Job does not wave his
protestation; Job. 27.6.
My rightcousnesse I hold fast, and my heart shall not reproach me as long as I
live. Not that I shall never sin, but never leave any sin unrepented; And then,
my heart cannot reproach me of a repented sin, without reproaching God himself.
The Sun must not set upon my anger; Ephesians. 4.24.
much less will I let the Sun set upon the anger of God toward me, or sleep
in an unrepeted sin. Every nights sleep is a Nunc dimittis; then the Lord lets
his servant depart in peace. Thy lying down is a valediction, a parting, a
taking leave, (shall I say so?) a shaking hands with God; and, when thou
shakest hands with God, let those hands be clean. Enter into thy grave, thy
metaphorical, thy quotidian grave, thy bed, as thou entredstinto the Church at
first, by Water, by Baptism; Re-baptise thy self every night, in Jobs Snow
water, in holy tears that may cool the inordinate lusts of thy heart, Job 9.30.
and withold unclean abuses of those hands even in that thy grave, thy Bed;
And evermore remember Jobs fear and jealouste in that place, That when he had
washed himself in Snow water, Abominabuntur me vestimenta mea, Mine own clothes
will make me foul again. Thy flesh is thy clothes; and to this mischievous
purpose of fouling thy hands with thine own clothes, thou have most clothes on
when thou art naked; Then, in that nakedness, thou art in most danger of
fouling thy hands with thine own clothes. Miserable man! that could have no
use of hands, nor any other organ of sense, if there were no other creature but
thy self, and yet, if there were no other creature but thy self, could sin
upon thy self, and foul thy hands with thine own hands. How much more then, if
thou strike with those hands, by oppression in thy office, or shut up those
hands, and that which is due to another, in them? Sleep with clean hands,
either kept clean all day, by integrity; or washed clean, at night, by
repentance; and whenever thou wakest, though all Jobs messengers thunder
about thee, and all Jobs friends multiply mis-interpretations against thee, yet
Jobs protestation shall be thy protestation, what end soever God have in this
proceeding, It is not for any injustice in my hands, and the other part of his
protestation too, Also my prayer is pure.

As clean hands denote all righteousness toward man, Oration.
so do pure prayers all devotion, and worship, and service of God. For, we are
of the household of the faithful, and the service which we are to do, as his
household servants, is prayer; for, his house is the house of prayer. And
therein only is it possible to us, to fulfill that Commandment, pray
continually, that continually, in all our familiar actions, we may serve God,
glorify God, (whether we eat or drink, we may do it to his glory) and every
glorifying, every thanksgiving, is prayer; there cannot be a more effectual
prayer for future, then a thankful acknowledgement of former benefits. Petitc,
and dabitur; How often is that repeated in the Gospel, and in the Epistles?
Ask, and it shall be given ye; no grant without prayer, no denial upon
prayer.

It must be prayer, and my prayer; Also my prayer is pure. Oration mea.
I must not rely upon the prayers of others; not of Angels; Though they be
Ministerial spirits, and not only to God himself, but between God and Man,
and so, as they present our prayers, no doubt pour out their own for us too,
yet we must not rely upon the prayers of Angels. Nor of Saints; Though they
have a more personal, and experimental sense of our miseries then Angels
have, we must not rely upon the prayers of Saints. No, nor upon the prayers of
the Congregation, though we see, and hear them pray, except we make our selves
parts of the Congregation, by true devotion, as well as by personal presence.

It must be mine own prayer, and no prayer is so truly, or so properly mine, as
that that the Church has delivered and recommended to me. In sudden and
unpremeditate prayer, I am not always I; and when I am not my self, my prayer
is not my prayer. Passions and affections sometimes, sometimes bodily
infirmities, and sometimes a vain desire of being eloquent in prayer, aliens
me, withdraws me from my self, and then that prayer is not my prayer. Though
that prayer which Luther is said to have said upon his deathbed, Oremus pro
Domine Deo nostro Jesus Christo, Let us pray for our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, may admit a good sense, because Christ being (as S. Augustine says
often) Caput and Corpus, both the Head and the Body, as he is the Body, the
Church, subject to so many pressures, he had need to be prayed for; yet, his
state being considered at that time, almost at the last gasp, he being scarce
he, that prayer can scarce be called his prayer.

In that African Council, in which S. Augustine was present, to remedy the
abuse of various forms of Prayers, which diverse Churches assumed, it was
decreed that no prayers should be received in the Church, but such as were
composed, or approved by the Council. We have proceeded so too; No prayers
received for public use, but those that are delivered by public authority;
and so, they become My prayers. As the Law of the Land is my Law, and I have an
inheritance in it, so the prayers of the Church are my prayers, and I have an
interest in them, because I am a Son of that family. My Baptism is mine, and
my Absolution is mine, because the Church has given them to me, and so are her
prayers mine. You would scarce thank a man for an extemporall Elegy, or
Epigram, or Panegyrique in your praise, if it cost the Poet, or the Orator no
pains. God will scarce hearken to sudden, inconsidered, irreverent prayers.
Men will study even for Complements; and Princes and Ambassadors will not speak
to one another, without thinking what they will say. Let not us put God to
speak to us so, (Preaching is Gods speaking to us) Let not us speak to God so,
(Praying is our speaking to God) not extemporally, unadvisedly,
inconsiderately. Prayer must be my prayer; and Quid habeo quod non accepi? Even
in this kind, what have I that I have not received? I have received my prayer
altogether, as a bundle of Myrrh, in that prayer which I have received from my
Savior, and then I have received it appropriated to me, and apportioned to my
particular necessities, and sacrifices, by the piety and wisdom of the Church;
so it is my prayer, and, as Jobs prayer was, pure prayer, Also my prayer is
pure.

The Holy Ghost has so marshalled and disposed the qualifications of Prayer in
this place, Pura.
as that there is no pure prayer without clean hands. The lifting up of hands
was the gesture of prayer, even among the heathen, Manibus supplex or are
supinis. Amongst the Jews, Prayer, and the lifting up of hands, was one and the
same thing, Let the lifting up of my hands be an evening Sacrifice; Psalm.
141.2. Exed. 17.11.
And, longer then Moses hands were lifted up, his prayer had no effect. All
this, perchance therefore especially, that this lifting up of my hands, brings
them into my sight; then I can see them, and see whether they be clean, or no,
and consider, that if I see impurity in my hands, God sees impurity in my
Prayer. Can I think to receive ease from God with that hand that oppresses
another? Mercy from God with that hand that exercises cruelty upon another? Or
Bounty from God with that hand that withholds right from another? Prayer is
our hand, but it must be a clean hand, pure prayer.

That Emperor whom no religion would lose, Constantine, (for, the heathen
deified him, and the Christians canonized him, They made him a god, and we came
as near as we could, we made him a Saint) that Emperor was coined Praying.
Other Emperors were coined Triumphing, in Chariots, or preparing for Triumphs,
in Battles, and Victories, but he, Constantine, in that posture, Kneeling,
Praying. He knew his coin would pass through every family; and to every family
he desired to be an example of piety; Every piece of single money was a
Catechism, and testified to every Subject all this, surely he will graciously
receive my Petition, and look graciously upon me, when I kneel, for, behold he
kneels to, and he exhibits petitions to that God, from whom he acknowledges,
that he needs as much as I can from him. And yet this Symbolicall, and
Catechisticall coin of Constantines, was not so convincing, nor so irrefragable
a testimony of his piety, (for Constantine might be coined praying, and yet
never pray) as when we see as great a Prince as he, actually, really,
personally, daily, duly at prayer with us.

To end this branch, let not thy prayer be lucrative, nor vindicative, pray not
for temporal superfluities, pray not for the confusion of them that differ
from thee in opinion, or in manners, but condition thy prayer, inanimate thy
prayer with the glory of God, and thine own everlasting happiness, and the
edification of others, and this prayer is Jobs prayer, pure prayer. And farther
we enlarge not his Protestation, My hands are clean, I do no man wrong; my
prayer is pure, I mock not God. But because continuing under so great
afflictions, men would not believe this, he proceeds, perchance to some
excess, and inconsiderateness, in desiring a manifestation of all his
actions, O Earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.

Difference of Expositions makes us stop here, upon this inquisition, in what
affection Job spoke this. Whether this were merely an adjuration of the earth,
2 Part.
not to cover his blood, but that his miseries, and the cry thereof might
pass, and be transferred over all the world; or whether it had the nature of
an imprecation upon himself, That he wished, or admitted against himself, that
which is against the nature of every man to admit, that is, to have all that
ever he had done, published, declared, manifested to all the world. S. Gregory,
according to his manner, through all this book, which is, to apply all Jobs
sufferings to Christ, and to make Job some kind of type of Christ, makes no
more of this, but that it is an adjuration of the earth, in the person and
behalf of Christ, not to suck in, or smoother his blood, but that it might be
notified, and communicated to all the world. And truly, this is a good use, but
it cannot be said to be a good sense of the place, because it cannot consist
with the rest of the words.

Amongst our later men, Cajetan, (and he, from a Rabbi of the Jews, Aben Ezra)
takes this to be an adjuration of the Earth, as Gregory does, but not, as
Gregory does, in the person of Christ, but of Job himself; That Job adjures
the earth, not to cover his blood, that is, not to cover the shedding of his
blood, not to conspire with the malice of his enemies so much, as to deny him
burial when he was dead, that they which trod him down alive, might not
triumph over him after his death, or conclude that God did certainly forsake
him alive, since he continued these declarations against him, when he was dead.
And this also may have good use, but yet it is too narrow, and too shallow, to
be the sense of this phrase, this elegancy, this vehemence of the Holy Ghost,
in the mouth of Job.

S. Chrysostom, I think, was the first that gave light to the sense of this
place. He says, that such men, as are (as they think) over-punished, have
naturally a desire, that the world knew their faults; that so, by comparing
their faults with their punishments, there might arise some pity and
commiseration of their state. And, surely, this, that Chrysostom says, is
true, and natural; for, if two men were to be executed together, by one kind
of death, the one for stealing a Sheep, (perchance in hunger) the other for
killing his Father, certainly, he that had but stolen the Sheep, would be
sorry the world should think their cases alike, or that he had killed a Father
too. And in such an affection Job says, I am so far from being guilty of those
things that are imputed to me, that I would be content, that all that ever I
have done, were known to all the world.

This light, which S. Chrysostom. gave to this place, shined not out, (I think)
till the Reformation; for, I have not observed any Author, between Chrysostom
and the Reformation, that has taken knowledge of this interpretation; nor any
of the Reformation, as from him, from Chrysostom. But, since our Authors of
the Reformation, have somewhat generally pursued that sense, ( Calvin has done
so, and so Tremellius, and so Piscator, and many, many more) now, one Author of
the Roman Church, (one as curious and diligent in interpreting obscure places
of Scripture, as any amongst them, and then more bold and confident in
departing from their vulgar, and frivolous, and impertinent interpretations of
Scriptures, then any amongst them) the Capuchin Bolduc, has also pursued that
sense. That sense is, that in this adjuration, or imprecation, O Earth cover
not thou my blood; Blood is not literally bodily blood, but spiritual blood,
the blood of the soul, exhausted by many, and heinous sins, such as they
insimulated Job of. For, in this signification, is that word, Blood, often
taken in the Scriptures. When God says, when you stretch forth your hands,
Esaias 1.15. Psalm. 51.14.
they are full of blood, there blood is all manner of rapine, of oppression, of
concussion, of violence. When David prays to be delivered from
bloodguiltinesse, it is not intended only, of an actual shedding of blood,
for, it is in the Original, a sanguinibus, in the plural; other crimes then
the actual shedding of blood, are bloody crimes. Ezech 7.23.
Therefore, says one Prophet, the land is full of bloody crimes; And, another,
blood touches blood, Hosea 4.2.
whom the Chalde Paraprase expresses aright, Aggregant peccata peccatis, blood
touches blood, when sin induces sin. Which place of Hosea, S. Gregory
interprets too, then blood touches blood, cum ante oculos Dei, adjunctis
peccatis cruentatur anima; Then God sees a soul in her blood, when she wounds
and wounds her self again, with variation of diverse, or iteration of the same
sins.

This then being thus established, that blood in this Text, is the blood of the
soul, exhausted by sin, (for every sin is an incision of the soul, a
Lancination, a Phlebotomy, a letting of the soul blood, and then, a delight in
sin, is a going with open veins into a warm bath, and bleeding to death) This
will be the force of Jobs Admiration, or Imprecation, O Earth cover not thou my
blood, I am content to stand as naked now, as I shall do at the day of
Judgment, when all men shall see all men's actions, I desire no disguise, I
deny, I excuse, I extenuate nothing that ever I did, I would mine enemies knew
my worst, that they might study some other reason of Gods thus proceeding with
me, then those heinous sins, which, from these afflictions, they will
necessarily conclude against me.

But had Job been able to have stood out this trial? Was Job so innocent, as
that he need not care, though all the world knew all? Perchance there may have
been some excess, some inordinatenesse in his manner of his expressing it; we
cannot excuse the vehemence of some holy men, in such expressions. We cannot
say, that there was no excess in Moses his Dele me, Pardon this people, or
blot my name out of thy book; or that there was no excess in S. Paul's
Anathema pro fratribus, That he wished to be accursed, to be separated from
Christ for his brethren. But for Job, we shall not need this excuse; for,
either we may restrain his words to those sins, which they imputed to him, and
then they have but the nature of that protestation, which David made so often
to God, Judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, according to mine
innocence, according to the cleanness of my hands; which was not spoken by
David simply, but respectively, not of all his sins, but of those which Saul
pursued him for: Or, if we enlarge Jobs words generally to all his sins, we
must consider them to be spoken after his repentance, and reconciliation to God
thereupon; If they knew, (may Job have said) how it stood between God and my
soul, how earnestly I have repented, how fully he has forgiven, they would
never say, these afflictions proceeded from those sins.

And truly, so may I, so may every soul say, that is rectified, refreshed,
restored, reestablished by the seals of Gods pardon, and his mercy, so the
world would take knowledge of the consequences of my sins, as well as of the
sins themselves, and read my leafes on both sides, and hear the second part of
my story, as well as the first; so the world would look upon my temporal
calamities, the bodily sicknesses, and the penuriousnesse of my fortune
contracted by my sins, and upon my spiritual calamities, dejections of spirit,
sadness of heart, declinations toward a diffidence and distrust in the mercy
of God, and then, when the world sees me in this agony and bloody sweat, in
this agony and bloody sweat would also see the Angels of heaven ministering
comforts unto me; so they would consider me in my Peccavi, and God in his
Transtulit, Me in my earnest Confessions, God in his powerful Absolutions, Me
drawn out of one Sea of blood, the blood of mine own soul, and cast into
another Sea, the bottomless Sea of the blood of Christ Jesus; so they would
know as well what God has done for my soul, as what my soul and body have
done against my God; so they would read me throughout, and look upon me
altogether, I would join with Job, in his confident adjuration, O Earth cover
not thou my blood; Let all the world know all the sins of my youth, and of mine
age too, and I would not doubt, but God should receive more glory, and the
world more benefit, then if I had never sinned. This is that that exalts Jobs
confidence, he was guilty of nothing, that is, no such thing as they concluded
upon, of nothing absolutely, because he had repented all. And from this, his
confidence rises to a higher pitch then this, Nec clamor, O Earth cover not
thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.

What means Job in this? Doubtful Expositors make us doubt too. Some have
said, Clamor.
that Job desires his cry might have no place, that is, no termination, no
resting place, but that his just complaint might be heard over all the world;
Stunnica the Augustinian interprets it so. Some have said, that he intends by
his cry, his crying sins, that they might have no place, that is, no hiding
place, but that his greatest sins, and secret sins might be brought to light;
Bolduc the Capuchin interprets it so; according to that use of the word Clamor,
God looked for righteousness, and ecce clamorem, behold a cry; that is, Esaias
5.7.
sins crying in the ears of God. But there is more then so, in this phrase, in
this elegancy, in this vehemence of the Holy Ghost in Jobs mouth, Let my cry
have no place.

In the former part, ( Jobs Protestation) he considered God and man;
righteousness toward man in clean hands, and, in pure prayers, devotion
toward God. In this part, (his Manifest) he pursues the same method, he
considers man, and God; Though men knew all my sins, that should not trouble
me, says he, (and that we have considered) yea, though my cry find no place,
no place with God, that should not trouble me; I should be content that God
should seem not to hear my prayers, but that he laid me open to that ill
interpretation of wicked men, Tush, he prays, but the Lord hears him not, he
cries, but God relieves him not. And yet, when will thou relieve me, O thou
reliever of men, if not upon my cries, upon my prayers? Yet, S. Augustine has
repeated that, more then once, more then twice, Non est magnum exaudiri ad
voluntatem, non est magnum; Be not over-joyed when God grants thee thy prayer.
Exauditi ad voluntatem Daemones, says that Father, The Devil had his prayer
granted, when he had leave to enter into the Heard of Swine; And so he had
(says he, exemplifying in our present example) when he obtained power from God
against Job. But all this aggravated the Devils punishment; so may it do
thine, to have some prayers granted. And, as that must not over-joy thee, if it
be, so if thy prayer be not granted, it must not deject thee. God suffered S.
Paul to pray, and pray and pray, yet, after his thrice praying, granted him not
that he prayed for. God suffered that si possibile, if it be possiblle, and
that Transeat calix, Let this Cup pass, to pass from Christ himself, yet he
granted it not.

But, in many of these cases, a man does easilier satisfy his own mind, then
other men. If God grant me not my prayer, I recover quickly, and I lay hold
upon the horns of that Altar, and ride safely at that Anchor, God saw that
that which I prayed for, was not so good for him, nor so good for me. But when
the world shall come to say, Where is now your Religion, where is your
Reformation? do not all other Rivers, as well as the Tiber, or the Poe, does
not the Seine, and the Rhene, and the Maene too, begin to ebb back, and to
empty it self in the Sea of Rome? why should not your Thames do so, as well
as these other Rivers? Where is now your Religion, your Reformation? Were not
you as good run in the same channel as others do? This is a shrewd tentation,
and induces opprobrious conclusions from malicious enemies, when our cries have
no place, our religious service no present acceptance, our prayers no speedy
return from God. But yet because even in this, God may propose farther glory to
himself, more benefit to me, and more edification even to them, at last, who,
at first, made ill constructions of his proceedings, I admit, as Job admits, O
Earth cover not thou my blood, (let all the world see all my faults) and let my
cry have no place, (let them imagine that God has forsaken me, and does not
hear my prayers;) my satisfaction, my acquiescence arises not out of their
opinion, and interpretation, that must not be my trial, but testis in coelis,
My witness is in heaven, and my record is on high, which is our third, and
last Consideration.

We must do in this last, as we have done in our former two parts, crack a
shell, 3 Part.
to taste the kernel, clear the words, to gain the Doctrine. I am ever
willing to assist that observation, That the books of Scripture are the
eloquentest books in the world, that every word in them has his weight and
value, his taste and verdure. And therefore must not blame those Translators,
nor those Expositors, who have, with a particular elegancy, varied the words in
this last clause of the Text, my witness, and my record. The oldest Latin
Translation received this variation, and the last Latin, even Tremellius
himself, (as close as he sticks to the Hebrew) retains this variation,
Testis, and Conscius. And that collection, which has been made upon this
variation, is not without use, that conscius may be spoken de interno, that God
will bear witness to my inward conscience; and testis, de externo, that God
will, in his time, testify to the world in my behalf. But other places of
Scripture will more advance that observation of the elegancy thereof, then
this; for in this, the two words signify but one and the same thing, it is but
witness, and witness, and no more. Not that it is easy to find in Hebrew
(nor, perchance, in any language) two words so absolutely Synonymous, as to
signify the same thing, without any difference, but that the two words in our
Text are not both of one language, not both Hebrew. For, the first word, Gned,
is an Hebrew word, but the other, Sahad, is Syriaque; and both signify alike,
Levit. 5.1.
and equally, testem, a witness. He that hears the voice of swearing, and is
a witness, says Moses, in the first word of our Text; and then the Chalde
Paraphrase, intending the same thing, expresses it in the other word, Sahad. So
in the contract between Laban and Jacob, Genesis 31.47.
Laban calls that heap of stones, which he had erected, Iegar-Sehadutha, by an
extraction from the last word of our Text, Sahad; Jacob calls it, by the first
word: And the reason is given in the body of the Text it self, in the vulgat
Edition, (though how it got thither, we know not, for, in the Original it is
not) Vterque juxta proprietatem lingua suae; Laban spoke in his language,
Syriaque, Jacob spoke in his, Hebrew, and both called that heap of stones, a
witness.

Now, our bestowing this little time upon the clearing of the words, has saved
us much more time; for, by this means we have shortened this clause of our
Text, and all that we are to consider, is but this, My witness is in heaven.
And truly, that is enough; I care not though all the world knew all my faults,
I care not what they conclude of Gods not granting my prayers, my witness is
in heaven. To be condemned unjustly amongst men, to be ill interpreted in the
acts of my Religion, is a heavy case; but yet, I have a relief in all this, my
witness is in heaven.

The first comfort is, Quia in Coelis.
Quia in Coelis, because he, whom I rely upon, is in heaven. For, that is the
foundation and Basis upon which our Savior erects that prayer, which he has
recommended unto us, Qui es in coelis, Our Father, which art in heaven; when I
lay hold upon him there, in heaven, I pursue cheerfully and confidently all
the other petitions, for daily bread, for forgiveness of sins, for deliverance
from tentations; from, and for all. Psalm. (...) Acts. (...)
Est in coelis, he is in heaven, and then Sedet in coelis, be sits in heaven;
That as I see him in that posture that Stephen saw him, standing at the right
hand of the Father, and so, in procinctu, in a readiness, in a willingness to
come to my succor, so I might contemplate him in a judiciary posture, in a
potestative, a sovereign posture, sitting, and consider him as able, as
willing to relieve me. He is in heaven, and he sits in heaven, and then habitat
in coelis, he dwells in heaven, Psalm. 113.5.
he is, and he is always there. Baals Priests could not always find him at
home; Jobs God, and our God is never abroad. He dwells in the heavens, and, (as
it is expressed there) In excelsis, he dwells on high; so high, that, (as it is
there added) God humbles himself, to behold the things that are in heaven.
With what amazedness must we consider the humiliation of God, in descending to
the earth, lower then so, to hell, when even his descending unto heaven, is a
humiliation? God humbles himself, when he beholds any thing lower then
himself, though Cherubins, though Seraphins, though the humane nature, the
body of his own, and only eternal Son; and yet he beholds, considers,
studies us, worms of the earth, and no men.

This then is Jobs, Testis.
and our first comfort, Quia in coelis, because he is in heaven, and sits in
heaven, and dwells in heaven, in the highest heaven, and so, sees all things.
But then, if God see, and say nothing, David apprehends that for a most
dangerous condition; and therefore he says, Psalm. 28.1. Psalm. 1^^.1.
Be not silent, O Lord, lest if thou be silent, I perish. And again, Hold not
thy peace, O God of my praise, for the mouth of the wicked is opened against
me: And, Lord, let thy mercy be as forward as their malice. And therefore, as
God, from that height, sees all, (and the strictest examination that we put
upon any Witness, is, that if he pretend to testify any thing upon his
knowledge, we ask, how he came by that knowledge, and if he be oculatus
testis, a Witness that saw it, this is good evidence) as God is to this
purpose, all eye, and sees all, so for our farther comfort, he descends to the
office of being a Witness, There is a Witness in heaven.

But then, Testis meus.
God may be a Witness, and yet not my Witness, and in that, there is small
comfort, (...) 29.22.
if God be a Witness on my adversaries side, a Witness against me. Even I
know, and am a Witness, says the Lord; that is, a Witness of the sins, which
I know by thee. Job 10.27.
And that is that which Job, with so much tenderness apprehended, Thou
renewest thy witnesses against me; Thou sent'st a witness against me, in the
Sabaeans, upon my servants; and then, thou renewedst that witness in the
Caldaeans upon my cattle; and then, thou renewedst that, in thy storms and
tempests, upon my children. All this while God was a Witness, but not his
witness, but a witness on his adversaries side. Now, if our own heart, our
own conscience condemn us, this is shrewd evidence, says S. John; 1 John 3.20
for mine own conscience, single, is a thousand witnesses against me. But
then, (says the Apostle there) God is greater then the heart; for, (says he)
he knows all things; He knows circumstances of sin, as well as substance;
and, that, we seldom know, seldom take knowledge of. If then mine own heart
be a thousand, God, that is greater, is ten thousand witnesses, if he witness
against me. But if he be my Witness, a Witness for me, as he always
multiplies in his ways of mercy, he is thousands of thousands, millions of
millions of witnesses in my behalf, for there is no condemation, no possible
condemnation, Romans 8.1.
to them that are in him; not, if every grain of dust upon the earth were an
Achitophel, and gave counsel against me, not if every sand upon the shore
were a Rabshakeh, and railed against me, not if every atome in the air were a
Satan, an Adversary, an Accuser, not if every drop in the Sea, were an Abaddon,
an Apollyon, a Destroyer, there could be no condemuation, if he be my Witness.
If he be my Witness, he proceeds thus in my behalf, his Spirit bears
witness with my spirit, for mine inward assurance, that I stand established in
his favor, and, either by an actual deliverance, or by some such declaration,
as shall preserve me from fainting, if I be not actually delivered, he gives a
farther testimony in my behalf. For, he is in Heaven, and he sits in Heaven,
and he dwells in Heaven, in the highest Heaven, and sees all, and is a Witness,
and my Witness; there is the largeness of our comfort.

But will all this come home to Jobs end and purpose; Iude^.
That he need not care though all men knew all his faults, he need not care
though God passed over his prayers, because God is his Witness; what
declarations soever he had in himself, would the world believe, that God
testified in his behalf, when they saw his calamities multiplied upon him, and
his prayers neglected? If they will not, herein lies his, and our final
comfort, That he that is my Witness, is in the highest Heaven, there is no
person above him, and therefore He that is my Witness, is my Judge too. I
shall not be tried by an arbitrary Court, where it may be wisdom enough, to
follow a wise leader, and think as he thinks. I shall not be tried by a Jury,
that had rather I suffered, then they fasted, rather I lost my life, then they
lost a meal. Nor tried by Peers, where Honor shall be the Bible. But I shall
be tried by the King himself, then which no man can propose a Nobler trial,
and that King shall be the King of Kings too; for, He, V. 5.
who in the first of the Revelation, is called The faithful Witness, is, in
the same place, called The Prince of the Kings of the earth; and, as he is
there produced as a Witness, so, Acts 10 42. John 5.22.
He is ordained to be the Judge of the quick and the dedd, and so, All
Judgment is committed to him. He that is my Witness, is my Judge, and the
same person is my Jesus, my Savior, my Redeemer; He that has taken my nature,
He that has given me his blood. So that he is my Witness, in his own cause,
and my Judge, but of his own Title, and will, in me, preserve himself; He
will not let that nature, that he has invested, perish, nor that treasure,
which he has poured out for me, his blood, be ineffectuall. My Witness is in
Heaven, my Judge is in Heaven; my Redeemer is in Heaven, and in them, who are
but One, I have not only a constant hope, that I shall be there too, but an
evident assurance, that I am there already, in his Person.

Go then in this peace, That you always study to preserve this testification
of the Spirit of God, by outward evidences of Sanctification. You are naturally
composed of four Elements, and three of those four are evident, and
unquestioned; The fourth Element, the element of Fire, is a more litigious
element, more problematicall, more disputable. Every good man, every true
Christian, in his Metaphysics,(for, in a regenerate man, all is Metaphysicall,
supernatural) has four Elements also; and three of those four are declared
in this text. First, a good Name, the good opinion of good men, for honest
dealing in the world, and religious discharge of duties toward God, That there
be no injustice in our hands, Also that our prayer be pure. A second Element is
a good conscience in my self, That either a holy wariness before, or a holy
repentance after, settle me so in God, as that I care not though all the world
knew all my faults. And a third element is, my Hope in God, that my Witness
which is in Heaven, will testify for me, as a witness in my behalf, here, or
acquit me, as a merciful Judge, hereafter. Now, there may be a fourth Element,
an Infallibility of final perseverance, grounded upon the eternal knowledge
of God; but this is, as the Element of fire, which may be, but is not, at
least, is not so discernable, so demonstrable as the rest. And therefore, as
men argue of the Element of fire, that whereas the other elements produce
creatures in such abundance, The Earth such herds of Cattle, the Waters such
shoales of Fish, the Air such flocks of Birds, it is no unreasonable thing, to
stop upon this consideration, whether there should be an element of fire, more
spacious, and comprehensive then all the rest, and yet produce no Creatures;
so, if thy pretended Element of Infallibility produce no creatures, no good
works, no holy actions, thou may justly doubt there is no such element in
thee. In all doubts that arise in thee, still it will be a good rule, to choose
that now, which thou would choose upon thy deathbed. If a tentation to
Beauty, to Riches, to Honor, be proposed to thee, upon such, and such
conditions, consider whether thou would accept that, upon those conditions,
upon thy deathbed, when thou must part with them, in a few minutes. So, when
thou doubtest, in what thou should place thy assurance in God, think
seriously, whether thou shall not have more comfort then, upon thy deathbed,
in being able to say, I have finished my course, I have fought a good fight, I
have fulfilled the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, I have clothed him when
he was naked, and fed him when he was poor, then in any other thing, that thou
may conceive God to have done for thee; And do all the way, as thou would
do then; prove thy element of fire, by the creatures it produces, prove thine
election by thy sanctification; for that is the right method, and shall deliver
thee over, infallibly, to everlasting glory at last, Amen.

SERMON XIV. Preached at White Hall, March 3. 1619.
AMOS 5.18. Woe unto you, that desire the day of the Lord: what have ye to do
with it? the day of the Lord is darkness and not light.


FOr the presenting of the woes and judgments of God, denounced by the
Prophets against Judah and Israel, and the extending and applying them to
others, involved in the same sins as Judah and Israel were, Solomon seems to
have given us somewhat a clear direction; Prove. 9.8.
Reprove not a scorner lest he hate thee, Rebuke a wise man and he will love
thee. But how if the wiseman and this scorner be all in one man, all one
person? If the wiseman of this world be come to take S. Paul so literally at
his word, as to think scornefully that preaching is indeed but the
foolishness of preaching, and that as the Church is within the State, so
preaching is a part of State government, flexible to the present occasions of
time, appliable to the present dispositions of men; This fell upon this Prophet
in this prophecy, Amos 7.10.
Amasias the Priest of Bethel informed the King that Amos meddled with matters
of State, and that the Land was not able to bear his words, and to Amos
himself he says, Eat thy bread in someother place, but prophecy here no
more, for this is the Kings Chapel, Amos 23.
and the Kings Court; Amos replies, I was no Prophet nor the son of a Prophet,
but in an other course, and the Lord took me and said unto me, Go and
Prophecy to my People. Though we find no Amasiah no mis-interpreting Priest
here, (we are far from that, because we are far from having a Jeroboam to
our King as he had, easy to give ear, easy to give credit to false
informations) yet every man that comes with Gods Message hither, brings a
little Amasiah of his own, in his own bosom, a little wisperer in his own
heart, that tells him, This is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court,
and these woes and judgments, and the denouncers and proclaimers of them are
not so acceptable here. But we must have our own Amos, as well as our Amasias,
this answer to this suggestion, I was no Prophet, and the Lord took me and bad
me prophecy. What shall I do?

And besides, since the woe in this Text is not S. John's woe? his iterated, his
multiplied woe, Vae, vae, vae habitantibus terram, Apoc. 8.13.
a woe of desolation upon the whole world (for God loves this world, as the
work of his own hands, as the subject of his providence, as the Scene of his
glory, as the Garden-plot that is watered by the Blood of his Son:) Since the
Woe in this Text is not Esaies woe, Vae genti peccatrici, Esaias 1.4.
an increpation and commination upon our whole Nation (for God has not come so
near to any Nation, and dealt so well with any Nation as with ours:) Since the
Woe in this Text is not Ezekiels Woe, Ezekiel. 24^.
Vae Civitati sanguinum, an imputation of injustice or oppression, and
consequently of a malediction laid upon the whole City (for God has carried
his woes upon other Cities, Vae Chorasin, vae Bethsaida; God has laid his
heavy hand of war and other calamities upon other Cities, that this City
might see her self and her calamities long before in that glass, and so avoid
them:) Since the Woe in this Text, is not the Prophets other woe, Ezekiel. 44.6.
Ios. 24.15.
Vae domui, not a woe upon any family (for when any man in his family comes to
Joshua's protestation, Ego and domus mea, As for me and my house we will serve
the Lord, the Lord comes to his protestation, In mill generationes, Esaias 28.1.
I will show mercy to thee and thy house for a thousand generations:) Since the
Woe in this Text, is not Esaies woe again, Vae Coronae, (for, the same Prophet
tells us of what affection they are, that they are Idolaters, persons inclined
to an idolatrous and superstitious Religion, and fret themselves, Esaias 8.2^.
and curse the King and their God; we know that the Prophets Vae Coronae in
that place is Vae Coronae superbiae, and the crown and height of Pride is in
him, who has set himself above all that is called God. Christian Princes know
that if their Crowns were but so as they seem (all gold) they should be but
so much the heavier for being all gold; but they are but Crowns of thorns
gilded, specious cares, glorious troubles, and therefore no subject of pride:)
To contract this, since the Woe in this Text, is no State woe, nor Church woe,
for it is not Ezechiels Vae Pastoribus insipientibus, which cannot feed their
flock, Ezekiel. 23.3. Ier. 23.1.
nor Ieremies Vae Pastoribus disperdentibus, Woe unto those lazy Shepherds,
which do not feed their flock but suffer them to scatter: Snce the Woe in this
Text is not a woe upon the whole World, nor upon the whole Nation, nor upon the
whole City, nor upon any whole Family, nor upon any whole rank or calling of
men, when I have asked with Solomon, Cui vae? to whom belongs this woe? I must
answer with S. Paul, Vae mihi, Prove. 23.19. 1 Cor. 9.16.
woe unto me if I do not tell them to whom it belongs. And therefore since in
spiritual things especially charity begins with it self, I shall transfer
this Vae from my self, by laying it upon them, whom your own conscience shall
find it to belong unto; Vae desiderantibus diem Domini; Woe be unto them that
desire the day of the Lord, etc.

But yet if these words can be narrow in respect of persons, it is strange, for
in respect of the sins that they are directed upon, they have a great compass;
they reach from that high fin of Presumption, and contempt, and deriding the
day of the Lord, the judgments of God, and they pass through the sin of
Hypocrisy, when we make shift to make the world, and to make our selves
believe that we are in good case toward God, and would be glad that the day of
the Lord, the day of judgment would come now; and then they come down to the
deepest sin, the sin of Desperation, of an unnatural valuing of this life,
when overwhelmed with the burden of other sins, or with Gods punishment for
them; men grow to a murmuring weariness of this life, and to an impatient
desire, and perchance to a practice of their own ends: In the first
acceptance, the day of the Lord is the day of his Judgments and afflictions
in this life; In the second, the day of the Lord is the day of the general
judgment; And in the third, the day of the Lord, is that Crepusculum that
twilight between the two lives, or rather that Meridies noctis, as the Poet
calls it, that noone of night, the hour of our death and transmigration out of
this world. And if any desire any of these days of the Lord, out of any of
these indispositions, out of presumption, out of hypocrisy, out of
desperation, he falls within the compass of this Text, and from him we cannot
take off this Vae desiderantibus.

First then the Prophet directs himself most literally upon the first sin of
Presumption. They were come to say, 1 Part.
that in truth whatsoever the Prophet declaimed in the streets, there was no
such thing as Dies Domini, any purpose in God to bring such heavy judgments
upon them; to the Prophets themselves they were come to say, You your selves
live parched and macerated in a starved and penurious fortune, and therefore
you cry out that all we must die of famine too, you your selves have not a foot
of land a mong all the Tribes, and therefore you cry out that all the Tribes
must be carried into another Land in Captivity. That which you call the Day of
the Lord is come upon you, beggary, and nakedness, and hunger, contempt, and
affliction, and imprisonment is come upon you, and therefore you will needs
extend this day upon the whole State, but desideramus, we would fain see any
such thing come to pass, we would fain see God go about to do any such thing,
as that the State should not be wise enough to prevent him. To see a Prophet
neglected, because he will not flatter, to see him despised below, because he
is neglected above, to see him injured, insulted upon, and really damnified,
because he is despised, All this is dies mundi, and not dies Domini, it is the
ordinary course of the world, and no extraordinary day of the Lord, but that
there should be such a stupor and consternation of mind and conscience as you
talk of, and that that should be so expressed in the countenance, Lam. 4.7.
that they which had been purer then snow, whiter then milk, redder then
Rubies, smoother then Saphirs, should not only be, as in other cases, pale with
a sudden fear, but blacker in face then a coal, as the Prophet says there,
that they should not be able to set a good face upon their miseries, nor
disguise them with a confident countenance, that there should be such a
consternation of countenance and conscience, and then such an excommunication
of Church and State, as that the whole body of the children of Israel should be
without King, Hos. 3.4.
without Sacrifice, without Ephod, without Terafim, Desideramus, We would fain
see such a time, we would fain see such a God as were so much too hard for us.

They had seen such a God before, they had known that that God had formerly
brought all the people upon the face of the earth so near to an annihilation,
so near to a new creation, as to be but eight persons in the general flood,
they had seen that God to have brought their own numerous, and multitudinous
Nation, their 600000. men that came out of Egypt to that paucity, as that but
two of them are recorded to enter into the land of promise, And could they
doubt what that God could do, or would do upon them? Or as Jeremy says, Jer.
12.
Could they belie the Lord, and say it is not he? neither shall evil come upon
us, or shall we see sword and famine? God expressed his anger thrice upon this
people, in their State, in their form of government, First he expressed it in
giving them a King, for though that be the best form of government in it self,
yet for that people at that time, God saw it not to be the fittest, and so it
was extorted from him, and he gave them their King in anger. Secondly, he
expressed his anger in giving them two Kings in the desection of the ten
Tribes, and division of the two Kingdoms. Thirdly, he expressed his anger in
leaving them without any King after this Captivity which was prophesied here.

Now of those 6000. years, which are vulgarly esteemed to be the age and term
of this world, 3000. were past before the division of the Kingdom, and
presently upon the division, they argued a divisibili ad corruptibile,
whatsoever may be broken and divided may come to nothing. It is the devils way
to come to destruction by breaking of unions. There was a contract between God
and Job, because Job loved and feared him, and there the devil attempts to
draw away the head from the union, God from Job, with that suggestion, Does Job
serve thee for nothing? Do thou get any thing by this union? or does not Job
serve himself upon thee? There was a natural, an essential, an eternal union
between the Father and the Son in the Trinity, and the devil sought to break
that. If he could break the union in the Godhead, he saw not why he might not
destroy the Godhead. The devil was Logician good enough, Omne divisibile
corruptibile, whatsoever may be broken, may be annihilated. And the devil was
Papist good enough, Schisma aequipollet haeresi, Whosoever is a Schismatic,
departed from the obedience of the Roman Church, is easily brought within
compass of heresy too, because it is a matter of faith to affirm a necessity
of such an obedience. And therefore the devil attempts to make that Schism in
the Trinity, with that, Si filius Deies, Make these stones bread, If thou be
the Son of God, cast thy self down from this Pinnacle, that is, do something of
thy self, exceed thy commission, and never attend so punctually all thy
directions from thy Father. In Jobs case he would draw the head from the union;
In Christ's case he would alienate the Son from the Father, because division is
the fore runner (and alas, but a little way the forerunner) of destruction.
And therefore as soon as that Kingdom was come to a division between ten and
two Tribes, between a King of Judah, and a King of Israel, presently upon it,
and in the compass of a very short time arose all those Prophets that
prophesied of a destruction; as soon as they saw a division, they foresaw a
destruction. And therefore when God had showed before what he could do, and
declared by his Prophets then what he would do, Vae desiderantibus, Woe unto
them that say, Esaias 5.18.
Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we may see it: That is, that are
yet confident that no such thing shall fall upon us, and confident with a
scorn, 2 Pet. 3.4.
and fulfill that which the Apostle says, There shall come in the latter days
scoffers, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning at the
Creation. But God shall answer their scorn with scorn, as in Ezekiel, Son of
man, Ezekiel. 12.22.
What is that Proverb which you have in the Land of Israel, saying, The days
are prolonged, and every vision fails? That is, the Prophets talk of great
calamities, but we are safe enough, Tell them (says the Lord) I will make
their proverb to cease, I will speak and it shall come to pass; in your days,
O rebellious house, will I say the word, and per-form it.

And therefore ut quid vobis? what should you pretend to desire that day? what
can ye get by that day? Because you have made a covenant with death, and are at
an agreement with hell, when that Invadens flagellum, (as the Prophet with an
elegant horror, if they can consist, expresses it) when that overflowing
scourge shall pass through, shall it not come to you? Why? Esaias 20.15.
who are you? have you thought of it before hand, considered it, digested it,
and resolved, that in the worst that can fall, your vocal constancy, and your
humane valor shall sustain you from all dejection of spirit? what judgment
of God soever shall fall upon you, whenever this dies Domini shall break out
upon you, you have light in your selves, and by that light you shall see light,
and pass through all incommodities. Be not deceived, this day of the Lord is
darkness and not light, the first blast, the first breath of his indignation
blows out thy candle, extinguishes all thy Wisdom, all thy Counsels, all
thy Philosophical sentences, disorders thy Seneca, thy Plutarch, thy Tacitus,
and all thy premeditations; for the sword of the Lord is a two-edged sword, it
cuts bodily, and it cuts ghostly, it cuts temporally, and it cuts spiritually,
it cuts off all worldly relief from others, and it cuts off all Christian
patience, and good interpretation of Gods correction in thine own heart.

Vt quid vobis? what can you get by that day? can you imagine that though you
have been benighted under your own obduration and security before, yet when
this day of the Lord, the day of affliction shall come, afflictio dabit
intellectum, the day will bring light of it self, the affliction will give
understanding, and it will be time enough to see the danger and the remedy both
at once, and to turn to God by that light, which that affliction shall give?
Be not deceived, dies Domini tenebrae, this day of the Lord will be darkness
and not light. God has made two great lights for man, the Sun, and the Moon;
God does manifest himself two ways to man, by prosperity, and adversity; but
if there were no Sun, there would be no light in the Moon neither; If there be
no sense of God in thy greatness, in thy abundance, it is a dark time to seek
him in the clouds of affliction, and heaviness of heart. Experience teaches
us, that if we be reading any book in the evening, if the twilight surprise us,
and it grows dark, yet we can read longer in that book which we were in
before, then if we took a new book of another subject into our hands: If we
have been accustomed to the contemplation of God in the Sunshine of prosperity,
we shall see him better in the night of misery, then if we began but then, Vae
desiderantibus. If you seem to desire that day of the Lord, because you do not
believe that that day will come, or because you believe that when that day
comes, it will be time enough to rectify your selves, then, Vi quod vobis?
this day shall be good for nothing to either of you, for to both you it shall
be darkness, and not light.

The days which God made for man were darkness, and then light, still the
evening and the morning made up the day. The day which the Lord shall bring
upon secure and carnal men, is darkness without light, judgments without any
beams of mercy shine through them, such judgments, as if we will consider the
vehemence of them, we shall find them expressed in such an extraordinary
height, as scarce anywhere else in Iercmy, Men shall ask one of another if
they be in labor, whether they travel with child. Ier. 3^.7.
Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in
travel? Alas, because that day is great, and none is like it. This is the
unexpected and unconsidered strangeness of that day, if we consider the
vehemence, and if we consider the suddenness, the speed of bringing that day
upon secure man. That is intimated very sufficiently in another story of the
same Prophet, that when he had said to the Prophet Hananiah, Jer 28.16.
That he should die within a year, when God says, his judgments shall come
shortly, if then we consider the vehemence, or the nearness of the day of the
Lord, the day of his visitation, we shall be glad to say with that Prophet,
Ier. 17.16.
As for me I have not desired that woeful day thou know, that is, I have
neither doubted but that there shall be such a day, nor I have not put off my
repentance to that day, for what can that do good to either of those
dispositions, when to them it shall be darkness, and not light?

Now this Woe of this Prophet thus denounced against contemptuous scorners of
the day of the Lord, 2 Part.
as that day signifies afflictions in this life, have had no subject to work
upon this congregation (as by Gods grace there is none of that distemper here)
it is a piece of a Sermon well lost; and God be blessed that it has had no
use, that no body needed it. But as the Woe is denounced in the second
acceptance against Hypocrites, so it is a chain-shot, and in every
congregation takes whole ranks, and here Dies Domini is the last day of
Judgment, and the desire in the Text is not, as before, a denying that any
such day should be, but it is an hypocritical pretense, that we have so well
performed our duties, as that we should be glad if that day would come, and
then the darkness of the Text is everlasting condemnation.

For this day of the Lord then, the last day of judgment, consider only, or
reflect only upon these three circumstances: First, there is Lex violata, a law
given to thee and broken by thee. Secondly, there is Testis prolatus, Evidence
produced against thee, and confessed by thee. And then there is Sententia lata,
A judgment given against thee, and executed upon thee.

For the Law first, when that Law is To love God with all thy power, not to
scatter thy love upon any other creature, when the Law is not to do, not to
covet any ill, will thou say this Law does not concern me, because it is
impossible in it self, for this coveting, this first concupiscence is not in a
man's own power? Why, this Law was possible to man, when it was given to man,
for it was naturally imprinted in the heart of man, when man was in his state
of innocence, and then it was possible, and the impossibility that is grown
into it since, is by man's own fault. Man by breaking the Law, has made the Law
impossible, and himself inexcusable; will thou say with that man in the
Gospel, Omnia haec a juventute, I have kept all this Law from my youth? From
thy youth? remember thy youth well, and what Law thou keptst then, and thou will find it to be another Law, Lex in membris, A Law of the flesh warring
against the Law of the mind, nay thou will find that thou did never
maintain a war against that Law of the flesh, but wast glad that thou came to
the obedience of that Law so soon, and art sorry thou can follow that Law no
longer.

This is the Law, and will thou put this to trial? Will thou say who can prove
it? Who comes in to give evidence against me? All those whom thy solicitations
have overcome, and who have overcome thy solicitations, good and bad, friends
and enemies, Wives and Mistresses, persons most incompatible, and contrary,
here shall join together, and be of the Jury. If S. Paul's case were so far thy
case, as that thou were in righteousness unblameable, no man, no woman able to
testify against thee, yet when the records of all thoughts shall be laid open,
and a retired and obscure man shall appear to have been as ambitious in his
Cloister, as a pretending man at the Court, and a retired woman in her chamber,
appear to be as licentious as a prostitute woman in the Stews, when the heart
shall be laid open, and this laid open too, that some sins of the heart are the
greatest sins of all (as Infidelity, the greatest sin of all, is rooted in the
heart) and sin produced to action, is but a dilatation of that sin, and all
dilatation is some degree of extenuation, (The body sometimes grows weary of
acting some sin, but the heart never grows weary of contriving of sin.)

When this shall be that Law, and this the Evidence, what can be the Sentence,
but that, Itemaledicti, Go ye accursed into ever lasting fire? where it is not
as in the form of our judgment here, You shall be carried to the place of
execution, but Ite, Go, our own consciences shall be our executioners, and
precipitate us into that condemnation. It is not a Captivity of Babylon for 70.
years, (and yet 70. years is the time of man's life, and why might not so many
years punishment, expiate so many years sinful pleasure?) but it is 70.
millions of millions of generations, for they shall live so long in hell, as
God himself in heaven; It is not an imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, but
during the Kings displeasure, whom nothing can please nor reconcile, after he
shall have made up that account with his Son, and told him, These be all you
dyed for, these be all you purchased, these be all whom I am bound to save for
your sake, for the rest, their portion is everlasting destruction.

Under this law, under this evidence, under this sentence, vae desiderantibus,
woe to them that pretend to desire this day of the Lord, as though by their
own outward righteousness, they could stand upright in this judgment. Woe to
them that say, Let God come when he will, it shall go hard, but he shall find
me at Church, I hear three or four Sermons a week; he shall find me in my
Discipline and Mortification, I fast twice a week; he shall find me in my
Stewardship and Dispensation, I give tithes of all that I possess. When
Ezechias showed the Ambassadors of Babylon all his Treasure and his Armor, the
malediction of the Prophet fell upon it, that all that Treasure and Armor
which he had so gloriously showed, should be transported to them, to whom he
had showed it, into Babylon. He that publishes his good works to the world,
they are carried into the world, and that is his reward. Not that there is not
a good use of letting our light shine before men too; for when S. Paul says,
If I yet please men, Gal. 1.10.
I should not be the servant of Christ; and when he says, I do please all men
in all things: S. Austine found no difficulty in reconciling those two; Navem
quaero, says he, sed and patriam, When I go to the Haven to hire a Ship, it
is for the love I have to my Country; When I declare my faith by my works to
men, it is for the love I bear to the glory of God; but if I desire the Lords
day upon confidence in these works, vae scirpo, as Job expresses it, woe unto
me poor rush, Job 8.16.
for (says he) the rush is green till the Sun come, that is, says Gregory
upon that place, donec divina districtio in judicio candeat, till the fire of
the judgment examine our works, they may have some verdure, some color, but
vae desiderantibus, woe unto them that put themselves unto that judgment for
their works sake.

For ut quid vobis? to what end is it for you? If your hypocritical security
could hold out to the last, if you could delude the world at the last gasp, if
those that stand about you then could be brought to say, he went away like a
Lamb, alas the Lamb of God went not away so, the Lamb of God had his
colluctations, disputations, expostulations, apprehensions of Gods indignation
upon him then: This security, call it by a worse name, stupidity, is not a
lying down like a Lamb, but a lying down like Issachers Ass between two
burdens, for two greater burdens cannot be, then sin, and the senslesnesse of
sin. Vt quid vobis? what will ye do at that day, which shall be darkness and
not light? God dwells in luce inaccessibili, 1 Timothy 6.16.
in such light as no man by the light of nature can comprehend here, but when
that light of grace which was shed upon thee here, should have brought thee at
last to that inaccessible light, then thou must be cast in tenebras exteriores,
Mat. 8.12.
into darkness, and darkness without the Kingdom of heaven. And if the
darkness of this world, which was but a darkness of our making, could not
comprehend the light, when Christ in his person, brought the light and offered
repentance, certainly in that outward darkness of the next world, the
darkness which God has made for punishment, they shall see nothing, neither
intramittendo, nor extramittendo, neither by receiving offer of grace from
heaven, nor in the disposition to pray for grace in hell. For as at our
inanimation in our Mothers womb, our immortal soul when it comes, swallows
up the other souls of vegetation, and of sense, which were in us before; so at
this our regeneration in the next world, the light of glory shall swallow up
the light of grace. To as many as shall be within, there will need no grace to
supply defects, nor eschew dangers, because there we shall have neither defects
nor dangers. There shall be no night, no need of candle, Apoc. 22.5.
nor of Sun, for the Lord shall give them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever. There shall be no such light of grace, as shall work repentance to
them that are in the light of glory; neither could they that are in outward
darkness, comprehend the light of grace, if it could flow out upon them.
First, you did the works of darkness, says the Apostle, Romans 13.12.
and then that custom, that practice brought you to love darkness better then
light; and then as the Prince of darkness delights to transform himself into
an Angel of light; John 3.
so by your hypocrisy you pretend a light of grace, when you are darkness it
self, and therefore, at quid vobis? what will you get by that day which is
darkness and not light?

Now as this Woe and commination of our Prophet had one aim, 3. Part.
to beat down their scorn which derided the judgments of God in this world,
and a second aim to beat down their confidence, that thought themselves of
themselves able to stand in Gods judgments in the next world; so it has a
third mark better then these two, it has an aim upon them in whom a
weariness of this life, when Gods corrections are upon them, or some other
mistaking of their own estate and case, works an overhasty and impatient
desire of death, and in this sense and acceptance, the day of the Lord is the
day of our death and transmigration out of this world, and the darkness is
still everlasting darkness. Now for this we take our lesson in Job, Job. 7.1.
Vita militia, man's life is a warfare; man might have lived at peace, Greg.
he himself chose a rebellious war, and now quod volens expetiit nolens
portat, that war which he willingly embarked himself in at first, though it
be against his will now, he must go through with. In Job we have our lesson,
and in S. Paul we have our Law, Ephesians 63.
Take ye the whole armor of God, that ye may be able having done all to stand;
that is, that having overcome one temptation, you may stand in battle against
the next, for it is not adoloscentia militia, but vita; that we should think to
triumph if we had overcome the heat and intemperance of youth, but we must
fight it out to our lives end. And then we have the reward of this lesson, and
of this law limited, nemo coronatur, no man is crowned, except he fight
according to this law that is, 2 Timothy 2.5.
he persever to the end. And as we have our lesson in Job, our rule and reward
in the Apostle, who were both great Commanders in the warfare; Mat. 26.38.
so we have our example in our great General, Christ Jesus, Who though his
soul were heavy, and heavy unto death, though he had a baptism to be baptized
with, and coarctabatur, he was straightned, and in pain till it were
accomplished, and though he had power to lay down his soul, John 10.18.
and take it up again, and no man else could take it from him, yet he sought
it out to the last hour, and till his hour came, he would not prevent it, nor
lay down his soul. Vae desiderantibus, woe unto them that desire any other
end of Gods correction, but what he has ordained and appointed, for ut quid
vobis? what shall you get by choosing your own ways? Tenebrae and non lux;
They shall pass out of this world, in this inward darkness of melancholy, and
dejection of spirit, into the outward darkness, which is an everlasting
exclusion from the Father of lights, and from the Kingdom of joy; their case
is well expressed in the next verse to our Text, they shall fly from a Lion,
and a Bear shall meet them, they shall lean on a wall, and a Serpent shall
bite them; they shall end this life by a miserable and hasty death, and out of
that death shall grow an immortal life in torments, which no weariness, nor
desire, nor practice can ever bring to an end.

And here in this acceptance of these words, this vae falls directly upon them
who coloring and apparelling treason in martyrdom, expose their lives to the
danger of the Law, Scribanius.
and embrace death; these of whom one of their own society says, that the
Scevolaes, the Caves, the Porciaes, the Cleopatraes of the old time, were
nothing to the Jesuits, for says he, they could dye once, but they lacked
courage ad multas mortes; perchance he means, that after those men were once
in danger of the Law, and forfeited their lives by one coming, they could come
again and again, as often as the plentiful mercy of their King would send them
away, Rapiunt mortem spontanea irruptione, says he to their glory, they are
voluntary and violent pursuers of their own death, and as he expresses it,
Crederes morbo adesos, Baron. Martyr^^. 29. December.
you would think that the desire of death is a disease in them; A graver man
then he mistakes their case and cause of death as much, you are (says he,
encouraging those of our Nation to the pursuit of death) in sacris septis ad
martyrium saginati, fed up and fatned here for martyrdom, and Sacramento
sanguinem spospondistis, they have taken an oath that they will be hanged, but
that he in whom (as his great pattern God himself) mercy is above all his
works, out of his abundant sweetness makes them perjured when they have so
Tworne and vowed their own ruin. But those that send them, give not the lives
of these men so freely, so cheaply as they pretend. But as in dry Pumps, men
pour in a little water, that they may pump up more; so they are content to
drop in a little blood of imaginary, but traitorous Martyrs, that, by that at
last they may draw up at last the royal blood of Princes, and the loyal blood
of Subjects; vae desiderantibus, woe to them that are made thus ambitious of
their own ruin, ut quid vobis? Tenebrae and non lux, you are kept in
darkness in this world, and sent into darkness from heaven into the next, and
so your ambition, ad multas mortes, shall be satisfied, you dye more then one
death, morte moriemini, this death delivers you to another, from which you
shall never be delivered.

We have now past through these three acceptations of these words, Conclusion.
which have fallen into the contemplation, and meditation of the Ancients in
their Expositions of this Text; as this dark day of the Lord, signifies his
judgments upon Atheistical scorners in this world, as it signifies his last
irrevocable, and irremediable judgments upon hypocritical relyers upon their
own righteousness in the next world, and between both, as it signifies their
uncomfortable passage out of this life, who bring their death inordinately upon
themselves; and we shall shut up all with one signification more of the Lords
day, That, that is the Lords day, of which the whole Lent is the Vigil, and the
Eve. All this time of mortification; and our often meeting in this place to
hear of our mortality, and our immortality, which are the two real Texts, and
Subjects of all our Sermons; All this time is the Eve of the Resurrection of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. That is the Lords day, when all our
mortification, and dejection of spirit, and humbling of our souls, shall be
abundantly exalted in his resurrection, and when all our fasts and abstinence
shall be abundantly recompensed in the participation of his body and his blood
in the Sacrament; Gods Chancery is always open, and his seal works always;
at all times remission of sins may be sealed to a penitent soul in the
Sacrament. That clause which the Chancellors had in their Patents under the
Roman Emperors, Vt praerogativamgerat conscientiae nostrae, is in our
commission too, for God has put his conscience into his Church, and whose sins
are remitted there, are remitted in heaven at all times; but yet dies Domini,
the Lords resurrection is as the full Term, a more general application of
this seal of reconciliation: But vae desiderantibus, woe unto them that desire
that day, only because they would have these days of preaching, and prayer,
and fasting, and trouble some preparation past and gone. Vae desiderantibus,
woe unto them who desire that day, only, that by rece^^ing the Sacrament day,
that they might delude the world, as though they were not of a contrary
religion in their heart; vae desiderantibus, woe unto them who present
themselves that day without such a preparation as becomes so fearful and
mystesious an action, upon any carnal or collateral respects. Before that day
of the Lord comes, comes the day of his crucifying; before you come to that
day, if you come not to a crucifying of your selves to the world, and the world
to you, ut quid vobis? what shall you get by that day? you shall profane that
day, and the Author of it, as to make that day of Christ's triumph, the triumph
of Satan, and to make even that body and blood of Christ Jesus, Vehiculum
Satanae, his Chariot to enter into you, as he did into Judas. That day of the
Lord will be darkness and not light, and that darkness will be, that you
shall not discern the Lords body, you shall scatter all your thoughts upon
wrangling and controversies, de modo, how the Lords body can be there, and you
shall not discern by the effects, nor in your own conscience, that the Lords
body is there at all. But you shall take it to be only an obedience to civil
or Ecclesiastical constitutions, or only a testimony of outward conformity,
which should be signaculum and viaticum, a seal of pardon for past sins, and a
provision of grace against future. But he that is well prepared for this,
strips himself of all these vae desiderantibus, of all these comminations that
belong to carnal desires, and he shall be as Daniel was, vir desideriorum, a
man of chaste and heavenly desires only; he shall desire that day of the Lord,
as that day signifies affliction here, with David, Psalm. 119.17.
Bonum est mihi quod humiliasti me, I am mended by my sickness, enriched by my
poverty; and strengthened by my weakness; and with S. Bern. desire, Irascar is
mihi Domine, O Lord be angry with me, for if thou chidest me not, thou
considerest me not, if I taste no bitterness, I have no Physic; If thou
correct me not, I am not thy son: And he shall desire that day of the Lord, as
that day signifies, the last judgment, with the desire of the Martyrs under
the Altar, Vsquequo Domine? How long, O Lord, ere thou execute judgment? And
he shall desire this day of the Lord, as this day is the day of his own death,
with S. Paul's desire, Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. And when this day of the Lord, as it is the day of the Lords
resurrection shall come, his soul shall be satified as with marrow, and with
fatness, in the body and blood of his Savior, and in the participation of all
his merits, as entirely, as if all that Christ Jesus has said, and done, and
suffered, had been said, and done, and suffered for his soul alone. Enlarge
our days, O Lord, to that blessed day, prepare us before that day, seal to us
at that day, ratify to us after that day, all the days of our life, an
assurance in that Kingdom, which thy Son our Savior has purchased for us,
with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood, To which glorious Son of
God, etc.

SERMON XV. Preached at White Hall, March 8. 1621.
1 COR. 15.26. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death.


THis is a Text of the Resurrection, and it is not Easter yet; but it is Easter
Eve; All Lent, is but the Vigill, the Eve of Easter: to so long a Festival as
never shall end, the Resurrection, we may well begin the Eve betimes. Forty
years long was God grieved for that Generation which he loved; let us be
content to humble our selves forty days, to be fitter for that glory which we
expect. In the Book of God there are many Songs; there is but one Lamentation:
And that one Song of Solomon, nay some one of David's hundred and fifty
Psalms, is longer then the whole book of Lamentations. Make way to an
everlasting Easter by a short Lent, to an undeterminable glory, by a temporary
humiliation. You must weep these tears, tears of contrition, tears of
mortification, before God will wipe all tears from your eyes; You must dye
this death, this death of the righteous, the death to sin, before this last
enemy, Death, shall be destroyed in you, and you made partakers of everlasting
life in soul and body too.

Our division shall be but a short, Divisio.
and our whole exercise but a larger paraphrase upon the words. The words imply
first, That the Kingdom of Christ, which must be perfected, must be
accomplished, (because all things must be subdued unto him) is not yet
perfected, not accomplished yet. Why? what lacks it? It lacks the bodies of
Men, which yet lie under the dominion of another. When we shall also see by
that Metaphor which the Holy Ghost chooses to express that in, which is that
there is Hostis, and so Militia, an enemy, and a war, and therefore that
Kingdom is not perfected, that he places perfect happiness, and perfect
glory, in perfect peace. But then how far is any State consisting of many men,
how far the state, and condition of any one man in particular, from this
perfect peace? How truly a warfare is this life, if the Kingdom of Heaven it
self, have not this peace in perfection? And it has it not, Quia hostis,
because there is an enemy: though that enemy shall not overthrow it, yet
because it plots, and works, and machinates, and would overthrow it, this is a
defect in that peace.

Who then is this enemy? An enemy that may thus far think himself equal to
God, that as no man ever saw God, and lived; so no man ever saw this enemy and
lived, for it is Death; And in this may think himself in number superior to
God, that many men live who shall never see God; But Quis homo, is David's
question, which was never answered, Is there any man that lives, and shall not
see death? An enemy that is so well victualled against man, as that he cannot
want as long as there are men, for he feeds upon man himself. And so well
armed against Man, as that he cannot want Munition, while there are men, for he
fights with our weapons, our own faculties, nay our calamities, yea our own
pleasures are our death. And therefore he is Novissimus hostis, says the Text,
The last enemy.

We have other Enemies; Satan about us, sin within us; but the power of both
those, this enemy shall destroy; but when they are destroyed, he shall retain
a hostile, and triumphant dominion over us. But Vsque quo Domine? How long O
Lord? for ever? No, Abolebitur: we see this Enemy all the way, and all the way
we feel him; but we shall see him destroyed; Abolebitur. But how? or when? At,
and by the resurrection of our bodies: for as upon my expiration, my
transmigration from hence, as soon as my soul enters into Heaven, I shall be
able to say to the Angels, I am of the same stuff as you, spirit, and spirit,
and therefore let me stand with you, and look upon the face of your God, and
my God, so at the Resurrection of this body, I shall be able to say to the
Angel of the great Council, the Son of God, Christ Jesus himself, I am of the
same stuff as you, Body and body, Flesh and flesh, and therefore let me sit
down with you, at the right hand of the Father in an everlasting security from
this last enemy, who is now destroyed, death. And in these seven steps we
shall pass apace, and yet clearly through this paraphrase.

We begin with this; Vestig. 1. Quia desunt Corpora.
That the Kingdom of Heaven has not all that it must have to a consummate
perfection, till it have bodies too. In those infinite millions of millions of
generations, in which the holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity enjoyed
themselves one another, and no more, they thought not their glory so perfect,
but that it might receive an addition from creatures; and therefore they made a
world, a material world, a corporeal world, they would have bodies. In that
noble part of that world which Moses calls the Firmament, that great expansion
from Gods chair to his footstool, from Heaven to earth, there was a defect,
which God did not supply that day, nor the next, but the fourth day, he did;
for that day he made those bodies, those great, and lightsome bodies, the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and placed them in the Firmament. So also the
Heaven of Heavens, the Presence Chamber of God himself, expects the presence
of our bodies.

No State upon earth, can subsist without those bodies, Men of their own. For
men that are supplied from others, may either in necessity, or in indignation,
be withdrawn, and so that State which stood upon foreign legs, sinks. Let the
head be gold, Dan. 2.31.
and the arms silver, and the belly brass, if the feet be clay, Men that may
slip, and molder away, all is but an Image, all is but a dream of an Image:
for foreign helps are rather crutches then legs. There must be bodies, Men,
and able bodies, able men; Men that eat the good things of the land, their
own figs and olives; Men not macerated with extortions: They are glorified
bodies that make up the kingdom of Heaven; bodies that partake of the good of
the State, that make up the State. Bodies, able bodies, and lastly, bodies
inanimated with one soul: one vegetative soul, all must be sensible and
compassionate of one another misery; and especially the Immortal soul, one
supreme soul, one Religion. For as God has made us under good Princes, a
great example of all that, Abundance of Men, Men that live like men, men united
in one Religion, so we need not go far for an example of a slippery, and
uncertain being, where they must stand upon others Men's men, and must
over-load all men with exactions, and distortions, and convulsions, and
earthquakes in the multiplicity of Religions.

The Kingdom of Heaven must have bodies; Kingdoms of the earth must have
them; and if upon the earth thou be in the way to Heaven, thou must have a
body too, a body of thine own, a body in thy possession: for thy body has
thee, and not thou it, if thy body tyrannize over thee. If thou can not
withdraw thine eye from an object of tentation, or withhold thy hand from
subscribing against thy conscience, nor turn thine ear from a popular, and
seditious Libell, what have thou toward a man? Thou have no soul, nay thou
have no body: There is a body, but thou have it not, it is not thine, it is not
in thy power. Thy body will rebel against thee even in a sin: It will not
perform a sin, when, and where thou would have it. Much more will it rebel
against any good work, till thou have imprinted Stigmata Jesus, Gal. 6.17.
The Marks of the Lord Jesus, which were but exemplar in him, but are
essential, and necessary to thee, abstinencies, and such discreet
disciplines, and mortifications, as may subdue that body to thee, and make it
thine: for till then it is but thine enemy, and maintains a war against
thee; and war, and enemy is the Metaphore which the holy Ghost has taken here
to express a want, a kind of imperfectnesse even in Heaven it self. Bellum
Symbolum mali. As peace is of all goodness, so war is an emblem, a
Hieroglyphique, of all misery; And that is our second step in this paraphrase.

If the feet of them that preach peace, be beautiful, (And, Vestig. 2. Pax
and bellum.
O how beautiful are the feet of them that preach peace? The Prophet Isaiah
asks the question, 52.7. And the Prophet Nahum asks it, 1.15. and the Apostle
S. Paul asks it, Romans 10.15. They all ask it, but none answers it) who shall
answer us, if we ask, How beautiful is his face, who is the Author of this
peace, when we shall see that in the glory of Heaven, the Center of all true
peace? It was the inheritance of Christ Jesus upon the earth, he had it at his
birth, he brought it with him, Glory be to God on high, peace upon earth. Luke
2.14. Colos. 1.20.
It was his purchase upon earth, He made peace (indeed he bought peace) through
the blood of his Cross. It was his Testament, John 14.27.
when he went from earth; Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.
Divide with him in that blessed Inheritance, partake with him in that blessed
Purchase, enrich thy self with that blessed Legacy, his Peace.

Let the whole world be in thy consideration as one house; and then consider in
that, in the peaceful harmony of creatures, in the peaceful succession, and
connection of causes, and effects, the peace of Nature. Let this Kingdom, where
God has blessed thee with a being, be the Gallery, the best room of that
house, and consider in the two walls of that Gallery, the Church and the State,
the peace of a royal, and a religious Wisdom; Let thine own family be a
Cabinet in this Gallery, and find in all the boxes thereof, in the several
duties of Wife, and Children, and servants, the peace of virtue, and of the
father and mother of all virtues, active discretion, passive obedience; and
then lastly, let thine own bosom be the secret box, and reserve in this
Cabinet, and then the best Jewel in the best Cabinet, and that in the best
Gallery of the best house that can be had, peace with the Creature, peace in
the Church, peace in the State, peace in thy house, peace in thy heart, is a
fair Model, and a lovely design even of the heavenly Jerusalem which is
Visio pacis, where there is no object but peace.

And therefore the holy Ghost to intimate to us, that happy perfectness, which
we shall have at last, and not till then, chooses the Metaphor of an enemy,
and enmity, to avert us from looking for true peace from any thing that
presents it self in the way. Neither truly could the holy Ghost imprint more
horror by any word, then that which intimates war, as the word enemy does. It
is but a little way that the Poet has got in description of war, Iam seges
est, that now, that place is ploughed where the great City stood: for it is not
so great a depopulation to translate a City from Merchants to husbandmen, from
shops to ploughes, as it is from many Husbandmen to one Shepherd, and yet that
has been often done. And all that, at most, is but a depopulation, it is not
a devastation, that Troy was ploughed. But, when the Prophet Isaiah comes to
the devastation, to the extermination of a war, Esaias 7.23.
he expresses it first thus; Where there were a thousand Vineyards at a cheap
rate, all the land become briars and thorns: That is much; but there is more,
Esaias 13.13.
The earth shall be removed out of her place; that Land, that Nation, shall no
more be called that Nation, nor that Land: But, yet more then that too; Not
only, not that people, Esaias 13.19.
but no oath shall ever inhabit it. It shall never be inhabited from generation
to generation, neither shall Shepherds be there; Not only no Merchant, nor
Husbandman, but no depopulator: none but Owls, and Ostriches, and Satyrs,
Indeed God knows what, Ochim, and Ziim, words which truly we cannot translate.

In a word, 2 Samuel 24.13.
the horror of War is best discerned in the company he keeps, in his
associates. And when the Prophet God brought War into the presence of David,
there came with him Famine, and Pestilence. And when Famine entered, we see the
effects; It brought Mothers to eat their Children of a span long; that is, as
some Expositors take it, to take medicines to procure abortions, to cast their
Children, that they might have Children to eat. And when War's other
companion, the Pestilence entered, we see the effects of that too: In less then
half the time that it was threatened for, it devoured threescore and ten
thousand of David's men; and yet for all the vehemence, the violence, the
impetuousnesse of this Pestilence, David chose this Pestilence rather then a
War. Militia and Malitia, are words of so near a sound, as that the vulgat
Edition takes them as one. For where the Prophet speaking of the miseries that
Jerusalem had suffered, says, Finita militia ejus, Esaias 42.2.
Let her warfare be at an end, they read, Finita malitia ejus, Let her misery
be at an end; War and Misery is all one thing. But is there any of this in
heaven? Even the Saints in heaven lack something of the consummation of their
happiness, Quia hostis, because they have an enemy. And that is our third and
next step.

Michael and his Angels fought against the devil and his Angels; though that
war ended in victory, Vest. 3. Quia Hostis.
yet (taking that war, as diverse Expositors do, for the fall of Angels) that
Kingdom lost so many inhabitants, as that all the souls of all that shall be
saved, shall but fill up the places of them that fell, and so make that
Kingdom but as well as it was before that war: So ill effects accompany even
the most victorious war. There is no war in heaven, yet all is not well,
because there is an enemy; for that enemy would kindle a war again, but that he
remembers how ill he sped last time he did so. It is not an enemy that invades
neither, but only detaines: he detaines the bodies of the Saints which are in
heaven, and therefore is an enemy to the Kingdom of Christ; He that detaines
the souls of men in Superstition, he that detaines the hearts and allegiance
of Subjects in an haesitation, a vacillation, an irresolution, where they shall
fix them, whether upon their Sovereign, or a foreign power, he is in the
notion, and acceptance of enemy in this Text; an enemy, though no hostile act
be done. It is not a war, it is but an enemy; not an invading, but a detaining
enemy; and then this enemy is but one enemy, and yet he troubles, and retards
the consummation of that Kingdom.

Antichrist alone is enemy enough; but never carry this consideration beyond
thy self. As long as there remains in thee one sin, or the sinful gain of
that one sin, so long there is one enemy, and where there is one enemy, there
is no peace. Gardners that husband their ground to the best advantage, sow all
their seeds in such order, one under another, that their Garden is always full
of that which is then in season. If thou sin with that providence, with that
seasonablenesse, that all thy spring, thy youth be spent in wantonness, all
thy Summer, thy middle-age in ambition, and the ways of preferment, and thy
Autumn, thy Winter in indevotion and covetousness, though thou have no
farther taste of licentiousness, in thy middle-age, thou have thy satiety in
that sin, nor of ambition in thy last years, thou have accumulated titles of
honor, yet all the way thou have had one enemy, and therefore never any
perfect peace. But who is this one enemy in this Text? As long as we put it
off, and as loath as we are to look this enemy in the face, yet we must, though
it be Death. And this is Vestigium quartum, The fourth and next step in this
paraphrase.

Surge and descend in domum figuli, says the Prophet Jeremy, that is, Mors.
Jer. 18.2.
say the Expositors, to the consideration of thy Mortality. It is Surge,
descend, Arise and go down: A descent with an ascension: Our grave is upward,
and our heart is upon Jacobs Ladder, in the way, and nearer to heaven. Our
daily Funerals are some Emblemes of that; for though we be laid down in the
earth after, yet we are lifted up upon men's shoulders before. We rise in the
descent to death, and so we do in the descent to the contemplation of it. In
all the Potters house, is there one vessel made of better stuff then clay?
There is his matter. And of all forms, a Circle is the perfectest, and art
thou loath to make up that Circle, with returning to the earth again?

Thou must, though thou be loath. Fortasse, says S. Augustine, That word of
contingency, of casualty, Perchance, In omnibus ferme rebus, praeterquam in
morte locum habet: It has room in all humane actions excepting death. He
makes his example thus: such a man is married; where he would, or at least
where he must, where his parents, or his Guardian will have him; shall he have
Children? Fortasse, says he, They are a young couple, perchance they shall: And
shall those Children be sons? Fortasse, they are of a strong constitution,
perchance they shall: And shall those sons live to be men? Fortasse, they are
from healthy parents, perchance they shall: And when they have lived to be men,
shall they be good men? Such as good men may be glad they may live? Fortasse,
still; They are of virtuous parents, it may be they shall: But when they are
come to that Morientur, shall those good men die? here, says that Father, the
Fortasse vanishes; here it is omnino, certe, sine dubitatione; infallibly,
inevitably, irrecoverably they must die. Does not man die even in his birth?
The breaking of prison is death, and what is our birth, but a breaking of
prison? As Soon as we were clothed by God, our very apparel was an Emblem of
death. In the skins of dead beasts, he covered the skins of dying men. As Soon
as God set us on work, our very occupation was an Emblem of death; It was to
dig the earth; not to dig pitfals for other men, but graves for our selves.
Has any man here forgot to day, that yesterday is dead? And the Bell tolls for
to day, and will ring out anon; and for as much of every one of us, as
appertains to this day. Quotidie morimur, and tamen nos esse aeternos putamus,
says S. Hierome; We die every day, and we die all the day long; and because we
are notabsolutely dead, we call that an eternity, an eternity of dying: And is
there comfort in that state? why, that is the state of hell it self, Eternal
dying, and not dead.

But for this there is enough said, by the Moral man; (that we may respite
divine proofs, for divine points anon, for our several Resurrections) for
this death is merely natural, and it is enough that the moral man says, Mors
lex, tributum, officium mortalium. First it is lex, you were born under that
law, upon that condition to die: Sencea.
so it is a rebellious thing not to be content to die, it opposes the Law. Then
it is Tributum, an imposition which nature the Queen of this world lays upon
us, and which she will take, when and where se lift; here a young man, there an
old man, herea happy, there a miserable man; And so itis a seditious thing not
to be content to die, it opposes the prerogative. And lastly, it is Officium,
men are to have rheir turns, to take their time, and then to give way by death
to successors; and so it is Incivile, inofficiosum, not to be content to die,
it opposes the frame and form of government. It comes equally to us all, and
makes us all equal when it comes. The eshes of an Oak in the Chimney, are no
Epitaph of that Oak, to tell me how high or how large that was; It tells me not
what flocks it sheltered while it stood, nor what men it hurt when it fell. The
dust of great persons graves is speechless too, it says nothing, it
distinguishes nothing: As soon the dust of a wretch whom thou would not, as
of a Prince whom thou could not look upon, will trouble thine eyes, if the
wind blow it thither; and when a whirle-winde has blown the dust of the
Churchyard into the Church, and the man sweeps out the dust of the Church into
the Churchyard, who will undertake to sift those dusts again, and to
pronounce, This is the Patrician, this is the noble flower, and this the
yeomanly, this the Plebeian bran. Sois the death of Iesabel (Ieabel was a
Queen) expressed; They shall not say, this is Iesabel; not only not wonder that
it is, not pity that it should be, but they shall not say, they shall not know,
This is Iesabel. It comes to all, to all alike; but not alike welcome to all.
To die too willingly, out ofimpatience to wish, or out of violence to hasten
death, or to die too unwillingly, to murmr at Gods purpose reveled by age, or
by sickness, are equal distempers; and to harbor a disobedient loathnesse
all the way, or to entertain it at last, argues but an irreligious ignorance;
An ignorance, that death is in nature but Expiratio, a breathing out, and we do
that every minute; An ignorance that God himself took a day to rest in, and a
good man's grave is his Sabbath; An ignorance that Abel the best of those whom
we can compare with him, was the first that dyed. Howsoever, whenever, all
times are Gods times: Vocantur obni ne diutius vexentur a noxiis, mali ne
diutius bonos persequantur, God calls the good to take them from their dangers,
and God takes the bad to take them from their trumph. And therefore neither
grudge that thou go, nor that worse stay, for God can make his profit of
both; Aut ideo vivit ut corrigatur, aut utper alum bonus exerceatur; God
reprieves him to mend him, or to make another better by his exercise; and not
to exult in the misery of another, but to glorify God in the ways of his
justice, let him know, Quantumcunque sero, subito ex hac oitatollitur, qui
finem praevidere nescivit: How long soever he live, how long soever he lie
sick, that man dies a sudden death, who never thought of it, If we consider
death in S. Paul's Statutum est, It is decreed that all men must die, there
death is indifferent; If we consider it in his Mori lucrum, that is an
advantage to die, there death is good; and so much the vulgat Edition seems to
intimate, when ( Deuteronomy. 30. 19) whereas we read, I have set before you life and
death, that reads it, Vitam and honum, Life and that which is good. If then
death be at the worst indifferent, and to the good, good, how is it Hostis, an
enemy to the Kingdom of Christ? for that also is Vestigium quintum, the fifth
and next step in this paraphrase.

First God did not make death, says the Wiseman, And therefore S. Augustine
makes a reasonable prayer to God, Ne permittas Domine quod nonfecisti, dominari
Creatur ae quam fecisti; Suffer not O Lord, death, whom thou did not make, to
have dominion over me whom thou did. Whence then came death? The same Wiseman
has showed us the father, Through envy of the devil, came death into the
world; and a wiser then he, the holy Ghost himself has showed us the Mother,
By sin came death into the world. But yet if God have naturalized death, taken
death into the number of his servants, and made Death his Commissioner to
punish sin, and he do but that, how is Death an enemy? First, he was an enemy
in invading Christ, who was not in his Commission, because he had no sin; and
still he is an enemy, because still he adheres to the enemy. Death hangs upon
the edge of every persecutors sword; and upon the sting of every calumniators,
and accusers tongue. In the Bull of Phalaris, in the Bulls of Basan, in the
Bulls of Babylon, the shrewdest Bulls of all, in temporal, in spiritual
persecutions, ever since God put an enmity between Man, and the Serpent, from
the time of Cain who began in a murder, to the time of Antichrist, who
proceeds in Massacres, Death has adhered to the enemy, and so is an enemy.

Death has a Commission, Stipendium peccati mors est, The reward of sin Death,
but where God gives a Supersedeas, upon that Commission, Vivo Ego, nolo mortem,
As I live says the Lord, I would have no sinner dye, not dye the second death,
yet Death proceeds to that execution: And where as the enemy, whom he adheres
to, Serpent himself, has power but In calcaneo, upon the heel, the lower,
the mortal part, the body of man, Death is come up into our windows, says
the Prophet, into our best lights, Jer. 9.21.
our understandings, and benights us there, either with ignorance, before sin,
or with senselessness after: And a Sheriff that should burn him, who were
condemned to be hanged, were a murderer, though that man must have dyed: To
come in by the door, by the way of sickness upon the body, is, but to come in
at the window by the way of sin, is not deaths Commission; God opens not that
window.

So then he is an enemy, for they that adhere to the enemy are enemies: And
adhering is not only a present subministration of supply to the enemy (for that
death does not) but it is also a disposition to assist the enemy, then when he
shall be strong enough to make benefit of that assistance. And so death
adheres; when sin and Satan have weakened body and mind, death enters upon
both. And in that respect he is Vltimus hostis, the last enemy, and that is
Sextum vestigium, our sixth and next step in this paraphrase.

Death is the last, and in that respect the worst enemy. In an enemy,
Novisssns^s hostis.
that appears at first, when we are or may be provided against him, there is
some of that, which we call Honor: but in the enemy that reserves himself
unto the last, and attends our weak estate, there is more danger. Keep it,
where I intend it, in that which is my sphere, the Conscience: If mine enemy
meet me betimes in my youth, in an object of tentation, (so Joseph's enemy met
him in Putifars Wife) yet if I do not adhere to this enemy, dwell upon a
delightful meditation of that sin, if I do not fuel, and foment that sin,
assist and encourage that sin, by high diet, wanton discourse, other
provocation, I shall have reason on my side, and I shall have grace on my side,
and I shall have the History of thousand that have perished by that sin, on my
side; Even Spittles will give me soldiers to fight for me, by their miserable
example against taht sin; nay perchance sometimes the virtue of that woman,
whom I solicit, will assist me. But when I lie under the hands of that
enemy, that has reserved himself to the last, to my last bed, then when I
shall be able to stir no limb in any other measure then a Fever or a Palsy
shall shake them, when everlasting darkness shall have an inchoation in the
present dimnesse of mine eyes, and the everlasting gnashing in the present
chattering of my teeth, and the everlasting worm in the present gnawing of the
Agonies of my body, and anguishes of my mind, when the last enemy shall watch
my remedilsse body, and my desconsolate soul there, there, where not the
Physician, in his way, perchance not the Priist in hi, shall be able to give
any assistance, And when he has sported himself with my misery upon that
stage, my deathbed, shall shift the Scene, and throw me from that bed, into
the grave, and there triumph over me, God knows, how many generations, till
the Redeemer, my Redeemer, the Redeemer of all me, body, as well as soul, come
again; As death is Novissimus hostis, the enemy which watches me, at my last
weakness, and shall hold me, when I shall be no more, till that Angel come,
Who shall say, and swear that time shall be no more, in that consideration, in
that apprehension, he is the powerfullest, the fearefulest enemy; and yet evern
there this enemy Abolebitur, he shall be destroyed, which is, Septimum
vestigium, our seventh and last step in this paraphrase.

This destruction, this abolition of this last enemy, is by the Resurrection;
Abolebieur.
for the Text is part of an argument for the Resurrection. And truly, it is a
fair intimation, and testimony of an everlasting end in that state of the
Resurrection (that no time shall end it) that we have it presented to us in all
the parts of time; in the past, in the present, and in the future. We had a
Resurrection in prophecy; we have a Resurrection in the present working of Gods
Sprit; we shall have a Resurrection in the final consummation. The Prophet
speaks in the furture, He will swallow up death in victory, there it is
Abolebit: Esaias 25.8.
All the Erangelists speak historically, of matter of fact, in them it is
Abolevit. And here in this Apostle, it is in the present, Aboletur, now he is
destroyed. And this exhibites unto us a threefold occasion of advancing our
devotion, in considering a threefold Resurrection; First, a Resurrection from
dejections and calamities in this world, a Temporary Resurrection; Secondly, a
Resurrection from sin, a Spiritual Resurrection; and then a Resurrection;
Secondly, a Resurrection.

A calamitate; When the Prophets speak of a Resurrection in the old Testament,
1. A calamitate.
for the most part their principal intention is, upon a temporal restitution
from calamities that oppress them then. Neither does Calvin carry those
emphaticall words, which are so often cited for a proof of the last
Resurrection: Job 19.25.
That he knows his Redeemer lives, that he knows he shall stand the last man
upon earth, that though his body be destroyed, yet in his flesh and with his
eyes he shall see God, to any higher sense then so, that how low soeve he be
brought, to what desperate state soever he be reducedin the eyes of the world,
yet he assures himself of a Resurrection, a reparation, a restitution to his
former bodily health, and worldly fortune which he had before, And such a
Resurrection we all know Job had.

In that famous, and most considerable prophetical vision which God exhibited
to Ezekiel, where God set the Prophet in a valley of very many, and very dry
bones, and invites the several joints to knit again, ties them with their old
sinews, and ligaments, clothes them in their old flest, wraps them in their old
skin, and calls life into them again, Gods, principal intention in that vision
was thereby to give them an assurance of a Resurrection from their present
calamity, not but that there is also good evidence of the last Resurrection in
that vision too; Thus far God argues with them are nota; from that which they
knew before, the final Resurrection, he assures them that which they knew not
till then, a present Resurrection from those pressures: Remember by this vision
that which you all know already, that at last I shall reunite the dead, and
dry bones of all men in a general Resurrection: And them if you remember, if
you consider, if you look upon that, can you doubt, but that I who can do that,
can also recollect you, from your present desperation, and give you a
Resurrection to your former temporal happiness? And this truly arises
pregnantly, necessarily out of the Prophets answer; God asks him there, Son of
man, cna these bones live? And he answers, Domine tu nosti, O Lord God thou
know. The Prophet answers according to Gods intention in the question. If
that had been for their living in the last Resurrection, Ezekiel would have
answered God as Martha answered Christ, John 11.24.
when he said, Thy brother Lazarus shall rise again; I know that he shall rise
again at the Resurrection at the last day; but when the question was, whether
men so macerated, so seattered in this world, could have a Resurrection to
their former temprorall happiness, here, that puts the Prophet to his Domine
tu nosti, It is in thy breast to proposeit, itis in thy hand to execute it,
whether thou do it, or do it not, thy name be glorisied; It falls not within our
conjecture, which way it shall please thee to take for this Resurrection,
Domine tu nosti, Thou Lord, and thou only know; Which is also the sense of
those words, Heb. 11.35.
Others were tortured, and accepted not a deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection: A present deliverance had been a Resurrection, but to be
the more sure of a better hereafter, they less respected that; According to
that of our Savior, Mat. 10.39.
He that finds hi life, shall lose it; He that fixes himself too earnestly
upon this Resurrection, shall lose a better.

This is then the prophetical Resurrection for the future, but a future in
this world; That if Rulers take counsel against the Lord, the Lord shall have
their counsel in derision; If they take arms against the Lord, the Lord shall
break their Bows, and cut their Spears in sunder; Psalm. 2.4.
If they hiss, and gnash their teeth, and say, we have swallowed him up; If we
be made their byword, their parable, their proverb, their libell, the theme
and burden of their songs, as Job complains, yet whatsoever fall upon me,
dmage, distress, scorn, or Hostis ultimus, death it self, that death which we
consider here, death of possessions, death of estimation, death of health,
death of contentment, yet Abolebitur, it sahll be destroyed in a Resurrection,
in the return of the light of Gods countenance upon me even in this world. And
this is the first Resurrection.

But this first Resurrection, 2. Apeecatis.
which is but from temporal calamities, does so little concern a true and
established Christian, whether it come or no, (for still Jobs Basis is his
Basis, and his Center, Etiamsi occiderit, though he kill me, kill me, kill me,
in all these several deaths, and give me no Resurrection in this world, yet I
will trust in him) as that, as though this first resurrection were no
resurrection, not to be numbered among the rersurrections, S. John calls that
which we call the second, which is from sin, the first resurrection: Blessed
and holy is be, who has part in the firstresurrection: And this resurrection,
Christimplies, Apoe. 20.6. John 5.25.
when he says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now
is, when the dead shall hear the ovyce of the Son of God; and they that hear
it shall live: That is, by the voice of the word of life, the Gospel of
repentance, they shall have a spiritual resurrection to a new life. S. Austine
and Lactantius both were so hard in believing the roundnesse of the earth, that
they thought that those homines pensiles, as they call them, those men that
hang upon the other cheek of the face of the earth, those Antipodes, whose feet
are directly against ours, must necessarily fall from the earth, if the earth
be round. But whither should they fall? If they fall, they must fall upwards,
for heaven is above them too as it is to us. So if the spiritual Antipodes of
this world, the Sons of God, that walk with feet opposed in ways contrary to
the sons of men, shall be said to fall, when they fall to repentance, to
mortification, to a religious negligence, and contempt of the pleasures of this
life, truly their fall is up wards, they fall toward heaven, God gives breath
unto the people upon the earth, says the Prophet, Et spiritum his, qui calcant
illam. Esaias 45.5
Our Translation carries that no farther, but that God gives breath to people
upon the earth, and spirit to them that walk thereon; But Irenaeus makes a
useful difference between afflatus and spiritus, that God gives breath to all
upon earth, but his spirit only to them, who tread in a religious scorn upon
earthly things.

Is it not a strange phrase of the Apostle, Mortify your members; fornication,
uncleanenesse, inordinate affections? He does not say, mortify your members
against those sins, Col. 3.5.
but he calls those very sins, the members of our bodies, as though we were
elemented and compacted of nothing but sin, till we come to this resurrection,
this mortification, which is indeed our vivification; Till we bear in our
body, the dying of our Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be made
manifest in our body. 2 Cor. 4.10.
God may give the other resurrection from worldly misery, and not give this. A
widow may be rescued from the sorrow and solitariness of that state, by having
a plentiful fortune; there she has one resurrection; but the widow that
lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives; 1 Timothy 5.6.
she has no second resurrection; and so in that sense, even this Chapel may
be a Churchyard, men may stand, and sit, and kneel, and yet be dead; and any
Chamber alone may be a Golgotha, a place of dead men's bones, of men not come to
this resurrection, which is the renunciation of their beloved sin.

It was inhumanely said by Vitellius, upon the death of Otho, when he walkedin
the field of carcasses, where the battle was fought; O how sweet a perfume is a
dead enemy! But it is a divine saying to thy soul, O what a savor of life,
unto life, is the death of a beloved sin! What an Angelical comfort was that
to Joseph and Mary in Egypt, after the death of Herod, Arise, for they are
dead, that sought the childs life! Mat. 2.20.
And even that comfort is multiplied upon thy soul, when the Spirit of God
says to thee, Arise come to this resurrection: for that Herod, that sin, that
sought the life, the everlasting life of this child, the child of God, thy
soul, is dead, dead by repentance, dead by mortification. The highest cruelty
that story relates, or Poets imagine, is when a persecutor will not afford a
miserable man death, not be so merciful to him, as to take his life. Thou have
made thy sin, thy soul, thy life; inanimated all thy actions, all thy purposes
with that sin. Miserere animatuae, be so merciful to thy self, as to take
away that life by mortification, by repentance, and thou art come to this
Resurrection: and thugh a man may have the former resurrection, and not this,
peace in his fortune, and yet not peace in his conscience, yet whosoever has
this second, has an infallible seal of the third resurrection too, to a
fullness of glory in body, as well as in soul. For Spiritus maturam efficit
carnem and capacem incorruptelae; this resurrection by the spirit, Irenaeus.
mellowes the body of man, and makes that capable of everlasting glory, which
is the last weapon, by which the last enemy death, shall be destroyed; A morte.

Upon that pious ground that all Scriptures were written for us, as we are
Christians, that all Scriptures conduce to the proof of Christ, and of the
Christian state, 3. A morte.
it is the ordinary manner of the Fathers to make all that David speaks
historically of himself, and all that the Prophet speaks futurely of the Jews,
if those place may be referred to Christ, to refer them to Christ primarily,
and but by reflection, and in a second consideration upon David or upon the
Jews, Thereupon do the Father (truly I think more generally more unanimely
then in any other place of Scripture) take that place of Ezekile which we spoke
of before, to be primarily intended of the last resurrection, and but
secundarily of the Jews restitution. But Gasper Sanctius a learned Jesuit,
(that is not so rare, but an ingenuous Jesuit too) though he be bound by the
Council Trent to interpret Scriptures according to the Fathers, yet he here
ackowledges the whole truth, that Gods purpose was to prove, by that which they
did know, which was the general resurrection, that which they knew not, their
temporal restitution. Tertullian is vehement at first, but after, more supple,
Allegoricae Scripturae, says he, resurrectionem subradiant aliae, aliae
determinant: Some figurative places of Scripture, do intimate a resurrection,
and some manifest it; and of those manifest places he takes this vision of
Ezekiel to be one. But he comes after to this, Sit and corporum, and rerum, and
meanihilinterest; let it sighnifie a temporal resurrection, so it may signify
the general resurrection of our bodies too, says he, and I am well satisfied;
and then the truth satisfies him, for it does signify both. It is true that
Tertullian says, De vacuo similitudo non competit; If the vision be but a
comparison, if there were no such thing as a resurrection, the comparison did
not hold. De nullo par abola non convenit, says he, and truly; If there were
no resurrection to which that Parable might have relation, it were no Parable.
All that is true; but there was a resurrection always known to them, always
believed by them, and that made their present resurrection from that calamity,
the more easy, the more intelligible, the more credible, the more discernable
to them.

Let therefore Gods method, be thy method; fix thy self firmly upon that
belief of the penerall resurrection, and thou will never doubt of either of
the particular resurrections, either from sin, by Gods grace, or from worldly
calamities, by Gods power. For that last resurrection is the ground of all. By
that Verevicta mors, says Irenaeus, this Last enemy, death, is truly
destroyed, because his last spoil, the body, is taken out of his hands. The
same body, eadem ovis, (as the same Father notes) Christ did not fetch another
sheep to the flock, in the place of that which was lost, but the same sheep:
God shall not give me another, abetter body at the resurrection, but the same
body made better; for Sinon haberet caro salvari, neutiquam verbum Dei caro
factum fuisset, If the flesh of man were not to be saved, Idem.
the Anchor of salvation would never have taken the flesh of man upon him.

The punishment that God laid upon Adam, In dolor and in sudore, In sweat, and
in sorrow sbalt thou eat thy bread, is but Donecreverteris, till man return
to dust: but when Man is returned to dust, Genesis 3.17.
God returns to the remembrance of that promise, Awake and sing yethat dwell
in the dust. A mercy already exhibited to us, in the person of our Savior
Christ Jesus, Esaias 26.19.
in whom, Per primitias benedixit campo, (says S. Chrysostom) as God by
taking a handful for the first Fruits, gave ablessing to the wholw field; so
he has sealed the bodies of all mankind to his glory, by pre-assuming the body
of Christ to that glory. For by that there is now Commercium inter Coelum and
terram; there is a Trade driven, a Staple established between Heaven and
earth; Bernard.
Ibi caronostra, hic Spiritus ejus; Thither have we sent our flest, and hither
has he sent his Spirti.

This is the last abolition of this enemy, Death; for after this, the bodies of
the Saints he cannot touch, the bodes of the damned he cannot kill, and if he
could, he were not therein their enemy, but their friend. This is that blessed
and glorious State, of which, when all the Apostles met to make the Creed, they
could say no more, but Credo Resurrectionem, I heleeve the Resurrection of the
body; and when those two Reverend Fathers, to whom it belongs, shall come to
speak of it, upon the day proper for it, in this place, and if all the
Bishops, that ever met in Councels should meet them here, they could but second
the Apostles Credo, with their Anathema, We believe, and woe be unto them that
do not believe the Resurrection of the body; but in gong about to express it,
the lips of an Angel would be uncircumcised lips, and the tongue of an
Archangell would stammer. I offer not therefore at it: but in respect of, and
with relation to that blessed State, according to the doctrine, and practice of
our Church, we do pray for the dead; for the militant Church upon earth, and
the trimphant Church in Heaven, and the whole Catholic Church in Heaveen, and
earth; we do pray that God will be pleased to hasten that Kingdom, that we
with all others departed in the true Faith of his holy Name, may have this
perfect consummation, both of body and soul, in his everlasting glory, Amen.

SERMON XVI. preached at White Hall, the first Friday in Lent. 1622.
JOHN 11.35. Jesus wept.


I Am now but upon the Compassion of Christ. There is much difference between
his Compassion and his Passion, as much as between the men that are to handle
them here. But Lacryma pass, ionis Chrisi est vicaria: August.
A great personage may speak of his Passion, of his blood; My vicargae is to
speak of his Compassion and his tears. Let me chafe the wax, and melt your
souls in a bath of his Tears now, Let him set to the great Seal of his
effectual passion, in his blood, then. It is a Common place I know to speak
of tears: I would you knew as well, it were a common practice, to shed them.
Though it be not so, yet bring S. Bernards, patience, Libenter audiam, qui non
sibi plausum, sed mihi planctum moveat; be willing to hear him, that seeks not
your acclamation to himself, but your humiliation to his and your God; not to
make you praise with them that praise, but to make you weep with them that
weep, And Jesus wept.

The Masorites (the Masorites are the Critiques upon the Hebrew Bible, the Old
Testament) cnnot tell us, who divided the Chapters of the Old Testament into
verses; Neither can any other tell us, who did it in the New Testament. Whoever
did it seems to have stopped in an amazement in this Text, and by making an
entire verse of these two words, Jesus wept, and no more, to intimate that
there needs no more for the exalting of our devotion to a competent height,
then to consider, how, and where, and when, and why Jesus wept. There is not a
shorter verse in the Bible, not a larger Text. There is another as short;
Semper gaudete, Rejoice evermore, and of that holy Joy, 1 These. 5.16.
I may have leave to speak here hereafter, more seasonably, in a more
Festival time, by my ordinary service. This is the season of general
Compunction, of general Mortification, and no man privileged, for Jesus wept.

In that Letter which Lentulus in said to have written to the Senate of Rome,
Divisi^.
in which he gives some Characters of Christ, he says, That Christ was never
seen to laugh, but to weep often. Now in what number he limits his often, or
upon what testimony he grounds him number, we know not. We take knowledgethat
he wept thrice. He wept here, when he mourned with them that mourned for
Lazarus; He wept again, when he drew near to Jerusalem, and looked upon that
City; And he wept a third time in his Passion. There is but one Evangelist, but
this, S. John, that tells us of these first tears, the rest say nothing of
them; There is but one Evangelist, S. Luke, Luke 19.41. Hcb. 5.7.
that tells us of his second tears, the rest speak not of those; There is no
Evangelist, but there is an Apostle that tells us of his third tears, S. Paul
says, That in the days of his flesh, be offered up prayers with strong cries,
and tears; And those tears, Expositors of all sides refer to his Passion,
though some to his Agony in the Garden, some to his Passion on the Corsse; and
these in my opinion most fitly; because those words of S. Paul belong to the
declaration of the Priesthood, and of the Sacrifice of Christ; and for that
function of his, the Cross was the Altar; and therefore to the Cross we fix
those third tears. The first were Humane tears, the second were Prophetical,
the third were Pontifical, appertaining to the Sarifice. The first were shed
in a Condolency of a humane and natural calamity fallen upon one family;
Lazarus was dead: The second were shed in Contemplation of future calamity
upon a Nation; Jerusalem was to be destroyed: The third, in Contemplation of
sin, and the everlasting punishments due to sin, and to such sinners, as would
make no benefit of that Sacrifice, which he offered in offering himself. His
friend was dead, and then Jesus wept; He justified naturail affectins and such
offices of piety: Jerusalem was tobe destroyed, and then Jesus wept; He
commiserated public and national calamities, though a private person: His
very giving of himself for sin, was to become to a great many ineffectuall;
and then Jsus wept; He declared how indelible the natural stain of sin is,
that not such sweat as hi, such tears, such blood as his could absolutely wash
it out of man's nature. The tears of the text are as a Spring, a Well.
belonging to onehoushold the Sisters of Lazarus: The tears over Jerusalem, are
as a River belonging to a whole Country: The tears upon the Cross, are as the
Sea belonging to all the world; and though literally there fall no more into
our text, then the Spring, yet because the Spring flows into the River, and
the River into the Sea, and that wheresoever we find that Jesus wept, we find
our Text, (for our Text is but that, Iisus wept) therefore by the leave and
light of his blessed Spirit, we shall look upon those lovely, those heavenly
eye, through this glass of his own tears, in all these three lines, as he
wept here over Lazarus, as he wept there over Jerusalem, as he wept upon the
Cross over all us. For so often Jesus wept.

Fitst then, 1 Part. Humanitus.
Jesus wept Hum^nitus, he took a necessary occasion to show that he was true
Man. He was now in hand with the greatest Miracle that ever he did, the raising
of Lazarus, so long dead. Could we but do so in our spiritual raising, what a
blessed harvest were that? What a comfort to find one man here to day, raised
from his spiritual death, this day twelvemonth? Christ did it every year,
and every year he improved his Miracle, Mat. 9.25.
In the first year, he raised the Governors Daughter: se was newly dead, and
as yetin the house. In the beginning of sin, and whilst in the house, in the
house of God, in the Church, in a glad obedience to Gods Ordinances and
Institutions there, for the reparation and resuscitation of dead souls, the
work is not so hard. In his second year, Luke 7.15.
Christ raised the Widows Son; and him he found without, ready to be buried. In
a man grown cold and stiff in sin, impenetrable, inflexible by denouncing the
Judgments of God, almost buried in a stupidity, and insensiblenesse of his
being dead, there is more difficulty. But in his third year, Christ raised
this Lazarus; he had been long dead, and buried, and in probability, puttrified
after four days.

This Miracle Christ meant to make a pregnant proof of the Resurrection, which
was his principal intention therein. For, the greatest arguments against the
Resurrection, being for the most part of this kind, when a Fish eats a man,
and another man eats that fish, or when one man eats another, how shall both
these men rise again? when a body is resolved in the grave to the first
principles, or is passed into other substances, the case is somewhat near the
same; and therefore Christ would work upon a body near that state, abody
putrified. And truly, in our srirituall raising of the dead, to raise a sinner
putrified in his own earth, resolved in his own dung, especially that has
passed many transformations, from shape to shape, from sin to sin, (hi has
been a Salamander and lived in the fire, in the fire successvely, in the fire
of lust in his youth, and in his age in the fire of Ambition; and then he has
been a Serpent, a Fish, and lived in the waters., in the water successively,
in the troubled water of sedition in his youth, and in his age in the cold
waters of indevotion) how shall we raise this Salamander and this Serpent, when
this Serpent and this Salamander is all one person, and must have contrary
music to charm him, contrary physic to cure him? To raise a man resolved
into diverse substances, scattered into diverse forms of several sins, is
the greatest work. And there. fore this Miracle (which implied that) S. Basil
calls Miraculum in Miraculo, a pregnant, a double Miracle. For here is Mortuus
redivivus, A dead man lives; that had been done before; but Alligatus ambulat,
says Basil; he that is settered, and manacled, and tied with many
difficulties, he walks.

And therefore as this Miracle raised him most estmation, so (for they ever
accompany one another) it raised him most envy: Envy that extended beyond him,
to Lazarus himself, who had done nothing; John 12.10
and yet, The chief Priests consulted how they might put Lizarus to death,
because by reason of him, many believed in Jesus. A disease, a distemper, a
danger which no time shall ever be free from, that whereforer there is a
coldness, a disaffection to Gods Cause, those who are any way occasionally
instrumenta of Gods glory, August.
sahll find cold affection. If they killed Lazarus, had not Christ done enough
to let them see that he could raise him again? for Caeca sevitia, sialiud
videtur mertuus, aliud occisus; It was a blind malice, if they thought, that
Christ could raise a man naturally dead, and could not if he were violently
killed. This then being his greatest Miracle, preparing the hardest Article of
the Creed, the Resurrection of the body, as the Mirracle it self declared
sufficiently his Divinity, that nature, so in this declaration that he was God,
he would declare that he was man too, and therefore Jesus wept.

He wept as man does weep, and he wept as a man may weep; Noninordinate.
Bernard. Job 10.4.
for these tears were Testes naturae, non Indices diffidentiae, They declared
him to be true man, but no distrustful, no inordinate man. In Job there is a
question asked of God, Have thou eyes of flesh, and do thou see, as man
sees? Let this question be directed to God manifested in Christ, and Christ
will weep out an answer to that question, I have eyes of flesh, and I do weep
as man weeps. Not as sinful man, not as s man, that had het fall his bridle,
by which he should trune his horse: Not as a man that were cast from the
rudder, by which he should steer his Ship: Not as a man that had lost his
interest and power in his affections, and passions: Christ wept not so. Christ
mingt go farther that way, then any other man: Christ might ungirt himself,
and give more scope and liberty to his passions, then any other man: both
because he had no Original sin within, to drive him, no inordinate love
without to draw him, when his affections were moved; which all other men have.

God says to the Jews, That they had wept in his ears; God had heard them
weep: Numb. 11.18.
but for what, and how? they wept for flesh. There was a tincture, there was a
deep dye of murmuring in their tears. Christ goes as far in the passion, in his
agony, and he comes to a passionate deprecation, in his Tristis anima, and in
the Si possibile, and in the Transeat calix. But as all these passions were
sanctified in the root, from which no bitter leaf, no crooked twig could
spring, so they were instantly washed with his Veruntamen, a present and a full
submitting of all to Gods pleasure, Yet not my will O Father, but thine be
done. It will not be safe for any man to come so near an excess of passions,
as he may find some good men in the Scriptures to have done: That because he
hears Moses say to God, Dele me, Blot my name out of the book of life,
Therefore he may say, God damn me, or I renounce God. It is not safe for a man
to expose himself to a tentation, because he has seen another pass through
it. Every man may know his own Byas, and to what sin that diverts him: The
beauty of the person, the opportunity of the place, the importunity of the
party, being his Mistress, could not shake Joseph's constancy. There is one
such example, of one that resisted a strong tentation: But then there are in
one place, two men together, that sinned upon their own bodies, Her and Onan,
Genesis 46.^2.
then when no tentation was offered, nay when a remedy against tentation was
ministered to them.

Some man may be chaster in the Stews, then another in the Church; and some man
will sin more in his dreams, then another in his discourse. Every man must know
how much water his own vessel draws, and not to think to sail over,
wheresoever he has seen anothe (he knows not with how much labor) shove over:
No nor to adventure so far, as he may have reason to be confident in his own
strength: For thugh he may be safe in himself, yet he may sinin anogher, if by
his indiscreete, and improvident example, another be scandalized. Christ was
always safe; He was led ofthe Spirit: Mat. 4.1.
of what spirit? his own Spirit: Led willingly into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the devil. No other man might do that; but he who was able to say
to the Sun, Siste sol, was able to say to Satan, Siste Lucifer. Christ in
another place gave such scope to his affections, and to others interpretations
of his actions, that his frineds and kinsfolds thught him mad, besides himself:
But all this while, Christ had his own actions, and passions, and their
interpretations in his own power: he could do what he would. Here in our Text,
Jesus was troubled, and he groaned; and vehemently, and often, his affections
were stirred: but as in a clan glass, if water be stirred and troubled, though
it may conceive a little light froth, yet it contracts no foulness in that
clean galsse, the affections of Christ were moved, but so: in that holy vessel
they would contract no foulness, no declination toward inordinatenesse. But
then every Christian is not a Christ; and therefore as he that would fast forty
days, as Christ did, might starve; and he that would whip Merchants out of the
Temple, as Christ did, might be knocked down in the Temple; So he knowing his
own inclinations, or but the general ill inclination of all mankind, as he is
infected with Original sin, should converse so much with publicans and
sinners, might participate of their sins. The rule is, we must avoid
inordinatenesse of affections; but when we come to examples of that rule, our
selves well understood by our selves, must be our own exaples; for it is not
always good to go too far, as some good men have gone before.

Now though Christ were far from both, Non Apathes.
yet he came nearer to an excess of passion, then to an Indolencie, to a
senselessness, to a privation of natural affections. Inordinatenesse of
affections may sometimes make some men like some beasts; but indolencie,
absence, emptiness, privation of affections, makes any man at all times, like
stones, like dirt. In novissimis, says S. Peter, In the last, that is, in the
worst days, in the dregs, and lees, and tartar of sin, then shall come men,
lovers of themselves; and that is ill enough in man; for that is an affection
peculiar to God, to love himself. Non speciale vitium, sed radix omnium
vitiorum, says the School in the mouth of Aquinas: self. love cannot be
called a distinct sin, but the root of all sins. It is true that Justin Martyr
says, Philosophanti finis est Deo assimilari, The end of Christian Philosophy
is to be wise like God; but not in this, to love our selves; for the greatest
sin that ever was, and that upon which even the blood of Christ Jesus has not
wrought, the sin of Angels was that, Similis ero Altissimo, to be like God. To
love our selves, to be satisfied in our selves, to find an omnisufficiency in
our selves, is an intrusion, an usurpation upon God: And even God himself who
had that omni-sufficiency in himself, conceived a convenience for his glory,
to draw a Circumference about that Center, Creatures about himself, and to
shed forth lines of love upon all them, and not to love himself alone.
Self-love in man sinks deep: but yet you see, the Apostle in his order, casts
the other sin lower, that is, into a worse place, To be without natural
affections.

S. Augustine extends these natural affections, to Religious affections,
because they are natural to a supernatural man, to a regenerate man, who
naturally loves those, that are of the household of the faithful, that profess
the same truth of Religion: and not to be affected with their distresses, when
Religion it self is distressed, in them, is impiety. He extends these
affections to Moral affections; the love of Eminent and Heroical virtues in
any man: we ought to be affected with the fall of such men. And he extends them
to civil affections, the love of friends; not to be moved in their behalf, is
argument enough that we do not much love them.

For our case in the Text, These men whom Jesus found weeping, and wept with
them, were none of his kindred: They were Neighbors, and Christ had had a
conversation, and contracted a friendship in that Family; V. 5.
He loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus, says the Story: and he would
let the world see that he loved them: for so the Jews argued that saw him
weep, V. 36.
Behold how he loved them; without outward declarations, who can conclude an
inward love? to assure that, Jesus wept.

To an inordinatenesse of affections it never came; to a natural tenderness
it did; and so far as to tears; Laerymae.
and then who needs be ashamed of weeping? Look away far from me, for I will
weep bitterly, says Jerusalem in Esaias. But look upon me, says Christ in the
Lamentations, Behold and see if ever there were any sorrow, any tears like
mine: Not like his in value, but in the root as they proceeded from natural
affection, they were tears of imitation, and we may, we must weep tears like
his tears. They scourged him, they crowned him, they nailed him, they pierced
him, and then blood came; but he shed tears voluntarily, and without violence:
The blood came from their ill, but the tears from his own good nature: The
blood was drawn, the tears were given. We call it a childish thing to weep,
and a womanish; and perchance we mean worse in that then in the childish; for
therein we may mean falsehood to be mingled with weakness. Christ made it an
argument of his being man, to weep, for though the lineaments of man's body,
eyes and ears, hands and feet, be ascribed to God in the Scriptures, though
the affections of man's mind be ascribed to him, (even sorrow, nay Repentance it
self, is attributed to God) I do not remember that ever God is said to have
wept: It is for man. And when God shall come to that last Act in the glorifying
of Man, when he promises, to wipe all tears from his eyes, what shall God have
to do with that eye that never wept?

He wept out of a nuturall tenderness in general; and he wept now out of a
particular occasion. What was that? Quia mortuus, because Lazarus was dead. We
stride over many steps at once; waive many such considerable circumstances as
these; Lazarus his friend was dead, therefore he wept, Lazarus, the staff and
sustentatio of that family was dead, he upon whom his Sisters relied, was dead,
therefore he wept. But I stop only upon this one step, Quia mortuus, that he
was dead. Now a good man is not the worse for dying, that is true and capable
of a good sense, because he is established in a better world: but yet when he
is gone out of this world he is none of us, he is no longer a man. The stronger
opinion in the School, is, That Christ himself, when he lay dead in the
grave, was no man. Though the God head never departed from the Carcass, (there
was no divorce of that Hypostaticall union) yet because the Humane soul was
departed from it, he was no man. Hugo de S. Victor. who thinks otherwise, that
Christ was a man then, thinks so upon a weak ground: He thinks, that because
the soul is the form of man, the soul is man; and that therefore the soul
remaining, the man remains. But it is not the soul, but the union of the
soul, that makes the man. The Master of the Sentences, Peter Lombard, that
thinks so too, that Christ was then a man, thinks so upon as weak a ground: He
thinks that it is enough to constitute a man, that there be a soul and body,
though that soul and body be not united; but still it is the union that makes
the man: And therefore when he is disunited, dead, he is none of us, he is no
man; and therefore we weep how well soever he be. Abraham was loath to let go
his wife, though the King had her: A man has a natural lothnesse to let go
his friend, though God take him to him.

S. Augustine says, that he knew well enough, that his mother was in heaven;
and S. Ambrose, that he knew well enough that his master Theodosius the emperor
was in heaven, but because they saw not in what state they were, they thought
that something might be asked at Gods hands in their behalf; and so out of a
humane and pious officiousness, in a devotion perchance indigested, uncocted,
and retaining yet some crudities, some irresolutions, they strayed into prayers
for them after they were dead. Lazarus his sisters made no doubt of their
brothers salvation; they believed his soul to be in a good estate: And for his
body, they told Christ, Lord we know that he shall rise at the last day: And
yet they wept.

Here, in this world, we who stay, lack those who are gone out of it: we know
they shall never come to us; and when we shall go to them, whether we shall
know them or no, we dispute. They who think that it conduces to the perfection
of happiness in heaven, that we should know one another, think piously if they
think we shall. For, as for the maintenance of public peace, States, and
Churches, may think diversely in points of Religion, that are not fundamental,
and yet both be true and Orthodoxall Churches; so for the exaltation of private
devotion in points that are not fundamental, diverse men may think diversely,
and both be equally good Christians. Whether we shall know them there, or no,
is problematicall and equal; that we shall not till then, is dogmaticall and
certain: Therefore we weep. I know there are Philosophers that will not let us
weep, nor lament the death of any: And I know that in the Scriptures there are
rules, and that there are instructions convayed in that example, that David
left mourning as soon as the child was dead; And I know that there are Authors
of a middle nature, above the Philosophers, and below the Scriptures, the
Apocryphal books, and I know it is said there, Comfort thy self, for
thou-shalt do him no good that is dead, Ecclus. 38.6.
Et teipsum pessimabis (as the vulgat reads it) thou shall make thy self worse
and worse, in the worst degree. But yet all this is but of inordinate
lamentation; for in the same place, the same Wise man says, My Son, let thy
tears fall down over the dead; weep bitterly and make great moan, as he is
worthy. When our Savior Christ had uttered his consummatum est, all was
finished, and their rage could do him no more harm, when he had uttered his In
manus tuas, he had delivered and God had received his soul, yet how did the
whole frame of nature mourn in Eclipses, and tremble in earthquakes, and
dissolve and shed in pieces in the opening of the Temple, Quia mortuus, because
he was dead.

Truly, to see the hand of a great and mighty Monarch, that hand that has
governed the civil sword, the sword of Justice at home, and drawn and sheathed
the foreign sword, the sword of war abroad, to see that hand lie dead, and
not be able to nip or fillip away one of his own worms (and then Quis homo,
what man, though he be one of those men, of whom God has said, Ye are gods,
yet Quis homo, what man is there that lives, and shall not see death?) To see
the brain of a great and religious Counselor (and God bless all from making,
all from calling any great that is not religious) to see that brain that
produced means to becalme gusts at Council tables, storms in Parliaments,
tempests in popular commotions, to see that brain produce nothing but swarms
of worms and no Proclamation to disperse them; To see a reverend Prelate that
has resisted Heretics and Schismatiques all his life, fall like one of them
by death, and perchance be called one of them when he is dead. To re-collect
all, to see great men made no men, to be sure that they shall never come to us,
not to be sure, that we shall know them when we come to them, to see the
Lieutenants and Images of God, Kings, the sinews of the State, religious
Counselors, the spirit of the Church, zealous Prelates, And then to see
vulgar, lgnorant, wicked, and facinorous men thrown all by one hand of death,
into one Cart, into one common Tide-boate, one Hospital, one Almeshouse, one
Prison, the grave, in whose dust no man can say, This is the King, this is the
Slave, this is the Bishop, this is the Heretic, this is the Counselor, this
is the Fool, even this miserable equality of so unequal persons, by so foul
a hand, is the subject of this lamentation, even Quia mortuus, because Lazarus
was dead, Jesus wept.

He wept even in that respect, Quia non abhibita media.
Quia mortuus, and he wept in this respect too, Quia non adhibita media,
because those means which in appearance might have saved his life, by his
default were not used, for when he came to the house, one sister, Martha says
to him, Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed; and then the
other sister, Mary says so too, Lord if thou had been here, my brother had
not dyed: They all cry out, that he who only, only by coming, might have saved
his life, would not come. Our Savior knew in himself that he abstained to
better purpose, and to the farther glory of God: for when he heard of his
death, he said to his Disciples, I am glad for your sakes that I was not there.
Christ had certain reserved purposes which conduced to a better establishing of
their faith, and to a better advancing of Gods Kingdom, the working of that
miracle. But yet because others were able to say to him, it was in you to have
saved him, and he did not, even this Quia non adhibita media, affected him; and
Jesus wept.

He wept, Etsi quatriduanus, Etsi quatriduanus.
though they said unto him, He has been four days dead, and stinkes. Christ
does not say, there is no such matter, he does not stink; but though he do, my
friend shall not lack my help. Good friends, useful friends though they may
commit some errors, and though for some misbehaviours they may stink in our
nostrils, must not be derelicted, abandoned to themselves. Many a son, many a
good heir, finds an ill air from his Father; his Fathers life stinkes in the
nostrils of all the world, and he hears every where exclamations upon his
Fathers usury, and extortion, and oppression: yet it becomes him by a
betterlife, and by all other means to rectify and redeem his Fathers fame.
Quatriduanus est, is no plea for my negligence in my family; to say, My son, or
my servant has proceeded so far in ill courses, that now it is to no purpose
to go about to reform him, because Quatriduanus est. Quatriduanus est, is no
plea in my pastoral charge, to say that seducers, and practisers, and
perswaders, and sollicitors for superstition, enter so boldly into every
family, that now it is to no purpose to preach religious wariness, religious
discretion, religious constancy. Quatriduanus est, is no plea for my Usury, for
my Simony; to say, I do but as all the world does, and has used to do a long
time. To preach there where reprehension of growing sin is acceptable, is to
preach in season; where it is not acceptable, it is out of season; but yet we
must preach in season, and out of season too. And when men are so refractary,
as that they forbear to hear, or hear and resist our preaching, we must
pray; and where they despise or forbid our praying, we must lament them, we
must weep: Quatriduanus erat, Lazarus was far spent, yet Jesus wept.

He wept, Etsisuscitandus.
Though he knew that Lazarus were to be restored, and raised to life again. for
as he meant to declare a great good will to him at last, so he would utter some
by the way; he would do a great miracle for him, as he was a mighty God; but he
would weep for him too, as he was a good natured man. Truly it is no very
charitable disposition, if I give all at my death to others, if I keep all all
my life to my self. For how many families have we seen shaked, ruined by this
distemper, that though the Father mean to alien nothing of the inheritance from
the Son at his death, yet because he affords him not a competent maintenance in
his life, he submits his Son to an encumbring of his fame with ignominious
shiftings, and an encumbring of the estare with irrecoverable debts. I may mean
to feast a man plentifully at Christmas, and that man may starve before in
Lent: Great persons may think it in their power to give life to persons and
actions by their benefits, when they will, and before that will be up and
ready, both may become incapable of their benefits. Jesus would not give this
family, whom he pretended to love, occasion of jealousy, of suspicion, that
he neglected them; and therefore though he came not presently to that great
work, which he intended tended at last, yet he left them not comfortless by
the way, Jesus wept.

And so (that we may reserve some minutes for the rest) we end this part,
applying to every man that blessed exclamation of S. Ambrose, Ad monumentum hoc
digner is accedere Domine Jesus, Lord Jesus be pleased to come to this grave, to
weep over this dead Lazarus, this soul in this body: And though I come not to
a present rising, a present deliverance from the power of all sin, yet if I can
feel the dew of thy tears upon me, if I can discern the eye of the compassion
bent toward me, I have comfort all the way, and that comfort will flow into an
infallibility in the end.

And be this the end of this part, to which we are come by these steps. Jesus
wept, That as he showed himself to be God, he might appear to be man too: he
wept not in ordinately; but he came nearer excess then indolency: He wept
because he was dead; and because all means for life had not been used; he wept,
though he were far spent; and he wept, though he meant to raise him again.

We pass now from his humane to his prophetical tears, from Jesus weeping in
contemplation of a natural calamity fallen upon one family, Lazarus was dead,
2 Part.
to his weeping in contemplation of a National calamity foreseen upon a whole
people; Jerusalem was to be destroyed. His former tears had sOme of the spirit
of prophecy in them; for therefore says Epiphanius, Christ wept there, because
he foresaw how little use the Jews would make of that miracle, his humane
tears were prophetical, and his prophetical tears are humane too, they rise
from good affections to that people. And therefore the same Author says, That
because they thought it an uncomely thing for Christ to weep for any temporal
thing, some men have expunged and removed that verse out of S. Lukes Gospel,
That Jesus when he saw that City, wept: But he is willing to be proposed, and
to stand for ever for an example of weeping in contemplation of public
calamities; Therefore Iesuswept.

He wept first, Inter acclamationes, in the midst of the congratulations and
acclamations of the people, then when the whole multitude of his Disciples
cried out, Vivat Rex, Inter accla. mationes. Luke 19.38.
Blessed be the King, that comes in the name of the Lord, Jesus wept. When
Herod took to himself the name of the Lord, when he admitted that gross
flattery, It is a God and not a man that speaks, It was no wonder that present
occasion of lamentation fell upon him. But in the best times, and under the
best Prince, (first, such is the natural mutability of all worldly things; and
then (and that especially) such is the infiniteness, and enormousnesse of our
rebellious sin) then is ever just occasion of fear of worse, and so of tears.
Every man is but a sponge, and but a sponge filled with tears: and whether you
lay your right hand or your left upon a full sponge, it will weep. Whether God
lay his left hand, temporal calamities, or his right hand, temporal
prosperity; even that temporal prosperity comes always accompanied with so
much anxiety in our selves, so much uncertainty in it self, and so much envy
in others, as that that man who abounds most, that sponge shall weep.

Jesus wept, Inter acclamationes, when all went we enough with him; Inter
judicia.
to show the slipperinesse of worldly happiness, and then he wept Inter
judicia; then when himself was in the act of denouncing judgments upon them,
Jesus wept, To show with how ill a will he inflicted those judgments, and that
themselves, and not he, had drawn those judgments upon them. How often do
the Prophets repeat that phrase, Onus visionis, O the burden of the judgments
that I have seen upon this, and this people! It was a burden that pressed
tears from the Prophet Esaias, I will water thee with my tears, Esaias 16.9.
O Heshbon: when he must pronounce judgments upon her, he could not but weep
over her. No Prophet so tender as Christ, nor so compassionate; and therefore
he never takes rod into his hand, but with tears in his eyes. Alas, did God
lack a footstool, that he should make man only to tread and trample upon? Did
God lack glory, and could have it no other way, but by creating man therefore,
to afflict him temporally here, and eternally hereafter? whatsoever Christ
weeps for in the way of his mercy, it is likely he was displeased with it in
the way of his Justice: If he weep for it, he had rather it were not so. If
then those judgments upon Jerusalem were only from his own primary, and
positive, and absolute Decree, without any respect to their sins, could he be
displeased with his owneact, or weep and lament that which only himself had
done? would God ask rael? if God lay open to that answer, We die therefore,
because you have killed us; Jerusalem salem would not judge her self,
therefore Christ judged her; Jerusalem would not weep for her self, and
therefore Jesus wept; but in those tears of his, he showed, that he had rather
her own tears had averted, and washed away those judgments.

He wept, cum appropinquavit, says the Text there, when Jesus came near the
City and saw it Cum appropinquavit.
then he wept; not till then. If we will not come near the miseries of our
brethren, if we will not see them, we will never weep over them, never be
affected toward them. It was cum ille, Non cumilli.
not cumilli, when Christ himself, not when his Disciples, his followers, who
could do Jerusalem no good, took knowledge of it. It was not cum illi, nor it
was not cum illa, not when those judgments drew near; It is not said so;
neither is there any time limited in the Text, when those judgments were to
fall upon Jerusalem; it is only said generally, indefinitely, these days
shall come upon her. And yet Christ did not ease himself upon that, that those
calamities were remote and far off, but though they were so, and not to fall
till after his death, yet he lamented future calamities then, then Jesus wept.
Many such little Brooks as these fall into this River, the consideration of
Christ's Prophetical tears; but let it be enough to have sprinkled these drops
out of the River; That Jesus, though a private person, wept in contemplation of
public calamities; That he wept in the best times, foreseeing worse; That he
wept in their miseries, because he was no Author of them: That he wept not till
he took their miseries into his consideration: And he did weep a good time,
before those miseries fell upon them. There remain yet his third tears, his
pontifical tears, which accompany his sacrifice; Those tears we called the
Sea, but a Sea which must now be bounded with a very little sand.

To sail apace through this Sea; 3. Part.
these tears, the tears of his Cross, were expressed by that inestimable
weight, the sins of all the world. If all the body were eye, argues the
Apostle in another place; why, here all the body was eye; every pore of his
body made an eye by tears of blood, and every inch of his body made an eye by
their bloody scourges. And if Christ's looking upon Peter, made Peter weep,
shall not his looking upon us here, with tears in his eyes, such tears in
such eyes, springs of tears, rivers of tears, seas of tears make us weep
too? Peter who wept under the weight of his particular sin, wept bitterly: how
bitterly wept Christ under the weight of all the sins of all the world? In the
first tears. Christ humane tears (those we called a spring) we fetched water
at one house, we condoled a private calamity in another; Lazarus was dead. In
his second tears, his Prophetical tears, we went to the condoling of a
whole Nation; and those we called a River. In these third tears, his
pontifical tears, tears for sin, for all sins (those we call a Sea) here is
Mare liberum, a Sea free and open to all; Every man may sail home, home to
himself, and lament his own sins there.

I am far ftom concluding all to be impenitent, that do not actually weep
and shed tears; I know there are constitutions, complexions, that do not
afford them. And yet the worst Epithet, which the best Poet could fix upon
Pluto himself, was to call him Illachrymabilis, a person that could not weep.
But to weep for other things, and not to weep for sin, or if not to tears, yet
not to come to that tenderness, to that melting, to that thawing, that
resolving of the bowels which good souls feel; this is a sponge (I said
before, every man is a sponge) this is a sponge dried up into a Pumice stone;
the lightness, the hollownesse of a sponge is there still, but (as the Pumice
is) dried the Aetnaes of lust, of ambition, of other flames in this world.

I have but three words to say of these tears of this weeping. What it is,
what it is for, what it does; the nature, the use, the benefit of these tears,
is all. And in the first, I forbear to insist upon S. Basils Metaphor,
Lachrymae sudor animi male sani; Sin is my sickness, the blood of Christ Jesus
is my Bezar, tears is the sweat that that produces. I forbear Greg. Nyssens
metaphor too, Lachryma sanguis cordis defoecatus; Tears are out best blood, so
agitated, so ventilated, so purified, so rarefied into spirits, as that thereby
I become Idem spiritus, one spirit with my God. That is large enough, and
embraces all, which S. Gregory says, That man weeps truly, that soul sheds
true tears, that considers seriously, first, ubi fuit in innocentia, the
blessed state which man was in, in his integrity at first, ubifuit; and then
considers, ubi est in tentationibus, the weak estate that man is in now, in the
midst of tentations, where, if he had no more, himself were tentation too much,
ubi est; and yet considers farther, ubi erit, in gehenna, the insupportable,
and for all that, the inevitable, theirreparable, and for all that,
undeterminable torments of hell, ubi erit; and lastly, ubi non erit, in coelis,
the unexpressible joy and glory which he loses in heaven, ubi non erit, where
he shall never be. These four to consider seriously, where man was, where he
is, where he shall be, where he shall never be, are four such Rivers, as
constitute a Paradise. And as a ground may be a weeping ground, though it have
no running River, no constant spring, no gathering of waters in it; so a soul
that can pour out it self into these religious considerations, may be a
weeping soul, though it have a dry eye: This weeping then is but a true
sorrow, (that was our first) and then, what this true sorrow is given us for,
and that is our next Consideration.

As water is in nature a thing indifferent, in may give life, Ad quid.
(so the first livin things that were, were in the water) and it may destroy
life, (so all things living upon the earth, were destroyed in the water) but
yet though water may, though it have done good and bad, yet water does now one
good office, which no ill quality that is in it can equal, it washes our
souls in Bap?isme; so though there be good tears and bad tears, tears that
wash away sin, and tears that are sin, yet all tears have this degree of good
in them, that they are all some kind of argument of good nature, of a tender
heart; and the Holy Ghost loves to work in Wax, and not in Marble. I hope that
is but merely Poetical which the Poet says, Discunt lachrymare decenter; that
some study to weep with a good grace; Quoque volunt plorant empore, quoquemode,
they make use and advantage of their tears, and weep when they will. But of
those who weep not when they would, but when they would not, do half employ
their tears upon thatfor which God has given them that sacrifice upon sin.
God made the Firmament, which he called Heaven, after it had divided the
waters: After we have distinguished our tears, natural from spiritual,
worldly from heavenly, then there is a Firmament established in us, then there
is a heaven opened to us: and truly, to cast Pearls before Swine, will scarce
be better resembled, then to shed tears which resemble pearls for worldly
losses.

Are there examples of menopassionately enamored upon age? or if upon age, upon
deformity? If there be example of that, are they not examples of scorn too? do
not all others laugh at their tears? and yet such is our passionate doting
upon this world. Mundi facies, says S. Augustine, (and even S. Augustine
himself has scarce said any thing more pathetically) tanta rerani labe
contrita, ut etiam speciem seductionis amiserit: The face of the whold world is
so defaced, so wrinkled, so ruined, so deformed, as that man might be trusted
with this world, and there is no jealousy, no suspicion that this world should
be able to minister any occasion of tentation to man: Speciem seductionis
amisit. And yet, Qui in seipso aruit, in nobis floret, says S. Gregory, as
wittily as S. Augustine, (as it is easy to be witty, easy to extend an
Epigram to a Satyr, and a Satyr to an Invective, in declaiming against this
world) that world which finds it self truly in an Autumn, in it self,
finds it self in a spring, in our imaginations. Labenti haeremus, says that
Father; Et cum labentem sistere non possumus, cum ipso labimur; The world
passes away, and yet we cleave to it; and when we cannot stay it from passing
away, we pass away with it.

To mourn passionately for the love of this world, which is decrepit, and upon
the deathbed, or imoderately for the death of any that is passed out of this
world, is not the right use of tears. That has good use which Chrysologus
notes, that when Christ was told of Lazarus death, he said he was glad; when he
came to raise him to life, then he wept: for though his Disciples gained by
it, (they were confirmed by a Miracle) though the family gained by it, (they
had their Lazarus again) yet Lazarus himself lost by it, by being
re-imprisoned, re-committed, re-submitted to the manifold incommodities of this
world. When our Savior Christ forbad the women to weep for him, it was
becausethere was nothing in him, for tears to work upon; no sin: Ordinem
flendi docuit, says S. Bernard, Christ did not absolutely forbid tears, but
regulate and order their tears, that they might weep in the right place;
first for sin. David wept for Absolon; He might imagine, that he died in sin,
he wept not for the Child by Bathsheba, he could not suspect so much danger in
that. Exitus aquarum, says David, Rivers of waters ran down from mine eyes,
why? Quia illi, Because they, who are they? not other men, Psalm. 119.136.
as it is ordinarily taken; but Quia illi, Because mine own eyes (so Hilary,
and Ambrose, and August take it) have not kept thy Laws: As the calamities of
others, so the sins of others may, but our own sins must be the object of our
sorrow. Thou shall offer to me, says God, Exodus 22.19.
the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors, as our Translation has it:
The word in the Original ginall is Vedingnacha, lachrymarum, and of thy
tears: Thy first tears must be to God for sin: The second and third may be to
nature and civility, and such secular offices. But Liquore ad lippitudinem apto
quisquamne ad pedes lavandos abutetur? It is S. Chrysostomes exclamation and
admiration, will and wash his feet in water for sore eyes? will any man embalme
the Carcass of the world, which he treads under foot, with those tears which
should embalme his soul? Did Joseph of Arimathea bestow any of his perfumes
(though he brought a superfluous quantity, a hundred pound weight for one body)
yet did he bestow any upon the body of either of the Thieves? Tears are true
sorrow, that you heard before; True sorrow is for sin, that you have heard now;
All that remains is how this sorrow works, what is does.

The Fathers have infinitely delighted themselves in this descant, the blessed
effect of holy tears. Quid operantur.
He amongst them that reemembers us, that in the old Law all Sacrifices were
washed, he means, That our best sacrifice, even prayer it self, receives an
improvement, a dignity, by being washed in tears. He that remembers us, that
if any room of out house be on fire, we run for water, means that in all
tentations, we should have recourse to tears. He that tells us, that money
being put into a basin, is seen at a farther distance, if there be water in
the basin, then if it be empty, means also, that our most precious devotions
receive an addition, a multiplication by holy tears. S. Bernard means all
that they all mean in that, Cor lachrymas nesciens durum, impurum, A hard
heart is a foul heart. Would you shut up the devil in his own channel, his
channel of brimstone, and make that worse? S. hierom tells the way, Plus tua
lachryma, etc. Thy tears torment him more then the fires of hell; will you
needs have holy water? truly, true tears are the holiest water. Mend eza. in
1. Sam.
And for Purgatory, it is liberally confessed by a Jesuit, Non minus efficax,
etc. One tear will do thee as much good, as all the flames of Purgatory. We
have said more then once, that man is a sponge; And in Codice scripta, all our
sins are written in Gods Book, says S. Chrysostom: If there I can fill my
sponge with tears, and so wipe out all my sins out of that Book, it is a
blessed use of the Sponge.

I might stand upon this, the manifold benefits of godly tears, long: so long,
as till you wept, and wept for sin; and that might be very long. I contract all
to this one, which is all: To how many blessednesses must these tears, this
godly sorrow reach by the way, when as it reaches to the very extreme, to that
which is opposed to it, to Joy? for godly sorrow is Joy. Job 10.20.
The words in Job are in the Vulgat, Dimitte meut plang am dolorem meum: Lord
spare me a while that I may lament my lamentable estate: and so ordinarily the
Expositors that follow that Translation, make their use of them. But yet it is
in the Original, Lord spare me a while, that I may take comfort: That which
one calls lamenting, the other calls rejoicing: To conceive true sorrow and true
joy, are things not only contiguous, but continual; they do not only touch
and follow one another in a certain succession, Joy assuredly after sorrow,
but they consist together, they are all one, Joy and Sorrow. My tears have
been my meat day and night, Psalm. 42.3.
says David: not that he had no other meat, but that none relisht so well.
Mendoza.
It is a Grammatical note of a Jesuit, (I do not tell you it is true; I have
almost tole you that it is not true, by telling you whose it is, but that it is
but a Grammatical note) That when it is said Tempus cantus, The time offinging
is come, it might as well be rendered out of the Hebrew, Cant. 2.12.
Tempus plorationis, The time of weeping is come; 2 Samuel 22.50.
And when it is said, Nomini tuo cantabo, Lord I will sing unto thy Name, it
might be as well rendered out of the Hebrew, Plorabo, I will weep, I will
sacrifice my tears unto thy Name. So equal, so indifferent a thing is it,
when we come to godly sorrow, whether we call it sorrow or joy, weeping or
singing.

To end all, to weep for sin is not a damp of melancholy, to sigh for sin, is
not a vapor of the spleen, but as Monicaes Confessor said still unto her, in
the behalf of her Son S. Augustine, filius istarum lachrymarum, the son of
these tears cnnot perish; so wash thy self in these three examplar bathes of
Christ's tears, in his humane tears, and be tenderly affected with humane
accidents, in his Prophetical tears, and avert as much as in thee lies, the
calamities imminent upon others, but especially in his pontifical tears,
tears for sin, and I am thy Confessor, non ego, sed Dominus; not I, but the
spirit of God himself is thy Confessor, and he absolves thee, filius istarum
lachrymarum, the soul bathed in these tears cannot perish: for this is trina
immer sio, that threefold dipping which was used in the Primitive Church in
baptism. And in this baptism, thou take a new Christian name, thou who wast
but a Christian, art now a regenerate Christian; and as Naaman the Leper came
cleaner out of Jordan, then he was before his leprosy, (for his flesh came as
the flesh of a child) so there shall be better evidence in this baptism of thy
repentance, then in thy first baptism; better in thy self, for then thou had
no sense of thy own estate, in this thou have: And thou shall have better
evidence from others too; for howsoever some others will dispute, whether all
children which dye after Baptism, be certainly saved or no, it never fell into
doubt or disputation, whether all that die truly repentant, be saved or no.
Weep these tears truly, and God shall perform to thee, first that promise
which he makes in Esaias, The Lord shall wipe all tears from thy face, Esaias 25.
all that are fallen by any occasion of calamity here, in the militant Church;
and he shall perform that promise which he makes in the Revelation, Revel.
7.17.
The Lord shall wipe all tears from thine eyes, that is, dry up the fountain
of tears; remove all occasion of tears hereafter, in the triumphant Church.

SERMON XVII. Preached at White Hall, March 4. 1624.
MAT. 19.17. And he said unto him, Why call thou me Good? There is none Good
but One; that is, God.


THat which God commanded by his Word, to be done at some times (that we should
humble our souls by fasting) the same God tommands by his Church, to be done
now: In the Scriptures you have Praeceptum, The thing it self, What; In the
Church, you have the Nunt, The time, When. The Scriptures are Gods Voice; The
Church is his Echo; a redoubling, a repeating of some particular syllables,
and accents of the same voice. And as we harken with some earnestness, and
some admiration at an Echo, when perchance we do not understand the voice
that occasioned that Echo; so do the obedient children of God apply
themselves to the Echo of his Church, when perchance otherwise, they would
less understand the voice of God, in his Scriptures, if that voice were not so
redoubled unto them. This fasting then, thus enjoined by God, for the general,
in his Word, and thus limited to this Time, for the particular, in his Church,
is indeed but a continuation of a great Feast: Where, the first course (that
which we begin to serve in now) is Manna, food of Angels, plentiful, frequent
preaching; but the second course, is the very body and blood of Christ Jesus,
shed for us, and given to us, in that blessed Sacrament, of which himself
makes us worthy receivers at that time. Now, as the end of all bodily eating,
is Assimilation, that after all other concoctions, that meat may be made Idem
corpus, the same body that I am; so the end of all spiritual eating, is
Assimilation too, That after all Hearing, and all Receiving, I may be made Idem
spiritus cum Domino, the same spirit, that my God is: for, though it be good to
Hear, good to Receive, good to Meditate, yet, (if we speak effectually, and
consummatively) why call we these good? there is nothing good but One, that is,
Assimilation to God; In which perfect and consummative sense, Christ says to
this Man, in this Text, Why call thou me good? there is none good but one,
that is God.

The words are part of a Dialogue, of a Conference, between Christ, Divisio.
and a man who proposed a question to him; to whom Christ makes an answer by
way of another question, Why call thou me good, etc. In the words, and by
occasion of them, we consider the Text, the Context, and the Pretext: Not as
three equal parts of the Building; but the Context, as the situation and
Prospect of the house, The Pretext, as the Access and entrance to the house,
And then the Text it self, as the House it self, as the body of the building:
In a word, In the Text, the Words; In the Context, the Occasion of the words;
In the Pretext, the Pretense, the purpose, the disposition of him who gave the
occasion.

We begin with the Context; 1 Part. Context.
the situation, the prospect; how it stands, how it is butted, how it is
bounded; to what it relates, with what it is connected. And in that, we are no
farther curious, but only to note this, that the Text stands in that Story,
where a man comes to Christ, inquires the way to Heaven, believes himself to
be in that way already, and (when he hears of nothing, but keeping the
Commandments) believes himself to be fargone in that way; But when he is told
also, that there belongs to it a departing with his Riches, his beloved Riches,
he breaks off the conference, he separates himself from Christ; for, (says
the Story) This Man had great possessions. And to this purpose, (to separate us
from Christ) the poorest amongst us, has great possessions. He corners of the
streets, as well as he that sits upon carpets, in the Region of perfumes, he
that is ground and trod to dirt, with obloquie, and contempt, as well as he
that is built up every day, a story and story higher with additions of Honor,
Every man has some such possessions as possess him, some such affections as
weigh down Christ Jesus, and separate him from Him, rather then from those
affections, those possessions. Scarce any sinner but comes sometimes to Christ,
in the language of the man in this Text, Good Master what good thing shall I
do, that I may have eternal life? And if Christ would go no farther with such
men, but to say to the Adulterer, Do not thou give thy money to usury; no more
to the penurious Usurer, but, Do not thou wast thy self in superfluous and
expensive feasting; If Christ would proceed no farther, but to say to the needy
person, that had no money, Do not thou buy preferment; or to the ambitious
person that soars up after all, Do not thou forsake thy self, deject thy
self, undervalue thy self, In all these cases, the Adulterer and the Usurer,
The needy and the ambitious man, would all say with the man in the Text, All
these things have we done from our youth. But when Christ proceeds to a Vade,
and vende, to depart with their possessions, that which they possess, that
which possesses them, this changes the case.

There are some sins so rooted, so riveted in men, so incorporated, so
consubstantiated in the soul, by habitual custom, as that those sins have
contracted the nature of Ancient possessions. As men call Manners by their
names, so sins have taken names from men, and from places; Simon Magus gave the
name to a sin, and so did gehazi, and Sodom did so: There are sins that run in
Names, in Families, in Blood; Hereditary sins, entailed sins; and men do almost
prove their Gentry by those sins, and are scarce believed to be rightly borne,
if they have not those sins; These are great possessions, and men do much more
easily part with Christ, then with these sins. But then there are less sins,
light sins, vanities; and yet even these come to possess us, and separate us
from Christ. How many men negiect this ordinary means of their Salvation, the
coming to these Exercises, not because their undoing lies on it, or their
discountenancing; but merely out of levity, of vanity, of nothing; they know
not what to do else, and yet do not this. You hear of one man that was drowned
in a vessel of Wine; but how many thousands in ordinary water? And he was no
more drowned in that precious liquor, then they in that common water. A gad of
steel does no more choke a man, then a feather, then a hair; Men perish with
whispering sins, nay with silent sins, sins that never tell the conscience they
are sins, as often as with crying sins: And in hell there shall meet as many
men, that never thought what was sin, as that spent all their thoughts in the
compassing of sin; as many, who in a slack in consideration, never cast a
thought upon that place, as that by searing their conscience, overcame the
sense and fear of the place. Great sins are great possessions; but levities
and vanities possess us too; and men had rather part with Christ, then with
any possessions; which is all we will note out of this first part, The Context,
the situation, and prospect of the house, the coherence and connection of the
Text.

The second part, 2 Part. Pretext.
is the pretext; that is the pretense, the purpose, the disposition of him that
moved this question to Christ, and occasioned this answer. Upon which we make
this stop, because it has been variously apprehended by the Expositors; for
some think he came in an humble disposition to learn of Christ, and others
think he came in a Pharisaicall confidence in himself, with which Epiphanius
first, and then S. Jerome charge him. But in such doubtful cases in other men's
actions, when it appears not evidently, whether it were well, or ill done,
where the balance is eaven, always put you in your charity, and that will
turn the scale the best way. Things which are in themselves, but
mis-interpretable, do not you presently mis-interpret, you allow some grains
to your gold, before you call it light: allow some infirmities to any man,
before you call him ill. For this man in the Text, venit, says this
Evangelist, he came to Christ, he came of himself. S. Peter himself came not
so. S. Peter came not, till his brother Andrew brought him: none of the twelve
Apostles came to Christ so, they came not, till Christ called them: Here, we
hear of no calling, no inviting, no mention of any motion toward him, no
intimation of any intimation to him, and yet he came. Blessed are they that
come to Christ Jesus, before any collateral respects draw them, before the
Laws compel them, before calamities drive them to him: He only comes hither,
that comes voluntarily, and is glad he is here; He that comes so, as that he
had rather he were away, is not here. Venit, says our Evangelist, of this man:
And then, says S. Mark, Mark. 10.17.
handling the same story, Venit procurrens, He came running. nicodemus came not
so, Nicodemus durst not avow his coming; and therefore he came creeping, and
he came softly, and he came seldom, and he came by night.

Blessed are they who make haste to Christ, and publish their zeal to the
encouragement of others: For, let no man promise himself a religious constancy
in the time of his trial, that does not his part in establishing the religious
constancy of other men. Of all proofs, Demonstration is the powerfullest: when
I have just reason to think my superious would have it thus, this is Music to
my soul; When I hear them say they would have it thus, this is Rhetorique to
my soul; When I see their Laws enjoyne it to be thus, this is Logic to my
soul; but when I see them actually, really, clearly, constantly do thus, this
is a Demonstration to my soul, and Demonstration is the powerfullest proof:
The eloquence of inferiors is in words, the eloquence of superiors is in
action.

He came to Christ; he ran to him; and when he was come, as S. Mark relates
it, He fell upon his knees to Christ. He stood not then Pharisaically upon his
own legs, his own merits, though he had been a diligent observer of the
Commandments before. Blessed are they, who bring the testimony of a form
zeal to Gods service, and yet make that no excuse for their present, or future
slacknesst; The benefit of our former goodness is, that that enables us to be
the better still: for, as all example is powerful upon us, so our own example
most of all; in this case we are most immediately bound by ourselves; still to
be so good, as we our selves have been before: There was a time when I was
nothing; but there shall never be any time, when I shall be nothing; and
therefore I am most to respect the future. The good services that a man has
done to God by pen, or sword, are wings, and they exalt him if he would go
forward; but they are waights and depresse him, and aggravate his condemnation,
if his presumption upon the merit of those former services, retard him for the
future. This man had done well, but he stood not upon that; he kneeled to
Christ, and he said to him, Magister bone, Good master. He was no ignorant man,
and yet he acknowledged that he had somewhat more to learn of Christ, then he
knew yet. Blessed are they that inanimate all their knowledge, consummate all
in Christ Jesus. The University is a Paradise, Rivers of knowledge are there,
Arts and Sciences flow from thence. Counsel Tables are Horti conclusi, (as it
is said in the Canticles) Gardens that are walled in, and they are Fontes
signati, Wells that are sealed up; bottomless depths of unsearchable Counsels
there. But those Aquae quietudinum, which the Prophet speaks of, The waters of
rest, they flow a magistro bono, from this good master, and flow into him
again; All knowledge that begins not, and ends not with his glory, is but a
giddy, but a vertiginous circle, but an elaborate and exquisite ignorance. He
would learn of him, and what? Quid boni faciam, What good thing shall I do?
Blessed are they that bring their knowledge into practice; and blessed again,
that crown their former practice with future perseverance.

This was his disposition that came; His, though he were a youn man; (for so he
is said to be, in the 22. ver.) and young men are not ofter so forward in such
ways. I remember one of the Panegyriques celebrates and magnifies one of the
Roman Emperors for? is, that he would marry when he was young; that he would so
soon confine and limit his pleasures, so soon determine his affections in one
person. When a young man comes to Christ, Christ receives him with an
extraordinary welcome; well intimated though he were young; and he came though
he wre Vnus e principibus, (for so he is qualified in S. Luke) A principal
man, a great man; as we translate it, One of the Rulers: Luke 18.18.
for so he is a real and a personal answer and instance to that scornful
question of the Pharisees, Nunquid e principibus, Do any of the Rulers, any
great men, believe in Christ? It is true that the Holy Ghost does say, 1 Cor.
1.26.
Non multi nobiles, few noble men come to heaven. Not out of Panigorola, the
Bishop of Asti, his reason, Pauci quia pauci, There cannot come many noble men
to heaven, because there are not many upon earth; for many times there are
many. In calm and peaceable times, the large favors of indulgent Princes, in
active and stirring times, the merit and the fortune of forward men, do often
enlarge the number. But such is often the corrupt inordinatenesse of
greatness, that it only carries them so much beyond other men, but not so much
nearer to God; It only sets men at a farther, not God at a nearer distance to
them; but because they are come to be called gods, they think they have no
farther to go to God, but to themselves. But God is the God of the Mountains, 1
King. 20.28. Esaias 40.12.
as well as of the Valleys: Great and small are equal, and equally nothing in
his sight: for, when all the world is In pugillo, in Gods fist, (as the Prophet
speaks) who can say then, This is the Ant, this is the Elephant? Our
conversation should be in heaven; and if we look upon the men of this world, as
from heaven, as if we looked upon this world it self, from thence, the hills
would be no hills, but all one flat and equal plain; so are all men, one kind
of dust. Records of nobility are only from the book of Life, and your
preferment is your interest in a place at the right hand of God. But yet, when
those men whom God has raised in this world, take him in their arms, and
raise him too, though God cannot be exalted above himself, yet he is content to
call this a raising, and to thank them for it. Therefore when this man, a man
of this rank came to him, Mar. 10.21.
Jesus beheld him, says the Gospel, and he loved him, and he said, one thing
thou lackest; God knows, he lacked many things; but because he had that one,
zeal to him, Christ does not reproach to him his other defects: God pardons
great men many errors, for that one good affection, a general zeal to his
glory, and his cause.

His disposition then, (though it have seemed suspicious, and questionable to
some) was so good, as that it has afforded us these good considerations. If it
were not so good as these circumstances promise, yet it affords us another as
good consideration, That how bad soever it were, Christ Jesus refused him not,
when he came to him. When he enquired of Christ after salvation, Christ does
not say, There is no salvation for thee, thou Viper, thou Hypocrite, thou
Pharisee, I have locked an iron door of predestination between salvation and
thee; when he enquired of him, what he should do to be sure of heaven, Christ
does not say, There is no such art, no such way, no such assurance here; but
you must look into the eternal decree of Election first, and see whether that
stand for you or no: But Christ teaches him the true method of this art: for,
when he says to him, Why call thou me good? There is none good but God, he
only directs him in the way to that end, which he did indeed, or pretended to
seek. And this direction of his, this method is our third part; In which,
(having already seen in the first, the Context) the situation and prospect of
the house, that is, the coherence and occasion of the words, And in the second,
(the Pretext) the access and entrance to the house, that is, the pretense and
purpose of him that occasioned the words, you may now be pleased to look
farther into the house it self, and to see how that is built; that is, by what
method Christ builds up, and edifies this new disciple of his; which is the
principal scope and intention of the Text, and that, to which all the rest did
somewhat necessarily prepare the way.

Our Savior Christ thus undertaking the farther rectifying of this thus
disposed disciple, 3. Part.
by a fair method leads him to the true end; Good ends, and by good ways,
consummate goodness. Now Christ's answer to this man is diversely read: We read
it, (as you have heard) why call thou me good? The vulgat Edition in the
Roman Church, reads it thus, Quid me interrogas de bono? Why do thou
question me concerning goodness? Which is true? That which answers the
Original; and it can admit no question, but that ours does so. But yet,
Origin, to be sure, in his eighth Tractate upon this Gospel, reads it both
ways: And S. Augustine, in his 63. Chap. of the second book De consensu
Evangelist arum, thinks it may very well be believed, that Christ did say both:
That when this man called him good master, Christ said then, There was none
good but God; and that when this man asked him, what good thing he should do,
then Christ said, Why do thou ask me, me whom thou think to be but a mere
man, what is goodness? There is none good but God; If thou look to understand
goodness from man, thou must look out such a man as is God too. So that this
was Christ's method, by these holy insinuations, by these approaches, and
degrees, to bring this man to a knowledge, that he was very God, and so the
Messiah that was expected. Nihil est falsitas, August.
nisi cum esse putatur, quod non est: All error consists in this, that we take
things to be less or more, other then they are. Christ was pleased to redeem
this man from this error, and bring him to know truly what he was, that he was
God. Christ therefore does not rebuke this man, by any denying that he himself
was good; for Christ does assume that addition to himself, I am the good
Shepherd. Neither does God forbid, that those good parts which are in men,
should be celebrated with condign praise. We see that God, as soon as he saw
that any thing was good, he said so, he uttered it, he declared it, first of
the Light, and then of other creatures: God would be no author, no example of
smothering the due praise of good actions. For, surely that man has no zeal
to goodness in himself, that affords no praise to goodness in other men.

But Christ's purpose was also, that this praise, this recognition, this
testimony of his goodness, might be carried higher, and referred to the only
true author of it, to God. So the Priests and the Elders come to Judith, and
they say to her, Judith 15.8.
Thou art the exaltation of Jerusalem, thou art the great glory of Israel, thou
art the rejoicing of our Nation, thou have done all these things by thy hand;
And all this was true of Judith, and due to Judith; and such recognitions, and
such acclamations God requires of such people, as have received such benefits
by such instruments: For as there is Treason, and petty-treason, so there is
Sacrilege, and petty-sacriledge; and petty-sacriledge is to rob Princes and
great persons of their just praise. But then, as we must confer this upon them,
so must they, and we, and all transfer all upon God: for so Judith proceeds
there, with her Priests and Elders, Begin unto my God, with Timbrels, sing unto
the Lord with Cymbals, exalt him, and call upon his name. So likewise Elizabeth
magnifies the blessed Virgin Mary, Blessed art thou amongst women: And this was
true of her, and due to her; Luke 1.42.
and she takes it to her self, when she says there, From henceforth all
Generations shall call me blessed; but first, she had carried it higher, to the
highest, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit does rejoice in God my
Savior. In a word, Christ forbids not this man to call him good, but he
directs him to know in what capacity that attribute of goodness belonged to
him, as he was God: That when this man believed before that Christ was good,
and learnt from him now, that none was good but God, he might by a farther
concoction, a farther rumination, a farther meditation of this, come in due
time to know that Christ was God; And this was his Method.

Now this leads us into two rich and fragrant fields; this sets us upon the two
Hemispheares of the world; the Western Hemispheare, the land of Gold, and
Treasure, and the Eastern Hemispheare, the land of Spices and Perfumes; for
this puts us upon both these considerations, first, That nothing is Essentially
good, but God, (and there is the land of Gold, centricall Gold, viscerall Gold,
gremiall Gold, Gold in the Matrice and womb of God, that is, Essential
goodness in God himself) and then upon this consideration too, That this
Essential goodness of God is so diffusive, so spreading, as that there is
nothing in the world, that does not participate of that goodness; and there is
the land of Spices and Perfumes, the dilatation of Gods goodness. So that now
both these propositions are true, First, That there is nothing in this world
good, and then this also, That there is nothing ill: As, amongst the Fathers,
it is in a good sense, as truly said, Deus non est Ens, Deus non est
substantia, God is no Essence, God is no substance, (for fear of imprisoning
God in a predicament) as it is said by others of the Fathers, that there is no
other Essence, no other Substance but God.

First then, there is nothing good but God: neither can I conceive any thing in
God, that concerns me so much as his goodness; for, by that I know him, and
for that I love him. I know him by that, for, as Damascen says, primarium Dei
nomen, Bonitas; Gods first name, that is, the first way by which God notified
him self to man, was Goodness; for out of his goodness he made him. His name
of Jehova we admire with a reverence; but we cannot express that name: not
only not in the signification of it, but not considently, not assuredly in the
sound thereof; we are not sure that we should call it Jehova; not sure that any
man did call it Jehova a hundred years ago. But, August.
ineffabili dulcedine teneor cum audio, Bonus Dominus; I am, not transported
with astonishment, as at his name of Jehova, but replenished with all
sweetness, established with all soundness, when I hear of my God in that
name, my good God. By that I know him, and for that I love him: For, the object
of my understanding is truth; but the object of my love, my affection, my
desire, is goodness. If my understanding be defective, in many cases, faith
will supply it; if I believe it, I am as well satisfied, as if I knew it; but
nothing supplies, nor fills, nor satisfies the desire of man, on this side of
God; Every man has something to love, and desire, till he determine it in God;
because God only has Imminuibi lem bonitatem, as they render Dyonisius the
Areopagite, an inexhaustible goodness; a sea that no land can suck in, a land
that no sea can swallow up, a forest that no fire can waste, a fire that no
water can quench. Aug.
He is so good, goodness so, as that he is Causa bonorum, and quae in nos, and
quae in nobis, the cause of all good either received by us, or conceived in us;
of all, either prepared externally for us, Idem.
or produced internally in us. In a word, he is Bonum caetera bona colorans,
and amabilia reddens, it is his goodness, that gilds and enamels all the good
persons, or good actions in this world. There is none good but God; and quale
bonum ille, says that Father, what kind of goodness God is, this does
sufficiently declare, Quod nulli ab co recedenti been sit, That no man that
ever went from him, went by good way, or came to good end; There is none good
but God; there is centricall, viscerall, gremiall gold, goodness in the root,
in the tree of goodness, God.

Now, Arbor bona, bonos fructus, says Christ; If the tree be good, the fruit
is good too. The tree is God; What are the fruits of this tree? What are the
offspring of God? S. Ambr. tells us, Angeli and homines, and virtutes eorum;
Angels and men, and the good parts, and good actions of Angels and men, are the
fruit of this tree, they grow from God. Angels, as they fell, Adam, as he fell,
the sins of Angels and men, are not fruits of this tree, they grow not
radically, not primarily from God. Nihil in se habet Deus semi-plenum, says
Damascen: God is no half-god, no fragmentary God; he is an entire God, and not
made of remnants; not good only so, as that he has no room for ill in
himself, but good so too, as that he has no room for any ill will toward any
man; no man's damnation, no man's sin, grows radically from this tree. When God
had made all, says Tertullian, he blessed all; Maledicere non norat, quia nec
malefacere, says he: God could no more mean ill, then do ill; God can no
more make me sin, then sin himself. It is the fool that says, There is no
God, says David; And it is the other fool, says S. Basil, that says, God
produces any ill; par precii scelus, quia negat Deum bonum; It is as impiously
done, to deny God to be entirely good, as to deny him to be God. For, we see
the Manichees, and the Marcionites, and such other Heretics in the Primitive
Church, would rather admit, and constitute two Gods, a good God, and a bad God,
then be drawn to think, that he that was the good God indeed, could produce any
ill of himself, or mean any ill to any man, that had done none.

And therefore even from Plato himself, some Christians might learn more
moderation in expressing themselves in this point; Plato says, Creavit quia
bonus, therefore did God create us, that he might be good to us; and then he
adds, Bono nunquam inest invidia, certainly that God, that made us out of his
goodness, does not now envy us that goodness which he has communicated to
us; certainly he does not wish us worse, that so he might more justly damn us,
and therefore compel us, by any positive decree, to sin, to justify his
desire of damning us: Much less did this good God hate us, or mean ill to us,
before he made us, and made us only therefore, that he might have glory in our
destruction. There is nothing good but God, there is nothing but goodness in
God.

How abusively then do men call the things of this world, Goods? They may as
well call them (so they do in their hearts) Gods, as Goods; for there is none
good but God. But how much more abusively do they force the world, that call
them Bona quia beant, Goods because they make us good, blessed, happy? In which
sense, Seneca uses the word shrewdly, Insolens malum beata uxor, a good wife, a
blessed wife, says he, that is, a wife that brings a great estate, is an
insolent mischief. If we do but cast our eye upon that title in the Law,
Bonorum, and De bonis, of Goods, we shall easily see, what poor things they
make shift to call Goods. And if we consider (if it deserve a consideration) how
great a difference their Lawyers make ( Baldus makes that, and others with him)
between Bonorum possessio, and possessio bonorum, that one should amount to a
right and propriety in the goods, and the other but to a sequestration of such
goods, we may easily see, that they can scarce tell what to call, or where to
place such Goods. Health, and strength, and stature, and comeliness, must be
called Goods, though but of the body; The body it self is in the substance it
self, but dust; these are but the accidents of that dust, and yet they must be
Goods. Land, and Money, and honor must be called Goods, though but of fortune;
Fortune her self, is but such an Idol, as that S. Aug. was ashamed ever to have
named her in his works, and therefore repents it in his Retractations; her self
is but an Idol, and an Idol is nothing these, but the accidents of that
nothing, and yet they must be Goods. Are they such Goods, as make him
necessarily good that has them? Or such, as no man can be good, that is
without them? How many men make themselves miserable, because they want these
Goods? And how many men have been made miserable by others, because they had
them? Except thou see the face of God upon all thy money, as well as the face
of the King, the hand of God to all thy Patents, as well as the hand of the
King, Gods Amen, as well as the Kings fiat, to all thy creatio^s, all these
reach not to the title of Goods, for there is none good but God.

Nothing in this world; not if thou could have it all; carry it higher, to
the highest, to heaven; heaven it self were not good, without God. For, in the
School, very many and very great men, have thought and taught, That the humane
nature of Christ, though united Hypostatically to the Divine Nature, was not
merely by that Union, impeccable, but might have sinned, if besides that Union,
God had not infused, and super-induced other graces, of which other graces, the
Beatificall vision, the present sight of the face and Essence of God, was one:
Because, (say they) Christ had from his Conception, in his Humane Nature, that
Beatificall Vision of God, which we shall have in the state of Glory, therefore
he could not sin. This Beatificall Vision, say they, which Christ had here, and
which, (as they suppose, and not improbably, in the problematicall way of the
School) God, of his absolute power, might have withheld, and yet the
Hypostaticall Union have remained perfect; (for, say they, the two Natures,
Humane and Divine, might have been so united, and yet the Humane not have so
seen the Divine) This Beatificall Vision, this sight of God, was the Cause, or
Seal, or Consummation of Christ's Perfection, and impeccability in his Humane
Nature. Much more is this Beatificall Vision, this sight of God in Heaven, the
Cause or Consummation of all the joys and glory which we shall receive in that
place: for howsoever they dispute, whether that kind of Blessedness consist
in seeing God, formaliter, or causaliter, that is, whether I shall see all
things in God, as in a glass, in which the species of all things are, or
whether I shall see all things, by God, as by the benefit of a light, which
shall discover all things to me, yet they all agree, (though they differ de
modo, of the manner, how) that howsoever it be, the substance of the
Blessedness is in this, that I shall see God: Blessed are the pure in heart,
says Christ, for they shall see God; If they should not see God, they were not
blessed. And therefore they who place children that die unbaptised, in a room,
where though they feel no torment, yet they shall never see God, durst never
call that room a part of heaven, but of hell rather; Though there be no
torment, yet, if they see not God, it is hell. There is nothing good in this
life, nothing in the next, without God, that is, without sight and fruition of
the face, and presence of God; which is that, which S. Augustine intends, when
he says, Secutio Dei est appetitus Beatitatis, consecutio Beatitas; our
looking toward God, is the way to Blessedness, but Blessedness it self is
only the sight of God himself.

That therefore thou may begin thy heaven here, put thy self in the sight of
God, put God in thy sight, in every particular action. We cannot come to the
body of the Sun, but we can use the light of the Sun many ways: we cannot come
to God himself here, but yet here we can see him by many manifestations: so
many, as that S. Augustine, in his 20. Chapt. De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae,
has collected aright places of Scripture, where every one of our senses is
called a Seeing; there is a Gustate and videte, and audite, and palpate;
tasting, and hearing, and feeling, and all, to this purpose, are called seeing;
In all our senses, in our faculties, we may see God if we will: God sees us at
midnight; he sees us, then, when we had rather he looked off. If we see him so,
it is a blessed interview. How would he that were come abroad at midnight, to
do a mischief, sneak away, if he saw the watch? what a damp must it
necessarily cast upon any sinner, in the nearest approach to his sin, if he can
see God? See him before thou sinnest; then he looks lovingly: After the sin,
remember how fain Adam would have hid himself from God: He that goes one step
out of Gods sight, is loath to come into it again: If you will sit at the
right hand of God hereafter, you must walk with God here; So Abraham, so Enoch
walked with God, Genesis 5.25.
and God took him. God knows, God takes not every man that dies: God says to
the rich secure man, Fool, this night they shall fetch away thy soul; but he
does not tell him who. That then you be no strangers to God then, see him now;
and remember, that his last judgment is expressed in that word, Nescio vos, I
know you not; not to be known by God, is damnation; and God knows no man there,
with whom he was not acquainted here. There is none good but God; the fruition
of that God, is in seeing him; The way to see him there, is to look toward him
here. And so we have gone as far as the first of our two propositions carried
us, That in this world there is nothing good.

The other that remains, is, That there is nothing ill; that this goodness of
God is so spread over all, (all actions, all persons) as that there is nothing
ill. Seneca, whom Tertullian calls still Senecam nostram, our Seneca, that is,
that Christian Seneca, as though he had read that of S Paul, (between whom and
him, it has been thought, there passed Epistles) Quid habes, quod non
accepisti? what have thou, that thou have not received from God? and meant to
say more then that, says quid non dedit? what is there, that were good for
thee, that God has not given thee? And he, whom they call so often Platonem
Hebraeorum, the Jews Plato, that is, Philo Iudaeus, says well, Nihil boni
sterile creavit Deus; God has made nothing, in which he has not imprinted,
and from which he has not produced some good: He follows it so far, (and
justly) as to say, that God does good, where that good does no good: He takes
his examples from Gods raining in the Sea; that rain does no good in the Sea:
And from Gods producing fresh springs in the desert Land, where, not only no
beasts come to drink, but where the very salt tide overflows the fresh spring.
He might have added an example from Paradise, that God would plant such a
garden, for so few hours; that God would provide man such a dwelling, when he
knew he would not dwell a day in it. And he might have added an example from
the Light too; That God would create light, and say it was good, then when it
could be good for nothing, for there was nothing made to see it, nor to be seen
by it: so forward, so early was God, in diffusing his goodness. Of every
particular thing. God said it was good, and of all together, that it was very
good; there was, there is nothing ill. For, when it is ordinarily inquired in
the School, whether any thing be essentially good, it is safely answered
there, that if by essentially we mean independantly, so good as that it can
subsist of it self, without dependence upon, or relation to any other thing, so
there is nothing essentially good: But if by essentially good, we mean that
whose essence, and being is good, so every thing is essentially good. And
therefore when the Manichees pressed S. August. with that, Vnde malum? If there
be not an ill God, as well as a good, unde malum, from whom, or from whence
proceed all that ill that is in the world? S. Aug. says, Vnde malum? Quid
malum? From whence comes evil? Why, what is there, that you can call evil? I
know no such thing; so that, if there be such a God, that God has no creature.
For, as poisons conduce to Physic, and discord to Music, so those two kinds
of evil, into which we contract all others, are of good use, that is, malum
poenae, the evil of punishment, affliction, adversity, and malum culpae, even
sin it self, from which, the punishment flows.

Be pleased to stop a little, upon each of these. First, malum poenae,
affliction, poverty, sickness, imprisonment, banishment, and such, are not
evil. The blood of Christ Jesus only is my cordial; that restores me,
repaires me; but affliction is my Physic; that purges, that cleanses me.
Hostiliter se opponit medicus, says Tertullian, The Physician comes in like an
enemy, with a knife to lance, with fire to cauterize, but opponit se morbo, he
is but an enemy to the disease, he means the patient no harm; no more does God
to me, in all his medicinal corrections. But how if these afflictions hang
long upon me? If they do so, that is Aegrotantium animarum diaeta; Clem. Alex.
God enters into another course of Physic, and finds it better for me to spend
my disease by a diet; and long sicknesses are such diets: God will recover my
soul by a consumption of the body, and establish everlasting health, by long
sickness. Howsoever, let Gods corrections go as high as they can go in this
world, Etsi novum videtur, quod dicere volo, says Origin, dicam tamen; Though
it be strange that I will say, I will say it, Etiam bonitas Dei est, qui dicitur
faror ejus; That which we call the anger of God, the wrath of God, the fury of
God, is the goodness of God. Correct me not O Lord, in thy wrath, says David;
but, rather then leave me uncorrected, correct me any way. We call God, Just,
and we call him Merciful, according to our present taste of God, and use of
God, Civil. Alex.
Cum unicam habeat affectionem Deus, nempe bonitatem, when as God has but one
affection in himself, that is, goodness, nor but one purpose upon us, that is,
to do us good.

So then, this which we call Malum poenae, Affliction, Adversity, is not evil;
That which occasions this, Malum culpae, sin it self, is not evil; not evil
so, as that it should make us incapable of this diffusive goodness of God. You
know, I presume, in what sense we say in the School, Malum nihil, and Peccatum
nihil, that evil is nothing, sin is nothing; that is, it has no reality, it
is no created substance, it is but a privation, as a shadow is, as sickness
is; so it is nothing. It is wittily argued by Boethius, God can do all things;
God cannot sin; Therefore sin is nothing. But it is strongly argued by S.
Augustine, If there be any thing naturally evil, it must necessarily be
contrary to that which is naturally good; and that is God. Now, Contraria
aequalia, says he; whatsoever things are contrary to one another, are equal
to one another; so, if we make any thing naturally evil, we shall slide into
the Manichees error, to make an Evil God. So far does the School follow
this, as that there, one Archbishop of Canterbury, out of another, that is,
Bradwardin out of Anselme, pronounces it Haereticum esse dicere, Malum esse
aliquid, To say that any thing is naturally evil, is an heresy.

But if I cannot find a foundation for my comfort, in this subtilty of the
School, That sin is nothing, (no such thing as was created or induced by God,
much less forced upon me by him, in any coactive Decree) yet I can raise a
second step for my consolation in this, that be sin what it will in the nature
thereof, yet my sin shall conduce and cooperate to my good. So Joseph says to
his Brethren, You thought evil against me, Genesis 51.20.
but God meant it unto good: which is not only good to Joseph, who was no
partaker in the evil, but good even to them, who meant nothing but evil. And
therefore, as Origin said, Etsi novum, Though it be strangely said, yet I say
it, That Gods anger is good; so says S. Augustine, Audeo dicere, Though it be
boldly said, yet I must say it, Vtile esse cadere in aliquod manifestum
peccatum, Many sinners would never have been saved, if they had not committed
some greater sin at last, then before; for, the punishment of that sin, has
brought them to a remorse of all their other sins formerly neglected. If
neither of these will serve my turn, neither that sin is nothing in it self,
and therefore not put upon me by God, nor that my sin, having occasioned my
repentance, has done me good, and established me in a better state with God,
then I was in before that sin, yet this shall fully rectify me, and assure my
consolation, that in a pious sense I may say, Christ Jesus is the sinner, and
not I. For, though in the two and twentieth Session of the Council of Basil,
that proposition were condemned as scandalous, in the mouth of a Bishop of
Nazareth, Augustinus de Roma, Christus quotidie peccat, That Christ does sin
every day, yet Gregory Nazianzen expresses the same intention, in equivalent
terms, when he says, Quamdiu inobediens ego, tamdiu, quantum ad me attinet,
inobediens Christus: As long as I sin, for so much as concerns me, me, who am
incorporated in Christ, me, who by my true repentance have discharged my self
upon Christ, Christ is the sinner, even in the sight, and justice of his
Father, and not I.

And as this consideration, That the goodness of God, in Christ, is thus
spread upon all persons, and all actions, takes me off from my aptness to
mis-interpret other men's actions, not to be hasty to call indifferent things,
sins, not to call hardness of access in great Persons, pride, not to call
sociablenesse of conversation in women, prostitution, not to call accommodation
of Civil businesses in States, prevarication, or dereliction and abandoning of
God, and toleration of Religion; as it takes me off from this mis-interpreting
of others; so, for my self, it puts me upon an ability, to chide, and yet to
cheer my soul, with those words of David, O my Soul, why art thou so sad?
why art thou so disquieted within me? Since sin is nothing, no such thing as is
forced upon thee by God, by which thy damnation should be inevitable, or thy
reconciliation impossible, since of what nature soever sin be in it self, thy
sins being truly repented, have advanced, and emproved thy state in the favor
of God, since thy sin, being by that repentance discharged upon Christ, Christ
is now the sinner, and not thou, O my Soul, why art thou so sad? why art thou
disquieted within me? And this consideration of Gods goodness, thus derived
upon me, and made mine in Christ, ratifies and establishes such a holy
confidence in me, as that all the moral constancy in the world, is but a
bulrush, to this bulwark; and therefore, we end all, with that historical, but
yet useful note, That that Duke of Burgundy, who was surnamed Carolus Audax,
Charles the Bold, was Son to that Duke, who was surnamed Bonus, The Good Duke;
A Good one produced a Bold one: True confidence proceeds only out of true
Goodness: for, The wicked shall fly, Prove. 28.1.
when no man pursues, but the righteous are bold as a Lion. This constancy,
and this confidence, and upon this ground, Holy courage in a holy fear of him,
Almighty God infuse and imprint in you all, for his Son Christ Jesus sake. And
to this glorious Son of God, etc.

SERMONS Preached upon EASTER DAY.
SERMON XVIII. Preached at S. Paul's, in the Evening, upon Easter Day. 1623.
ACTS 2.36. Part of the second Lesson of that Evening Prayer.

Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, That God has made that
same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord, and Christ.


THe first word of the Text, must be the last part of the Sermon, Divisio.
Therefore; Therefore let all know it. Here is something necessary to be
known, And the Means by which we are to know it; And these will be our two
parts; Scientia, and Modus, Knowledge, and the way to it; For, Qui testatur de
scientia, testatur de modo scientiae, is a good rule, in all Laws, He that will
testify any thing upon his knowledge, must declare how he came by that
knowledge. So then, what we must conclude, and upon what premises, what we
must resolve, and what must lead us to that resolution, are our two stages, our
two resting places: And to those two, our several steps are these; In the
first, Let all the house of Israel know, etc. we shall consider first, The
Manner of S. Peter, (for the Text is part of a Sermon of S. Peter's) in
imprinting this Knowledge in his Auditory; which is, first, in that
Compellation of love and honor, Domus Israel, The house of Israel: But yet,
when he has raised them to a sense of their dignity, in that attribute, he
does not pamper them with an overvalue of them, he lets them know their worst,
as well as their best, Though you be the house of Israel, yet it is you that
have crucified Christ Jesus, That Jesus, whom ye have crucified; And from this
his Manner of preparing them, we shall pass to the Matter that he proposes to
them: When he had remembered them what God had done for them (You are the house
of Israel) and what they had done against God, (You have crucified that Jesus)
He imparts a blessed message to them all, Let all know it: Let them know it,
and know it assuredly; He exhibits it to their reason, to their natural
understanding, And what? The greatest mystery, the entire mystery of our
salvation, That that Jesus is both Lord, and Christ; But he is made so; Made so
by God; Made both; Made Christ, that is, anointed, embalmed, preserved from
corruption, even in the grave, And made Lord by his triumph, and by being made
Head of the Church, in the Resurrection, and in the Ascension: And so, that
which is the last step of our first stage, (That that Jesus is made Lord, as
well as he is made Christ) enters us upon our second stage, The means by which
we are to know, and prove all this to our selves; Therefore, says the Text,
let all know it; wherefore? why, because God has raised him, after you had
crucified him; Because God has loosed the bands of death, Ver. 23, 24, 25, 26,
27.
because it was impossible that he should be holden by death; Because David's
prophecy of a deliverance from the grave is fulfilled in him, Therefore let all
know this to be thus. So that the Resurrection of Christ is argument enough to
prove, that Christ is made Lord of all; And if he be Lord, he has Subjects,
that do as he does; And so his Resurrection is become an argument, and an
assurance of our Resurrection too; and that is as far as we shall go in our
second part, That first Christ's Resurrection is proof enough to us of his
Dominion, if he be risen, he is Lord, and then his Dominion is proof enough to
us of our Resurrection, if he be Lord, Lord of us, we shall rise too: And when
we have paced, and passed through all these steps, we shall in some measure
have solemnized this day of the Resurrection of Christ; and in some measure
have made it the day of our Resurrection too.

First then, 1. Part. Domus Israel.
the Apostle applies himself to his Auditory, in a fair, in a gentle manner;
he gives them their Titles, Domus Israel, The house of Israel. We have a word
now denizened, and brought into familiar use amongst us, Complement; and for
the most part, in an ill sense; so it is, when the heart of the speaker does
not answer his tongue; but God forbid but a true heart, and a fair tongue
might very well consist together: As virtue it self receives an addition, by
being in a fair body, so do good intentions of the heart, by being expressed
in fair language. That man aggravates his condemnation, that gives me good
words, and means ill; but he gives me a rich Jewel, and in a fair Cabinet,
he gives me precious wine, and in a clean glass, that intends well, and
expresses his good intentions well too. If I believe a fair speaker, I have
comfort a little while, though he deceive me, but a froward and peremptory
refuser, unsaddles me at first. I remember a vulgar Spanish Author, who writes,
the Iosephina, the life of Joseph, the husband of the blessed Virgin Mary, who
moving that question, why that Virgin is never called by any style of Majesty,
or Honor in the Scriptures, he says, That if after the declaring of her to be
the Mother of God, he had added any other Title, the Holy Ghost had not been a
good Courtier, (as his very word is) nor exercised in good language, and he
thinks that had been a defect in the Holy Ghost in himself. He means surely
the same that Epiphanius does, That in naming the Saints of God, and especially
the blessed Virgin, we should always give them the best Titles that are
applyable to them; Epiphan. Haeres. 78.
Quis unquam ausus, (says he) proferre nomen Mariae, and non statim addidit
virgo? Who ever durst utter the name of that Mary, without that addition of
incomparable honor, The Virgin Mary?

That Spanish Author need not be suspicious of the Holy Ghost in that kind,
that he is no good Courtier so; for in all the books of the world, you shall
never read so civil language, nor so fair expressions of themselves to one
another, as in the Bible: When Abraham shall call himself dust, and ashes, (and
indeed if the Son of God were a worm and no man, what was Abraham?) If God
shall call this Abraham, this Dust, this Worm of the dust, The friend of God,
(and all friendship implies a parity, an equality in something;) when David
shall call himself a flea, and a dead dog, even in respect of Saul, and God
shall call David, A man according to his own heart, when God shall call us, The
Apple of his own eye, The Seal upon his own right hand, who would go farther
for an Example, or farther then that example for a Rule, of fair accesses, of
civil approaches, of sweet and honorable entrances into the affections of
them with whom they were to deal? Especially is this manner necessary in men
of our profession; Not to break a bruised reed, nor to quench smoking flax,
not to avert any, from a will to hear, by any frowardness, any morosity, any
defrauding them of their due praise, and due titles; but to accompany this
blessed Apostle, in this way of his discreet, and religious insinuation, to
call them Men of Judea, ver. 14. and Men of Israel, ver. 22. and Men and
Brethren, ver. 29. and here Domus Israel, the ancientest house, the
honourablest house, the lastingest house in the world, The house of Israel.

He takes from them nothing that is due, Accusat tamen.
that would but exasperate; He is civil, but his civility does not amount to a
flattery, as though the cause of God needed them, or God must be beholding to
them, or God must pay for it, or smart for it, if they were not pleased. And
therefore, though he do give them their titles, Aperte illis imputat
crucifixionem Christi, says S. Chrysostom, Plainly and without disguise he
imputes and puts home to them, the crucifying of Christ; how honorably soever
they were descended, he lays that murder close to their Consciences, You, you
house of Israel have crucified the Lord Jesus. There is a great deal of
difference between Shimeis vociferations against David; 2 Samuel 16.5.
Thou man of blood, thou man of Belial, And Nathans proceeding with David; and
yet Nathan forbore not to tell him, 2 Samuel 12.7.
Thou art the man, Thou have despised the Lord, Thou have killed Vriah, Thou
have taken his wife. It is one thing to sow pillows under the elbows of Kings,
(flatterers do so) another thing to pull the chair from under the King, and
popular and seditious men do so. Where Inferiors insult over their Superiors,
we tell them, Christi Domini, they are the Lords anointed, and the Lord has
said, Touch not mine anointed; And when such Superiors insult over the Lord
himself, and think themselves Gods without limitation, as the God of heaven
is, when they do so, we must tell them they do so, Etsi Christi Domini,
though you be the Lords anointed, yet you crucify the anointed Lord: for this
was S. Peter's method, though his successor will not be bound by it.

When he has carried the matter thus evenly between them, (I do not deny,
Omnes.
but you are the House of Israel, you cannot deny but you have crucified the
Lord Jesus; you are heirs of a great deal of honor, but you are guilty of a
shrewd fault too) stand or fall to your Master, your Master has dealt thus
mercifully with you all, that to you all, all, he sends a message, Sciant
omnes, Let all the house of Israel know this. Needs the house of Israel know
any thing? Needs there any learning in persons of Honor? We know, this
characterizes, this distinguishes some whole Nations; In one Nation it is
almost a scorn for a gentleman to be learned, in another almost every
gentleman, is conveniently, and in some measure, learned. But I enlarge not my
self, I pretend not to comprehend National virtues, or National vices. For
this knowledge, which is proclaimed here, which is, the knowledge that the true
Messiah is come, and that there is no other to be expected, is such a
knowledge, as that even the house of Israel it self, is without a Foundation,
if it be without this knowledge. Is there any house, that needs no reparations?
Is there a house of Israel, (let it be the Library, the depositary of the
Oracles of God, a true Church, that has the true word of the true God, let it
be the house fed with Manna, that has the true administration of the true
Sacraments of Christ Jesus) is there any such house, that needs not a farther
knowledge, that there are always thieves about that house, that would rob us
of that Word, and of those Sacraments?

The Holy Ghost is a Dove, and the Dove couples, paires, is not alone; Take
heed of singular, of schismatical opinions; and what is more singular, more
schismatic, then when all Religion is confined in one man's breast? The Dove
is animal sociale, a sociable creature, and not singular; and the Holy Ghost is
that; And Christ is a Sheep, animal gregale, they flock together: Embrace thou
those truths, which the whole flock of Christ Jesus, the whole Christian
Church, has from the beginning acknowledged to be truths, and truths necessary
to salvation; for, for other Traditionall, and Conditional, and Occasional,
and Collateral, and Circumstantiall points, for Almanac Divinity, that
changes with the season, with the time, and Meridionall Divinity, calculated to
the height of such a place, and Lunary Divinity, that ebbes and flows, and
State Divinity, that obeyes affections of persons, Domus Israel, the true
Church of God, had need of a continual succession of light, a contiuall
assistance of the Spirit of God, and of her own industry, to know those things
that belong to her peace.

And therefore let no Church, no man, think that he has done enough, or knows
enough. If the Devil thought so too, we might the better think so: but since
we see, that he is in continual practice against us, let us be in a continual
diligence, and watchfulness, to countermine him. We are domus Israel, the
house of Israel, and it is a great measure of knowledge, that God has afforded
us; but if every Pastor look into his Parish, and every Master into his own
Family, and see what is practicing there, sciat domus Israel, let all our
Israel know, that there is more knowledge, and more wisdom necessary; Be every
man far from calumniating his Superiors, for that mercy which is used
toward them that are fallen, but be every man as far from remitting, or
slackning his diligence, for the preserving of them, that are not fallen.

The wisest must know more, though you be domus Israel, the house of Israel
already; Crucifixistis.
and then, Etsi Crucifixistis, though you have crucified the Lord Jesus, you
may know it, sciant omnes, let all know it. S. Paul says once, If they had
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of life; but he never says,
if they have crucified the Lord of life, 1 Cor. 2.8.
they are excluded from knowledge. I mean no more, but that the mercy of God
in manifesting and applying himself to us, is above all our sins. No man knows
enough; what measure of tentations soever he have now, he may have tentations,
through which, this knowledge, and this grace, will not carry him; and
therefore he must proceed from grace to grace. So no man has sinned so deeply,
but that God offers himself to him yet; Sciant omnes, the wisest man has ever
something to learn, he must not presume; the sinfullest man has God ever ready
to teach him, he must not despair.

Now the universality of this mercy, Sciant.
has God enlarged, and extended very far, in that he proposes it, even to
our knowledge, Sciant, let all know it. It is not only credant, let all believe
it; for the infusing of faith, is not in our power: but God has put it in our
power to satisfy their reason, and to chafe that wax, to which he himself
vouchsafes to set to the great seal of faith. And that S. Hierome takes to be
most properly his Commission, Tentemus animas, quae deficiunt a fide, nature
alibus rationibus adjuvare; Let us endeavor to assist them, who are weak in
faith, with the strength of reason. And truly it is very well worthy of a
serious consideration, that whereas all the Articles of our Creed, are objects
of faith, so, as that we are bound to receive them de fide, as matters of
faith, yet God has left that, out of which, all these Articles are to be
deduced, and proved, (that is, the Scripture) to humane arguments; It is not an
Article of the Creed, to believe these, and these Books, to be, or not to be
Canonical Scripture; but our arguments for the Scripture are humane arguments,
proportioned to the reason of a natural man. God does not seal in water, in
the fluid and transitory imaginations, and opinions of men; we never set the
seal of faith to them; But in Wax, in the rectified reason of man, that
reason that is ductile, and flexible, and pliant, to the impressions that are
naturally proportioned unto it, God sets to his seal of faith. They are not
continual, but they are contiguous, they flow not from one another, but they
touch one another, they are not both of a piece, but they enwrap one another,
Faith and Reason. Faith it self, by the Prophet Esaias is called knowledge; Esaias
53.11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, says God of
Christ; that is, by that knowledge, that men shall have of him. So Zechary
expresses it at the Circumcision of John Baptist, That he was to give
knowledge of salvation, Luke 1.77.
for the remission of sins.

As therefore it is not enough for us, in our profession to tell you, Qui non
crediderit, damnabitur, Except you believe all this, you shall be damned,
without we execute that Commission before, Ite praedicate, go and preach, work
upon their affections, satisfy their reason; so it is not enough for you, to
rest in an imaginary faith, and easiness in believing, except you know also
what, and why, and how you come to that belief. Implicit believers, ignorant
believers, the adversary may swallow; but the understanding believer, he must
chaw, and pick bones, before he come to assimilate him, and make him like
himself. The implicit believer stands in an open field, and the enemy will
ride over him easily; the understanding believer, is in a fenced town, and he
has outworks to lose, before the town be pressed; that is, reasons to be
answered, before his faith be shaked, and he will sell himself dear, and lose
himself by inches, if he be sold or lost at last; and therefore sciant omnes,
let all men know, that is, endeavor to inform themselves, to understand.

That particular, Iesum.
that general particular, (if we may so say, for it includes all) which all
were to know, is, that the same Jesus, whom they Crucified, was exalted above
them all.

Suppose an impossibility; (S. Paul does so, when he says to the Galatians, If
an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel; for that is impossible;)
If we could have been in Paradise, and seen God take a clod of red earth, and
make that wretched clod of contemptible earth, such a body as should be fit to
receive his breath, an immortal soul, fit to be the house of the second
person in the Trinity, for God the Son to dwell in bodily; fit to be the Temple
for the third person, for the Holy Ghost, should we not have wondered more, then
at the production of all other creatures? It is more, that the same Jesus, whom
they had crucified, is exalted thus, to sit in that despised flesh, at the
right hand of our glorious God; that all their spitting should but macerate
him, and dissolve him to a better mold, a better plaster; that all their
buffetings should but knead him, and press him into a better form; that all
their scoffs, and contumelies should be prophesies; that that Ecce Rex, Behold
your King; and that Rex Iudaeorum, This is the King of the Jews, which words,
they who spoke them, thought to be lies, in their own mouths, should become
truths, and he be truly the King, not of the Jews only, but of all Nations too;
that their nayling him upon the Cross, should be a settling of him upon an
everlasting Throne; and their lifting him up upon the Cross, a waiting upon
him, so far upon his way to heaven, that this Jesus, whom they had thus
evacuated, thus crucified, should be thus exalted, was a subject of infinite
admiration, but mixed with infinite confusion too.

Wretched Blasphemer of the name of Jesus, that Jesus, whom thou crucifiest,
and treadest under thy feet, in that oath, is thus exalted. Unclean Adulterer,
that Jesus, whom thou crucifiest, in stretching out those forbidden arms in a
strange bed, thou that beheadest thy self, castest off thy Head; Christ Jesus,
that thou might make thy body, the body of a Harlot, that Jesus, whom thou
defilest there, is exalted. Let several sinners pass this through their
several sins, and remember with wonder, but with confusion too, that that
Jesus, whom they have crucified, is exalted above all.

How far exalted? Three steps, which carry him above S. Paul's third heaven:
Factus.
He is Lord, and he is Christ, and he is made so by God; God has made him both
Lord and Christ. We return up these steps, as they lie, and take the lowest
first: Fecit Deus, God made him so: Nature did not make him so, no, not if we
consider him in that Nature, wherein he consists of two Natures, God, and Man.
We place in the School, (for the most part) the infinite Merit of Christ Jesus
(that his one act of dying once, should be a sufficient satisfaction to God, in
his Justice, for all the sins of all men) we place it, I say, rather in pacto,
then in persona, rather that this contract was thus made between the Father,
and the Son, then that, whatsoever that person, thus consisting of God and Man,
should do, should, only in respect of the person, be of an infinite value,
and extention, to that purpose; for then, any act of his, his Incarnation, his
Circumcision, any had been sufficient for our Redemption, without his death.
But fecit Deus, God made him that, that he is; The contract between the Father
and him, that all that he did, should be done so, and to that purpose, that
way, and to that end, this is that, that has exalted him, and us in him.

If then, not the subtilty, and curiosity, but the wisdom of the School, and
of the Church of God, have justly found it most commodious, to place all the
mysteries of our Religion, in pacto, rather then in persona, in the Covenant,
rather then in the person, though a person of incomprehensible value, let us
also, in applying to our selves those mysteries of our Religion, still
adhaerere pactis, and not personis, still rely upon the Covenant of God, with
man, revealed in his word, and not upon the person of any man: Not upon the
persons of Martyrs, as if they had done more then they needed for themselves,
and might relieve us, with their supererogations; for, if they may work for us,
they may believe for us; and Iustus fide sua vivet, says the Prophet, Habak.
2.4.
The righteous shall live by his own faith. Not upon that person, who has
made himself supernumerary, and a Controller upon the three persons in the
Trinity, the Bishop of Rome; not upon the consideration of accidents upon
persons, when God suffers some to fall, who would have advanced his cause, and
some to be advanced, who would have thrown down his cause, but let us ever
dwell in pacto, and in the fecit Deus, this Covenant God has made in his word,
and in this we rest.

It is God then, not nature, not his nature that made him; And what? Christ;
Christus.
Christ is anointed: And then Mary Magdalen made him Christ, for she anointed
him before his death; And Joseph of Arimathea made him Christ, for he anointed
him, and embalmed him, after his death. But her anointing before, kept him not
from death, nor his anointing after, would not have kept him from putrefaction
in the grave, if God had not in a far other manner, made him Christ, anointed
him praeconsortibus, above his fellows. God has anointed him, embalmed him,
enwrapped him in the leaves of the Prophets, That his flesh should not see
corruption in the grave, That the flames of hell should not take hold of him,
nor sindge him there; so anointed him, as that, in his Humane nature, He is
ascended into heaven, and set down at the right hand of God; For, de eo quod
ex Maria est, Petrus loquitur, says S. Basil, That making of him Christ, that
is, that anointing which S. Peter speaks of in this place, is the dignifying
of his humane nature, that was anointed, that was consecrated, that was
glorified in heaven.

But he had a higher step then that; God made this Jesus, Christ, and he made
him Lord; Dominus.
He brought him to heaven, in his own person, in his humane nature; so he shall
all us; but when we shall be all there, he only shall be Lord of all. And if
there should be no other bodies in heaven, then his, yet, yet now he is Lord of
all, as he is Head of the Church. Ask of me, says his Father, and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, Psalm. 2.8.
and the utter most parts of the Earth for thy possession. And, as it is added,
ver. 6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion; So he has made him Lord,
Head of the Jews, and of the Gentiles too, of Sion, and of the Nations also;
He has consecrated his person, raised his humane nature, to the glorious
region of blessed Spirits, to Heaven, and he has dignified him with an office,
made him Lord, Head of the Church, not only of Jews, and Gentiles upon earth,
but of the Militant and Triumphant Church too.

Our two general parts were Scientia, 2. Part.
and modus, what we must all know, and by what we must know it. Our knowledge
is, this Exaltation of Jesus; and our means is implied, in the first word of
the Text, Therefore.
Therefore, Therefore because he is raised from the Dead; for to that
Resurrection, expressed in three, or four several phrases before the Text, is
this Text, and this Exaltation referred; Christ was delivered for our sins,
raised for our justification, and upon that depends all. Christ's descending
into hell, and his Resurrection, in our Creed, make but one Article, and in our
Creed we believe them both alike: Quis nisi Infidelis negaverit, apud inferos
fuisse Christum? says S. Augustine; Who but an Infidel, will deny Christ's
descending into hell? And if he believe that to be a limme of the article of
the Resurrection, His descent into hell, must rather be an inchoation of his
triumph, then a consummation of his Exinanition, The first step of his
Exaltation there, rather then the last step of his Passion upon the Cross: But
the Declaration, the Manifestation, that which admits no disputation, was his
Resurrection. Factus, id est, declaratus per Resurrectionem, says S. Cyrill,
He was made Christ, and Lord, that is, declared evidently to be so, 1 Cor. 1.20.
by his Resurrection; As there is the like phrase, in S. Paul, God has made
the wisdom of this world, foolishness, that is, declared it to be so. And
therefore it is imputed to be a crucifying of the Lord Jesus again, Heb. 6.6.
Non credere eum, post mortem, immortalem, Not to believe, that now after his
having overcome death in his Resurrection, he is in an immortal, and in a
glorious state in heaven. For when the Apostle argues thus, 1 Cor. 15.14.
If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching in vain, and your faith in
vain, he implies the contrary too, If you believe the Resurrection, we have
preached to good purpose: Mortuum esse Christum, August.
pagani credunt; resurrexisse propria fides Christianorum: The Heathen confess
Christ's death; To believe his Resurrection, is the proper character of a
Christian: for the first stone of the Christian faith, was laid in this article
of the Resurrection; In the Resurrection only was the first promise performed,
Ipse conteret, He shall bruise the Serpents head; for, in this, he triumphed
over Death, and Hell; And the last stone of our faith, is laid in the same
article too, that is, the day of Judgment; of a day of Judgment God has
given an assurance unto all men (says S. Paul at Athens) In that he has
raised Christ Jesus from the dead. Acts 17.31.
In this Christ makes up his circle; in this he is truly Alpha and Omega, His
coming in Paradise in a promise, his coming to Judgment in the clouds, are
tied together in the Resurrection: And therefore all the Gospel, all our
preaching, is contracted to that one text, To bear witness of the
Resurrection; only for that, Acts 1.22.
was there need of a new Apostle, There was a necessity of one to be chosen in
Judas room, to be a witness of the Resurrection; Non ait caeterorum, sed
tantum Resurrectionis, says S. Chrysostom, He does not say, to bear witness
of the other articles, but only of the Resurrection; he charges him with no
more instructions, he needs no more, in his Commission, but to preach the
Resurrection: Athan.
for in that, Trophaeum de morte excitavit, and indubitatum reddidit
corruptionem deletam: Here is a retreat from the whole warfare, here is a
Trophee erected upon the last enemy; The last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death, and here is the death of that enemy, in the Resurrection.

And therefore, to all those who importuned him for a sign, Christ still
turns upon the Resurrection. John 2.38. Mat. 12.38.
The Jews pressed him in general, Quod signum, What sign showest thou unto
us? and he answers, Destroy this Temple, (this body) and in three days I will
raise it. In another place, the Scribes and the Pharisees join, Master we
would see a sign from thee, and he tells them, There shall be no sign, but the
sign of the Prophet Jonas; who was a type of the Resurrection. And then the
Pharisees, and Sadduces join; now they were bitter enemies to one another; but,
as Tertullian says, Semper inter duos latrones crucifixus Christus, It was
always Christ's case to be crucified between two Thieves; So these, though
enemies join in this vexation, They ask a sign, as the rest, and, as to the
rest, Christ gives that answer of Jonas. So that Christ himself determines
all, sums up all in this one Article, the Resurrection.

Now, Nos.
if the Resurrection of this Jesus, have made him, not only Christ, Anointed
and consecrated in Heaven, in his own person, but made him Lord, then he has
Subjects, upon whom that dominion, and that power works, and so we have
assurance of a resurrection in him too. That he is made Lord of us by his
Resurrection, is rooted in prophecy; It pleased the Lord to bruise him, says
the Prophet Esaias; But he shall see his seed, Esaias 53.10.
and he shall prolong his days; that is, he shall see those that are
regenerate in him, live with him, forever. It is rooted in prophecy, and it
spreads forth in the Gospel. To this end, says the Apostle, Christ died, and
rose, that he might be Lord of the dead, and of the living. Now, Romans 14.9.
Gregor.
what kind of Lord, if he had no subjects? Cum videmus caput super aquas, when
the head is above water, will any imagine the body to be drowned? What a
perverse consideration were it, to imagine a live head, and dead members? Or,
consider our bodies in our selves, and Our bodies are Temples of the Holy
Ghost; and shall the Temples of the holy Ghost lie for ever, for ever, buried
in their rubbidge? They shall not; for, the day of Judgment, is the day of
Regeneration, as it is called in the Gospel; Mat. 19.28. August.
Quia caro nostra ita generabitur per incorruptionem, sicut anima per fidem:
Because our body shall be regenerated by glory there, as our souls are by
faith here. Therefore, Tertul. calls the Resurrection, Exemplum spei nostrae,
The Original, out of which we copy out our hope; and Clavem sepulchroru^
nostrorum, How hard soever my grave be locked, yet with that key, with the
application of the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, it will open; And they are all
names, which express this well, which Tertullian gives Christ, Vadem, obsidem,
fidejussorem resurrectionis nostrae, That he is the pledge, the hostage, the
surety of our Resurrection: So does that also which is said in the School,
Sicut Adam forma morientium, Theoph.
it a Christus forma resurgentium; Without Adam, there had been no such thing
as death, without Christ, no such thing as a Resurrection: But ascendit ille
effractor, (as the Prophet speaks) The breaker is gone up before, and they have
passed through the gate, that is, assuredly, Mich. 2.13.
infallibly, they shall pass.

But what needs all this heat, all this animosity, all this vehemence, about
the Resurrection? May not man be happy enough in heaven, though his body never
come thither? upon what will ye ground the Resurrection? upon the Omnipotence
of God? Asylum haereticorum est Omnipotentia Dei, (which was well said, and
often repeated amongst the Ancients) The Omnipotence of God, has always been
the Sanctuary of Heretics, that is, always their refuge, in all their
incredible doctrines, God is able to do it, can do it. You confess, the
Resurrection is a miracle; And miracles are not to be multiplied, nor imagined
without necessity; and what necessity of bodies in Heaven?

Beloved, we make the ground and foundation of the Resurrection, to be, not
merely the Omnipotency of God, for God will not do all, that he can do: but
the ground is, Omnipotens voluntas Dei revelata, The Almighty will of God
revealed by him, to us: And therefore Christ joins both these together,
Erratis, Ye err, Mat. 22.29.
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God; that is, not considering the
power of God, as it is revealed in the Scriptures: for there is our foundation
of this Doctrine: we know, out of the Omnipotence of God, it may be; and we
know out of the Scriptures it must be: That works upon our faith, this upon our
reason; That it is man that must be saved, man that must be damned; and to
constitute a man, there must be a body, as well as a soul. Nay, the
Immortality of the soul, will not so well lie in proof, without a resuming of
the body. For, upon those words of the Apostle, If there were no Resurrection,
we were the miserablest of all men, the School reasons reasonably; Naturally
the soul and body are united, when they are separated by Death, it is contrary
to nature, which nature still affects this union; and consequently the soul is
the less perfect, for this separation; and it is not likely, that the perfect
natural state of the soul, which is, to be united to the body, should last
but three or four score years, and, in most, much less, and the unperfect
state, that in the separation, should last eternally, for ever: so that either
the body must be believed to live again, or the soul believed to die.

Never therefore dispute against thine own happiness; never say, God asks the
heart, that is, the soul, and therefore rewards the soul, or punishes the
soul, and has no respect to the body; Nec auferamus cogitationes a collegio
carnis, says Tertullian, Never go about to separate the thoughts of the heart,
from the college, from the fellowship of the body; Siquidem in carne, and cum
carne, and per carnem agitur, quicquid ab anima agitur, All that the soul
does, it does in, and with, and by the body. And therefore, (says he also)
Caro abluitur, ut anima emaculetur, The body is washed in baptism, but it is
that the soul might be made clean; Caro ungitur, ut anima consecretur, In all
unctions, whether that which was then in use in Baptism, or that which was in
use at our transmigration, and passage out of this world, the body was
anointed, that the soul might be consecrated; Caro signatur, (says Tertullian
still) ut anima muniatur; The body is signed with the Cross, that the soul
might be armed against tentations; And again, Caro de Corpore Christi
vescitur, ut anima de Deo saginetur; My body received the body of Christ, that
my soul might partake of his merits. He extends it into many particulars, and
sums up all thus, Non possunt in mercede separari, quae opera conjungunt,
These two, Body, and Soul, cannot be separated for ever, which, whilst they
are together, concur in all that either of them do. Never think it
presumption, says S. Gregory, Sperare in te, quod in se exhibuit Deus homo, To
hope for that in thy self, which God admitted, when he took thy nature upon
him. And God has made it, says he, more easy then so, for thee, to believe
it, because not only Christ himself, but such men, as thou art, did rise at
the Resurrection of Christ. And therefore when our bodies are dissolved and
liquefied in the Sea, putrified in the earth, resolved to ashes in the fire,
macerated in the air, Velut in vasa sua transfunditur caro nostra, Tertul.
make account that all the world is Gods cabinet, and water, and earth, and
fire, and air, are the proper boxes, in which God lays up our bodies, for the
Resurrection. Curiously to dispute against our own Resurrection, is
seditiously to dispute against the dominion of Jesus; who is not made Lord by
the Resurrection, if he have no subjects to follow him in the same way. We
believe him to be Lord, therefore let us believe his, and our Resurrection.

This blessed day, Ille. John 2.19. John 10.17.
which we celebrate now, he rose: he rose so, as none before did, none after,
ever shall rise; He rose; others are but raised: Destroy this Temple, says he,
and I will raise it; I, without employing any other Architect. I lay down my
life, says he: the Jews could not have killed him, when he was alive; If he
were alive here now, the Jesuits could not kill him here now; except his being
made Christ, and Lord, an anointed King, have made him more open to them. I
have a power to lay it down, says he, and I have a power to take it up again.

This day, Nos. John 2.3.
we celebrate his Resurrection; this day let us celebrate our own: Our own,
not our one Resurrection, for we need many. Upon those words of our Savior to
Nicodemus, Oportet denuo nasci, speaking of the necessity of Baptism, Non
solum denuo, sed tertio nasci oportet, says S. Bernard, He must be born
again, and again; again by baptism, for Original sin, and for actual sin,
again by repentance; Infoelix homo ego, and miser abilis casus, says he, cui
non sufficit una regeneratio! Miserable man that I am, and miserable condition
that I am fallen into, whom one regeneration will not serve! So is it a
miserable death that has swallowed us, whom one Resurrection will serve. We
need three, but if we have not two, we were as good be without one. There is a
Resurrection from worldly calamities, a resurrection from sin, and a
resurrection from the grave.

First, Exodus 10.17. 1 Cor. 15.31. Psalm. 41.8.
from calamities; for, as dangers are called death, ( Pharaoh calls the plague
of Locusts, a death, Entreat the Lord your God, that he may take from me, this
death only, And so S. Paul says, in his dangers, I dye daily) So is the
deliverance from danger called a Resurrection: It is the hope of the wicked
upon the godly, Now that he lies, he shall rise no more; that is, Now that he
is dead in misery, he shall have no resurrection in this world. Now, this
resurrection God does not always give to his servants, neither is this
resurrection the measure of Gods love of man, whether he do raise him from
worldly calamities or no.

The second is the resurrection from sin; Apec. 20.5.
and therefore, this S. John calls The first Resurrection, as though the other,
whether we rise from worldly calamities, or no, were not to be reckoned. Anima
spiritualiter cadit, and spiritualiter resurget, says S. Augustine, Since we
are sure, there is a spiritual death of the soul, let us make sure a
spiritual resurrection too. Audacter dicam, says S. Hierome, I say
confidently, Cum omnia posset Deus, suscitare Virginem post ruinam, non potest;
Howsoever God can do all things, he cannot restore a Virgin, that is fallen
from it, to virginity again. He cannot do this in the body, but God is a
Spirit, and has reserved more power, upon the spirit and soul, then upon the
body, and therefore Audacter dicam, I may say, with the same assurance, that S.
Hierome does, No soul has so prostituted her self, so multiplied her
fornications; but that God can make her a virgin again, and give her, even the
chastity of Christ himself. Fulfill therefore that which Christ says, John
5.25.
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live: Be this that hour, be this thy
first Resurrection. Bless Gods present goodness, for this now; and attend
Gods leisure, for the other Resurrection hereafter. 1 Cor. 15.20.
He that is the first fruits of them that slept, Christ Jesus is awake; he dies
no more, he sleeps no more. Sacrificium pro te fuit, sed a te accepit, August.
quod pro te obtulit: He offered a Sacrifice for thee, but he had that from
thee, that he offered for thee: Primitiae fuit, sed tuae primitiae; He was the
first fruits, but the first fruits of thy Corn: Spera in te futurum, quod
praecess it in primitiis tuis: Doubt not of having that in the whole Croppe,
which thou have already in thy first fruits; that is, to have that in thy self,
which thou have in thy Savior. And what glory soever thou have had in this
world, Glory inherited from noble Ancestors, Glory acquired by merit and
service, Glory purchased by money, and observation, what glory of beauty and
proportion, what glory of health and strength soever thou have had in this
house of clay, The glory of the later house, Hag. 2.9.
shall be greater then of the former. To this glory, the God of this glory, by
glorious or inglorious ways, such as may most advance his own glory, bring us
in his time, for his Son Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

SERMON XIX. Preached at S. Paul's, upon Easter Day, in the Evening. 1624.
APOC. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection.


IN the first book of the Scriptures, that of Genesis, there is danger in
departing from the letter; In this last book, this of the Revelation, there is
as much danger in adhering too close to the letter. The literal sense is
always to be preserved; but the literal sense is not always to be discerned:
for the literal sense is not always that, which the very Letter and Grammar
of the place presents, as where it is literally said, That Christ is a Vine,
and literally, That his flesh is bread, and literally, That the new Jerusalem
is thus situated, thus built, thus furnished: But the literal sense of every
place, is the principal intention of the Holy Ghost, in that place: And his
principal intention in many places, is to express things by allegories, by
figures; so that in many places of Scripture, a figurative sense is the
literal sense, and more in this book then in any other. As then to depart from
the literal sense, that sense which the very letter presents, in the book of
Genesis, is dangerous, because if we do so there, we have no history of the
Creation of the world in any other place to stick to; so to bind our selves to
such a literal sense in this book, will take from us the consolation of many
spiritual happinesses, and bury us in the carnal things of this world.

The first error of being too allegorical in Genesis, transported diverse of
the ancients beyond the certain evidence of truth, and the second error of
being too literal in this book, fixed many, very many, very ancient, very
learned, upon an evident falsehood; which was, that because here is mention of a
first Resurrection, and of reigning with Christ a thousand years after that
first Resurrection, There should be to all the Saints of God, a state of
happiness in this world, after Christ's coming, for a thousand years; In
which happy state, though some of them have limited themselves in spiritual
things, that they should enjoy a kind of conversation with Christ, and an
impeccability, and a quiet serving of God without any reluctations, or
co^cupiscences; or persecutions; yet others have dreamed on, and enlarged their
dreams to an enjoying of all these worldly happinesses, which they, being
formerly persecuted, did formerly want in this world, and then should have them
for a thousand years together in recompense. And even this branch of that
error, of possessing the things of this world, so long, in this world, did very
many, and very good, and very great men, whose names are in honor, and justly
in the Church of God, in those first times stray into; and flattered themselves
with an imaginary intimation of some such thing, in these words, Blessed and
holy is he, that has part in the first Resurrection.

Thus far then the text is literal, Divisio.
That this Resurrection in the text, is different from the general
Resurrection. The first differs from the last: And thus far it is figurative,
allegorical, mystical, that it is a spiritual Resurrection, that is
intended. But wherein spiritual? or of what spiritual Resurrection? In the
figurative exposition of those places of Scripture, which require that way often
to be figuratively expounded, that Expositor is not to be blamed, who not
destroying the literal sense, proposes such a figurative sense, as may exalt
our devotion, and advance our edification; And as no one of those Expositors
did ill, in proposing one such sense, so neither do those Expositors ill, who
with those limitations, that it destroy not the literal sense, that it violate
not the analogy of faith, that it advance devotion, do propose another and
another such sense. So does that preacher well also, who to the same end, and
within the same limit, makes his use of both, of all those expositions; because
all may stand, and it is not evident in such figurative speeches, which is the
literal, that is, the principal intention of the Holy Ghost.

Of these words of this first Resurrection (which is not the last, of the body,
but a spiritual Resurrection) there are three expositions authorized by
persons of good note in the Church. Alcazar.
First, that this first Resurrection, is a Resurrection from that low estate,
to which persecution had brought the Church; and so it belongs to this whole
State, and Church, August. and nostri.
and Blessed are we who have our part in this first Resurrection. Secondly,
that it is a Resurrection from the death of sin, of actual, and habitual sin;
so it belongs to every particular penitent soul; and Blessed art thou, blessed
am I, if we have part in this first Resurrection. And then thirdly, because
after this Resurrection, it is said, That we shall reign with Christ a thousand
years, Ribera.
(which is a certain for an uncertain, a limited, for a long time) it has also
been taken for the state of the soul in heaven, after it is parted from the
body by death; for though the soul cannot be said properly to have a
Resurrection, because properly it cannot die, yet to be thus delivered from the
danger of a second death, by future sin, to be removed from the distance, and
latitude, and possibility of tentations in this world, is by very good
Expositors called a Resurrection; and so it belongs to all them who are
departed in the Lord; Blessed and holy is he that has part in this first
Resurrection. And then the occasion of the day, which we celebrate now, being
the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, invites me to propose a
fourth sense, or rather use of the words; not indeed as an exposition of the
words, but as a convenient exaltation of our devotion; which is, that this
first Resurrection should be the first fruits of the dead; The first Rising, is
the first Riser, Christ Jesus: for as Christ says of himself, that He is the
Resurrection, so he is the first Resurrection, the root of the Resurrection. He
upon whom our Resurrection, all ours, all our kinds of Resurrections are
founded; and so it belongs to State and Church, and particular persons, alive,
and dead; Blessed and holy is he that has part in this first Resurrection.

And these four considerations of the words; A Resurrection from persecution,
by deliverance; a Resurrection from sin, by grace; a Resurrection from
tentation to sin, by the way of death, to the glory of heaven; and all these,
in the first Resurrection, in him that is the root of all, in Christ Jesus,
These four steps, these four passages, these four transitions will be our
quarter Clock, for this hours exercise.

First then, 1. Part. From persecution.
we consider this first Resurrection, to be a Resurrection from a persecution
for religion, for the profession of the Gospel, to a forward glorious passage
of the Gospel. And so a learned Expositor in the Roman Church carries the
exposition of this whole place (though not indeed the ordinary way, yet truly
not incommodiously, not improperly) upon that deliverance, which God afforded
his Church, from those great persecutions, which had otherwise supplanted her,
in her first planting, in the primitive times. Then says he (and in part well
toward the letter of the place) The devil was chained for a thousand years,
and then we began to reign with Christ for a thousand years; reckoning the
time from that time, when God destroyed Idolatry more fully, and gave peace and
rest, and free exercise of the Christian religion, under the Christian
Emperors, till Antichrist in the height of his rage shall come, and let this
thousand years prisoner Satan loose, and so interrupt our thousand years
reign with Christ, with new persecutions. In that persecution was the death of
the Church, in the eye of the world; In that deliverance by Christian Emperors
was the Resurrection of the Church; And in Gods protecting her ever since is
the chaining up of the devil, and our reigning with Christ for those thousand
years.

And truly, beloved, if we consider the low, the very low estate of Christians
in those persecutions, tried ten times in the fire, ten several and distinct
persecutions, in which ten persecutions, God may seem to have had a mind to
deal eavenly with the world, and to lay as much upon his people whom he would
try then, as he had laid upon others, for his people before, and so to equal
the ten plagues of Egypt, in ten persecutions, in the primitive Church; if we
consider that low, that very low estate, we may justly call their deliverance a
Resurrection. For as God said to Jerusalem, I found thee in thy blood, and
washed thee, so Christ Jesus found the Church, the Christian Church in her
blood, and washed her, and wiped her; washed her in his own blood, which washes
white, and wiped her with the garments of his own righteousness, that she
might be acceptable in the sight of God, and then wiped all tears from her
eyes, took away all occasions of complaint, and lamentation, that she might be
glorious in the eyes of man, and cheerful in her own; such was her
Resurrection.

We wonder, and justly, at the effusion, at the pouring out of blood, in the
sacrifices of the old Law; that that little country scarce bigger then some
three of our Shires, should spend more cattle in some few days sacrifice at
some solemnities, and every year in the sacrifices of the whole year, then
perchance this kingdom could give to any use. Seas of blood, and yet but
brooks, tuns of blood, and yet but basins, compared with the sacrifices, the
sacrifices of the blood of men, in the persecutions of the Primitive Church.
For every Ox of the Jew, the Christian spent a man, and for every Sheep and
Lamb, a Mother and her child; and for every heard of cattle, sometimes a town
of Inhabitants, sometimes a Legion of Soldiers, all martyred at once; so that
they did not stand to fill their Martyrologies with names, but with numbers,
they had not room to say, such a day, such a Bishop, such a day, such a
General, but the day of 500. the day of 5000. Martyrs, and the martyrdom of a
City, or the Martyrdom of an Army; This was not a red Sea, such as the Jews
passed, a Sinus, a Creek, an Arm, an Inlet, a gut of a Sea, but a red Ocean,
that overflowed, and surrounded all parts; and from the depth of this Sea God
raised them; and such was their Resurrection. Such, as that they which
suffered, lay, and bled with more ease, then the executioner stood and sweat;
and embraced the fire more fervently, then he blew it; and many times had this
triumph in their death, that even the executioner himself, was in the act of
execution converted to Christ, and executed with them; such was their
Resurrection.

When the State of the Jews was in that depression, in that conculcation, in
that consternation, in that extermination in the captivity of Babylon, as that
God presents it to the Prophet in that Vision, in the field of dry bones, so,
Fili hominis, Son of man, as thou art a reasonable man, do thou think these
bones can live, that these men can ever be re-collected to make up a Nation?
The Prophet says, Domine tu scis, Lord thou know; which is, not only thou
know whether they can, or no, but thou know clearly they can; thou can
make them up of bones again, for thou made those bones of earth before. If
God had called in the Angels to the making of man at first, and as he said to
the Prophet, Fili hominis, Son of man, as thou art a reasonable man, so he had
said to them, Filii Dei, as you are the Sons of God, illumined by his face, do
you think, that this clod of red earth can make a man, a man that shall be
equal to you, in one of his parts, in his soul, and yet then shall have such
another part, as that he, whom all you worship, my essential Son shall assume,
and invest that part himself, can that man made of that body, and that soul, be
made of this clod of earth? Those Angels would have said, Domine tu scis, Lord
thou must needs know, how to make as good creatures as us of earth, who made
us of that which is infinitely less then earth, of nothing, before. To induce,
to facilitate these apprehensions, there were some precedents, some such thing
had been done before. But when the Church was newly conceived, and then lay
like the egg of a Dove, and a Giants foot over it, like a worm, like an ant,
and hill upon hill whelmed upon it, nay, like a grain of corn between the upper
and lower Millstone, ground to dust between Tyrans and Heretics, when as she
bled in her Cradle, in those children whom Herod slew, so she bled upon her
crutches, in those decrepit men whom former persecutions and tortures had
creepled before, when East and West joined hands to crush her, and hands, and
brains, joined execution to consultation to annihilate her; in this wane of the
Moon, God gave her an instant fullness; in this exinanition, instant glory; in
this grave, an instant Resurrection.

But beloved, the expressing the pressing of their depressions, does but chafe
the Wax; the Printing of the seal, is the reducing to your memory, your own
case: and not that point in your case, as you were for a few years under a
sensible persecution of fire, and prisons; that was the least part of your
persecution; for it is a cheap purchase of heaven, if we may have it for dying;
Mat. 13.44.
To sell all we have to buy that field where we know the treasure is, is not so
hard, as not to know it; To part with all, for the great Pearl, not so hard a
bargain, as not to know that such a Pearl there might have been had; we
could not say heaven was kept from us, when we might have it for a Faggot, and
when even our enemies helped us to it: but your greater affliction was, as you
were long before, in an insensiblenesse, you thought your selves well enough,
and yet were under a worse persecution of ignorance, and of superstition, when
you, in your Fathers, were so far from expecting a resurrection, as that you
did not know your low estate, or that you needed a Resurrection; And yet God
gave you a Resurrection from it, a reformation of it.

Now, who have their parts in this first resurrection? or upon what conditions
have you it? We see in the fourth verse, They that are beheaded for the
witness of Jesus; that is, that are ready to be so, when the glory of Jesus
shall require that testimony. In the mean time, as it follows there, They
that have not worshipped the Beast; that is, not applied the Honor, and the
Allegiance due to their Sovereign, to any foreign State; nor the Honor due to
God, that is, infallibility, to another Prelate; That have not worshipped the
Beast, nor his Image, says the Text; that is, that have not been transported
with vain imaginations of his power, and his growth upon us here, which has
been so diligently Painted, and Printed, and Preached, and set out in the
promises, and practices of his Instruments, to delude slack, and easy persons:
And then, as it is added there, That have not received his mark upon their
foreheads; That is, not declared themselves Romanists apparently; nor in their
hands, says the Text; that is, which have not underhand sold their secret
endeavors, though not their public profession, to the advancement of his
cause. These men, who are ready to be beheaded for Christ, and have not
worshipped the Beast, nor the Image of the Beast, nor received his mark upon
their foreheads, nor in their hands, these have their parts in this first
resurrection. These are blessed, and holy, says our Text; Blessed, because
they have means to be holy, in this resurrection; For the Lamb has unclasped
the book; the Scriptures are open; which way to holiness, our Fathers lacked;
And then, our blessedness is, that we shall reign a thousand years with
Christ; Now since this first resurrection, since the reformation we have
reigned so with Christ, but 100. years: But if we persist in a good use of it,
our posterity shall add the Cipher, and make that 100. 1000. even to the time,
when Christ Jesus shall come again, and as he has given us the first, so
shall give us the last resurrection; and to that come Lord Jesus, come quickly;
and till that, continue this.

This is the first resurrection, 2 Part. Apeccato.
in the first acceptance, a resurrection from persecution, and a peaceable
enjoying of the Gospel: And in a second, it is a resurrection from sin; and so
it has a more particular appropriation to every person. Aug.
So S. Augustine takes this place, and with him many of the Fathers, and with
them, many of the sons of the Fathers, better sons of the Fathers, then the
Roman Church will confess them to be, or then they are themselves, The
Expositors of the Reformed Church. They, for the most part, with S. Augustine,
take this first resurrection, to be a resurrection from sin. Inter abjectos
abjectissimus peccator: Grego:
No man falls lower, then he that falls into a course of sin; Sin is a fall; It
is not only a deviation, a turning out of the way, upon the right, or the left
hand, but it is a sinking, a falling: In the other case, of going out of the
way, a man may stand upon the way, and inquire, and then proceed in the way, if
he be right, or to the way, if he be wrong; But when he is fallen, and lies
still, he proceeds no farther, inquires no farther. To be too apt to conceive
scruples in matters of religion, stops, and retards a man in the way; to
mistake some points in the truth of religion, puts a man for that time in a
wrong way; But to fall into a course of sin, this makes him unsensible of any
end, that he has to go to, of any way that he has to go by. God has not
removed man, not with-drawne man from this Earth; he has not given him the
Air to fly in, as to Birds, nor Spheres to move in, as to Sun and Moon; he
has left him upon the Earth; and not only to tread upon it, as in contempt,
or in mere Dominion, but to walk upon it, in the discharge of the duties of
his calling; and so to be conversant with the Earth, is not a falling. But as
when man was nothing but earth, nothing but a body, he lay flat upon the earth,
his mouth kissed the earth, his hands embraced the earth, his eyes respected
the earth; And then God breathed the breath of life into him, and that raised
him so far from the earth, as that only one part of his body, (the soles of
his feet) touches it, And yet man, so raised by God, by sin fell lower to the
earth again, then before, from the face of the earth, to the womb, to the
bowels, to the grave; So God, finding the whole man, as low as he found Adams
body then, fallen in Original sin, yet erects us by a new breath of life, in
the Sacrament of Baptism, and yet we fall lower then before we were raised,
from Original into Actual, into Habitual sins; So low, as that we think not,
that we need, know not, that there is a resurrection; and that is the
wonderful, that is the fearful fall.

Though those words, Quomodo cecidisti de Coelo, Lucifer, Esaias 14.12.
How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer, the Son of the morning? be
ordinarily applied to the fall of the Angels, yet it is evident, that they are
literally spoken of the fall of a man: It deserves wonder, more then pity, that
man, whom God had raised, to so Noble a height in him, should fall so low from
him. Man was borne to love; he was made in the love of God; but then man falls
in love; when he grows in love with the creature, he falls in love: As we are
bid to honor the Physician, and to use the Physician, but yet it is said in
the same Chapter, Ecclus. 38.1. V. 15.
He that sins before his Maker, let him fall into the hands of the
Physician; It is a blessing to use him, it is a curse to rely upon him, so it
is a blessing to glorify God, in the right use of his creatures, but to grow
in love with them, is a fall: For we love nothing that is so good as our
selves; Beauty, Riches, Honor, is not so good as man; Man capable of grace
here, of glory hereafter. Nay as those things, which we love, in their nature,
are worse then we which love them, so in our loving them, we endeavor to make
them worse then they in their own nature are; by over-loving the beauty of the
body, we corrupt the soul, by overloving honor, and riches, we deflect, and
detort these things, which are not in their nature ill, to ill uses, and make
them serve our ill purposes: Man falls, as a fall of waters, that throws
down, and corrupts all that it embraces. Nay beloved, when a man has used
those wings, which God has given him, and raised himself to some height in
religious knowledge, and religious practice, Acts 29.9.
as Eutichus, out of a desire to hear Paul preach, was got up into a Chamber,
and up into a window of that Chamber, and yet falling asleep, fell down dead;
so we may fall into a security of our present state, into a pride of our
knowledge, or of our purity, and so fall lower, then they, who never came to
our height. So much need have we of a resurrection.

So sin is a fall, and every man is afraid of falling, even from his temporal
station; M^rs. Clem. Alex.
more afraid of falling, then of not being raised. And Qui peccat, quatenus
peccat, fit seipso deterior: In every sin a man falls from that degree which
himself had before; In every sin, he is dishonored, he is not so good a man,
as he was; impoverished, he has not so great a portion of grace as he had;
Infatuated, he has not so much of the true wisdom of the fear of God, as
he had; disarmed, he has not that interest and confidence in the love of God,
that he had: and deformed, he has not so lively a representation of the Image
of God as before. In every sin, we become prodigals, but in the habit of sin,
we become bankrupts, afraid to come to an account. A fall is a fearful thing,
that needs a raising, a help; but sin is a death, and that needs a
resurrection; and a resurrection is as great a work, as the very Creation it
self. It is death in semine, in the root, it produces, it brings forth death;
It is death in arbore, in the body, in it self; death is a divorce, and so is
sin; and it is death in fructu, in the fruit thereof; sin plants spiritual
death, and this death produces more sin, Obduration, Impenitence, and the like.

Be pleased to return, and cast one half thought upon each of these: Sin is
the root of death; Death by sin entered, and death passed upon all men, for all
men have sinned. Romans 5.12.
It is death because we shall dye for it. But it is death in it self, We are
dead already, dead in it; Thou have a name, that thou live, and art dead, was
spoken to a whole Church. Apoc. 3.1.
It is not evidence enough, to prove that thou art alive, to say, I saw thee at
a Sermon; that spirit, that knows thy spirit, he that knows whether thou were
moved by a Sermon, melted by a Sermon, mended by a Sermon, he knows whether
thou be alive or no.

That which had wont to be said, That dead men walked in Churches, is too true;
Men walk out a Sermon, or walk out after a Sermon, as ill as they walked in;
they have a name that they live, John 5.25.
and are dead: But the hour is come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God: That is, at these hours they may hear, if they will,
and till they do hear, they are dead. Sin is the root of death, the body of
death, and then it is the fruit of death. August.
S. Augustine confesses of himself, that he was Allisus intra parietes in
celebritate solemnitatum tuarum, that in great meetings upon solemn days, in
the Church, there, within the walls of Gods house, Egit negotium procurandi
fructus mortis, he was not buying and selling doves, but buying and selling
souls, by wanton looks, cheapning and making the bargain of the fruits of
death, as himself expresses it. Sin is the root, and the tree, and the fruit
of death; The mother of death, death it self, and the daughter of death; and
from this death, this threefold death, death past in our past sins, present
death in our present in sensiblenesse of sin, future death in those sins, with
which sins God will punish our former, and present sins, (if he proceed merely
in justice) God affords us this first resurrection.

How? Resurrectio.
Thus. Death is the Divorce of body and soul; Resurrection is the Reunion of
body and soul: And in this spiritual death, and resurrection, which we
consider now, and which is all determined in the soul it self, Grace is the
soul of the soul, and so the departing of grace, is the death, and the
returning of grace is the resurrection of this sinful soul. But how? By what
way, what means? Consider Adam; Adam was made to enjoy an immortality in his
body; He induced death upon himself: And then, as God having made Marriage for
a remedy against uncleanness, intemperate men make even Marriage it self an
occasion of more uncleanness, then if they had never married; so man having
induced and created death, by sin, God takes death, and makes it a means of the
glorifying of his body, in heaven. God did not induce death, death was not in
his purpose; Cyril. Alex.
but veluti medium opportunum, quo vas confractum rursus fingeretur, As a
means, whereby a broken vessel might be made up again, God took death, and
made it serve for that purpose, That men by the grave might be translated to
heaven.

So then, to the resurrection of the body, there is an ordinary way, The grave;
To the resurrection of the soul, there is an ordinary way too, The Church. In
the grave, the body that must be there prepared for the last resurrection, has
worms that eat upon it: In the Church, the soul that comes to this first
resurrection, must have worms, The worm, the sting, the remorse, the
compunction of Conscience; In those that have no part in this first
resurrection, the worm of conscience shall never die, but gnaw on, to
desperation; but those that have not this worm of conscience, this remorse,
this compunction, shall never live. In the grave, which is the furnace, which
ripens the body for the last resurrection, there is a putrefaction of the body,
and an ill savor: In the Church, the womb where my soul must be mellowed for
this first resurrection, my soul, which has the savor of death in it, as it
is leavened throughout with sin, must stink in my nostrils, and I come to a
detestation of all those sins, which have putrified her. And I must not be
afraid to accuse my self, to condemn my self, to humble my self, lest I
become a scorn to men; Augus^.
Nemo me derideat ab eo medico aegrum sanari, a quo sibi praestitum est ne
aegrotaret, Let no man despise me, or wonder at me, that I am so humbled under
the hand of God, or that I fly to God as to my Physician when I am sick, since
the same God that has recovered me as my Physician when I was sick, has been
his Physician too, and kept him from being sick, who, but for that Physician,
had been as ill as I was: At least he must be his Physician, if ever he come to
be sick, and come to know that he is sick, and come to a right desire to be
well. Spiritual death was before bodily; sin before the wages of sin; God
has provided a resurrection for both deaths, but first for the first; This is
the first resurrection, Reconciliation to God, and the returning of the soul
of our soul, Grace, in his Church, by his Word, and his seals there.

Now every repentance is not a resurrection; It is rather a waking out of a
dream, then a rising to a new life: Nay it is rather a startling in our sleep,
then any awaking at all, Ephesians. 5.14. Esaias ^0.1.
to have a sudden remorse, a sudden flash, and no constant perseverance. Awake
thou that sleep, says the Apostle, out of the Prophet: First awake, come to
a sense of thy state; and then arise from the dead, says he, from the practice
of dead works; and then, Christ shall give thee light: life, and strength to
walk in new ways. It is a long work, and has many steps; Awake, arise, and
walk, and therefore set out betimes; At the last day, in those, which shall be
found alive upon the earth, we say there shall be a sudden death, and a sudden
resurrection; In raptu, in transitu, in ictu oculi, In an instant, in the
twinkling of an eye; but do not thou trust to have this first Resurrection In
raptu, in transitu, in ictu oculi, In thy last passage upon thy deathbed, when
the twinkling of the eye, must be the closing of thine eyes: But as we assign
to glorified bodies after the last Resurrection, certain Dotes, (as we call
them in the School) certain Endowments, so labor thou to find those
endowments, in thy soul here, if thou be come to this first Resurrection.

Amongst those Endowments we assign Subtilitatem, Agilitatem; The glorified
body is become more subtle, more nimble, not encumbred, not disable for any
motion, that it would make; So has that soul, which is come to this first
Resurrection, by grace, a spiritual agility, a holy nimblenesse in it, that it
can slide by tentations, and pass through tentations, and never be polluted;
follow a calling, without taking infection, by the ordinary tentations of that
calling. So have those glorified bodies Claritatem, a brightness upon them,
from the face of God; and so have these souls, which are come to this first
resurrection, a sun in themselves, an inherent light, by which they can
presently distinguish between action and action; what must, what may, what
must not be done. But of all the endowments of the glorified body, we consider
most, Impassibilitatem, That that body shall suffer nothing; and is sure that
it shall suffer nothing. And that which answers that endowment of the body most
in this soul, that is come to this first resurrection, is as the Apostle
speaks, That neither persecution, sickness, nor death, Romans 8.
shall separate her from Christ Jesus. In Heaven we do not say, that our
bodies shall divest their mortality, so, as that naturally they could not dye;
for they shall have a composition still; and every compounded thing may perish:
but they shall be so assured, and with such a preservation, as they shall
always know they shall never dye. S. Augustine says well, Aug.
Assit motio, absit fatigatio, assit potestas vescendi, absit necessitas
esuriendi; They have in their nature a mortality, and yet be immortal; a
possibility and an impossibility of dying, with those two diverse relations, one
to nature, the other to preservation, will consist together. So in this soul,
that has this first Resurrection from sin, by grace, a conscience of her own
infirmity, that she may relapse, and yet a testimony of the powerfulness of
Gods Spirit, that easily she shall not relapse, may consist well together. But
the last seal of this holy confidence is reserved for that, which is the third
acceptance of this first Resurrection; not from persecutions in this world,
nor from sin in this world, but from all possibility of falling back into sin,
in the world to come; and to this, have diverse Expositors referred these words,
this first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he, that has part in this first
Resurrection.

Now, a Resurrection of the soul, seems an improper, an impertinent, an
improbable, 3 Part.
an impossible form of speech; for, Resurrection implies death, and the soul
does not dye in her passage to Heaven. And therefore Damascen makes account, De
ortho. sid. l. 4. c. ult.
that he has sufficiently proved the Resurrection of the body (which seems so
incredible) if he could prove any Resurrection; if there be any Resurrection at
all, says he, it must be of the body, for the soul cannot dye, therefore not
rise. Yet have not those Fathers, nor those Expositors, who have in this text,
acknowledged a Resurrection of the soul, mistaken nor miscalled the matter.
Take Damascens own definition of Resurrection: Resurrectio est ejus quod
cecidit secunda surrectio: A Resurrection is a second rising to that state,
from which any thing is formerly fallen. Now though by death, the soul do not
fall into any such state, as that it can complain, (for what can that lack,
which God fills?) yet by death, the soul falls from that, for which it was
infused, and poured into man at first; that is, to be the form of that body,
the King of that Kingdom; and therefore, when in the general Resurrection,
the soul returns to that state, for which it was created, and to which it
has had an affection, and a desire, even in the fullness of the Joys of
Heaven, then, when the soul returns to her office, to make up the man,
because the whole man has, therefore the soul has a Resurrection; not from
death, but from a deprivation of her former state; that state, which she was
made for, and is ever inclined to.

But that is the last Resurrection; and so the soul has part even in that
last Resurrection; But we are in hand with the first Resurrection of the soul;
and that is, when that soul, which was at first breathed from God, and has
long suffered a banishment, a close imprisonment in this body, returns to God
again; The returning of the soul to him, from whom it proceeded at first, is
a Resurrection of the soul. Here then especially, I feel the straitness of
time; two considerations open themselves together, of such a largeness, as all
the time from Moses his In principio, when time began, to the Angels Affidavit,
in this book, That shall say and swear, that time shall be no more, were too
narrow to contemplate these two Hemispheares of Man, this Evening, and Morning
of Man's everlasting day; The miseries of man, in this banishment, in this
emprisonment, in this grave of the soul, the body, And the glory, and
exaltation of that soul in her Resurrection to Heaven. That soul, which being
borne free, is made a slave to this body, by coming to it; It must act, but
what this body will give it leave to act, according to the Organs, which this
body affords it; and if the body be lame in any limme, the soul must be lame
in her operation, in that limme too; It must do, but what the body will have
it do, and then it must suffer, whatsoever that body puts it to, or whatsoever
any others will put that body to: If the body oppress it self with
Melancholy, the soul must be sad; and if other men oppress the body with
injury, the soul must be sad too; Consider, (it is too immense a thing to
consider it) reflect but one thought, but upon this one thing in the soul,
here, and hereafter, In her grave, the body, and in her Resurrection in Heaven;
That is the knowledge of the soul.

Here says S. Augustine, when the soul considers the things of this world,
Non veritate certior, sed consuetudine securior; She rests upon such things as
she is not sure are true, but such as she sees, are ordinarily received and
accepted for truths: so that the end of her knowledge is not Truth, but
opinion, and the way, not Inquisition, but ease: But says he, when she
proceeds in this life, to search into heavenly things, Verberatur luce
veritatis, The beams of that light are too strong for her, and they sink her,
and cast her down, Et ad familiaritatem tenebrarum suarum, non electione sed
fatigatione convertitur; and so she returns to her own darkness, because she
is most familiar, and best acquainted with it; Non electione, not because she
loves ignorance, but because she is weary of the trouble of seeking out the
truth, and so swallows even any Religion to escape the pain of debating, and
disputing; and in this laziness she sleeps out her lease, her term of life,
in this death, in this grave, in this body.

But then in her Resurrection, her measure is enlarged, and filled at once;
There she reads without spelling, and knows without thinking, and concludes
without arguing; she is at the end of her race, without running; In her
triumph, without fighting; In her Haven, without sailing: A freeman, without
any prentiship; at full years, without any wardship; and a Doctor, without any
proceeding: She knows truly, and easily, and immediately, and entirely, and
everlastingly; Nothing left out at first, nothing worn out at last, that
conduces to her happiness. What a death is this life? what a resurrection is
this death? For though this world be a sea, yet (which is most strange) our
Harbor is larger then the sea; Heaven infinitely larger then this world. For,
though that be not true, which Origin is said to say, That at last all shall be
saved, nor that evident, which Cyril of Alexandria says, That without doubt
the number of them that are saved, is far greater then of them that perish, yet
surely the number of them, with whom we shall have communion in Heaven, is
greater then ever lived at once upon the face of the earth: And of those who
lived in our time, how few did we know? and of those whom we did know, how few
did we care much for? In Heaven we shall have Communion of Joy and Glory with
all, Aug.
always; Vbi non intrat inimicus, nec amicus exit, Where never any man shall
come in that loves us not, nor go from us that does.

Beloved, I think you could be content to hear, I could be content to speak
of this Resurrection, our glorious state, by the low way of the grave, till God
by that gate of earth, let us in at the other of precious Stones. And blessed
and holy is he, who in a rectified conscience desires that resurrection now.
But we shall not depart far from this consideration, by departing into our last
branch, or conclusion, That this first Resurrection may also be understood to
be the first riser Christ Jesus; and Blessed and holy is he that has part in
that first Resurrection.

This first Resurrection is then without any detorting, 4 Part.
any violence, very appliable to Christ himself, who was Primitiae dormientium,
in that, that action, That he rosc again, he is become (says the Apostle) the
first fruits of them that sleep: 1 Cor. 15.20. Hier. in Mat. 27.52.
He did rise, and rise first; others rose with him, none before him: for S.
Hierome taking the words as he finds them in that Evangelist, makes this note,
That though the graves were opened, at the instant of Christ's death, (death was
overcome, the City opened the gates) yet the bodies did not rise till after
Christ's Resurrection. For, for such Resurrections as are spoken of, That women
received their dead raised to life again, Heb. 11.35.
and such as are recorded in the old and new Testament, they were all unperfect
and temporary resurrections, such, as S. Hierome says of them all, Resurgebant
iterum morituri; They were but reprieved, not pardoned; Hier.
They had a Resurrection to life, but yet a Resurrection to another death.
Christ is the first Resurrection; others were raised; but he only rose; they by
a foreign, and extrinsique, he by his own power.

But we call him not the first, in that respect only; for so he was not only
the first, but the only; he alone arose by his own power; but with relation
to all our future Resurrections, he is the first Resurrection. First, If Christ
be not raised, your faith is in vain, 1 Cor. 15.17.
says the Apostle; You have a vain faith if you believe in a dead man. He
might be true Man, though he remained in death; but it concerns you to
believe, that he was the Son of God too; And he was declared to be the Son of
God, Romans 11.4.
by the Resurrection from the dead. That was the declaration of himself, his
Justification; he was justified by the Spirit, when he was proved to be God, by
raising himself. But thus our Justification is also in his Resurrection. For,
He was raised from the dead, for our Justification: how for ours? Romans 4. ult.
That we should be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. What is that?
that he has told us before; Our Resurrection in Christ is, that we should
walk in newness of life. Romans 6.4.


So that then Christ is the first Resurrection, first, Efficiently, the only
cause of his own Resurrection; First, Meritoriously, the only cause of our
Resurrection; first, Exemplarily, the only pattern, how we should rise, and
how we should walk, when we are up; and therefore, Blessed and happy are we,
if we refer all our resurrections to this first Resurrection Christ Jesus.
For as Job said of Comforters, so miserable Resurrections are they all without
him.

If therefore thou need and seek this first Resurrection, in the first
acceptance, a Resurrection from persecutions, and calamities, as they oppress
thee here, have thy recourse to him, to Christ. Remember that at the death of
Christ, there were earthquakes; the whole earth trembled; There were rendings
of the Temple; Schisms, Convulsions, distractions in the Church will be: But
then, the graves opened in the midst of those commotions; Then when thou
think thy self swallowed, and buried in affliction, as the Angel did his,
Christ Jesus shall remove thy grave stone, and give thee a resurrection; but if
thou think to remove it by thine own wit, thine own power, or the favor of
potent Friends, Digitus Dei non est hic, The hand of God is not in all this,
and the stone shall lie still upon thee, till thou putrify into desperation,
and thou shall have no part in this first Resurrection.

If thou need, and seek this first resurrection, in the second acceptance,
from the fearful death of heinous sin, have thy recourse to him, to Christ
Jesus, and remember the weight of the sins that lay upon him: All thy sins, and
all thy Fathers, and all thy childrens sins, all those sins that did induce the
first flood, and shall induce the last fire upon this world; All those sins,
which that we might take example by them to escape them, are recorded, and
which, lest we should take example by them, to imitate them, are left
unrecorded; all sins, of all ages, all sexes, all places, al times, all
callings, sins heavy in their substance, sins aggravated by their
circumstances, all kinds of sins, and all particular sins of every kind, were
upon him, upon Christ Jesus; and yet he raised his holy Head, his royal Head,
though under thorns, yet crowned with those thorns, and triumphed in this
first Resurrection: and his body was not left in the Grave, nor his soul in
Hell. Christ's first tongue was a tongue that might be heard, He spoke to the
Shepherds by Angels; His second tongue was a Star, a tongue which might be
seen; He spoke to the Wisemen of the East by that. Hearken after him these two
ways; As he speaks to thine ear, (and to thy soul, by it) in the preaching
of his Word, as he speaks to thine eye, (and so to thy soul by that) in the
exhibiting of his Sacraments: And thou shall have thy part in this first
Resurrection. But if thou think to overcome this death, this sense of sin, by
diversions, by worldly delights, by mirth, and music, and society, or by good
works, with a confidence of merit in them, or with a relation to God himself,
but not as God has manifested himself to thee, not in Christ Jesus, The stone
shall lie still upon thee, till thou putrify into desperation, and then have
thou no part in this first Resurrection.

If thou desire this first Resurrection in the third acceptance, as S. Paul
did, To be dissolved, and to be with Christ, go Christ's way to that also. He
desired that glory that thou do; and he could have laid down his soul when
he would; but he staid his hour, says the Gospel. He could have ascended
immediately, immediately in time, yet he staid to descend into hell first; and he
could have ascended immediately of himself, by going up, yet he staid till he
was taken up. Thou have no such power of thine own soul and life, not for the
time, not for the means of coming to this first Resurrection by death; Stay
therefore patiently, stay cheerfully Gods leisure till he call; but not so
over-chearfully, as to be loath to go when he calls. Relief in persecution by
power, reconciliation in sin by grace, dissolution, and transmigration to
heaven by death, are all within this first Resurrection: But that which is
before them all, is Christ Jesus.

And therefore, as all that the natural man promises himself without God, is
impious, so all that we promise our selves, though by God, without Christ, is
frivolous. God, who has spoken to us by his Son, works upon us by his Son too;
He was our Creation, he was our Redemption, he is our Resurrection. And that
man trades in the world without money, and goes out of the world without
recommendation, that leaves out Christ Jesus. To be a good Moral man, and
refer all to the law of Nature in our hearts, is but Diluculum, The dawning of
the day; To be a godly man, and refer all to God, is but Crepusculum, A
twylight; But the Meridionall brightness, the glorious noon, and height, is
to be a Christian, to pretend to no spiritual, no temporal blessing, but for,
and by, and through, and in our only Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; for he is
this first Resurrection, and Blessed and holy is he, that has part in this
first Resurrection.

SERMON XX. Preached at S. Paul's, in the Evening, upon Easter Day. 1625.
JOHN 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming, in the which,
all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice; And shall come forth, They
that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; And they that have done
evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation.


AS the Sun works diversely, according to the diverse disposition of the
subject, (for the Sun melts wax, and it hardens clay) so do the good actions of
good men: upon good men they work a virtuous emulation, a noble and a holy
desire to imitate, upon bad men they work a vicious, and impotent envy, a
desire to disgrace, and calumniate. And the more the good is that is done, and
the more it works upon good men, the more it disaffects the bad: for so the
Pharisees express their rancor and malignity against Christ, J^^n 11.48.
in this Gospel, If we let him thus alone, all men will believe in him; And
that they foresaw would destroy them in their reputation. And therefore they
enlarged their malice, beyond Christ himself, to him, upon whom Christ had
wrought a Miracle, John 12.10.
to Lazarus, They consulted to put him to death, because by reason of him, many
believed in Jesus. Our Text leads us to another example of this impotency in
envious men; Christ, in this Chapter had, by his only word, cured a man that
had been eight and thirty years infirm; and he had done this work upon the
Sabbath. They envyed the work in the substance, but they quarrel the
circumstance; And they envy Christ, but they turn upon the man, who was more
obnoxious to them; and they tell him, John 5.^^.
That it was not lawful for him to carry his bed that day. He discharges
himself upon Christ; I dispute not with you concerning the Law; This satisfies
me, He that made me whole, Ve^. ^.
bad me take up my bed and walk. Thereupon they put him to find out Jesus; And
when he could not find Jesus, Jesus found him, and in his behalf offers
himself to the Pharisees. Then they direct themselves upon him, and (as the
Gospel says) They sought to slay him, because he had done this upon the
Sabbath: And, V. 16.
as the patient had discharged himself upon Christ, Christ discharges himself
upon his Father; does it displease you that I work upon the Sabbath? be angry
with God, be angry with the Father, for the Father works when I work. V. 17. V.
18.
And then this they take worse then his working of Miracles, or his working
upon the Sabbath, That he would say, that God was his Father; And therefore in
the averring of that, that so important point, That God was his Father, Christ
grows into a holy vehemence, and earnestness, and he repeats his usual oath,
Verily, verily, three several times: First, ver. 19. That whatsoever the
Father does, He, the Son, does also, And then ver. 24. He that believes on me,
and him that sent me, has life everlasting. And then again, ver. 25. The hour
is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear it shall live. At this, that the dead should live, they
marvelled; But because he knew that they were men more affected with things
concerning the body, then spiritual things, as in another story, when they
wondered that he would pretend to forgive sins, because he knew, that they
thought it a greater matter to bid that man that had the Palsy, take up his
bed and walk, then to forgive him his sins, therefore he took that way which
was hardest in their opinion, he did bid him take up his bed and walk; So here,
when they wondered at his speaking of a spiritual Resurrection, to hear him
say, that at his preaching, the dead (that is, men spiritually dead in their
sins) should rise again, to them who more respected the body, and did less
believe a real Resurrection of the body, then a figurative Resurrection of the
soul, he proceeds to that which was, in their apprehension, the more difficult,
Marvel not at this, says he, here in our Text; not at that spiritual
Resurrection by preaching, for the hour is coming, in the which, all that are
in the graves, etc. and so he establishes the Resurrection of the body.

That then which Christ affirms and avows, is, That he is the Son of God;
Divisio.
and that is the first thing, that ever was done in Heaven, The eternal
generation of the Son: that, by which, he proves this, to these men, is, That
by him, there shall be a resurrection of the body; and that is the last thing,
that shall be done in Heaven, for, after that, there is nothing, but an even
continuance in equal glory. Before that, says he, that is, before the
resurrection of the body, there shall be another resurrection, a spiritual
resurrection of the soul from sin; but that shall be, by ordinary means, by
Preaching, and Sacraments, and it shall be accomplished every day; but fix not
upon that, determine not your thoughts upon that, marvel not at that, make
that no cause of extraordinary wonder, but make it ordinary to you, feel it,
and find the effect thereof in your souls, as often as you hear, as often as
you receive, and thereby provide for another resurrection, For, the hour is
coming, in which, all that are in their graves, etc.

Where we must necessarily make thus many steps, though but short ones. First,
the dignity of the Resurrection, marvel at nothing so much, as at this,
nothing is so marvailous, so wonderful as this; And secondly, the approach of
the Resurrection, The hour is coming; And thirdly, The generality, All that
are in the graves; And then the instrument of the resurrection, The voice of
Christ, that shall be heard; And lastly, the diverse end of the resurrection,
They shall come forth, they that have done good, etc. God has a care of the
Body of man, that is first; And he defers it not, that is next; And he extends
it to all, that is a third; And a fourth is, That he does that last act, by
him, by whom he did the first, The Creation, and all between, the Redemption,
that is, by his Son, by Christ; And then the last is, that this is an
everlasting separation and divorce of the good and the bad, The bad shall never
be able to receive good from the Good, nor to do harm to the Good, after that.

First then, Christ says, Ne miremini, Marvel not at this, Ne miremini.
not at your spiritual resurrection, not that a Sermon should work upon man,
not that a Sacrament should comfort a man, make it not a miracle, nor an
extraordinary thing, by hearing to come to repentance, and so to such a
resurrection. For though S. Augustine say, That to convert a man from sin, is
as great a miracle, as Creation, yet S. August. speaks that of a man's first
conversion, in which the man himself does nothing, but God all; Then he is
made of nothing; but after God has renewed him, and proposed ordinary means
in the Church still to work upon him, he must not look for miraculous
working, but make Gods ordinary means, ordinary to him. This is Panis
quotidianus, The daily bread which God gives you, as often as you meet here,
according to his Ordinances; Ne miremini, stand not to wonder, as though you
were not sure, but come to enjoy Gods goodness, in his ordinary way here.

But it is, Hoc.
Ne miremini hoc, Wonder not at this; but yet, there are things, which we may
wonder at. Nil admirari, is but the Philosophers wisdom; He thinks it a
weakness, to wonder at any thing, That any thing should be strange to him: But
Christian Philosophy that is rooted in humility, tells us, in the mouth of
Clement of Alexand. Principium veritatis est res admirari, The first step to
faith, is to wonder, to stand, and consider with a holy admiration, the ways
and proceedings of God with man: for, Admiration, wonder, stands as in the
midst, between knowledge and faith, and has an eye toward both. If I know a
thing, or believe a thing, I do no longer wonder: but when I find that I have
reason to stop upon the consideration of a thing, so, as that I see enough to
induce admiration, to make me wonder, I come by that step, and God leads me by
that hand, to a knowledge, if it be of a natural or civil thing, or to a
faith, if it be of a supernatural, and spiritual thing.

And therefore be content to wonder at this, That God would have such a care to
dignifie, and to crown, and to associate to his own everlasting presence, the
body of man. God himself is a Spirit, and heaven is his place; my soul is a
spirit, and so proportioned to that place; That God, or Angels, or our Souls,
which are all Spirits, should be in heaven, Ne miremini, never wonder at that.
But since we wonder, and justly, that some late Philosophers have removed the
whole earth from the Center, and carried it up, and placed it in one of the
Spheres of heaven, That this clod of earth, this body of ours should be
carried up to the highest heaven, placed in the eye of God, set down at the
right hand of God, Miremini hoc, wonder at this; That God, all Spirit, served
with Spirits, associated to Spirits, should have such an affection, such a love
to this body, this earthly body, this deserves this wonder. The Father was
pleased to breathe into this body, at first, in the Creation; The Son was
pleased to assume this body himself, after, in the Redemption; The Holy Ghost
is pleased to consecrate this body, and make it his Temple, by his
sanctisication; In that Faciamus hominem, Let us, all us, make man, that
consuitation of the whole Trinity in making man, is exercised even upon this
lower part of man, the dignifying of his body. So far, as that amongst the
ancient Fathers, very many of them, are very various, and irresolved, which way
to pronounce, and very many of them clear in the negative, in that point, That
the soul of man comes not to the presence of God, but remains in some
out-places till the Resurrection of the body: That observation, that
consideration of the love of God, to the body of man, withdrew them into that
error, That the soul it self should lack the glory of heaven, till the body
were become capable of that glory too.

They therefore oppose God in his purpose of dignifying the body of man, first,
who violate, and mangle this body, which is the Organ in which God breathes;
And they also which pollute and defile this body, in which Christ Jesus is
apparelled; and they likewise who profane this body, which the Holy Ghost, as
the high Priest, inhabites, and consecrates.

Trangressors in the first kind, that put Gods Organ out of tune, that
discompose, and tear the body of man with violence, are those inhumane
persecutors, who with racks, and tortures, and prisons, and fires, and
exquisite inquisitions, throw down the bodies of the true Gods true servants,
to the Idolatrous worship of their imaginary Gods; that torture men into hell,
and carry them through the inquisition into damnation. S. Augustine moves a
question, and institutes a disputation, and carries it somewhat
problematically, whether torture be to be admitted at all, or no. That presents
a fair probability, which he says against it: we presume, says he, that an
innocent man should be able to hold his tongue in torture; That is no part of
our purpose in torture, says he, that he that is innocent, should accuse
himself, by confession, in torture. And, if an innocent man be able to do so,
why should we not think, that a guilty man, who shall save his life, by
holding his tongue in torture, should be able to do so? And then, where is the
use of torture? Res fragilis, and periculosa quaestio, says that Lawyer, who
is esteemed the law, alone, Vlpian: It is a slippery trial, and uncertain, to
convince by torture: For, many times, says S. Augustine again, Innocens luit
pro incerto scelere certissimas poenas, He that is yet but questioned, whether
he be guilty or no, before that be known, is, without all question, miserably
tortured. And whereas, many times, the passion of the Judge, and the
covetousness of the Judge, and the ambition of the Judge, are calamities heavy
enough, upon a man, that is accused, in this case of torture, Ignorantia
Iudicis est calamitas plerumque innocentis, says that Father, for the most
part, even the ignorance of the Judge, is the greatest calamity of him that is
accused: If the Judge knew that he were innocent, he should suffer nothing; If
he knew he were guilty, he should not suffer torture; but because the Judge is
ignorant, and knows nothing, therefore the Prisoner must be racked, and
tortured, and mangled, says that Father.

There is a whole Epistle in S. Hierome, full of heavenly meditation, and of
curious expressions: It is his forty ninth Epistle, Ad Innocentium: where a
young man tortured for suspicion of adultery with a certain woman, ut
compendio cruciatus vitaret, says he, for his ease, and to abridge his
torment, and that he might thereby procure and compass a present death,
confessed the adultery, though false: His confession was made evidence against
the woman: and she makes that protestation, Tu testis Domine Jesus, Thou Lord
Jesus be my Witness, Non ideo me negare velle, ne peream, sed ideo mentiri
nolle, ne peccem: I do not deny the fact for fear of death, but I dare not
belie my self, nor betray mine innocence, for fear of sinning, and offending
the God of Truth; And, as it follows in that story, though no torture could
draw any Confession, any accusation from her, she was condemned; and one
Executioner had three blows at her with a Sword, and another four, and yet
she could not be killed.

And therefore, because Story abounds with Examples of this kind, how
uncertain a way of trial, and conviction, torture is, though S. Augustine
would not say, that torture was unlawful, yet he says, It behooves every Judge
to make that prayer, Erue me Domine a necessitatibus meis, If there be some
cases, in which the Judge must necessarily proceed to torture; O Lord, deliver
me, from having any such case brought before me.

But what use soever there may be for torture, for Confession, in the
Inquisition they torture for a denial, for the denial of God, and for the
renouncing of the truth of his Gospel: As men of great place, think it
concerns their honor, to do above that which they suffer, to make their
revenges, not only equal, but greater then their injuries; so the Roman
Church thinks it necessary to her greatness, to inflict more tortures now,
then were inflicted upon her in the Primitive Church; as though it were a just
revenge, for the tortures she received then, for being Christian, to torture
better Christians then her self, for being so. In which tortures, the
Inquisition has found one way, to escape the general clamor of the world
against them, which is to torture to that height, that few survive, or come
abroad after, to publish, how they have been tortured. And these, first, oppose
Gods purpose, in the making, and preserving, and dignifying the body of man.

Transgressors herein, in the second kind, are they, that defile the garment
of Christ Jesus, the body in which he has vouchsafed to invest and enwrap
himself, and so apparel a Harlot in Christ's clothes, and make that body,
which is his, hers. That Christ should take my body, though defiled with
fornication, and make it his, is strange; but that I, in fornication, should
take Christ's body, and make it hers, is more. Know ye not, 1 Cor. 6.15. V. 16.
says the Apostle, that your bodies are the members of Christ? And again,
Know you not, that he that is joined to a harlot, is one body? Some of the
Roman Emperors, made it treason, to carry a Ring, that had their picture
engraved in it, to any place in the house, of low Office. What Name can we give
to that sin, to make the body of Christ, the body of a harlot? And yet, the
Apostle there, as taking knowledge, that we loved our selves better then
Christ, changes the edge of his argument, and argues thus, ver. 18. He that
commits fornication, sins against his own body; If ye will be bold with
Christ's body, yet favor your own: No man ever hated his own body; and yet, no
outward enemy is able so to macerate our body, as our own licentiousness.
Christ, who took all our bodily infirmities upon him, Hunger, and Thirst, and
Sweat, and Cold, took no bodily deformities upon him, he took not a lame, a
blind, a crooked body; and we, by our intemperance, and licentiousness,
deforme that body which is his, all these ways. The licentious man, most of
any, studies bodily handsomeness, to be comely, and gracious, and acceptable,
and yet, soonest of any, deformes, and destroys it, and makes that loathsome
to all, which all his care was to make amiable: And so they oppose Gods purpose
of dignifying the body.

Transgressors in a third kind are they, that sacrilegiously profane the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, by neglecting the respect and duties, belonging to
the dead bodies of Gods Saints, in a decent and comely accompanying them to
convenient Funerals. Heirs and Executors are oftentimes defective in these
offices, and pretend better employments of that, which would be, (say they)
vainly spent so. But remember you, of whom (in much such a case) that is said
in S. John, John 12.6.
This he said, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a Thief,
and had the bag, and bore that which was put therein: This Executors say, not
because they intend pious uses, but because they bear, and bear away the
bags. Generally, thy opinion must be no rule for other men's actions; neither
in these cases of Funerals, must thou call all too much, which is more then
enough; That woman's Ointment poured upon Christ's feet, that hundred pound
weight of perfumes to embalme his one body, was more then enough, necessarily
enough; yet it was not too much, for the dignity of that person, nor for the
testimony of their zeal, who did it, in so abundant manner.

Now, as in all these three ways, men may oppose the purpose of God, in
dignifying the body, so in concurring with Gods purpose, for the dignifying
thereof, a man may exceed, and go beyond Gods purpose, in all three. God would
not have the body torn, and mangled with tortures, in those cases; but then,
he would not have it pampered with wanton delicacies, nor varnished with
foreign complexion. It is ill, when it is not our own heart, that appears in
our words; it is ill too, when it is not our own blood, that appears in our
cheeks; It may do some ill offices of blood, it may tempt, but it gives over,
when it should do a good office of blood, it cannot blush. If when they are
filling the wrinkles, and graves of their face, they would remember, that there
is another grave, that calls for a filling with the whole body, so, even their
pride would flow into a mortification. God would not have us put on a sad
countenance, nor disfigure our face, not in our fastings, and other
disciplines; God would not have us mar his work; nor God would not have us
go about to do his last work, which he has reserved to himself in heaven,
here upon earth, that is, to glorify our bodies, with such additions here, as
though we would need no glorification there.

So also in the second way of giving due respect to the body of man, a man may
exceed Gods purpose. God would not have the body corrupted and attenuated,
shrunk and deformed with incontinency, and licentiousness; But God would not
have that sparing of the body, to dishonor, or undervalue, or forbear
marriage, nor to frustrate that, which was one of Gods purposes, in the
institution of marriage, procreation of children. Marriage without possibility of
children, lacks one half of Gods purpose in the institution of marriage; for,
the third reason of marriage, after the other two, (which two were, for a
Helper, and for Children) which is, that marriage should be for a Remedy, that
third came in after; for at the time of the institution of marriage, man was not
fallen into any inordinate concupiscencies, and so, at that time, needed no
remedy. Marriage without possibility of children, lacks one of Gods two reasons
for children; but marriage with a contract against children, or a practice
against children, is not (says S. Augustine) a marriage, but a solemn, an
avowed, a daily Adultery. To choose to be ill in the sight of God, rather then
to look ill, in the sight of men, is a perverse, and a poisonous Physic. The
sin of Er, and Onan, in married men; the sin of procured abortions, in married
women, do, in many cases, equal, in some, exceed, the sin of Adultery; To rob
a husband, or a wife, of a future child, may be in the wife, or husband, as
great a sin, as to bring a supposititious, or a spurious child, into the
Fathers inheritance. God would not have the comeliness, the handsomeness of
the body defaced by incontinency, and intemperance, but he would not have the
care of that comeliness, and handsomeness frustrate his purpose of children
in marriage.

And as in those two, (God would not have the body tortured, nor mangled, God
would not have the body deformed by licentiousness) so, in his third respect
to man's body, God would not have the bodies of his dead Saints neglected, Gods
purpose may be exceeded too. Gods purpose therein is, that all men should be
Decently; and Honorable persons, Honorably buried; but his purpose herein is
exceeded, when any ragge of their skin, or chip of their bones, or lock of
their hair, is kept for a Relic, and made an Universal balm, and Amulet,
and Antidote, against all temporal, and all spiritual diseases, and
calamities, not only against the rage of a Fever, but of hell it self. What
their counterfeit Relics may do, against their counterfeit hell, against
their Purgatory, I know not: That powerful, and precious, and only Relic,
which is given to us, against hell it self, is only the Communion of the
body, and blood of Christ Jesus, left to us by him, and preserved for us, in
his Church, though his body be removed out of our sight.

To end this, Miramini hoc, marvel at this, at the wonderful love of God to
the body of man, and thou will favor it so, as not to macerate thine own
body, with uncommanded and inhumane flagellations, and whippings, nor afflict
their bodies, who are in thy charge, with inordinate labor; thou will not
dishonor this body, as it is Christ's body, nor deforme it, as it is thine
own, with intemperance, but thou will behave thy self toward it so, as
toward one, whom it has pleased the King to honor, with a resurrection,
(which was our first) and not to defer that resurrection long, which is our
next step, Venit hora, The hour is coming.

Non talem Deum tuum putes, qualis nec tu debes esse, is excellently said by S.
Augustine: Venit hora.
Never presume upon any other disposition in God, then such as thou find in
thine own heart, that thou art bound to have in thy self; for we find in our
hearts, a band of conformity, and assimilation to God, that is, to be as like
God as we can. Therefore whatsoever thou find thy self bound to do to
another, thou may expect at Gods hand. Thou art bound to help up another that
is fallen, therefore thou may assure thy self, that God will give thee a
Resurrection: so, thou find in thy heart, that the soul of an alms, the
soul of a benefit, that that gives it life, is the speedy, the present doing
of it; Therefore thou may be sure, that God will make speed to save thee,
that he will not long defer this thy resurrection, horavenit. S. Augustine
comparing the former resurrection, which is the spiritual resurrection of the
soul, ver. 25. with this in the Text, which is the resurrection of the body,
observes, that there Christ says, hora venit, and nunc est, the hour is
coming, and now is; because in every private inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in
every Sermon, in every meeting of the Congregation, the dead may hear, and
live; nunc est, they may do it now. But that in this resurrection in the Text,
the resurrection of the body, it is not said, nunc est, that the hour is now;
for, the Son of Man who says it, (as he is the Son of Man) knows not when it
shall be; But he says Hora venit, It is coming, and coming apace, and
coming quickly, shortly.

As soon as God had made man, he gave him his patent, Dominamini, Dominion
over the Creature; As soon as Man was fallen, God gave him the promise of a
Messiah; And of his second coming, himself says, Ecce, venio cito, Behold, I
come speedily: Venit, he comes, he is upon the way; and Ecce, venit, Behold, he
comes, he is within sight, you may see him in his fore-running tokens; and Ecce
cito, as little way as he has to go, he makes haste, And there is a Jesuit
that makes the haste so great, as that he says, Maldon.
Howsoever S. Augustine make use of that note, that it is not said in the Text,
Nunc est, That the hour of the Resurrection is now, yet he does believe, that
Christ did say so, though the Evangelist left it out. We need not say so; we
do not; so much less liberty do we take in departing from the Fathers, then
the Roman Authors do: But yet, so as S. John speaks, Hora novissima, This is
the last time, (Now there are many Antichrists, 1 John 2.18.
whereby we know that this is the last time) And so, as S. Peter speaks, 2 Pet.
3.8.
Be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day: So as this Nunc may signify Vltimum
statum, The last course of times, the time not of Nature, nor of Law, but of
Grace; so we admit that addition in this Resurrection too, Hora venit, and nunc
est, The hour is coming, and now is, because there are no other means to be
hereafter instituted for the attaining of a happy Resurrection, then those that
now are established in the Church, especially at a man's death, may we very
properly say, Nunc est, Now is the Resurrection come to him, not only because
the last Judgment is involved in the first, (for that Judgment which passes
upon every man at his death, stands for ever without Repeal, or Appeal, or
Error) but because after the death of the Body, there is no more to be done
with the Body, till the Resurrection; for as we say of an Arrow, that it is
over shot, it is gone, it is beyond the mark, though it be not come to the mark
yet, because there is no more to be done to it till it be; so we may say, that
he that is come to death, is come to his Resurrection, because he has not
another step to make, another foot to go, another minute to count, till he be
at the Resurrection.

The Resurrection then, being the Coronation of man, his Death, and lying down
in the grave, is his enthroning, his sitting down in that chair, where he is
to receive that Crown. As then the Martyrs, under the Altar, though in heaven,
yet do cry out for the Resurrection; so let us, in this miserable life, submit
our selves cheerfully to the hand of God, in death, since till that death we
cannot have this Resurrection, and the first thing that we shall do after this
death, is to rise again. To the child that is now borne, we may say, Hora
venit, The day of his Resurrection is coming; To him that is old, we may say,
The hour is come; but to him that is dead, The minute is come, because to him
there are no more minutes till it do come.

Miremini hoc, Omnes.
Marvail at this, at the descent of Gods love, He loves the Body of Man, And
Miremini hoc, Mervaile at his speed, He makes haste to express this love, Hora
venit, And then Miremini hoc, Marvel at the Generality, it reaches to all,
all that are in the Grave; All that are in the graves shall hear his voice,
etc. God has made the Body as a House for the soul, till he call her out, and
he has made the Grave as a House for the body, till he call it up. The misery,
and poor estate that Christ submitted himself unto for man, Mat 8.20.
was not determined in that, That foxes had holes, but he no where to lay his
head, while he lived; but he had no grave that he could claim, when he was
dead. It is some discontinuance of the Communion of Saints, if I may not be
buried with the Saints of God. Every man that has not divested Humanity, has
a desire to have his bones lie at rest, and we cannot provide for that so well,
any way, as to bury them in Consecrated places, which are, in common
entendment, safest from profane violences. Even that respect, that his bones
might lie at rest, seems to have moved one Prophet, 1 King. 13.31.
to enjoyne his Sons, to bury him, in the Sepulcher, where the other Prophet
was buried. He knew that Josiah would burn the bones of all the other graves,
upon the Altar of Bethel, as was prophesied; and he presumed that he would
spare the bones of that Prophet, and so his bones should be safe, if they were
mingled with the other. Deuteronomy. 34.6.
God expressed his love to Moses, in that particular, That he buried him; And,
to deliver, and remove him, from the violence of any that loved him not, and so
might dishonor his memory, and from the superstition of any that over-lov'd
him, and so might over-honour his memory, God buried him in secret. In more
then one place does David complain, That there was none to bury Gods Saints;
And the Dignity that is promised here in the Text, is appropriated to them, who
are in the graves, who are buried.

But then, was that general? Is it simply, plainly, literally of them, and
them only, who are in graves, who are buried? Shall none enjoy a Resurrection,
that have not enjoyed a Grave? Still I say, it is a comfort to a dying man, it
is an honor to his memory, it is a discharge of a duty in his friends, it is a
piece of the Communion of Saints, to have a consecrated grave: But the word
here is, In monumentis, All that are in Monuments; that is, in Receptacles of
Bodies, of what kind soever they be: wheresoever the hand of God lays up a
dead Body, Psalm. 34.20.
that place is the Receptacle, so the monument, so the grave of that Body. God
keeps all the bones of the righteous, so that none of them are broken: Though
they be trod to dust in our sight, they are entire in his, because he can bid
them be whole again in an instant. Some Nations burnt their dead, there the
fire is the grave; some drowned their dead, there the sea is the grave; and
some hung them up upon trees, and there the air is their grave: Some Nations
eat their dead themselves, and some maintained dogs to eat the dead; Herod.
Strabo.
and as they called those dogs, Canes Sepulchrales, Sepulchrall dogs, so those
men were sepulchrall men, those men and those dogs were graves. Death and hell
shall deliver up their dead, Ap^c. 20.13.
says S. John: That is, the whole state, and mansion of the dead, shall be
emptied: The state of the dead is their grave, and upon all that are in this
state, shall the testimony of Gods love, to the body of man, fall; And that is
the Generality, All that are in the grave, etc.

Our next step is, Audient.
The Instrument, the Means, by which, this, first so speedy, and then so
general love of God, to man, to man in his lowest part, his body, is
accomplished unto him; These, All these, All these that are in graves, in all
these kinds of graves, shall hear his voice, and that is the Means. First,
whose voice? That is expressed immediately before, The Son of man. In the other
Resurrection, in that of the dead soul, ver. 25. there it is said, The dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God. In this, which is the Resurrection to
Judgment, it is The Son of man. The former Resurrection (that of a sinner to
repentance by preaching) is wrought by a plain, and ordinary means here in
the Church; where you do but hear a man in a Pew, read prayers, and pronounce
Absolution, and a man in a Pulpit preach a Sermon, and a man at a Table
consecrate, and administer a Sacrament; And because all this, though it be the
power of life, and the means of your spiritual resurrection, is wrought by
the Ministry of man, who might be contemptible in your eye, therefore the
whole work is referred to God, and not the son of man, but the Son of God, is
said to do it.

In this Resurrection of the Text, which is a Resurrection to Judgment, and to
an account with God, that God whom we have displeased, exasperated, violated,
wounded in the whole course of our life, lest we should be terrified, and
dejected at the presence of that God, the whole work is referred to the Son of
Man, which has himself formerly felt all our infirmities, and has had as sad
a soul at the approach of death, as bitter a Cup in the form of Death, as
heavy a fear of Gods forsaking him in the agony of death, as we can have: And
for sin it self, I would not, I do not extenuate my sin, but let me have
fallen, not seven times a day, but seventy seven times a minute, yet what are
my sins, to all those sins that were upon Christ? The sins of all men, and all
women, and all children, the sins of all Nations, all the East and West, and
all the North and South, the sins of all times and ages, of Nature, of Law, of
Grace, the sins of all natures, sins of the body, and sins of the mind, the
sins of all growth, and all extentions, thoughts, and words, and acts, and
habits, and delight, and glory, and contempt, and the very sin of boasting, nay
of our belying our selves in sin; All these sins, past, present and future,
were at once upon Christ, and in that depth of sin, mine are but a drop to his
Ocean; In that treasure of sin, mine are but single money to his Talent; And
therefore, that I might come with a holy reverence to his Ordinance, in this
place, though it be but in the Ministry of man, that first Resurrection is
attributed to the Son of God, to give a dignity to that Ministry of man, which
otherwise might have been under-valued, that thereby we might have a
consolation, and a cheerfulness toward it; It is He, that is, the Son of
God, and the Son of man, Christ; which remembers us alfo, that all that belongs
to the expressing of the Law of God to man, must be received by us, who
profess our selves Christians, in, and by, and for, and through Christ.

We use to ascribe the Creation to the Father, but the Father created by the
Word, and his Word, is his Son, Christ; When he prepared the Heavens, I was
there, (says Christ, Prove. 8.27.
of himself in the person of Wisdom) and when he appointed the foundations of
the earth, then was I by him, as one brought up with him; It is not, as one
brought in to him, or brought in by him, but with him; one as old, that is, as
eternal, as much God as he. We use to ascribe Sanctification to the Holy
Ghost; But the Holy Ghost sanctifies in the Church, And the Church was
purchased by the blood of Christ, and Christ remains Head of the Church, usque
in consummationem, till the end of the world. I look upon every blessing that
God affords me, and I consider whether it be temporal, or spiritual; and that
distinguishes the metal; the temporal is my silver, and the spiritual is my
Gold; but then I look again upon the Inscription, Cujus Imago, whose Image,
whose inscription it bears, and whose Name; and except I have it, in, and for,
and by Christ Jesus, Temporal, and Spiritual things too, are but imaginary,
but illusory shadows; for God convayes himself to us, no other way, but in
Christ.

The benefit then in our Text, the Resurrection, is by him; but it is limited
thus, Christum.
It is by hearing him, They that are in their Graves shall hear, etc. So it is
in the other Resurrection too, the spiritual resurrection. v. 25. There, they
must hear him, that will live. In both resurrections, That in the Church, now,
by Grace, And that in the Grave hereafter, by Power, it is said, They shall
hear him. They shall, which seems to imply a necessity, though not a
coaction; But that necessity, not of equal force, not equally irresistible in
both: In the Grave, They shall; Though they be dead, and senseless as the dust,
(for they are dust it self) though they bring no concurrence, no cooperation,
They shall hear, that is, They shall not choose but hear. In the other
resurrection, which is, in the Church, by Grace, in Gods Ordinance, They shall
hear too, that is, There shall be a voice uttered so, as that they may hear,
if they will, but not whether they will or no, as in the other cafe, in the
grave. Therefore when God expresses his gathering of his Church, in this world,
it is Sibilabo and congregabo, I will hiss, or chirpe for them, Zecha. 10.8.
and so gather them: He whispers in the voice of the Spirit, and he speaks a
little louder, in the voice of a man; Let the man be a Boanerges, a Son of
thunder, never so powerful a speaker, yet no thunder is heard over all the
world. Mat. 24.31.
But for the voice that shall be heard at the Resurrection, He shall send his
Angels, with a great sound of a Trumpet; A great sound, such as may be made by
a Trumpet, such as an Angel, all his Angels can make in a Trumpet, and more
then all that, 1 These. 4.16.
The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, and that, with a shout, and with
the voice of an Archangel, that is, says S. Ambrose, of Christ himself, And
in the Trumpet of God, that is also, Christ himself.

So then, you have the Person, Christ; The means, A Voice, And the
powerfulness of that voice, in the Name of an Archangell, which is named but
once more in all the Scriptures: And therefore, let no man, that has an holy
anhelation and panting after the Resurrection, suspect that he shall sleep in
the dust, for ever; for, this is a voice, that will be heard, he must rise. Let
no man, who because he has made his course of life like a beast, would
therefore be content his state in death might be like a beast too, hope that he
shall sleep in the dust, for ever, for this is a voice, that must be heard,
And all that hear shall come forth, they that have done good, etc.

He shall come forth; Procedent.
even he that has done ill, and would not, shall come forth. You may have
seen moral men, you may have seen impious men, go in confidently enough: not
afrighted with death, not terrified with a grave; but when you shall see them
come forth again, you shall see them in another complexion. That man that dyed
so, with that confidence, thought death his end; It ends his seventy years,
but it begins his seventy millions of generations of torments, even to his
body, and he never thought of that: Indeed, Iudicii, nisi qui vitae aeternae
praedestinatus est, non potest reminisci, says S. Ambrose, No man can, no man
dares think upon the last Judgment, but he that can think upon it with
comfort, he that is predestined to eternal life. Even the best, are
sometimes shaked with the consideration of the Resurrection, because it is
impossible to separate the consideration of the Resurrection, from the
consideration of the Judgment; and the terrors of that may abate the joy of
the other: Sive comedo^sive bibo, says S. Hierom, Whether I eat, or drink,
still me thinks I hear this sound, Surgite mortui, and venite ad Iudicium,
Arise you dead, and come to Judgment: When it calls me up from death, I am
glad, when it calls me to Judgment, that impaires my joy. Can I think that God
will not take a strict account; or, can I be without fear, if I think he
will? Non expavescere requisiturum est dicere, non requiret, is excellently
said by S. Bernard, If I can put off all fear of that Judgment, I have put
off all imagination, that any such Judgment shall be. But, when I begin this
fear, in this life, here, I end this fear, in my death, and pass away
cheerfully: But the wicked begin this fear, when the Trumpet sounds to the
Resurrection, and then shall never end it; but, as a man condemned to be half
hanged, and then quartered, has a fearful addition in his quartering after,
and yet had no ease in his hanging before; so they that have done ill, when
they have had their hanging, when they have suffered in soul, the torments of
Hell, from the day of their death, to the day of Judgment, shall come to that
day with fear, as to an addition to that, which yet, was insinite before. And
therefore the vulgat Edition has rendered this well, Procedent, They shall
proceed, they shall go farther and farther in torment.

But this is not the object of our speculation, Con^lusio.
the subject of our meditation, now: we proposed this Text, for the
Contemplation of Gods love to man, and therefore we rather comfort our selves
with that branch, and refresh our selves with the shadow of that, That they who
have done good, shall come forth unto the Resurrection of life. Alas, the
others shall live as long as they; Lucifer is as immortal as Michael, and
Judas as immortal as S. Peter: August.
But Vita damnatorum, mors est, That which we call immortality in the damned,
is but a continual dying; howsoever it must be called life, it has all the
qualities of death, saving the ease, and the end, which death has, and
damnation has not. They must come forth; they that have done evil, must do so
too: Neither can stay in their house, their grave; for, their house (though
that house should be the sea) shall be burnt down; all the world dissolved
with fire. But then, They who have done evil, shall pass from that fire, into
a farther heat, without light, They who have done good, into a farther light,
without heat.

But fix upon the Conditions, and perform them; They must have done Good; To
have known Good, to have believed it, to have intended it, nay to have
preached it to others, will not serve, They must have done good. They must be
rooted in faith, and then bring forth fruit, and fruit in season; and then is
the season of doing good, when another needs that good at thy hands. God gives
the evening rain, but he gave the morning rain before; A good man gives at his
death, but he gives in his life time too. To them belongs this Resurrection of
the body to life; upon which, since our Text inclines us to marvel rather then
to discourse, I will not venture to say with David, Narrabo omnia mirabilia
tua, I will show all thy wondrous works, Psalm. 9.2. Psalm. 105.5. Psalm. 119 18.
(an Angels tongue could not show them) but I will say with him, Mementote
mirabilium, Remember the mavelous works he has done, And by that, God will
open your eyes, that you may behold the wondrous things that he will do:
Remember with thankfulness the several resurrections that he has given you;
from superstition and ignorance, in which, you, in your Fathers lay dead; from
sin, and a love of sin, in which, you, in the days of your youth, lay dead;
from sadness, and dejection of spirit, in which, you, in your worldly crosses,
or spiritual tentations, lay dead; And assure your self, that that God that
loves to perfect his own works, when you shall lie dead in your graves, will
give you that Resurrection to life, which he has promised to all them that do
good, and will extend to all them, who having done evil, do yet truly repent
the evil they have done.

SERMON XXI. The first Sermon upon this Text, Preached at S. Paul's, in the
Evening, upon Easter Day. 1626.
1 COR. 15.29. Else what shall they do that are baptized for dead? If the dead
rise not at all, why are they then baptized for dead?


O Dit Dominus qui festum Domini unum putat diem, says Origin; God hates that
man that thinks any of his Holy days last but one day; That is, that never
thinks of a Resurrection, but upon Easter Day. I have therefore proposed words
unto you, which will not be determined this day; That so, when at any other
time, we return to the handling of then, we may also return to the meditation
of the Resurrection. To which we may best give a beginning this day, in which
we celebrate the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: And in his
one Resurrection, all those several kinds of Resurrections which appertain
unto us, because howsoever these words have received diverse good expositions
from diverse good Expositors, and received one perverse exposition from our
adversaries in the Roman Church, who have detorted and deflected them, to the
maintenance of their Purgatory, yet all agree, that these words are an argument
for the Resurrection, and therefore proper to this day. And yet this day we
shall not so much inquire, wherein, and in what sense the words are an argument
of the Resurrection, as enjoy the assurance that they are so; not so much
distribute the Text into an explication of the particular words (which is, as
the Mintage and Coining of gold into several lesser pieces) as to lay up the
whole wedge, and ingot of Gold all at once in you, that is, the precious
assurance of your glorious Resurrection.

In establishing whereof, we shall this day, make but this short passage,
Divisio.
by these two steps: Glory in the end, And Grace in the way; The Glory of our
bodies, in the last Resurrection then, And the Grace upon our souls, in their
present Resurrection now. For as we do not dig for gold merely and only for
treasure, but to dispense and issue it also, for present provision and use, not
only for the future, but for the present too; So we do not gather the doctrine
of the Resurrection only for that dignity which the body shall receive in the
Triumphant, but also for the consolation which thereby our souls may receive
in the Militant Church. And therefore, as in our first part, which will be, By
what means the knowledge and assurance of the Resurrection of the body accrues
to us, we shall see, that though it be presented by Reason before, and
illustrated by Reason after, yet the root and foundation thereof is in Faith;
though Reason may chafe the wax, yet Faith imprints the seal, (for the
Resurrection is not a conclusion out of natural Reason, but it is an article
of supernatural Faith; and though you assent to me now, speaking of the
Resurrection, yet that is not out of my Logic, nor out of my Rhetorique, but
out of that Character, and Ordinance which God has imprinted in me, in the
power and efficacy whereof, I speak unto you, as often as I speak out of this
place.) As, I say we determine our first part in this, How the assurance of
this Resurrection accrues to us, so when we descend to our second part, That is
the consolation which we receive whilst we are In via, here upon our way in
this world, out of the contemplation of that Resurrection to glory, which we
shall have In patria, at home in heaven, and how these two Resurrections are
arguments and evidences of one another, we shall look upon some
correspondencies, and resemblances between natural death, and spiritual death
by sin, and between the glorious Resurrection of the body, and the gracious
Resurrection of the soul, that so having brought bodily death and bodily
Resurrection, and spiritual death and spiritual Resurrection, by their
comparison into your consideration, you may anon depart somewhat the better
edified in both, and so enjoy your present Resurrection of the soul, by Grace,
with more certainty, and expect the future Resurrection of the body to glory,
with the more alacrity and cheerfulness.

Though therefore we may hereafter take just occasion of entering into a war, 1.
Part.
in vindicating and redeeming these words, seized and seduced by our
adversaries, to testify for their Purgatory, yet this day being a day of peace
and reconciliation with God and man, we begin with peace, with that wherein all
agree, That these words (Else what shall they do that are baptized for dead? If
the dead rise not at all, why are they baptized for dead?) must necessarily
receive such an Exposition, as must be an argument for the Resurrection; This
baptism pro mortuis, for dead, must be such a baptism as must prove that, the
Resurrection. For, that the Apostle repeats twice in these few words; Else,
(says he) that is, if there be no Resurrection, why are men thus baptized? And
again, if the dead rise not, why are men thus baptized? Indeed the whole
Chapter is a continual argument for the Resurrection; from the beginning
thereof to the 35. ver. he handles the An sit, whether there be a Resurrection,
or no; For, if that be denied, or doubted in the root, in the person of
Christ, whether he be risen or no, the whole frame of our religion falls, and
every man will be apt (and justly apt) to ask that question which the Indian
King asked, when he had been catechized so far in the articles of our Christian
religion, as to come to the suffered, and crucified, and dead, and buried,
impatient of proceeding any farther, and so losing the consolation of the
Resurrection, he asked only, Is your God dead, and buried? then let me return
to the worship of the Sun, for I am sure the Sun will not die; If Christ be
dead and buried, that is, continue in the state of death, and of the grave,
without a Resurrection, where shall a Christian look for life? Therefore the
Apostle handles, and establishes that first, that assurance, A Resurrection
there is.

From thence he raises and pursues a second question De modo; But some man will
say, says he, How are the dead raised up, and with what body come they forth?
And in these questions, De modo, there is more exercise of reason and of
discourse: for, many times, The matter is matter of faith, when the manner is
not so, but considerable, and triable by reason; Many times, for the matter, we
are all bound, and bound upon salvation, to think alike; But for the manner, we
may think diversely, without forfeiture of salvation, or impeachment of
discretion; For, he is not presently an indiscreet man, that differs in opinion
from another man that is discreet, in things that fall under opinion. Absit
superstito, Ge^son
hoc est superflua religio, says a moderate man of the Roman Church; This is
truly superstition, to bring more under the necessity of being believed, then
God has brought in his Scriptures; superfluous religion, says he, is
superstition; Remove that, and then (as he adds there) Contradictoria, quorum
utrumque probabile, credi possunt, Where two contrary opinions are both
probable, they may be embraced, and believed by two men, and those two be both
learned, and discreet, and pious, and zealous men. And this consideration
should keep men from that precipitation, of imprinting the odious and
scandalous names of Sects, or Sectaries upon other men who may differ from
them, and from others with them, in some opinions. Probability leads me in my
assent, and I think thus; Let me allow another man his probability too, and let
him think his way, in things that are not fundamental. They that do not
believe alike, in all circumstances of the manner of the Resurrection, may all,
by Gods goodness, meet there, and have their parts in the glory thereof, if
their own uncharitableness do not hinder them: And he that may have been in
the right opinion, may sooner miss heaven, then he that was in the wrong, if
he come uncharitably to condemn or contemn the other: for, in such cases,
humility, and love of peace, may, in the sight of God, excuse and recompense
many errors, and mistakings.

And after these, of the Matter, of the Manner of the Resurrection, the Apostle
proceeds to a third question, of their state and condition, whom Christ shall
find alive upon Earth, at his second coming; and of them he says only this,
Ecce, mysterium vobis dico, Behold, I tell you a mystery, a secret, we shall
not all sleep, that is, not dye so, as that we shall rest any time in the
grave, but we shall all be changed, that is, receive such an immutation, as
that we shall have a sudden dissolution of body and soul, which is a true
death, and a sudden reunion of body and soul, which is a true resurrection,
in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye. Thus careful, and thus particular
is the Apostle, that the knowledge of the resurrection might be derived unto us.

Now of these three questions, which he raises and pursues; first, whether
there be a Resurrection, then what manner of Resurrection, and then what kind
of Resu rrection they shall have that live to the day of Judgment, our Text
enters into the first; For, for the first, That a resurrection there is, the
Apostle opens several Topiques, to prove it; One is, from our Head, and
Pattern, and Example, Christ Jesus: For so he argues first, If the dead be not
raised, then Christ is not raised; As sure as the head is, V. 16.
so sure the body is raised. And then another Topique, from whence he produces
arguments, is, the absurd consequences, and illations, that would follow, if
there were no resurrection. Of that kind one is, Nos miserrimi, If in this
life only we have hops in Christ, V. 19.
we are of all men the most miserable; Why? because in this life we suffer
persecution for this profession. And another is, Edamus and bibamus, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; V. 32.
What needs this abstinence, and this severe denying our selves, the
conveniences of this life, if all end in this life? And lastly, in the same
kind, follows this Text, Si omnino mortui non excitentur, If the dead rise
not at all, why are they baptized for dead? And by all these ways does the
Apostle convay this knowledge of the Resurrection.

But would all these ways serve? Resurrectio, mysterium.
would all this satisfy that Inquisition which we have brought, how this
assurance of the Resurrection accrues to us? Would any of these reasons, or
would all these reasons convince a man, who were not at all prepossessed, and
preoccupated with a belief of the resurrection, with an assurance thereof? The
resurrection was always a mystery in it self; Sacrum secretum, a holy secret,
and above the search of reason. For there are secrets and mysteries of two
kinds, as the School presents them; some things are so, Quia quaedam
interposita, Because, though the thing be near enough unto me, yet something is
interposed between me, and it, and so I cannot see it: And somethings are so,
Quia long seposita, because they are at so remote a distance, as that, though
nothing be interposed, yet my sight cannot extend to them. In the first sense,
the Sacraments are mysteries, because though the grace therein be near me,
yet there is Velamen interpositum, there is visible figure, a sensible sign,
and seal, between me, and that grace, which is exhibited to me in the
Sacrament: In the second sense, the resurrection is a mystery, because it is so
far removed, as that it concerns our state and condition in the next world;
For man sleeps, and rises not; Job. 14.12.
he shall not wake again, nor be raised from his sleep, till the heavens be
no more; that is, not till the dissolution of all.

So then, the knowledge of the resurrection in it self, is a mystery,
Resurrectio Christ's, mysterium.
removed out of the Sphere, and latitude of reason; And, (to consider this
remoteness farther) though the knowledge of Christ Resurrection, be nearer us,
then our own, (for first we know his, because from his we argue and conclude
our own, as the Apostle institutes his argument, If the dead rise not, Christ
is not risen) yet even the Resurrection of Christ, V. 16.
was so far from being clear and obvious to the best, and the best illumined
understandings, as that, though Christ himself had spoken often of his
Resurrection, to his Disciples, and Apostles, yet they did not clearly,
thoroughly, (scarce at all) understand his Resurrection. When Christ said to the
Jews promiscuously, Solvite Templum hoc, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it; I wonder not that they, blinded with their own malice,
discerned no resurrection in that saying, but applied it to that Temple, which
was forty six years in building; For, till the resurrection was really
accomplished, and actually performed, the Apostles themselves understood not
the Resurrection. Then, when Christ was risen from the dead, and that those two
great Apostles, Peter, and John, had been at the Sepulcher, and received from
thence so much evidence, as convinced them, and prevailed upon them, then, and
not till then, they began to understand the resurrection; for, John 22.9.
till then, (says the Text expressly there) they knew not the Scriptures, that
he must rise from the dead.

And truly, Etiam post Resurrectionem.
if we take a holy liberty, (as piously we may) to consider Christ's bodily
actions after his resurrection, they were not such, as without admitting any
opposition, might induce a necessity of confessing a resurrection. For, though
he exhibited himself to their eyes to be seen, and to their ears to be heard,
and to their fingers to be felt, though he eat with them, and did many other
actions of a living body, yet, as the Angels in the old Testament, did the like
actions, in those bodies which they had assumed; so might Christ have done all
these, in such a body, though that which was buried in the Sepulcher, had had
no resurrection.

It is true, that Christ confirmed his Resurrection, Multis argumentis, as the
vulgat reads that place; Acts 1.3.
with many infallible tokens, says our former Translation, with many
infallible proofs, says our later; But still all these arguments, and tokens,
and proofs wrought by way of confirmation, something was otherwise imprinted
in them, and established by a former apprehension of faith, and these
arguments, and tokens, and proofs confirmed it. For, the reasons for the
resurrection, do not convince a natural man at all, neither do they so
convince a Christian, but that there is more left to his faith, and he believes
something beyond and above his reason.

The resurrection in it self, Resurrectio nostra, mysterium.
Christ's Resurrection, though it be clearer then ours, Christ's Resurrection,
even after it was actually accomplished, was still a mystery, out of the
compass of reason; And then, as it was above our reason, so, howsoever it be
out proof, and our pattern for our resurrection, yet it is above our
imitation. For our resurrection shall not be like his. Omnes alii suscitati,
Christus solus resurrexit, says S. Bernard; All we shall be raised from the
dead, only Christ arose from the dead. We shall be raised by a power working
upon us, he rose by a power inherent, and resident in himself. And yet, though
in this respect, our resurrection be more open to the proof of reason, then
the resurrection of Christ, (for that which has least miracle in it, is most
open to reason; and therefore a natural man would easilier believe that God
might raise a dead man, then that a dead man should be God, and so able to
raise himself, which was Christ's case, for the Godhead of Christ was as much
united to his dead body in the grave, as it was to his soul in Paradise, or to
his whole person consisting of body and soul, before, or after his death and
resurrection) Though, in this respect, I say, our resurrection be more open to
reason, because it has less of the miracle in it, yet when we come to assign
reasons, even for our resurrection, (as we see Athanagoras has undertaken,
with a great deal of wit, and learning, and confidence, in his Apology for the
Christians, to the Emperor, within 155. years after Christ; and the
Schoolmen make account, that they have brought it nearer to the
understanding, nay even to the very sense, by producing some such things, as
even in nature, do not only resemble, but (as they apprehend) evict a
resurrection) yet when all is done, and all the reasons of Athenogaras, and the
School, and of S. Paul himself, are waighed, they determine all in this, that
they are fair, and pregnant, and convenient illustrations of that which was
believed before; and that they have force, and power to incline to an assent,
and to create and beget such a probability, as a discreet, and sad, and
constant man might rest in, and submit to. But yet, we shall find also, that
though no man may speak a word, or conceive a thought against the resurrection,
because for the matter, we are absolutely and expressly concluded by the
Scriptures, yet a man may speak probably, and dangerously against any
particulur argument, that is produced for the resurrection. We believe it
immediately, entirely, cheafully, undisputably, because we see it expressly
delivered by the Holy Ghost; And we embrace thankfully, that sweetness, and
that fullness of that blessed Spirit, that as he lays an obligation upon our
faith, by delivering the article positively to us, so he is also pleased to
accompany that Article, with reasons and arguments proportionable to our reason
and understanding: for though those reasons do not so conclude us, as that
nothing might be said to the contrary, or nothing doubted after, yet the Holy
Ghost having first begotten the faith of this Article, Per ea augescit fides,
and pinguescit, (as Luther speaks in another case) By those reasons and
arguments, and illustrations, that faith is nourished and maintained in a good
habitude and constitution.

And of that kind are all the reasons brought by S. Paul here; Argumentae
Apostols.
The matter is positively delivered by him, and so apprehended by us, and his
reasons (as we said before) issue out of two Topiques; Be pleased to look upon
both. The first is our pattern, Christ Jesus: He is risen, therefore we shall.
In which, though I have a fair illustration and consolation in that, The Head
is risen, therefore the Body shall, yet this reaches not to make my
Resurrection like his, for I shall not rise as he did. And then from his other
Topique, his reasons rise thus: If there be no Resurrection, we that suffer
thus much for the prefession of Christ, are the miserablest men in the world.
Why so? have not all Philosophers had Scholars, and all Heretics Disciples,
and all great Men flatterers, and every private man affections? And has there
not been as much suffered by occasion of these, as S. Paul argues upon here,
and yet no imagination, no expectation of a resurrection? Leave out the
consideration of Philosophers, many of which suffered more then the Turks do,
and yet the Turks suffer infinitely more, in their Mortifications, then the
Papists do; Leave out the Heretics, which were so hungry of suffering, that
if they could not provoke others to kill them, they would kill themselves;
Leave out the pressures of our own affections, and concupiscencies, and yet the
covetous man is in a continual starving, and the licentious man in a
continual Consumption; Take only into your consideration, the miserable
vexation of the flatterer, and humourer, and dependant upon great persons, that
their time is not their own, nor their words their own; their joys are not
their own, nay their sorrows are not their own; they might not smile if they
would, nor they may not sigh when they would, they must do all according to
another mind, and yet they must not know his mind; consider this, and you
cannot say, but that there is as much suffered in the world, as this upon which
S. Paul argues, by them who place not their consolation, nor their retribution
in the hope of a resurrection. He argues farther, Edamus and bibamus, If there
be no resurrection, let us dissolve our selves into the pleasures of this
world, and enjoy them; Why so too? Have we not stories full of exemplar men,
that might be our patterns for sobriety, and continency, and denying themselves
the sweetnesses of this life, and yet never placed Consolation, nor Retribution
upon a Resurrection? Would not S. Paul's own Pondus gloriae, That there is an
exceeding weight of eternal glory attending our afflictions, serve our turn,
though that were determined in the salvation of the soul, though there were no
resurrection of the body? It is strongly and wisely said by Aquinas, Derogant
fidei Christianae rations non cogentes; To offer reasons for any Article of
faith, which will not convince a man therein, derogates from the dignity of
that Article. Therefore we must consider S. Paul's reasons as they were
intended; to Christians, that had received the Article of the Resurrection into
their faith before; And then, as God gave Adam a body immediately from himself,
but then maintained and nourished that body by other means; so the holy Ghost
by S. Paul gives the article of the Resurrection to our faith positively, and
then enables us to declare to our own consciences, and to other men's
understandings, that we believe no impossible thing, in believing the
Resurrection: for as it is the candle that lights me, but yet I take a
lantern to defend that candle from the wind; so my faith assures me of the
Resurrection, but these reasons and illustrations assist that faith. And so we
have done with our first part, How this assurance accrues unto us, and pass in
order to the other, The consolation which we have from this resurrection of the
body, not only in it self, but as it gives us a sense of the spiritual
resurrection of our souls from sin, by Grace.

We are assured then of a Resurrection, and we see how that assurance grows.
2. Part.
But of what? Of all, Body and soul too; For, Quod cadit, resurgit, says S.
Hierome, All that is fallen, receives a resurrection; and that is suppositum,
says the School, that is, The person, the whole man, not taken in pieces,
soul alone, or body alone, but both. For as Damascen expresses the same that
S. Hierome intends, Resurrectio est ejus quod cecidit iterata surrectio, The
Resurrection is a new rising of that which fell; and Man fell. A man is not
saved, a sinner is not redeemed, I am not received into heaven, if my body be
left out; The soul and the body concurred to the making of a sinner, and body
and soul must concur to the making of a Saint. So it is in the last
Resurrection, so it is in the first, which we consider now, by Grace from sin;
And therefore we receive into comparison, Triplicem casum, a threefold fall,
and a threefold resurrection, as in the natural and bodily death, so in the
spiritual death of the soul also: For first, in natural death, there is
Casus in separationem, The man, the person falls into a separation, a divorce
of body and soul; and the resurrection from this fall is by Reunion, the soul
and body are reunited at the last day. A second fall in natural death, is
Casus in dissolutionem, The dead body falls by putrefaction into a dissolution,
into atoms and grains of dust; and the resurrection from this fall, is by
Re-efformation: God shall re-compact and re-compile those atoms and grains of
dust, into that Body, which was before: And then a third fall in natural
death, is Casus in Dispersionem, This man being fallen into a divorce of body
and soul, this body being fallen into a dissolution of dust, this dust falls
into a dispersion, and is scattered unsensibly, undiscernibly upon the face of
the earth; and the resurrection from this death, is by way of Re-collection;
God shall recall and re-collect all these Atoms, and grains of dust, and
re-compact that body, and reunite that soul, and so that resurrection is
accomplished: And these three falls, Into a Divorce, into a Separation, into a
Dispersion; And these three Resurrections, By Reunion, by Re-efformation, by
Re-collecting, we shall also find in our present state, The spiritual death
of the soul by sin.

First then, Casus in separationem.
the first fall in the spiritual death, is the divorce of body and soul; That
whereas God has made the body to be the Organ of the soul, and the soul to
be the breath of that Organ, and bound them to a mutual relation to one
another, Man sometimes withdrawes the soul from the body, by neglecting the
duties of this life, for imaginary speculations; and oftener withdrawes the body
from the soul, which should be subject to the soul, but does maintain a war;
and should be a wife to the soul, and does stand out in a divorce.

Now the Resurrection, Resurrectie a casu in separationem.
from this first fall into a Divorce, is, seriously and wisely, that is, both
piously and civilly to consider, that Man is not a soul alone, but a body too;
That man is not placed in this world only for speculation; He is not sent into
this world to live out of it, but to live in it; Adam was not put into
Paradise, only in that Paradise to contemplate the future Paradise, but to
dress and to keep the present; God did not breathe a soul toward him, but
into him; Not in an obsession, but a possession; Not to travail for knowledge
abroad, but to direct him by counsel at home; Not for ecstasies, but for an
inherence; for when it was come to that, in S. Paul, we see it is called a
rapture, he was not in his proper station, nor his proper motion; He was
transported into the third heaven: but as long as we are in our dwelling upon
earth, though we must love God with all our soul, yet it is not with our soul
alone; Our body also must testify and express our love, not only in a
reverentiall humiliation thereof, in the dispositions, and postures, and
motions, and actions of the body, when we present our selves at Gods Service,
in his house, but in the discharge of our bodily duties, and the sociable
offices of our callings, toward one another: Not to run away from that Service
of God, by hiding our selves in a superstitious Monastery, or in a secular
Monastery, in our own house, by an unprofitable retiredness, and absenting
our selves from the necessary businesses of this world: Not to avoid a Calling,
by taking none: Not to make void a Calling, by neglecting the due offices
thereof. In a word, To understand, and to perform in the best measure we can,
the duties of the body and of the soul, this is the resurrection from the
first fall, The fall into a divorce of body and soul. And for the advancing of
this knowledge, and the facilitating of this performance of these duties, be
pleased a little to stop upon the consideration of both, both of Spiritual and
Divine, and then of secular and sociable duties, so far as concerns this
subject in hand.

First for the duties of the soul, Officium animae.
God was never out of Christ's sight; He was always with him, always within
him, always he himself; yet Christ, at some times, applied himself in a nearer
distance, and stricter way of prayer to God then at other times. Christ's whole
life was a continual abstinence, a perpetual sobriety, yet Christ proposed,
and proportioned a certain time, and a certain number of days for a
particular fast, upon particular occasion. This is the harmony, this is the
resurrection of a Christian, in this respect, That his soul be always so
fixed upon God, as that he do nothing but with relation to his glory
principally, and habitually; That he think of God, at all times, but that,
besides that, he sepose some times, to think of nothing but God: That he pray
continually, so far, as to say nothing, to wish nothing, that he would not be
content God should hear, but that, besides that, he sepose certain fixed
times for private prayer in his chamber, and for public prayer in the
Congregation. For, though it be no where expressly written, that Christ did pray
in the Congregation, or in company, yet, all that Christ did, is not written;
and it is written, that he went often into the Temples, and into the
Synagogues; and it is written, that even the Pharisee, and the Publican, that
went to those places, went thither to pray. But howsoever, Christ was never so
alone, but that if he were not in the Church, the Church was in him; All
Christians were in him, as all Men were in Adam.

This then is our first Resurrection, for the duty that belongs to the soul,
Officium corporis.
That the soul do at all times think upon God, and at some times think upon
nothing but him; And for that, which in this respect belongs to the body, That
we neither enlarge, and pamper it so, nor so adorn and paint it, as though the
soul required a spacious, and specious palace to dwell in. Of that excess,
Porphyrie, who loved not Christ nor Christians, said well, out of mere
Morality, That this enormous fatning and enlarging our bodies by excessive
diet, was but a shoveling of more and more fat earth upon our souls to bury
them deeper: Dum corpus augemus, mortaliores efficimur, says he, The more we
grow, the more mortal we make our selves, and the greater sacrifice we provide
for death, when we gather so much flesh: with that elegancy speaks he, speaking
out of Nature, and with this simplicity and homeliness speaks S. Hierom,
speaking out of Grace, Qui Christum desiderat, and illo pane vescitur, de quam
preciesis cibis stercus conficiat, non quaerit, He that can relish Christ, and
feed upon that Bread of life, will not be so diligent to make precious dung,
and curious excrements, to spend his purse, or his wit, in that, which being
taken into him, must pass by so ignoble a way from him.

The flesh that God has given us, is affliction enough; but the flesh that the
devil gives us, is affliction upon affliction; and to that, there belongs a
woe. Per tenuitatem assimilamur Deo, says the same Author; The attenuation,
the slenderness, the deliverance of the body from the encumbrance of much
flesh, gives us some assimilation, some conformity to God, and his Angels; The
less flesh we carry, the liker we are to them, who have none: That is still,
the less flesh of our own making: for, for that flesh, which God, and his
instrument, Nature, has given us, in what measure, or proportion soever, that
does not oppress us, to this purpose, neither shall that be laid to our
charge; but the flesh that we have built up by curious diet, by meats of
provocation, and witty sawces, or by a slothful and drowsy negligence of the
works of our calling. All flesh is sinful flesh; sinful so, as that it is the
mother of sin, it occasions sin, natural flesh is so; But this artificial
flesh of our own making, is sinful so, as that it is also the daughter of
sin; It is, indeed, the punishment of former sins, and the occasion of future.

The soul then requires not so large, so vast a house of sinful flesh, to
dwell in: Macerationes corporis.
But yet on the other side, we may not by inordinate abstinencies, by
indiscreet fastings, by inhumane flagellations, by unnatural macerations, and
such Disciplines, as God does not command, nor authorize, so wither, and
shrink, and contract the body, as though the soul were sent into it, as into
a prison, or into fetters, and manacles, to wring, and pinch, and torture it.
Nihil interest, says S. Hierome, It is all one whether thou kill thy self at
one blow, or be long in doing it, if thou do it. All one, whether thou fall
upon thine own sword, or sterve thy self with such a fasting, as thou
discernest to induce that effect: for, says he, Descendit a dignitate viri,
and not as insaniae incurrit. He departs from that dignity, which God has
imprinted in man, in giving him the use, and the dominion over his creatures,
and he gives the world just occasion to think him mad; And, as Tertullian
adds; Respuit datorem, qui datum deserit, He that does not use a benefit,
reproaches the Benefactor, and he is ungrateful to God, that does not accept
at his hands the use of his blessings. Therefore is it accepted as a good
interpretation, which is made of Christ's determining his fast in forty days,
Ne sui homicida videretur, Lest if he continued it longer, he might have seemed
to have killed himself, by being the author of his own death; And so do they
interpret aright his Esuriit, That then he began to be hungry, that he began to
languish, to faint, to find a detriment in his body; for else, a fasting when
a man is not hungry, is no fasting; but then he gave over fasting, when he
found the state of his body empaired by fasting.

And therefore those mad doctrines, (so S. Hierom calls them, Notas insaniae
habent) yea those devilish doctrines, (so S. Paul calls them) that forbid
certain meats, and that make un-commanded macerations of the body,
meritorious, that upon a supposititious story, of an Ermit that lived 22.
years, Abbasll sperg.
without eating any thing at all, And upon an impertinent example of their S.
Francis, that kept three Lents in the year, which they extol, and magnify in
S. Francis, and S. Hierom condemned, and detested in the Montanists, who did so
too, have built up those Carthusian Rules, That though it appear that that,
and nothing but that, would save the patients life, yet he may not eat flesh,
that is a Carthusian, And have brought into estimation those Apocryphal and
bastardly Canons which they father upon the Apostles, That a man must rather
sterve, then receive food from the hand of a person excommunicate, or otherwise
detected of any mortal sin; And that all that can be done with the alms of
such a person, is, that it be spent in wood and coals and other fuel, that
so, (as the subtle philosophy of their Canon is) it may be burnt, and consumed
by fire; for, to save a man's life, it must not be spent upon meat or drink, or
such sustentation: These Doctrines are not the Doctrines of this Resurrection,
by which, man considered in Composito, as he consists of soul and body, by a
sober and temperate life, makes his body obsequious, and serviceable to his
soul, but yet leaves his soul a body to work in, and an Organ to praise God
upon, both in a devout humiliation of his body, in Gods service, and in a
bodily performance of the duties of some calling; for this is our first
Resurrection A casu separationis, from having fallen into a separation of body
and soul, for they must serve God jointly together, because God having joined
them, man may not separate them, but as God shall reunite them at the last
Resurrection, so must we, in our Resurrections in this life; And farther we
extend not this Resurrection, from this separation, this divorce.

The second fall of man in natural death, Casus in dissolutionem.
is Casus in dissolutionem, The man being fallen into a divorce of soul and
body, the body falls by putrefaction into a dissolution of dust; and the
Resurrection from this fall, is, a re-efformation, when God shall recompact
that dust into that body. This fall, and this resurrection we have in our
spiritual death too: for we fall into daily customs, and continual habits of
those sins, and we become not only as that Lazarus in the parable, to have
sores upon us, but as that Lazarus in the Gospel, that was dead; Domine jam
faetemus, and quatriduani sumus, Lord we stink in thy nostrils, and we have
been buried four days; All the four changes of our life, Infancy, Youth,
Middle Age, and Old, have been spent and worn out in a continual, and
uninterrupted course of sin. In which, we shall best consider our fall, and
best prepare our Resurrection, by looking from whence we are fallen, and by
what steps; and they are three.

First, Nardus nostra. Cant. 1.12.
Perdidimus nardum nostra^, We have lost the sweet savor of our own Spikenard;
for so the Spouse says, Nardus mea dedit odorem suum: My Spikenard has given
forth her sweet savor. There was a time, when we had a Spikenard, and a sweet
savor of our own, when our own Natural faculties, in that state as God
infused them, in Adam, had a power to apprehend, and lay hold upon the graces
of God. Man has a reasonable soul capable of Gods grace, so has no creature
but man; man has natural faculties, which may be employed by God in his
service, so has no creature but man. Only man was made so, as that he might
be better; whereas all other creatures were but to consist in that degree of
goodness, in which they entered. Miserable fall! Only man was made to mend, and
only man does grow worse; Only man was made capable of a spiritual
sovereignty, and only man has enthralled, and mancipated himself to a
spiritual slavery. And Perdidimus possibilitatem boni, August.
We have lost that good and all possibility of recovering it, by our selves, in
losing Nardum nostram, The savor of our Spikenard, the life, and vigor of our
natural faculties, to supernatural uses. For though the soul be Forma
hominis, it is but Materia Dei; The soul may be the form of man, for without
that, Man is but a carcass; But the soul is but the matter upon which God
works; for, except our soul receive another soul, and be inanimated with
Grace, even the soul it self, is but a carcass. And for this, we have lost
Nardum nostram, The odor, the verdure, the vigor of those powers, in
possession whereof God put us into this world. But there is a step in our fall,
lower then this.

We have not only lost Nardum nostram, Vnguentum Domini.
The use of our own faculties, in original sin, But we have lost also
Vnguentum Domini, The sweet savor, and the holy perfume of that ointment which
the Lord has poured out upon us. For, Cant. 1.3.
as the Spouse says in the same Chapter, Oleum effusum nomen ejus, His name is
an ointment poured out upon us; The name of Christ has been shed upon us all
in our baptism, and that has made us Christians; And the merits and promises
of Christ have been shed upon us all, in the preaching of his word, and that
has declared us to be Christians; The ointment is super caput, super barbam,
super oram vestimenti, as David speaks; It is fallen upon the Head, Psalm. 133.2.
we have had, and have religious Princes; And upon the Beard, the Beard of
Aaron, we have had, and have (no Time, no Church ever more, ever so much) a
religious Clergy, vigilance in the Superior, laboriousnesse in the Inferior
Clergy; And it is fallen upon the Skirts of the garment, the love, the desire,
the hunger of hearing is fallen upon the lowest, and upon all our
Congregations, Oleum effusum nomen ejus, his Name, and his Ordinance is poured
out upon us all; but, as the Spouse says there, Adolescentulae dilexerunt te,
Only the virgins have loved thee; And where are those Virgins? which of us have
preserved that virginity, that integrity? which of us has not married himself
to some particular sin? which of us has not multiplied his fornications, and
yet is not satisfied? we have all lost Nardum nostram, that which we had at
first in Adam, and that which has been offered us since in Christ. And this is
our second step in this fall; But there is a lower then this.

We come to lose Odorem agri, The sweet savor of the field it self. Oder agri.
Genesis 27.27.
As Isaac said of his Son, The smell of my Son is as the smell of a field which
the Lord has blessed, So the Lord of heaven, as he smelt a savor of Rest from
the Sacrifice of Noah, may have smelt from us the savor of medicinal herbs,
of Remorse, and Repentance, and Contrition, and Detestation of former sins, And
the savor of odoriferous, and fragrant, and aromaticall herbs, works worthy
of Repentance, amendment of life, edification of others, and zeal to his
glory, and yet we may relapse into former sins, or fall into new, and come to
savor only of the earth, in a worldly covetousness, or to savor of the
flesh, in a licentious filthiness; We may have received the good seed, and
dured for a while, as S. Matthew expresses Christ's words; Received it, and
Believed it for a while, as S. Luke expresses them, Mat. 13.18. Luke 8.13.
and then depart from the goodness which Gods grace had formerly wrought in
us, and from the Grace of God it self.

Now to this lamentable state, belong those fearful words of the Apostle,
That for a man that sins thus, there remains no more sacrifice; And those
also, in another place, Heb. 10.2. Heb. 6.4.
That for such a man it is impossible, impossible to be renewed. Some of the
Fathers, out of a holy tenderness, and compassion, have mollified this
impossible with a difficile; It is impossible, say they, that is, it is very
hard; very hard for him that has been in Gods service, and is run away, to
return to it again. For, as Tertullian says elegantly in that case, Iudicato
pronunciavit, That sinner, says he, has proceeded solemnly, and judicially,
and has heard what both sides could say, what grace could say, and what sin,
what God could say, and what Satan, and now he has decreed the cause against
Grace and against God, and declared the other side to be in the right, because
he has applied himself to the other side. But there is more in this
Impossible, then Difficile: It is not only hard, but truly impossible: So, as
it is impossible for God to lie, (so the Apostle speaks) so as it is impossible
to take away sin by the blood of Bulls and Goats, (so he speaks) so as it is
impossible to please God without faith, (so he speaks) so impossible is it for
this man to be renewed. Cap. 6. Cap. 10. Cap. 11.
Impossible est, non speres quod impossible, says Chrysostom, It is
impossible, never hope for that which is impossible. For (as that Father exalts
this impossibility) Non dixit, non decet, non prodest, non licet; God has not
said, it becomes not the majesty, and the constancy of my proceedings to renew
such a man; he says not so, non decet; He does not say, it conduces not to my
ends, nor to my manner of government, it would not be good for the public,
for the Church, for the rest of my servants, who might be scandalized if I
should exact so much as I do at their hands, and renew such a man; He says
not so, non prodest; He does not say, non licet; I cannot do it in justice, it
cannot consist with my Laws, and my Edicts, by which I have proclaimed, That
with the froward I will grow froward, and harden their hearts that oppose
themselves against me; He does not say so, non licet; for to all these (it
stands not with my ways, non decet; or it conduces not to my ends, non
prodest; or it consists not with my justice, non licet) mercy would still
present dispensations; but it is expressly, directly impossible, impossible.

It is true, that the hardness of this saying, put the Fathers to hard
Expositions. The greater part by much, of them who find themselves put to a
necessity of admitting an impossibility, (for as I told you before, some of
them mollify and souple the impossibility into a difficulty) place the
impossibility in this, That it is impossible for such a man to be renewed by
baptism, as he was renewed before: for in those Primitive times, though they
excluded not children, yet the greatest part of them who were baptized, were
such as understood their case, persons of discretion, such as had spent many
months, many times many years, in studying and in practicing the Christian
religion, and then were baptized; and if these men (say those Fathers) fell
after this, it was impossible to be renewed that way, impossible that they
should have a second baptism: And it is scarce mannerly, scarce safe to depart
from so many as meet in this interpretation of this impossibility; for they all
intend that which S. Chrysostom expresses most plainly, Dixit impossible, ut
in desperationem induceret; The Apostle says it is impossible, that he might
bring us before hand into a kind of desperation; A desperation of this kind,
That there was absolutely no hope of a possibility of renewing, as they were
renewed before, that is, by baptism.

But because at this time when the Apostle writ, that question, which troubled
the Church so much after, in S. Cyprians time, of Rebaptization, was not moved
at all, neither does it appear, nor is it likely, that any that fell so, put
his hopes upon renewing by a second baptism; there is something else in this
Impossibility then so. And that in one word is, That the falling intended here,
is not a falling a nardo nostra, from the savor of our own Spikenard, the good
use of our own faculties, lost in Original sin, nor a falling Ab unguento
Domini, that though the perfume an Incense of the name of Christ, and the offer
of his merits be shed upon us here, that does not restrain us from falling into
some sins, But this falling is, as it is expressed, a falling away, away from
Christ in all his Ordinances; an undervaluing, a despising of those means
which he has established for the renewing of a broken soul, which is the
making a mock of the Son of God, and the treading the blood of the Covenant
under foot. When Christ has ordained but one way for the renewing of a soul,
The conveyance of his merits, in preaching the word, and the sealing thereof,
in applying the Sacraments, to that man that is fallen so, as to refuse that,
as it is impossible to live, if a man refuse to eat, Impossible to recover, if
a man refuse Physic, so it is Impossible for him to be renewed, because God
has notified to us but one way, and he refuses that. So this is a true
Impossibility, and yet limited too; for though it be impossible to us, by any
means imparted to us, or to our dispensing, and stewardship, yet shall any
thing be impossible to God? God forbid; For, even from this death, and this
depth there is a Resurrection.

As from the loss of our Spikenard, Rosurrectio.
our natural faculties in original sin, we have a resurrection in baptisine,
And from the loss of the ointment of the Lord, the offer of his Graces, in
these meetings, and the falling into some actual sins, for all that
assistance, we have a resurrection in the other Sacrament; So when we have lost
the savor of the field, those degrees of goodness, and holiness which we
had, and had declared before, when we are fallen from all present sense of the
means of a resurrection, yet there may be a resurrection wrapped up in the good
purposes of God upon that man, which, unless he will himself, shall not be
frustrated, not evacuated, not disappointed. Though he have foetorem pro Odore,
Esaias 3.24.
as the Prophet speaks, That in stead of the sweet savor, which his former
holy life exhaled and breathed up, he be come now to stink in the sight of the
Church, (and howsoever God may have a good savor from his own work, from those
holy purposes which he has upon him, which lie in Gods bosom, yet from his
present sins, and from the present testimony and evidence that the Church gives
against him, as a present sinner, he must necessarily stink in the nostrils of
God too) yet, as in the Resurrection of the body, it shall come, when we shall
not know of it, So when this poor dead, put rified soul has no sense of it,
and perchance, little or no disposition toward it, the efficacy of Gods
purpose shall break out, and work in him a resurrection: And this S.
Chrysostom takes to be intended in that which is said in the same place to the
Hebrews, That that earth which drinks in the rain, Heb. 6.
and brings forth nothing but Briars, is Maledicto proxima, nearest to be
accursed, That man is nearest to be a Reprobate; But yet, says he, Vides
quantam habet consolationem, We apprehend a blessed consolation in this, That
it is said, near a curse, near reprobation, and no worse; for, Qui prope est,
procul esse potcrit, says he, That soul which is but near destruction, may
weather that mischief, and grow to be far from it, and out of danger of it.

It is true, this man has lost his paratum cor meum; he cannot say, his heart
is prepared; Psalm. 57.7.
that he has lost in original sin; This man has lost his Confirmatum cor
meum, Psalm. 112.7.
he cannot say, his heart is est ablished; that has been offered him in these
exercises, but it has not prevailed upon him. He has lost his variis odoribus
delectatum cor, Prove. 27.9.
the delight which his heart heretofore had in the savor of the field, in
those good actions, in which formerly he exercised himself, and now is fallen
from: But yet there may be cor novum, Psalm. 51.10.
a new heart, a heart which is yet in Gods bosom, and shall be transplanted
into his; A dupli^ate, an exemplification of Gods secret purpose to be
manifested, and revealed by the Spirit of God, in his good time, upon him. And
this may work, Chr^sost.
In insigni and vehementi mutatione, in such an evidence, and demonstration of
it self, as he shall know it to be that, because it shall not work as a
Circumcision, but as an Excision, not as a lopping off, but as a rooting up,
not by mending him, but by making him a new creature; He shall not grow less
riotous then before, for so a sentence in the Star Chamber, or any other
Criminal Court for a riot, might be a resurrection to him; nor less
voluptuous, for so, poverty in his Fortune, or insipidnesse and tastlesnesse in
his palate might be a resurrection to him; Nor less licentious, for so age or
sickness, nor less quarrelsome, for so blows, and oppression might be a
resurrection to him. But when in a rectified understanding he can but
apprehend, that such a resurrection there may be, nay there is for him; it
shall grow up to a holy confidence, established by the sensible effects
thereof, that he shall not only discontinue his former acts, and divest his
former habits of sin, but produce acts, and build up habits, contrary to his
former habits, and former acts, for this is the resurrection from this second
fall, In dissolutionem, into the dissolution of particular sins.

Now, after all this, there is in natural death, a third fall, casus in
dispersionem, In dispersionem.
the man is fallen in separationem, into a divorce of body and soul, the body
is fallen in dissolutionem, to putrefaction, and dissolution in dust, and then
this dust is fallen in dispersionem, into a dispersion, and scattering over the
earth, as God threatens, Comminuam in pulverem, I will break the wicked as
small as dust, and scatter them with the wind; Psalm. 18.
For after such a scattering, no power, but of God only can recollect those
grains of dust, and re-compact them into a body, and re-inanimate them into a
man. And such a state, such a dispersion, does the heart and soul of an
habitual sinner undergo; For, Pro. 17.24.
as the eyes of a fool are in the corners of the earth, so is the heart and
soul of a sinner. The wanton and licentious man, sighs out his soul, weeps
out his soul, swears out his soul, in every place, where his lust, or his
custom, or the glory of victory, in overcomming, and deluding, puts him upon
such solicitations. In the corrupt taker, his soul goes out, that it may leave
him unsensible of his sin, and not trouble him in his corrupt bargain; and in
a corrupt giver, ambitious of preferment, his soul goes out with his money,
which he loves well, but not so well as his preferment: This year his soul
and his money goes out upon one office, and next year, more soul, and more
money upon another; He knows how his money will come in again; for they will
bring it, that have need of his corruptnesse in his offices; But where will
this man find his soul, thus scattered upon every woman corruptly won, upon
every office corruptly usurped, upon every quillet corruptly bought, upon every
fee corruptly taken?

Thus it is, when a soul is scattered upon the daily practice of any one
predominant, and habitual sin; but when it is indifferently scattered upon
all, how much more is it so? In him, that swallows sins in the world, as he
would do meats at a feast; passes through every dish, and never asks
Physician the nature, the quality, the danger, the offense of any dish: That
baits at every sin that rises, and poures himself into every sinful mold he
meets: That knows not when he began to spend his soul, nor where, nor upon
what sin he laid it out; no, nor whether he have, whether ever he had any
soul, or no; but has lost his soul so long ago, in rusty, and in incoherent
sins, (not sins that produced one another, as in David's case (and yet that is a
fearful state, that concatenation of sins, that pedigree of sins) but in sins
which he embraces, merely out of an easiness to sin, and not out of a love,
no, nor out of a tentation to that sin in particular) that in these incoherent
sins has so scattered his soul, as that he has not soul enough left, to
seek out the rest. And therefore David makes it the Title of the whole Psalm,
Domine ne disperdas, O Lord do not scatter us: Psalm. 58.
And he begins to express his sense of Gods Judgments, in the next Psalm,
so, O Lord thou have cast us out, thou have scattered us, turn again unto us;
for even from this aversion, there may be conversion, and from this last and
lowest fall, a resurrection. But how?

In the general resurrection upon natural death, God shall work upon this
dispersion of our scattered dust, as in the first fall, which is the Divorce,
by way of Reunion, and in the second, which is Putrefaction, by way of
Re-efformation; so in this third, which is Dispersion, by way of Re-collection;
where man's buried flesh has brought forth grass, and that grass fed beasts,
and those beasts fed men, and those men fed other men, God that knows in which
Box of his Cabinet all this seed Pearl lies, in what corner of the world
every atome, every grain of every man's dust sleeps, shall recollect that dust,
and then recompact that body, and then re-inanimate that man, and that is the
accomplishment of all.

In this resurrection, from this Dilpersion and scattering in sin, the way is
by Recollection too: That this sinner recollect himself, and his own history,
his own annalls, his own journalls, and call to mind where he lost his way,
and with what tenderness of conscience, and holy startling he entered into some
sins at first, in which he is seared up now, and whereas his triumph should
have been, in a victory over the flesh, he is come to a triumph in his victory
over the spirit of God, and glories in having overcome the Holy Ghost, and
brought his conscience to an unsensiblenesse of sin: If he can recollect
himself thus, and cast up his account so, If he can say to God, Lord, we have
sold our selves for nothing, he shall hear God say to him, as he does there in
the Prophet, You have sold your selves for nothing, Esaias 52.3.
and you shall be redeemed without money. But how is this recollecting wrought?

God has intimated the way, Ezekiel. 37.
in that vision to the Prophet Ezekiel: He brings the Prophet into a field of
dead bones, and dry bones, sicca vehementer, (as it is said there) as dry as
this dust which we speak of: And he asks him, fili hominis, thou that art but
the son of man, and must judge humanely, Putasne vivent ossa ista? Do thou
think that these bones can live? The Prophet answers, Domine tu nosti, thou
Lord, who know whose names are written in the Book of Life, and whose are
not; whose bones are wrapped up in the Decree of thy Election, and whose are
not, know whether these bones can live, or no; for, but in the efficacy and
power of that Decree, they cannot. Yes, they shall, says God Almighty; and
they shall live by this means, Dices eis, Thou shall say unto them, O ye dry
bones, hear the word of the Lord: As dry, as desperate, as irremediable as
they are in themselves, God shall send his servants unto them, and they shall
hear them: And, as it is added in that place, Prophetante me, factus sonitus,
and commotio, As I Prophesied, there was a noise and a shaking; As whilst Peter
spoke, The Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the word; So whilst the
Messengers of God speak in the presence of such sinners, there shall be a
noise, and a commotion, a horror of their former sins, a wonder how they could
provoke so patient, and so powerful a God, a sinking down under the weight of
Gods Judgments, a flying up to the apprehension of his mercies, and this noise
and commotion in their souls, shall be settled with that Gospel in that
Prophet, Dabo super vos nervos, I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up
flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath into you, and you shall
live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; God shall restore them to life, and
more, to strength, and more, to beauty, and comeliness, acceptable to himself
in Christ Jesus.

Your way is Recollecting; gather your selves into the Congregation, and
Communion of Saints in these places; gather your sins into your memory, and
pour them out in humble confessions, to that God, whom they have wounded;
Gather the crummes under his Table, lay hold upon the gracious promises, which
by our Ministry he lets fall upon the Congregation now; and gather the seals
of those promises, whenever, in a rectified conscience, his Spirit bears
witness with your spirit, that you may be worthy receivers of him in his
Sacrament; and this recollecting shall be your resurrection.

Beatus qui habet partem, Ap^^ 20.6
says S. John, Blessed is he that has part in the first Resurrection, for on
such the second death has no power. He that rises to this Judgment of
recollecting, and of judging himself, shall rise with a cheerfulness, and
stand with a confidence, when Christ Jesus shall come in the second: Au^
And, Quando exacturus est in secundo, quod dedit in primo, when Christ shall
call for an account, in that second judgment, how he has husbanded those
graces, which he gave him; for the first, he shall make his possession of this
first resurrection, his title, and his evidence to the second. When thy body,
which has been subject to all kinds of destruction here; to the destruction
of a Flood, in Catarrhs, and Rheums, and Dropsies, and such distillations, to
the destruction of a fire, in Fevers, and Frenzies, and such conflagrations,
shall be removed safely and gloriously above all such distempers, and malignant
impressions, and body and soul so united, as if both were one spirit in it
self, and God so united to both, as that thou shall be the same spirit with
God. God began the first World, but upon two, Adam and Eve: The second world,
after the Flood, he began upon a greater stock, upon eight reserved in the
Arc; But when he establishes the last and everlasting world in the last
Resurrection, he shall admit such a number, as that none of us who are here
now, none that is, or has, or shall be upon the face of the earth, shall be
denied in that Resurrection, if he have truly felt this; for Grace accepted, is
the infallible earnest of Glory.

SERMON XXII. Preached at S. Paul's, upon Easter Day. 1627.
HEB. 11.35. Women received their dead raised to life again: And others were
tortured, not accepting a deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection.


MErcy is Gods right hand, with that God gives all; Faith is man's right hand,
with that man takes all. David, Psalm. 136. opens, and enlarges this right hand
of God, in pouring out his blessings, plentifully, abundantly, manifoldly
there. And in this Chapter, the Apostle opens, and enlarges this right hand of
man, by laying hold upon those mercies of God, plentifully, abundantly,
manifoldly, by faith here. There, David powers down the mercies. of God, in
repeating, and re-repeating that phrase, For his mercy endures for ever; And
here, S. Paul carries up man to heaven, by repeating, and re-repeating the
blessings which man has attained by faith; By faith Abel sacrificed, By faith
Enoch walked with God, By faith Noah built an Arc, etc. And as in that Psalm,
Gods mercies are expressed two ways, First in the good that God did for his
servants, He remembered them in their low estate, Ver 23. Ver. 24.
for his mercy endures for ever: And then again, He redeemed them from their
enemies, for his mercy endures for ever: And then also, in the evil that he
brought upon their enemies, He slew famous Kings, for his mercy endures for
ever: And then, He gave their land for an heritage, for his mercy endures for
ever. So in this Chapter, the Apostle declares the benefits of faith, two ways
also: First, how faith enriches us, and accommodates us in the ways of
prosperity, By faith Abraham went to a place which he received for an
inheritance: And so, By faith Sarah received strength to conceive seed: Ver. 8.
Ver. 11. Ver. 34.
And then, how faith sustaines, and establishes us in the ways of adversity,
By faith they stopped the mouths of Lions, by faith they quenched the violence of
fire, by faith they escaped the edge of the sword, in the verse immediately
before the Text. And in this verse, which is our Text, the Apostle has
collected both; The benefits which they received by faith, Women received their
dead raised to life again, And then, the holy courage which was infused by
Faith, in their persecutions, Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance,
that they might receive a better Resurrection. And because both these have
relation, evidently, pregnantly to the Resurrection, (for their benefit was,
that the Women received their dead by a Resurrection, And their courage in
their persecution was, That they should receive a better Resurrection)
therefore the whole meditation is proper to this day, in which we celebrate
all Resurrections in the Root, in the Resurrection of the First fruits of the
dead, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

Our Parts are two; How plentifully God gives to the faithful, Divisio.
Women receive their dead raised to life again, And how patiently the
faithful suffer Gods corrections, Others were tortured not accepting, etc.
Though they be both large considerations, (Benefits by Faith, Patience in the
Faithful) yet we shall contain our selves in those particulars which are
expressed, or necessarily employed in the Text it self. And so in the first place
we shall see first, The extraordinary consolation in Gods extraordinary
Mercies, in his miraculous Deliverances, such as this, Women received their
dead raised to life again, And secondly we shall seethe examples, to which the
Apostle refers here, What women had had their dead restored to life again; And
then, lastly, in that part, That this affection of joy, in having their dead
restored to life again, being put in the weaker sex, in women only, we may
argue conveniently from thence, That the strength of a true and just joy lies
not in that, but that our virility, our holy manhood, our religious strength
consists in a faithful assurance, that we have already a blessed communion
with these Saints of God, though they be dead, and we alive; And that we shall
have hereafter a glorious Association with them in the Resurrection, though we
never receive our dead raised to life again in this world. And in those three
considerations, we shall determine that first part. And then, in the other, The
Patience of the Faithful, Others were tortured, etc. we shall first look into
the examples which the Apostle refers to; who they were that were thus
tortured: And secondly, the height and exaltation of their patience, They
would not accept a deliverance: And lastly, the ground upon which their Anchor
was cast, what established their patience, That they might obtain a better
Resurrection.

First then, 1 Part.
for that Blessedness, which we need not be afraid, nor abstain from calling
the Recompense, the Reward, the Retribution of the faithful, (for as we
consider Death to grow out of Disobedience, and Life out of Obedience to the
Law, as properly as Death is the wages of sin, Life is the wages of
Righteousness) If I be asked, what it is wherein this Recompense, this Reward,
this Retribution consists, if I must be put to my Special Plea, I must say it
is, in that of the Apostle, Omnia cooperantur in bonum, That nothing can befall
the faithful, that does not conduce to his good, and advance his happiness:
For he shall not only find S. Paul's Mori lucrum, That he shall be the better
for dying, if he must dye; but he shall find S. Augustines Vtile cadere, He
shall be the better for sinning, if he have sinned; So the better, as that by a
repentance after that sin, he shall find himself established in a nearer, and
safer distance with God, then he was in that security, which he had before that
sin. But the Title, and the Plea of the faithful to this Recompense, extends
farther then so; It is not only, that nothing, how evil soever in the nature
thereof, shall be evil to them; but that all that is Good, is theirs; properly
theirs, Psalm. 34.9.
theirs peculiarly. There is no want to them that fear the Lord, says David;
The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord,
shall not want any good thing.

The Infidel has no pretense upon the next world, none at all; No nor so
clear a Title to any thing in this world, but that we dispute in the School,
whether Infidels have any true dominion, any true propriety in any thing which
they possess here; And whether there be not an inherent right in the
Christians, to plant Christianity in any part of the Dominions of the Infidels,
and consequently, to despoile them even of their possession, if they oppose
such Plantations, so established, and such propagations of the Christian
Religion. For though we may not begin at the dispossessing, and displanting of
the native and natural Inhabitant, (for so we proceed but as men against men,
and upon such equal terms, we have no right to take any men's possessions from
them) yet, when pursuing that Right, which resides in the Christian, we have
established such a Plantation, if they supplant that, we may supplant them, say
our Schools, and our Casuists; For in that case, we proceed not as men against
men; not by Gods Common Law, which is equal to all men; that is, the Law of
Nature; but we proceed by his higher Law, by his Prerogative, as Christians
against Infidels, and then, it is God that proceeds against them, by men, and
not those men, of themselves, to serve their own Ambitions, or their other
secular ends. 1 Cor. 3.20.
All things are yours, says the Apostle; By what Right? You are Christ's, says
he, And Christ is Gods; Thus is a Title convayed to us, All things are Gods,
God has put all things under Christ's feet; And he under ours, as we are
Christians. And then, as the general profession of Christ, entitles us to a
general Title of the world, (for the World belongs to the Faithful; and
Christians, as Christians, and no more, are Fideles, Faithful in respect of
Infidels) so those Christians that come to that more particular, more active,
more operative faith, which the Apostle speaks of in all this Chapter, come
also to a more particular reward, and recompense, and retribution at Gods
hands; God does not only give them the natural blessings of this World, to
which they have an inherent right, as they are general Christians, but as they
are thus faithful Christians, he gives them supernatural blessings, he
enlarges himself even to Miracles, in their behalf; Which is a second
consideration; First God opens himself in nature, and temporal blessings, to
the general Christian, but to the Faithful, in Grace, exalted even to the
height of Miracle.

In this, we consider first, That there is nothing dearer to God then a
Miracle. Miracula.
There is nothing that God has established in a constant course of nature, and
which therefore is done every day, but would seem a Miracle, and exercise our
admiration, if it were done but once; Nay, the ordinary things in Nature, would
be greater miracles, then the extraordinary, which we admire most, if they were
done but once; The standing still of the Sun, for Iosuahs use, was not, in it
self, so wonderful a thing, as that so vast and immense a body as the Sun,
should run so many miles, in a minute; The motion of the Sun were a greater
wonder then the standing still, if all were to begin again; And only the
daily doing takes off the admiration. But then God having, as it were,
concluded himself in a course of nature, and written down in the book of
Creatures, Thus and thus all things shall be carried, though he glorify
himself sometimes, in doing a miracle, yet there is in every miracle, a silent
chiding of the world, and a tacit reprehension of them, who require, or who
need miracles.

Therefore has God reserved to himself the power of Miracles, as a
Prerogative; For the devil does no miracles; the devil and his instruments,
do but hasten Nature, or hinder nature, antedate Nature, or postdate Nature,
bring things sooner to pass, or retarde them; And howsoever they pretend to
oppose nature, yet still it is but upon nature, and but by natural means,
that they work; only God shakes the whole frame of Nature in pieces, and in a
miracle, proceeds so, as if there were no Creation yet accomplished, no course
of Nature yet established. Facit mirabilia magnasolus, says David; Psalm. 136.4.
There are Mirabilia parva, some lesser wonders, that the devil and his
Instruments, Pharaohs Sorcerers, can do; But when it comes to Mirabilia magna,
Great wonders, so great, as that they amount to the nature of a Miracle, Facit
solus, God, and God only does them. And amongst these, and amongst the
greatest of these, is the raising of the Dead, and therefore we make it a
particular consideration, the extraordinary Joy in that case, when Women
received their dead raised to life again.

We know the dishonor, and the infamy that lay upon barrenness, among the
Jews; Mortui.
how wives deplored, and lamented that. When God is pleased to take away that
impediment of barrenness, and to give children, we know the misery, and
desolation of orbity, when Parents are deprived of those children, by death;
And by the measure of that sorrow, which follows barrenness, or orbitie, we
may proportion that joy, which accompanies Gods miraculous blessings, when
Women receive their dead naised to life again. In all the secular, and
profane Writers in the world, in the whole body of Story, you shall not find
such an expressing of the misery of a famine, as that of the Holy Ghost in the
Lamentations; That women eat Palmares silios; We translate it, Lament. 2.20.
Their children of a span long; that is, that they procured abortions and
untimely births of those children, which were in their bodies, that they might
have so much flesh to eat. As that is proposed for the greatest misery, that
ever was, women to destroy their children so, so is this for the highest
accumulation of Joy, to have dead children brought to life again. When we
hear S. Augustine in his Confessions, lament so passionately the death of his
Son, and insist so affectionately, upon the Pregnancie, and Forwardness of
that Son; though that Son if he had lived, must have lived a continual
evidence, and monument of his sin, (for, for all his Son, S. Augustine was no
married man) yet what may we think, S. Augustine would have given, though it
had been to have been cut out of his own life, to have had that Son restored
to life again? Measure it but by the Joy, which we have, in recovering a sick
child, from the hands, and jaws, and gates of death; Measure it but by that
delight which we have, when we see our Garden recovered from the death of
Winter. Men's curiosities have carried them to unlawful desires of
communication with the Dead; as in Saul's case toward Samuel. But if with a
good conscience, and without that horror, which is likely to accompany such a
communication with the Dead, a man might have the conversation of a friend,
that had been dead, and had seen the other World; As Dives thought no Preacher
so powerful to work upon his Brethren, as one sent from the Dead, so
certainly all the Travailers in the World, if we could hear them all, all the
Libraries in the world, if we could read them all, could not tell us so much,
as that friend, returned from the dead, which had seen the other World.

But wayving that consideration, because as we know not, what kind of
remembrance of this world, God leaves us in the next, when he translates us
thither, so neither do we know, what kind of remembrance of that world, God
would leave in that man, whom he should re-translate into this, we fix only
upon the examples intended in our Text, who these joyful Women were, that
received their Dead raised to life again, which is our second Branch of this
first part; for with those three considerations, which constituted our first
Branch, we have done, That God gives us this World, as we are general
Christians; And, as we are Faithful Christians, Miracles; And, the greatest of
Miracles, The raising of the Dead.

In the second Branch, Mulieres.
we have two Considerations; first, what kind of Women these were, and then,
who they were; first, their Qualities, and then, their Persons. We have
occasion to stop upon the first, because Aquinas in his Exposition of this
Text, tells us, there are some Expositors, who take this word, Women, in this
place, to be intended, not of Mothers, but of Wives; And then, because the
Apostle says here, that Women received their dead, that is, say they, Wives
received their dead Husbands, raised to life again, and received them, as
Husbands, that is, cohabited with them as Husbands, therefore they conclude,
says Aquinas, that Death it self does not dissolve the band of Marriage; and
consequently, that all other Marriages, all super-inductions, even after Death,
are unlawful. Let me say but one word, of the Word, and a word or two of the
Matter it self, and I shall pass to the other Consideration, The Women whom
the Apostle proposes for his examples.

The word, Vxores.
Women, taken alone, signifies the whole sex, women in general, When it is
contracted to a particular signification, in any Author, it follows the
circumstances, and the coherence of that place, in that Author; and by those a
man shall easily discern, of what kind of Women, that word is intended in
that place. In this place, the Apostle works upon his Brethren, the Hebrews, by
such examples, as were within their own knowledge, and their own stories,
throughout all this Chapter. And in those stories of theirs, we have no
example, of any Wife, that had her dead Husband restored to her; but of Mothers
that had their Children raised to life, we have. So that this word, Women, must
signify here, Mothers, and not Wives, as Aquinas Expositors mis-imagined.

And for the matter it self, Nuptiae iteratae.
that is, second or oftner-iterated Marriages, the dis-approving of them,
entered very soon into some Heretics, in the Primitive Church. For the eighth
Canon of that great Council of Nice, (which is one of the indubitable Canons)
forbids, by name, Catharos, The Puritanes of those Times, to be received by the
Church, except they would be content to receive the Sacrament with persons that
had been twice married; which, before they would not do. It entered soon into
some Heretics, and it entered soon, and went far, in some holy and reverent
Men, and some Assemblies, that had, and had justly, the name, and form of
Councels. For, in the Council of Neo-Caesarea, which was before the Nicen
Council, in the seventh Canon, there are somewhat shrewd aspersions laid upon
second Marriages. And certainly, the Roman Church cannot be denied, to come too
near this dis-approving of second Marriages. For though they will not speak
plain, (they love not that, because they get more by keeping things in
suspense) yet plainly they forbid the Benediction at second Marriages. Valeat
quantnm valere potest; Let them do as well as they can, with their second
Marriage, Let them marry De been esse, At all adventures; but they will
afford no Blessing to a second, as to a first Marriage. And though they will
not shut the Church doors against all such, yet they will shut up all Church
functions against all such. No such Person as has married twice, or married
once, one that has married twice, can be received to the dignity of Orders, in
their Church.

And though some of the Fathers pared somewhat too near the quick in this
point, yet it was not as in the Roman Church, to lay snares, and spread nets
for gain, and profit, and to forbid only therefore, that they might have market
for their Dispensations; neither was it to fix, and appropriate sanctity, only
in Ecclesiastical persons, who only must not marry twice, but out of a tender
sense, and earnest love to Continency, and out of a holy indignation, that men
tumbled and wallowed so licentiously, so promiscuously, so indifferently, so
inconsiderately in all ways of incontinency, those blessed Fathers admitted in
themselves a super-zealous, an over-vehement animosity in this point. But yet
S. Jerome himself, though he remember with a holy scorn, Ep. ad Agers. chiam.
that when he was at Rome in the assistance of Pope Damasus (as his word is,
Cum juvarem) he saw a man that had buried twenty wives, marry a wife, that
buried twenty two husbands, Apolog. ad Pamnach.
yet for the matter, and in seriousness, he says plainly enough, Non damno
Bigamos, imo nec Trigamos, nec si dici potest octogamos, I condemn no man for
marrying two, or three, or if he have a mind to it, eight wives. And so also
in his former Epistle, Abjicimus de Ecclesia Digamos? absit; God forbid we
should deny any Church assistance to any, for twice marrying; but yet, says
that blessed Father, Monogamos ad continentiam provocamus; Let me have leave to
persuade them who have been married, and are at liberty, to continency, now at
last.

Those Fathers departed not from the Apostles Nubat in Domino, Let them marry
in the Lord; but they would fain bring the Lord to the making of every
marriage, and not only the world, and worldly respects. For the Lord himself,
who honored marriage, even with the first fruits of his miracles, yet
persuades continency, Mat. 19.22.
He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. The fault which those
Fathers did, and we may reprehend, is, that men do not try whether they be able
to receive it or no; In all Treaties of marriage, in all Contracts for Portion,
and Jointure, who ever ask their children, who ever ask themselves, whether
they can live continently or no? Or what trial, what experiment can have been
made of this, in Cradle-marriages? Marriage was given for a remedy; but not
before any appearance of a danger. And given for Physic, but not before any
appearance of a disease. And do any Parents lay up a medicine against the
falling sickness, for their newborn children, because those children may have
the falling sickness? The peace of neighboring States, the uniting of great
Families for good ends, may present just occasions of departing from severe
rules. I only intend, as I take most of those Fathers to have done, to leave
all persons to their Christian liberty, as the Lord has done; and yet, as the
Lord has done too, to persuade them to consider themselves, and those who are
theirs, how far they need the use of that Liberty, and not to exceed that. And
thus much Aquinas Expositors, who would needs understand the Women in this
Text, to be Wives, have occasioned us to say in this point. In our order
proposed, we pass now to the other consideration, who these women were whom
the Apostle makes his Examples, for they are but two, and may soon be
considered.

The first is the Widow of Zareptha, in whose house Elias the Prophet
sojourned. 1 King. 17.
She was a Widow, and a poor Widow, and might need the labor, or the
providence of a husband in that respect: Yet she solicites not, nor Elias
endeavors not the raising of her dead husband to life again. A Widow, that
is, A Widow indeed, 1 Timothy 5.3.
(as the Apostle speaks) may have in that state of such a Widowhood, more
assistances toward the next world, then she should have for this, by taking
another husband. For, for that Widow, Quae in tumulo mariti, sepeliit
voluptates, Who has buried all her affections toward this world, in her
husbands grave, the Apostle in that place, ordaines honor, Hieron.
Honor Widows, that are Widows indeed. And when he says Honor, and speaks of
poor Widows, he speaks not of such honor as such poor souls are incapable
of, but of that Honor, which that word signifies ordinarily in the Scriptures,
Qui non tam in salutationibus, quam in elecmosynis, says S. Chrysostom, which
rather consists in Alms, and Relief, then in Salutations, and Reverences, or
such respects. For so (as S. Jerome notes in particular) when we are commanded
to honor our Parents, it is intended we should relieve and maintain our
Parents, if they be decayed. And such honor the Apostle persuades to be given,
and such honor God will provide, that is, Peace in the possession of their
estate, if they have any estate; and relief from others, if they have none,
for Widows, that are Widows indeed.

In which qualification of theirs, that they be Widows indeed, Ver. 9.
we may well take in that addition which the Apostle makes, That she have been
the wise of one man. For though we make not that an only, or an essential
Character of a Widow indeed, to have had but one husband, yet we note, as
Calvin does, that the Church received Widows, in years, therefore, Quia
timendum er at, ne ad novas nuptias aspirarent, because the Church feared that
they would marry again. And certainly, if the Church feared they would, the
Church had rather they would not. It is (as Calvin adds there) Pignus
continentiae, and pudoris (though Calvin were no man to be suspected, to
countenance the perverseness of the Roman Church, in defaming, or undervaluing
marriage. yet he says so) it is a good Pawn, and Evidence of Continency, to
have rested in one husband.

This Widow of Zareptha then, importunes not the Prophet to restore her dead
husband; She bears her widows estate well enough; but for her dead Son she
does importune him; in the agony and vehemence of a Passion, she says, at her
first encounter with the Prophet, V. 18.
Quid mihi, and tibi? What have I to do with thee? She does almost renounce
the means; In irregular passion, a disconsolate soul comes to say, what have I
to do with Prayers, with Sermons, with Sacraments, I see that God has forsaken
me: but yet she collects her self; What have I to do with thee, O thou man of
God? When she confesses him to be the man of God, she does not renounce him;
When we consider the means, to be means ordained by God, we find comfort in
them. Yet she cannot contain the bitterness of her passion; Art thou come unto
me, to call my sin to remembrance, and to kill my Son? She implies thus much;
Shall my soul never be at peace? Shall no repentance from my heart, no
absolution from thy mouth, make me sure that God has forgiven and forgotten my
sins? But when I have received all Seals of Reconciliation, will God still
punish those sins which he pretends to have forgiven, and punish them with so
high a hand, as the taking away of my only Child? And we may see an exaltation
of this woman's passion, not only in the loss, but in the recovery of her
child too. For when she had received her child alive, she comes to that
passionate acclamation, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that
the word of the Lord in thy mouth, is truth; V. 14.
As though, if this had not been done, she would not have believed that.

How then says our Apostle in this Text, That this woman received her dead Son
by faith, when she declares this inordinatenesse, this dis-composednesse, and
fluctuation of passion? This question made S. Chrysostom refer this faith that
the Apostle speaks of, to the Prophet that raised the child, and not to the
mother; For she seems to him to have had none. And so the Syriack translates
this place, Reddiderunt, not Acceperunt; By faith, They, that is, the Prophets
restored the dead, not By faith, They, that is, the mothers received their dead.

But God forbid that natural affections, even in an exaltation, and vehement
expressing thereof, should be thought to destroy faith; God forbid that I
should conclude an extermination of faith, in Moses Dele me, Pardon this
people, or blot my name out of thy Book; or in S. Paul's Anathema pro fratribus,
That he desired to be separated from Christ, rather then his brethren should;
or in Job, or in Jeremy, or in Jonas, when they expostulate, and chide with God
himself, out of a weariness of their lives; or in the Lord of Life himself,
Christ Jesus, when he came to an Vt quid dereliquisti? To an apprehension that
God had forsaken him upon the Cross. God that could restore her cold child,
could keep his child, her faith, alive in those hot embers of Passion. So God
did; But he did it thus; The child was taken from the mothers warm and soft
bosom, and carried to the Prophets hard and cold bed.

Beloved, we die in our delicacies, and revive not, but in afflictions; In
abundancies, the blow of death meets us, and the breath of life, in misery, and
tribulation. God puts himself to the cost of one of his greatest Miracles, for
her Faith; He raises her child to life; And then, he makes up his own work; he
continues with that child, and makes him a good man; There are men, whom, even
Miracles will not improve; but this child (we will not dispute it, Pro^^m. in
Ionam.
but accept it from S. Jerome, who relates it) became a Prophet. It was that
very Jonas, whom God employed to Ninive; in which Service, he gave some signs
whose Son he was, and how much of his mothers passion he inherited in his
vehement expostulations with God. Be this then our doctrinall instruction for
this first example, the Widow of Zareptha; first, that God thinks nothing too
dear for his faithful Children; not his great Treasure, not his Miracles; And
then God preserves this faith of theirs, in contemplation of which only, he
bestows this Treasure, this Miracle, in the midst of the storms of natural
affections, and the tempest of distempered passions; and then lastly, that he
proceeds, and goes on in his own goodness; Here he makes a Carcass a Man, and
then that man a Prophet; Every day he makes a dead soul, a soul again, and then
that soul, a Saint.

The other example in this point, is that Shunamite, 2 Reg. 4.
whose dead son Elisha restored to life. In the beginning of that Chapter, you
hear of another Widow; A certain woman, of the wives of the sons of the
Prophets, cried unto Elisha, Thy servant my husband is dead; And truly a Widow
of one of the sons of the Prophets, a Church-mans Widow, was like enough, to be
poor enough; And yet, the Prophet does not turn upon that way, either to
restore her dead husband, or to provide her another husband; but only enquires
how she was left; and finding her in poor estate, and in debt, provides her
means to pay her debts, and to bring up her children, and to that purpose,
procures a miracle from God, in the abundant increase of her oil; but he
troubles not God for her old, or for a new husband. But our example, to which
the Apostle in our Text referres himself, is not this Widow in the beginning,
but that Mother, in the body of the Chapter, who having, by Elisha's prayers,
obtained a Son of God, after she was past hope, and that Son being dead in her
lap, in her also, (as in the former example) we may consider, how Passion and
Faith may consist together: She asks her husband leave, V. 22.
That she might run to the Prophet; her zeal, her passionate zeal hastened
her, she would run, but not without her husbands leave.

As S. Jerome forbids a Lady, to suffer her daughter, to go to what Churches
she would, so may there be indiscretion at least, to suffer wives to go to
what meetings (though holy Convocations) they will; she does not harbor in her
house, a person dangerous to the Public State, or to her husbands private
state, nor a person likely to solicit her chastity, though in a Prophets name;
We may find women, that may have occasion of going to Confession, for
something that their Confessors may have done to them. In this woman's case,
there was no disguise; She would feign go, and run; but not without her
husbands knowledge, and allowance.

Her husband asks her, Why she would go to the Prophet, then, being neither
Sabbath, V. 23.
nor new Moon? He acknowledges, that God is likelier to confer blessings
upon Sabbaths, and new Moons, upon some days, rather then other; That all
days are not alike with God, then, when he, by his ordinance, has put a
difference between them. And he acknowledges too, that though the Sabbath be
the principal of those days which God has seposed for his especial working,
yet there are new Moons too; there are other Holy Days, for holy
Convocations, and for his Divine and Public Worship, besides the Sabbath. But
this was neither Sabbath, nor new Moon, neither Sunday, nor Holy Day; Why
would she go upon that day? Beloved, though for public meetings, in public
places, the Sabbaths, and Holy Days be the proper days, yet for conference,
and counsel, and other assistances from the Prophets, and Ministers of God,
all times are seasonable, all days are Sabbaths.

She goes to the Prophet; she presses with so much passion, and so much faith
too, and so good success, (for she had her dead son restored unto her) that as
from the other, so from this example arises this, That in a heart absolutely
surrendered to God, vehement expostulation with God, and yet full submission to
God, and a quiet acquiescence in God; A storm of affections in nature, and yet
a settled calm, and a fast anchorage in grace, a suspicion, and a jealousy,
and yet an assurance, and a confidence in God, may well consist together: In
the same instant that Christ said, Si possibile, he said Veruntamen too; though
he desired that that cup might pass, yet he desired not, that his desire
should be satisfied. In the same instant that the Martyrs under the Altar say,
Vsque quo Domine, How long Lord before thou execute judgment? they see, that
he does execute judgment every day, in their behalf. All jealousy in God,
does not destroy our assurance in him; nor all diffidence, our confidence; nor
all fear, our faith. These women had these natural weaknesses, that is, this
strength of affections, and passions, and yet by this faith, these women
received their dead, raised to life again.

But yet, (which is a last consideration, Foeminile.
and our conclusion of this part) this being thus put only in women, in the
weaker sex, that they desired, that they rejoiced in this resuscitation of the
dead, may well intimate thus much unto us, that our virility, our holy manhood,
our true and religious strength, consists in the assurance, that though death
have divided us, and though we never receive our dead raised to life again in
this world, yet we do live together already, in a holy Communion of Saints, and
shall live together for ever, hereafter, in a glorious Resurrection of bodies.
Little know we, how little a way a soul has to go to heaven, when it departs
from the body; Whether it must pass locally, through Moon, and Sun, and
Firmament, (and if all that must be done, all that may be done, in less time
then I have proposed the doubt in) or whether that soul find new light in the
same room, and be not carried into any other, but that the glory of heaven be
diffused over all, I know not, I dispute not, I inquire not. Without disputing,
or inquiring, I know, that when Christ says, That God is not the God of the
dead, he says that to assure me, that those whom I call dead, are alive. And
when the Apostle tells me, That God is not ashamed to be called the God of the
dead, Heb. 11.16.
he tells me that to assure me, That Gods servants lose nothing by dying.

He was but a Heathen that said, Menander. Thraces.
If God love a man, Iuvenis tollitur, He takes him young out of this world; And
they were but Heathens, that observed that custom, To put on mourning when
their sons were born, and to feast and triumph when they dyed. But thus much we
may learn from these Heathens, That if the dead, and we, be not upon one
floor, nor under one story, yet we are under one roof. We think not a friend
lost, because he is gone into another room, nor because he is gone into
another Land; And into another world, no man is gone; for that Heaven, which
God created, and this world, is all one world. If I had fixed a Son in Court, or
married a daughter into a plentiful Fortune, I were satisfied for that son and
that daughter. Shall I not be so, when the King of Heaven has taken that son
to himself, and married himself to that daughter, for ever? I spend none of my
Faith, I exercise none of my Hope, in this, that I shall have my dead raised to
life again.

This is the faith that sustaines me, when I lose by the death of others, or
when I suffer by living in misery my self, That the dead, and we, are now all
in one Church, and at the resurrection, shall be all in one Quire. But that is
the resurrection which belongs to our other part; That resurrection which we
have handled, though it were a resurrection from death, yet it was to death
too; for those that were raised again, died again. But the Resurrection which
we are to speak of, is forever; They that rise then, shall see death no more,
for it is (says our Text) A better Resurrection.

That which we did in the other part, 2 Part.
in the last branch thereof, in this part we shall do in the first; First we
shall consider the examples, from which the Apostle deduceth this
encouragement, and faithful constancy, upon those Hebrews, to whom he directs
this Epistle. Though, as he says in the beginning of the next Chapter, he were
compassed about with a Cloud of witnesses, and so might have proposed examples
from the Authenticke Scriptures, and the Histories of the Bible, yet we accept
that direction, which our Translators have given us, in the Marginall
Concordance of their Translation, That the Apostle, in this Text, intends, and
so referres to that Story, which is 2 Maccab. 7.7. To that Story also does
Aquinas refer this place; But Aquinas may have had a mind, to do that
service to the Roman Church, to make the Apostle cite an Apocryphal Story,
though the Apostle meant it not. It may be so in Aquinas; He might have such a
mind, such a meaning. But surely Beza had no such meaning, Calvin had no such
mind; and yet both Calvin, and Beza refer this Text to that Story. Though it
be said, says Calvin, that Jeremy was stoned to death, and Esaias sawed to
death, Non dubito, quin illas persecutiones designet, quae sub Antiocho, I
doubt not, says he, but that the Apostle intends those persecutions, which the
Maccabees suffered under Antiochus.

So then, there may be good use made of an Apocryphal Book. It always was,
and always will be impossible, for our adversaries of the Roman Church, to
establish that, which they have so long endeavored, that is, to make the
Apocryphal Books equal to the Canonical. It is true, that before there was
any occasion of jealousy, or suspicion, that there would be new Articles of
faith coined, and those new Articles authorized, and countenanced out of the
Apocryphal Books, the blessed Fathers in the Primitive Church, afforded
honorable names, and made fair and noble mention of those Books. So they have
called them Sacred; and more then that, Divine; and more then that too,
Canonical Books; and more then all that, by the general name of Scripture,
and Holy Writ. But the Holy Ghost, who foresaw the danger, though those
blessed Fathers themselves did not, has shed, and dropped, even in their
writings, many evidences, to prove, in what sense they called those Books by
those names, and in what distance they always held them, from those Books,
which are purely, and positively, and to all purposes, and in all senses,
Sacred, and Divine, and Canonical, and simply Scripture, and simply, Holy Writ.

Of this there is no doubt in the Fathers before S. Augustine: For all they
proposed these Books, as Canones morum, non sidei, Canonical, that is,
Regular, for applying our manners, and conversation to the Articles of Faith;
but not Canonical, for the establishing those Articles; Canonical for
edification, but not for foundation. And even in the later Roman Church, we
have a good Author that gives us a good rule, Caje^an.
Ne turberis Novitie, Let no young Student be troubled, when he hears these
Books, by some of the Fathers, called Canonical, for, they are so, says he,
in their sense, Regulares ad aedificationem, Good Canons, good Rules for matter
of manners, and conversation. And this distinction, says that Author, will
serve to rectify, not only what the Fathers before S. Augustine, (for they
speak clearly enough) but what S. Augustine himself, and some Councels have
said of this matter. But yet, this difference gives no occasion to an
elimination, to an extermination of these Books, which we call Apocryphal. And
therefore, when in a late foreign Synod, that Nation, where that Synod was
gathered, would needs dispute, whether the Apocryphal Books should not be
utterly left out of the Bible; And, not effecting that, yet determined, that
those Books should be removed from their old place, where they had ever stood,
that is, after the Books of the Old Testament, Exteri se excusari petierunt,
Sessio 10.
(say the Acts of that Synod) Those that came to that Synod, from other places,
desire to be excused, from assenting to the displacing of those Apocryphal
Books. For, in that place, (as we see by Athanasius) they prescribe; For,
though they be not Canonical, says he, yet they are Ejusdem veteris
Instrumenti libri, Books that belong to the Old Testament, that is, (at least)
to the elucidation, and clearing of many places in the Old Testament. And that
the Ancient Fathers thought these Books worthy of their particular
consideration, must necessarily be more then evident to him that reads S.
Chrysostomes Homily, or Leo his Sermon upon this very part of that Book of the
Maccab: to which the Apostle refers in this Text; that is, to that which the
seven Brethren there, suffered for a better Resurrection. And if we take in the
testimony of the Reformation, diverse great and learned men, have interpreted
these Books, by their particular Commentaries. Osyander has done so, and done
it, with a protestation, that diverse great Divines entreated him to do it.
Conrad: Pellicanus has done so too; Who, lest these Books should seem to be
undervalued, in the name of Apocryphal, says, that it is fitter to call them
Libros Ecclesiasticos, rather Ecclesiastical, then Apocryphal Books. And of
the first of these two books of the Maccab: he says freely, Revera, Divini
Spiritus instigatione, No doubt, but the holy Ghost moved some holy man to
write this Book; because, says he, by it, many places of they Prophets are the
better understood, and without that Book, (which is a great addition of
dignity) Ecclesiastica eruditio perfecta non fuisset, The Church had not been
so well enabled, to give perfect instruction in the Ecclesiastical Story.
Therefore he calls it Piissimum Catholicae Ecclesiae institutum, A most holy
Institution of the Catholic Church, that those Books were read in the Church;
And, if that Custom had been every where continued, Non tot errores
increvissent, So many errors had not grown in the Reformed Church, says that
Author. And to descend to practice, at this day we see, that in many Churches
of the Reformation, their Preachers never forbear, to preach upon Texts taken
out of the Apocryphal Books. We discern clearly, and as earnestly we detest
the mischievous purposes of our Adversaries, in magnifying these Apocryphal
Books; It is not, principally, that they would have these Books as good as
Scriptures; but, because they would have Scriptures, no better then these
Books: That so, when it should appear, that these Books were weak books, and
the Scriptures no better then they, their own Traditions might be as good as
either. But, as their impiety is inexcusable, that thus overvalue them, so is
their singularity too, that depresse these books too far; of which, the
Apostle himself makes this use, not to establish Articles of Faith, but to
establish the Hebrews in the Articles of Faith, by examples, deduced from this
Book.

The example then, to which the Apostle leads them, is that Story of a Mother,
and her seven Sons, which in one day suffered death, by exquisite torments,
rather then break that Law of their God, which the King pressed them to break,
though but a Ceremonial Law. Now, as Leo says, in his Sermon upon their day,
(for the Christian Church kept a day, in memory of the Martyredome of these
seven Maccabees, though they were but Jews) Gravant audita, nisi suscipiantur
imitanda; It is a pain to hear the good that others have done, except we have
some desire to imitate them, in doing the like. The Panegyricke said well,
Onerosum est, succederebono Principi; That King, that comes after a good
Predecessor, has a shrewd burden upon him; because all the World can compare
him with the last King; and all the world will look, that he should be as good
a King, as his immediate Predecessor, whom they all remember, was. So Gravant
audita, It will trouble you to hear, what these Maccabees, which S. Paul
speaks of, suffered for the Law of their God, but you are weary of it, and
would be glad we would give over talking of them, except you have a desire to
imitate them. And if you have that, you are glad to hear more, and more of
them; and, from this Apostle here, you may. For he makes two uses of their
example; First, that though they were tortured, they would not accept a
deliverance, And then, that they put on that resolution, That they might
obtain a better Resurrection.

What they suffered, has exercised all our Grammarians, and all our
Philologers, and all our Antiquaries, that have enquired into the Racks, and
Tortures of those times. We translate it roundly, They were tortured. And S.
Paul's word implies a torture of that kind, that their bodies were extended, and
rackt, as upon a drum, and then beaten with staves. What the torture,
intended in that word, was, we know not. But in the Story it self, to which he
refers, in the Maccab: you have all these diverse tortures; Cutting out of
tongues, and cutting off of hands, and feet, and macerating in hot Cauldrons,
and pulling off the skin of their heads, with their hair; And yet they would
not accept a deliverance. Ver. 24.
Was it offered them? Expressly it was. The King promises, and swears to one of
them, that he would make him Rich, and Happy, and his Friend, and trust him
with his affairs, if he would apply himself to his desires; and yet he would
not accept this deliverance. This is that which S. August: says, Sunt qui
patienter moriuntur, There may be many found, that dye without any distemper,
without any impatience, that suffer patiently enough; But then, Sunt qui
patienter vivunt, and delectabiliter moriuntur; There are others, whose life
exercises all their patience, so that it is a pain to them (though they endure
it patiently) to live. But they could dye, not only patiently, but cheerfully;
They are not only content, if they must, but glad if they may dye, when they
may dye so, as that thereby, They may obtain a better Resurrection.

And this was the case of these Martyrs, whom the Apostle here proposes to the
imitation of the Hebrews. They put all upon that issue, A better Resurrection.
So the second Brother says to the King, Ver. 9.
Thou, like a Fury, take us out of this life; but the King of the World,
shall raise us up, who have dyed for his Law, unto everlasting life. Here lay
his hope; That that which dyed, that which could dye, his body, should be
raised again. So the third Brother proceeded; Ver. 11.
He held out his hands, and said, These I had from Heaven; and, for his Laws, I
despise them; and from him, I hope to receive them again. There was his hope; a
restitution of the same hands, in the Resurrection. And so the fourth Brother;
Ver. 14.
It is good, being put to death, by men, to look for hope, from God. Hope of
what? To be raised up again by him; There was his hope. And he thought he
could not speak more bitterly to that Tyran, then to tell him, As for thee,
thou shall have no Resurrection unto life. And so the Mother established her
self too; To her Sons she says, I gave you not life in my womb, Ver. 22.
but doubtless the Creator that did, will, of his mercy, give you life again.
The soul needed not life again, for the soul never dyed; the body that dyed,
Ver. 29.
did; Therefore her hope was in a Resurrection. And to her youngest Son she
said, Be worthy of thy Brethren, Take thy death, that I may receive thee
again, in mercy, with thy Brethren. All their establishment, all their
expectation, all their issue was, That they might obtain a better Resurrection.

Now what was this that they qualified and dignified by that addition, The
better Resurrection? Is it called better, in that it is better then this life,
and determined in that comparison, and degree of betternesse, and no more? Is
it better then those honors, and preferments which that King offered them, and
determined in that comparison, and no more? Or better then other men shall have
at the last day, (for all men shall have a Resurrection) and determined in
that? Or, as S. Chrysostom takes it, is it but a better Resurrection then that
in the former part of this Text, where dead children are restored to their
mothers alive again? Is it but a better Resurrection in some of these senses?
Surely better in a higher sense then any of these; It is a supereminent degree
of glory, a larger measure of glory, then every man, who in a general
happiness, is made partaker of the Resurrection of the righteous, is made
partaker of.

Beloved, There is nothing so little in heaven, as that we can express it; But
if we could tell you the fullness of a soul there, what that fullness is; the
infiniteness of that glory there, how far that infiniteness goes; the
Eternity of that happiness there, how long that happiness lasts; if we could
make you know all this, yet this Better Resurrection is a heaping, even of that
Fullness, and an enlarging, even of that Infiniteness, and an extention, even
of that eternity of happiness; For, all these, this Fullness, this
Infiniteness, this Eternity are in all the Resurrections of the Righteous, and
this is a better Resurrection; We may almost say, it is something more then
Heaven; for, all that have any Resurrection to life, have all heaven; And
something more then God; for, all that have any Resurrection to life, have all
God; and yet these shall have a better Resurrection. Amorous soul, ambitious
soul, covetous soul, voluptuous soul, what would thou have in heaven?
What does thy holy amorousnesse, thy holy covetousness, thy holy ambition, and
voluptuousness most carry thy desire upon? Call it what thou will; think it
what thou can; think it something that thou can not think; and all this
thou shall have, if thou have any Resurrection unto life; and yet there is a
Better Resurrection. When I consider what I was in my parents loins (a
substance unworthy of a word, unworthy of a thought) when I consider what I am
now, (a Volume of diseases bound up together, a dry cynder, if I look for
natural, for radical moisture, and yet a Sponge, a bottle of overflowing
Rheumes, if I consider accidental; an aged child, a gray headed Infant, and
but the ghost of mine own youth) When I consider what I shall be at last, by
the hand of death, in my grave, (first, but Putrefaction, and then, not so much
as Putrefaction, I shall not be able to send forth so much as an ill air, not
any air at all, but shall be all insipid, tastlesse, savourlesse dust; for a
while, all worms, and after a while, not so much as worms, sordid, senseless,
namelesse dust) When I consider the past, and present, and suture state of this
body, in this world, I am able to conceive, able to express the worst that can
befall it in nature, and the worst that can be inflicted upon it by man, of
fortune; But the least degree of glory that God has prepared for that body in
heaven, I am not able to express, not able to conceive.

That man comes with a Barley corn in his hand, to measure the compass of the
Firmament, (and when will he have done that work, by that way?) he comes with a
grain of dust in his scales, to weigh the whole body of the world, (and when
will he have done that work, that way?) that bids his heart imagine, or his
language declare, or his wit compare the least degree of the glory of any good
man's Resurrection; And yet, there is a Better Resurrection. A Better
Resurrection reserved for them, and appropriated to them That fulfill the
sufferings of Christ, in their flesh, by Martyrdom, and so become witnesses to
that Conveyance which he has sealed with his blood, by shedding their blood;
and glorify him upon earth (as far as it is possible for man) by the same way
that he has glorified them in heaven; and are admitted to such a conformity
with Christ, as that (if we may have leave to express it so) they have dyed
for one another.

Neither is this Martyrdom, and so this Better Resurrection, appropriated to a
real, and actual, and absolute dying for Christ; but every suffering of ours,
by which suffering, he may be glorified, is a degree of Martyrdom, and so a
degree of improving, and bettering our Resurrection. For as S. Jerome says,
That chastity is a perpetual Martyrdom, So every war maintained by us,
against our own desires, is a Martyrdom too. In a word, to do good for Gods
glory, brings us to a Good, but to suffer for his glory, brings us to a Better
Resurrection; And, to suffer patiently, brings us to a Good, but to suffer
chearefully, and more then that, thankfully, brings us to a Better
Resurrection. If all the torments of all the afflicted men, from Abel, to that
soul that groans in the Inquisition, or that gaspes upon his deathbed, at
this minute, were upon one man at once, all that had no proportion to the least
torment of hell; nay if all the torments which all the damned in hell have
suffered, from Cain to this minute, were at once upon one soul, so, as that
soul for all that might know that those torments should have an end, though
after a thousand millions of millions of Generations, all that would have no
proportion to any of the torments of hell; because, the extention of those
torments, and their everlastingnesse, has more of the nature of torment, and
of the nature of hell in it, then the intensnesse, and the vehemence thereof
can have. So, if all the joys, of all the men that have had all their hearts
desires, were con-centred in one heart, all that would not be as a spark in his
Chimney, to the general conflagration of the whole world, in respect of the
least joy, that that soul is made partaker of, that departs from this world,
immediately after a pardon received, and reconciliation sealed to him, for all
his sins; No doubt but he shall have a good Resurrection; But then, we cannot
doubt neither, but that to him that has been careful in all his ways, and
yet crossed in all his ways, to him whose daily bread has been affliction, and
yet is satisfied as with marrow, and with fatness, with that bread of
affliction, and not only contented in, but glad of that affliction, no doubt
but to him is reserved a Better Resurrection; Every Resurrection is more then
we can think, but this is more then that more. Almighty God inform us, and
reveal unto us, what this Better Resurrection is, by possessing us of it; And
make the hastening to it, one degree of addition in it. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly to the consummation of that Kingdom which thou have purchased for us,
with inestimable price of thine incorruptible blood. Amen.

SERMON XXIII. Preached at S. Paul's, for Easter Day. 1628.
1 COR. 13.12. For now we see through a Glass darkly, But then face to sace;
Now I know in part, But then I shall know, even as also I am known.


THese two terms in our Text, Nunc and Tunc, Now and Then, Now in a glass,
Then face to face, Now in part, Then in perfection, these two secular terms,
of which, one designs the whole Age of this world from the Creation, to the
dissolution thereof (for, all that is comprehended in this word, Now) And the
other designs the everlastingnesse of the next world, (for that
incomprehensiblenesse is comprehended in the other word, Then) These two words,
that design two such Ages, are now met in one Day; in this Day, in which we
celebrate all Resurrections in the root, in the Resurrection of our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, blessed for ever. For the first Term, Now (Now in a
glass, now in part) is intended most especially of that very act, which we do
now at this present, that is, of the Ministry of the Gospel, of declaring God
in his Ordinance, of Preaching his word; ( Now, in this Ministry of his
Gospel, we see in a glass, we know in part) And then the Then, the time of
seeing face to face, and knowing as we are known, is intended of that time,
which we celebrate this day, the day of Resurrection, the day of Judgment, the
day of the actual possession of the next life. So that this day, this whole
Scripture is fulfilled in your ears; for now, (now in this Preaching) you have
some sight, and then, (Then when that day comes, which (in the first root
thereof) we celebrate this day) you shall have a perfect sight of all; Now we
see through a glass, etc.

That therefore you may the better know him, Divisio.
when you come to see him face to face, then, by having seen him in a glass
now, and that your seeing him now in his Ordinance, may prepare you to see him
then in his Essence, proceed we thus in the handling of these words. First,
That there is nothing brought into comparison, into consideration, nothing put
into the balance, but the sight of God, the knowledge of God; It is not called
a better sight, nor a better knowledge, but there is no other sight, no other
knowledge proposed, or mentioned, or intimated, or imagined but this; All other
sight is blindness, all other knowledge is ignorance; And then we shall see
how there is a twofold sight of God, and a twofold knowledge of God proposed to
us here; A sight, and a knowledge here in this life, and another manner of
sight, and another manner of knowledge in the life to come: For, here we see
God In speculo, in a glass, that is, by reflection, And here we know God In
aenigmate, says our Text, Darkly, (so we translate it) that is, by obscure
representations, and therefore it is called a Knowledge but in part; But in
heaven, our sight is face to face, And our knowledge is to know, as we are
known.

For our sight of God here, our Theater, the place where we sit and see him, is
the whole world, the whole house and frame of nature, and our medium, our
glass, is the Book of Creatures, and our light, by which we see him, is the
light of Natural Reason. And then, for our knowledge of God here, our Place,
our Academy, our University is the Church, our medium, is the Ordinance of God
in his Church, Preaching, and Sacraments; and our light is the light of faith.
Thus we shall find it to be, for our sight, and for our knowledge of God here.
But for our sight of God in heaven, our place, our Sphere is heaven it self,
our medium is the Patefaction, the Manifestation, the Revelation of God
himself, and our light is the light of Glory. And then, for our knowledge of
God there, God himself is All; God himself is the place, we see Him, in Him;
God is our medium, we see Him, by him; God is our light; not a light which is
His, but a light which is He; not a light which flows from him, no, nor a
light which is in him, but that light which is He himself. Lighten our
darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, O Father of lights, that in thy light we
may see light, that now we see this through this thy glass, thine Ordinance,
and, by the good of this, hereafter face to face.

The sight is so much the Noblest of all the senses, as that it is all the
senses. Visio.
As the reasonable soul of man, when it enters, becomes all the soul of man,
and he has no longer a vegetative, and a sensitive soul, but all is that one
reasonable soul; so, says S. Aug. (and he exemplifies it, by several pregnant
places of Scripture) Visus per omnes sensus recurrit, Aug.
All the senses are called Seeing; as there is videre and audire, S. John
turned to see the sound; Apoc. 1. Psalm. 34.9.
and there is Gustate, and videte, Taste, and see, how sweet the Lord is; And
so of the rest of the senses, all is sight. Employ then this noblest sense upon
the noblest object, see God; see God in every thing, and then thou needst not
take off thine eye from Beauty, from Riches, from Honor, from any thing. S.
Paul speaks here of a diverse seeing of God. Of seeing God in a glass, and
seeing God face to face; but of not seeing God at all, the Apostle speaks not
at all.

When Christ took the blind man by the hand, Mark 8.23.
though he had then begun his cure upon him, yet he asked him, if he saw
ought: Something he was sure he saw; but it was a question whether it were to
be called a sight, for he saw men but as trees. The natural man sees Beauty,
and Riches, and Honor, but yet it is a question whether he sees them or no,
because he sees them, but as a snare. But he that sees God in them, sees them
to be beams and evidences of that Beauty, that Wealth, that Honor, that is in
God, that is God himself. The other blind man that importuned Christ, Mark
10.46.
Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on me, when Christ asked him, What will thou, that I shall do unto thee? Had presently that answer, Lord that I may
receive my sight; And we may easily think, that if Christ had asked him a
second question, What would thou see, when thou have received thy sight, he
would have answered, Lord I would see thee; For when he had his sight, and
Christ said to him, Go thy way, he had no way to go from Christ, but, as the
Text says there, He followed him. All that he cared for, was seeing, all that
he cared to see, was Christ. Whether he would see a Peace or a War, may be a
States-mans Problem; whether he would see plenty or scarcity of some
commodity, may be a Merchants Problem; whether he would see Rome, or Spain
grow in greatness, may be a Jesuits Problem; But whether I had not rather see
God then any thing, is no Problematicall matter. All sight is blindness, that
was our first; all knowledge is Ignorance, till we come to God, that is our
next Consideration.

The first act of the will, is love, says the School; for till the will love,
till it would have something, it is not a will. But then, Amare nisi nota non
possumus; Scientia. Aug.
It is impossible to love any thing till we know it: First our Understanding
must present it as Verum, as a Known truth, and then our Will embraces it as
Bonum, as Good, and worthy to be loved. Therefore the Philosopher concludes
easily, as a thing that admits no contradiction. That naturally, all men desire
to know, that they may love. But then, as the addition of an honest man, varies
the signification, with the profession, and calling of the man, (for he is a
honest man at Court, that oppresses no man with his power; and at the Exchange
he is the honest man, that keeps his word; and in an Army, the Valiant man is
the honest man) so the Addition of learned and understanding, varies with the
man: The Divine, the Physician, the Lawyer are not qualified, nor denominated
by the same kind of learning. But yet, as it is for honesty, there is no
honest man at Court, or Exchange, or Army, if he believe not in God; so there
is no knowledge in the Physician, nor Lawyer, if he know not God. Neither does
any man know God, except he know him so, as God has made himself known, that
is, In Christ. Therefore, as S. Paul desires to know nothing else, so let no
man pretend to know any thing, but Christ Crucified; that is, Crucified for
him, made his. In the eighth verse of this Chapt. he says, Prophecy shall
fail, and Tongues shall fail, and Knowledge shall vanish; but this knowledge
of God in Christ made mine, by being Crucified for me, shall dwell with me for
ever. And so from this general consideration, All sight is blindness, all
knowledge is ignorance, but of God, we pass to the particular Consideration of
that twofold sight and knowledge of God expressed in this Text, Now we see
through a glass, etc.

First then we consider, 2. Part. Visio.
(before we come to our knowledge of God) our sight of God in this world, and
that is, says our Apostle, In speculo, we see as in a glass. But how do we
see in a glass? Truly, that is not easily determined. The old Writers in the
Optiques said, That when we see a thing in a glass, we see not the thing it
self, but a representation only; All the later men say, we do see the thing
it self, but not by direct, but by reflected beams. It is a useless labor
for the present, to reconcile them. This may well consist with both, That as
that which we see in a glass, assures us, that such a thing there is, (for we
cannot see a dream in a glass, nor a fancy, nor a Chimera) so this sight of
God, which our Apostle says we have in a glass, is enough to assure us, that
a God there is.

This glass is better then the water; The water gives a crookedness, and
false dimensions to things that it shows; as we see by an Oar when we row a
Boat, and as the Poet describes a wry and distorted face, Qui faciem sub aqua
Phoebe natant is habes, That he looked like a man that swomme under water. But
in the glass, which the Apostle intends, we may see God directly, that is, see
directly that there is a God. And therefore S. Cyrils addition in this Text, is
a Diminution; Videmus quasi in fumo, says he, we see God as in a smoke; we see
him better then so; for it is a true sight of God, though it be not a perfect
sight, which we have this way. This way, our Theater, where we sit to see God,
is the whole frame of nature; our medium, our glass in which we see him, is
the Creature; and our light by which we see him, is Natural Reason.

Aquinas calls this Theater, Theatrum, Mundus.
where we sit and see God, the whole world; And David compasses the world, and
finds God every where, and says at last, Whither shall I fly from thy
presence? Psalm. 138.8.
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; At Babel they thought to build to
heaven; but did any men ever pretend to get above heaven? above the power of
winds, or the impression of other malignant Meteors, some high hills are got:
But can any man get above the power of God? If I take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, there thy right hand shall hold
me, and lead me. If we sail to the waters above the Firmament, it is so too.
Nay, take a place, which God never made, a place which grew out of our sins,
that is Hell, yet, If we make our bed in hell, God is there too. It is a woeful
Inn, to make our bed in, Hell; and so much the more woeful, as it is more then
an Inn; an everlasting dwelling: But even there God is; and so much more
strangely then in any other place, because he is there, without any emanation
of any beam of comfort from him, who is the God of all consolation, or any
beam of light from him, who is the Father of all lights. In a word, whether we
be in the Eastern parts of the world, from whom the truth of Religion is
passed, or in the Western, to which it is not yet come; whether we be in the
darkness of ignorance, or darkness of the works of darkness, or darkness of
oppression of spirit in sadness, The world is the Theater that represents God,
and every where every man may, nay must see him.

The whole frame of the world is the Theater, Medium, Creatura.
and every creature the stage, the medium, the glass in which we may see God.
Moses made the Laver in the Tabernacle, of the looking glasses of women: Exodus
38.8.
Scarce can you imagine a vainer thing (except you will except the vain
lookers on, in that action) then the looking-glasses of women; and yet Moses
brought the looking-glasses of women to a religious use, to show them that came
in, the spots of dirt, which they had taken by the way, that they might wash
themselves clean before they passed any farther.

There is not so poor a creature but may be thy glass to see God in. The
greatest slat glass that can be made, cannot represent any thing greater then
it is: If every gnat that flies were an Arch-angell, all that could but tell
me, that there is a God; and the poorest worm that creeps, tells me that. If I
should ask the Basilisk, how came thou by those killing eyes, he would tell
me, Thy God made me so; And if I should ask the Slowworme, how came thou to
be without eyes, he would tell me, Thy God made me so. The Cedar is no better a
glass to see God in, then the Hyssope upon the wall; all things that are, are
equally removed from being nothing; and whatsoever has any being, is by that
very being, a glass in which we see God, who is the root, and the fountain
of all being. The whole frame of nature is the Theater, the whole Volume of
creatures is the glass, and the light of nature, reason, is our light, which
is another Circumstance.

Of those words, John 1.9. That was the true light, Lux rationi^.
that lights every man that comes into the World, the slackest sense that
they can admit, gives light enough to see God by. If we spare S. Chrysostomes
sense, That that light, is the light of the Gospel, and of Grace, and that that
light, considered in it self, and without opposition in us, does enlighten,
that is, would enlighten, every man, if that man did not wink at that light; If
we forbear S. Augustines sense, That light enlightens every man, that is, every
man that is enlightened, is enlightened by that light; If we take but S. Cyrils
sense, that this light is the light of natural Reason, which, without all
question, enlightneth every man that comes into the world, yet have we light
enough to see God by that light, in the Theater of Nature, and in the glass of
Creatures. God affords no man the comfort, the false comfort of Atheism: He
will not allow a pretending Atheist the power to flatter himself, so far, as
seriously to think there is no God. He must pull out his own eyes, and see no
creature, before he can say, he sees no God; He must be no man, and quench his
reasonable soul, before he can say to himself, there is no God. The
difference between the Reason of man, and the Instinct of the beast is this,
That the beast does but know, but the man knows that he knows. The bestiall
Atheist will pretend that he knows there is no God; but he cannot say, that he
knows, that he knows it; for, his knowledge will not stand the battery of an
argument from another, nor of a ratiocination from himself. He dares not ask
himself, who is it that I pray to, in a sudden danger, if there be no God? Nay
he dares not ask, who is it that I swear by, in a sudden passion, if there be
no God? Whom do I tremble at, and sweat under, at midnight, and whom do I curse
by next morning, if there be no God? It is safely said in the School, Media
perfecta ad quae ordinantur, How weak soever those means which are ordained by
God, seem to be, and be indeed in themselves, yet they are strong enough to
those ends and purposes, for which God ordained them.

And so, for such a sight of God, as we take the Apostle to intend here, which
is, to see that there is a God, The frame of Nature, the whole World is our
Theater, the book of Creatures is our Medium, our glass, and natural reason
is light enough. But then, for the other degree, the other notification of God,
which is, The knowing of God, though that also be first to be considered in
this world, the means is of a higher nature, then served for the sight of God;
and yet, whilst we are in this World, it is but In aenigmate, in an obscure
Riddle, a representation, darkly, and in part, as we translate it.

As the glass which we spoke of before, was proposed to the sense, Scientia
Dei.
and so we might see God, that is, see that there is a God, This anigma that is
spoken of now, this dark similitude, and comparison, is proposed to our faith,
and so far we know God, that is, Believe in God in this life, but by aenigmaes,
by dark representations, and allusions. Therefore says S. Augustine, that
Moses saw God, in that conversation which he had with him in the Mount,
Sevocatus ab omni corporis sensu, Removed from all benefit and assistance of
bodily senses, (He needed not that Glass, the help of the Creature) And more
then so, Ab omni significativo aenigmate Spiritus, Removed from all allusions,
or similitudes, or representations of God, which might bring God to the
understanding, and so to the belief; Moses knew God by a more immediate
working, then either sense, or understanding, or faith. Therefore says that
Father, Per speculum and aenigma, by this which the Apostle calls a glass, and
this which he calls aenigma, a dark representation Intelliguntur omnia
accommodata ad notificandum Deum, He understands all things by which God has
notified himself to man: By the Glass, to his Reason, by the aenigma to his
faith. And so, for this knowing of God, by way of Believing in him, (as for
seeing him, our Theater was the world, the Creature was our glass, and Reason
was our light) Our Academy to learn this knowledge, is the Church, our Medium
is the Ordinance and Institution of Christ in his Church, and our light is the
light of faith, in the application of those Ordinances in that Church.

This place then where we take our degrees in this knowledge of God, our
Academy, our University for that, Academia, Ecclesia.
is the Church; for, though, as there may be some few examples given, of men
that have grown learned, who never studied at University; so there may be some
examples of men enlightened by God, and yet not within that covenant which
constitutes the Church; yet the ordinary place for Degrees is the University,
and the ordinary place for Illumination in the knowledge of God, is the Church.
There fore did God, who ever intended to have his Kingdom of Heaven well
peopled, so powerfully, so miraculously enlarge his way to it, The Church, that
it prospered as a wood, which no felling, no stubbing, could destroy. We find
in the Acts of the Church, five thousand Martyrs executed in a day; Acts 4.4.
And we find in the Acts of the Apostles five thousand brought to the Church,
by one Sermon; still our Christnings were equal to our burials at least.

Therefore when Christ says to the Church, Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, it was not Quia de magnominuitur, sed quia de pusillo
crescit, says Chrysologus, Not because it should fall from great to little,
but rise from little to great. Such care had Christ of the growth thereof; and
then such care of the establishment, and power thereof, as that the first time,
that ever he names the Church, Mat. 16.18.
he invests it with an assurance of perpetuity, Upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; Therein is denoted
the strength and stability of the Church in it self, and then the power and
authority of the Church upon others, in those often directions, Dic Ecclesiae,
complain to the Church, and consult with the Church, and then Audi Ecclesiam,
Harken to the Church, be judged by the Church; hear not them, that hear not
the Church; And then Ejice de Ecclesia, let them that disobey the Church, be
cast out of the Church. In all which, we are forbidden private Conventicles,
private Spirits, private Opinions. For, as S. Augustine says well, Psalm. 49.
(and he cites it from another whom he names not, Quidam dixit) If a wall stand
single, not joined to any other wall, he that makes a door through the wall,
and passes through that door, Adhuc foris est, for all this is without still,
Nam domus nonest, One wall makes not a house; One opinion makes not Catholic
Doctrine, one man makes not a Church; for this knowledge of God, the Church is
our Academy, there we must be bred; and there we may be bred all our lives, and
yet learn nothing. Therefore, as we must be there, so there we must use the
means; And the means in the Church, are the Ordinances, and Institutions of
the Church.

The most powerful means is the Scripture; Medium, Institutie.
But the Scripture in the Church. Not that we are discouraged from reading the
Scripture at home: God forbid we should think any Christian family to be out of
the Church. At home, the holy Ghost is with thee in the reading of the
Scriptures; But there he is with thee as a Remembrancer, ( The Holy Ghost shall
bring to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you, says our Savior)
Here, John 14.26.
in the Church, he is with thee, as a Doctor to teach thee; First learn at
Church and then meditate at home, Receive the seed by hearing the Scriptures
interpreted here, and water it by returning to those places at home. When
Christ bids you Search the Scriptures, he means you should go to them, who
have a warrant to search; A warrant in their Calling. To know which are
Scriptures, To know what the holy Ghost says in the Scriptures, apply thy
self to the Church. Not that the Church is a Judge above the Scriptures, (for
the power, and the Commission which the Church has, it has from the
Scriptures) but the Church is a Judge above thee, which are the Scriptures, and
what is the sense of the Holy Ghost in them.

So then thy means are the Scriptures; That is thy evidence: but then this
evidence must be sealed to thee in the Sacraments, and delivered to thee in
Preaching, and so sealed and delivered to thee in the presence of competent
witnesses, the Congregation. When S. Paul was carried up In raptu, 2 Cor. 12.4.
in an ecstasy, into Paradise, that which he gained by this powerful way of
teaching, is not expressed in a Vidit, but an Audivit, It is not said that he
saw, but that he heard unspeakeable things. The eye is the devils door, before
the ear: for, though he do enter at the ear, by wanton discourse, yet he was
at the eye be fore; we see, before we talk dangerously. But the ear is the
Holy Ghosts first door, He assists us with Rituall and Ceremonial things,
which we see in the Church; but Ceremonies have their right use, when their
right use has first been taught by preaching. Therefore to hearing does the
Apostle apply faith; And, as the Church is our Academy, and our Medium the
Ordinances of the Church, so the light by which we see this, that is, know God
so, as to make him our God, is faith; and that is our other Consideration in
this part.

Those Heretics, against whom S. Chrysostom, and others of the Fathers writ,
Lumen, fides.
The Anomaei, were inexcusable in this, that they said, They were able to know
God in this life, as well as God knew himself; But in this more especially lay
their impiety, that they said, They were able to do all this by the light of
Nature, without Faith. By the light of Nature, in the Theater of the World, by
the Medium of Creatures, we see God; but to know God, by believing, not only
Him, but in Him, is only in the Academy of the Church, only through the Medium
of the Ordinances there, and only by the light of Faith.

The Schooledoes ordinarily design four ways of knowing God; and they make
the first of these four ways, to be by faith; but then, by faith they mean
no more but an assent, that there is a God; which is but that, which in our
former Considerations we called The seeing of God; and which indeed needs not
faith; for the light of Nature will serve for that, to see God so. They make
their second way Contemplation, that is, An union of God in this life; which is
truly the same thing that we mean by Faith: for we do not call an assent to
the Gospel, faith, but faith is the application of the Gospel to our selves;
not an assent that Christ dyed, but an assurance that Christ dyed for all.
Their third way of knowing God is by Apparition; as when God appeared to the
Patriarchs and others in fire, in Angels, or otherwise; And their fourth way is
per apertam visionem, by his clear manifestation of himself in heaven.

Their first way, by assenting only, and their third way of apparition, are
weak and uncertain ways. The other two, present Faith, and future Vision, are
safe ways, but admit this difference, That that of future Vision, is gratiae
consummantis, such a knowledge of God, as when it is once had can never be lost
nor diminished, But knowledge by faith in this world, is Gratiae communis, it
is an effect and fruit of that Grace which God shed upon the whole communion of
Saints, that is, upon all those who in this Academy, the Church, do embrace the
Medium, that is, the Ordinances of the Church; And this knowledge of God, by
this faith, may be diminished, and increased; for it is but In aenigmate, says
our Text, darkly, obscurely; Clearly in respect of the natural man, but yet
but obscurely in respect of that knowledge of God which we shall have in
heaven; for, says the Apostle, As long as we walk by faith, and not by sight,
we are absent from the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.6.
Faith is a blessed presence, but compared with heavenly vision, it is but an
absence; though it create and constitute in us a possibility, a probability, a
kind of certainty of salvation, yet that faith, which the best Christian has,
is not so far beyond that sight of God which the natural man has, as that
sight of God which I shall have in heaven, is above that faith which we have
now in the highest exaltation. Therefore there belongs a consideration to that
which is added by our Apostle here, That the knowledge which I have of God here
(even by faith, through the ordinances of the Church) is but a knowledge in
part. Now I know in part.

That which we call in part, the Syriack translates Modicum ex multis; Ex part.
Though we know by faith, yet, for all that faith, it is but a little of a
great deal that we know yet, because, though faith be good evidence, yet faith
is but the evidence of things not seen; Heb. 11.1.
And there is better evidence of them, when they are seen. For, if we consider
the object, we cannot believe so much of God, nor of our happiness in him, as
we shall see then. For, when it is said, that the heart comprehends it not,
certainly faith comprehends it not neither: And if we consider the manner,
faith it self is but darkness in respect of the vision of God in heaven: For,
those words of the Prophet, I will search Jerusalem with Candles, are spoken of
the times of the Christian Church, Zeph. 1.12.
and of the best men in the Christian Church; yet they shall be searched with
Candles, some darkness shall be found in them. To the Galatians well
instructed, and well established, Gal. 4.9.
the Apostle says, Now, after ye have known God, or rather are known of God;
The best knowledge that we have of God here, even by faith, is rather that he
knows us, then that we know him. And in this Text, it is in his own person,
that the Apostle puts the instance, Now I, (I, an Apostle, taught by Christ
himself) know but in part. And therefore, as S. Augustine says, Sunt quasi
cunabula charitatis Dei, quibus diligimus proximum, The love which we bear to
our neighbor is but as the Infancy, but as the Cradle of that love which we
bear to God; so that sight of God which we have In speculo, in the Glass,
that is, in nature, is but Cunabula fidei, but the infancy, but the cradle of
that knowledge which we have in faith, and yet that knowledge which we have in
faith, is but Cunabula visionis, the infancy and cradle of that knowledge which
we shall have when we come to see God face to face. Faith is infinitely above
nature, infinitely above works, even above those works which faith it self
produces, as parents are to children, and the tree to the fruit: But yet faith
is as much below vision, and seeing God face to face. And therefore, though we
ascribe willingly to faith, more then we can express, yet let no man think
himself so infallibly safe, because he finds that he believes in God, as he
shall be when he sees God; The faithfullest man in the Church must say, Domine
adauge, Lord increase my faith; He that is least in the kingdom of heaven,
shall never be put to that. All the world is but Speculum, a glass, in which we
see God; The Church it self, and that which the Ordinance of the Church begets
in us, faith it self, is but aenigma, a dark representation of God to us, till
we come to that state, To see God face to face, and to know, as also we are
known.

Now, Calum, Sphaera.
as for the sight of God here, our Theater was the world, our Medium and glass
was the creature, and our light was reason, And then for our knowledge of God
here, our Academy was the Church, our Medium the Ordinances of the Church, and
our Light the light of faith, so we consider the same Terms, first, for the
sight of God, and then for the knowledge of God in the next life. First, the
Sphere, the place where we shall see him, is heaven; He that asks me what
heaven is, means not to hear me, but to silence me; He knows I cannot tell
him; When I meet him there, I shall be able to tell him, and then he will be as
able to tell me; yet then we shall be but able to tell one another, This, this
that we enjoy is heaven, but the tongues of Angels, the tongues of glorified
Saints, shall not be able to express what that heaven is; for, even in heaven
our faculties shall be finite. Heaven is not a place that was created; for, all
place that was created, shall be dissolved. God did not plant a Paradise for
himself, and remove to that, as he planted a Paradise for Adam, and removed him
to that; But God is still where he was before the world was made. And in that
place, where there are more Suns then there are Stars in the Firmament, (for
all the Saints are Suns) And more light in another Sun, The Sun of
righteousness, the Son of Glory, the Son of God, then in all them, in that
illustration, that emanation, that effusion of beams of glory, which began not
to shine 6000. years ago, but 6000. millions of millions ago, had been 6000.
millions of millions before that, in those eternal, in those uncreated
heavens, shall we see God.

This is our Sphere, Medium, Revelatio sui.
and that which we are fain to call our place; and then our Medium, our way to
see him is Patefactio sui, Gods laying himself open, his manifestation, his
revelation, his evisceration, and embowelling of himself to us, there. Does
God never afford this patefaction, this manifestation of himself in his
Essence, to any in this life? We cannot answer yea, nor no, without offending a
great part in the School, so many affirm, so many deny, that God has been
seen in his Essence in this life. There are that say, That it is fere de fide,
little less then an article of faith, that it has been done; And Aquinas
denies it so absolutely, as that his Followers interpret him de absoluta
potentia, That God by his absolute power cannot make a man, remaining a mortal
man, and under the definition of a mortal man, capable of seeing his Essence;
as we may truly say, that God cannot make a beast, remaining in that nature,
capable of grace, or glory. S. Augustine speaking of discourses that passed
between his mother, and him, not long before her death, says; Perambulavimus
cuncta mortalia, and ipsum coelum, We talked our selves above this earth, and
above all the heavens; Venimus in mentes nostras, and transcendimus eas, We
came to the consideration of our own minds, and our own souls, and we got
above our own souls; that is, to the consideration of that place where our
souls should be for ever; and we could consider God then, but then we could
not see God in his Essence. As it may be fairly argued that Christ suffered
not the very torments of very hell, because it is essential to the torments of
hell, to be eternal, They were not torments of hell, if they received an end;
So is it fairly argued too, That neither Adam in his ecstasy in Paradise, nor
Moses in his conversation in the Mount, nor the other Apostles in the
Transfiguration of Christ, nor S. Paul in his rapture to the third heavens, saw
the Essence of God, because he that is admitted to that sight of God, can never
look off, nor lose that sight again. Only in heaven shall God proceed to this
patefaction, this manifestation, this revelation of himself; And that by the
light of glory.

The light of glory is such a light, as that our Schoolmen dare not say
confidently, Lux Cloris.
That every beam of it, is not all of it. When some of them say, That some
souls see some things in God, and others, others, because all have not the
same measure of the light of glory, the rest cry down that opinion, and say,
that as the Essence of God is indivisible, and he that sees any of it, sees all
of it, so is the light of glory communicated entirely to every blessed soul.
God made light first, and three days after, that light became a Sun, a more
glorious Light: God gave me the light of Nature, when I quickened in my mothers
womb by receiving a reasonable soul; and God gave me the light of faith, when
I quickened in my second mothers womb, the Church, by receiving my baptism; but
in my third day, when my mortality shall put on immortality, he shall give me
the light of glory, by which I shall see himself. To this light of glory, the
light of honor is but a glowworm; and majesty it self but a twilight; The
Cherubims and Seraphims are but Candles; and that Gospel it self, which the
Apostle calls the glorious Gospel, but a Star of the least magnitude. And if I
cannot tell, what to call this light, by which I shall see it, what shall I
call that which I shall see by it, The Essence of God himself? and yet there is
something else then this sight of God, intended in that which remains, I shall
not only see God face to face, but I shall know him, (which, as you have seen
all the way, is above sight) and know him, even as also I am known.

In this Consideration, God alone is all; in all the former there was a place,
Deus omnia solus.
and a means, and a light; here, for this perfect knowledge of God, God is all
those. Then, sales the Apostle, God shall be all in all. Hic agit omnia in
omnibus, says S. Hierome; 1 Cor. 15.28.
Here God does all in all; but here he does all by Instruments; even in the
infusing of faith, he works by the Ministry of the Gospel: But there he shall
be all in all, do all in all, immediately by himself; for, Christ shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. Ver. 24.
His Kingdom is the administration of his Church, by his Ordinances in the
Church. At the resurrection there shall be an end of that Kingdom; no more
Church; no more working upon men, by preaching, but God himself shall be all in
all. Ministri quasi larvae Dei, says Luther. It may be somewhat too
familiarly, too vulgarly said, but usefully; The ministry of the Gospel is
but as Gods Vizar; for, by such a liberty the Apostle here calls it aenigma, a
riddle; or, (as Luther says too) Gods picture; but in the Resurrection, God
shall put of that Vizar, and turn away that picture, and show his own face.
Therefore is it said, That in heaven there is no Temple, but God himself is
the Temple; God is Service, Apoc. 21.22. August.
and Music, and Psalm, and Sermon, and Sacrament, and all. Erit vita de
verbo sine verbo; We shall live upon the word, and hear never a word; live
upon him, who being the word, was made flesh, the eternal Son of God. Hic
nonest omnia in omnibus, Hieron.
sed pars in singulis: Here God is not all in all; where he is at all in any
man, that man is well; In Solomone sapientia, says that Father; It was well
with Solomon, because God was wisdom with him, and patience in Job, and faith
in Peter, and zeal in Paul, but there was something in all these, which God
was not. But in heaven he shall be so all in all, Idem.
Vt singuli sanctorum omnes virtutes habeant, that every soul shall have every
perfection in it self; and the perfection of these perfections shall be, that
their sight shall be face to face, and their knowledge as they are known.

Since S. Augustine calls it a debt, a double debt, a debt because she asked
it, Facie ad faciem.
a debt because he promised it, to give, even a woman, Paulina, satisfaction in
that high point, and mystery, how we should see God face to face in heaven, it
cannot be unfit in this congregation, to ask and answer some short questions
concerning that. Is it always a declaration of favor when God shows his
face? No. I will set my face against that soul, Levit. 17.10.
that eats blood, and cut him off. But when there is light joined with it, it
is a declaration of favor; This was the blessing that God taught Moses for
Aaron, to bless the people with, The Lord make his face to shine upon thee,
and be gracious to thee. Numb. 6.25.
And there we shall see him face to face, by the light of his countenance,
which is the light of glory. What shall we see, by seeing him so, face to face?
not to enlarge our selves into Gregory's wild speculation, Qui videt videntem
omnia, oninia videt, because we shall see him that sees all things, we shall
see all things in him, (for then we should see the thoughts of men) rest we in
the testimony of a safer witness, a Council, Senon.
In speculo Divinit at is quicquid eorum intersit illucescet; In that glass we
shall see, whatsoever we can be the better for seeing. First, all things that
they believed here, they shall see there; and therefore, Discamus in terris,
Hicron.
quorum scicntia nobiscum perseveret in Caelis, let us meditate upon no other
things on earth, then we would be glad to think on in heaven; and this
consideration would put many frivolous, and many fond thoughts out of our
mind, if men and women would love another but so, as that love might last in
heaven.

This then we shall get, concerning our selves, by seeing God face to face; but
what concerning God? nothing but the sight of the humanity of Christ, which
only is visible to the eye. So Theodoret, so some others have thought; but that
answers not the sicutiest; and we know we shall see God, (not only the body of
Christ) as he is in his Essence. Why? did all that are said to have seen God
face to face, fee his Essence? no. In earth God assumed some material things
to appear in, and is said to have been seen face to face, when he was seen in
those assumed forms. But in heaven there is no material thing to be assumed,
and if God be seen face to face there, he is seen in his Essence. S. Augustine
sums it up fully, In Psalm 36.10.
upon those words, In lumine tuo, In thy light we shall see light, Te scilicet
in te, we shall see thee in thee; that is, says he, face to face.

And then, Vt cognitus.
what is it to know him, as we are known? First, is that it, which is intended
here, That we shall know God so as we are known? It is not expressed in the
Text so: It is only that we shall know so; not, that we shall know God so. But
the frame, and context of the place, has drawn that unanime exposition from
all, that it is meant of our knowledge of God then. A comprehensive knowledge
of God it cannot be; To comprehend is to know a thing as well as that thing can
be known; and we can never know God so, but that he will know himself better:
Our knowledge cannot be so dilated, nor God condensed, and contracted so, as
that we can know him that way, comprehensively. It cannot be such a knowledge
of God, as God has of himself, nor as God has of us; For God comprehends us,
and all this world, and all the worlds that he could have made, and himself.
But it is Nota similitudinis, non aequalitatis; As God knows me, so I shall
know God; but I shall not know God so, as God knows me. It is not quantum, but
sicut; not as much, but as truly; as the fire does as truly shine, as the Sun
shines, though it shine not out so far, nor to so many purposes. So then, I
shall know God so, as that there shall be nothing in me, to hinder me from
knowing God; which cannot be said of the nature of man, though regenerate, upon
earth, no, nor of the nature of an Angel in heaven, left to it self, till
both have received a super-illustration from the light of Glory.

And so it shall be a knowledge so like his knowledge, as it shall produce a
love, like his love, and we shall love him, as he loves us. For, as S.
Chrysostom, and the rest of the Fathers, whom Oecumenius has compacted,
interpret it, Cognoscam practice, idest, accurrendo, I shall know him, Aug.
that is, embrace him, adhere to him. Qualis sine fine festivitas! what a
Holy Day shall this be, which no working day shall ever follow! By knowing, and
loving the unchangeable, the immutable God, Mutabimur in immutabilitatem, we
shall be changed into an unchangeablenesse, says that Father, that never said
any thing but extraordinarily. He says more, Idem.
Dei praesentia si in inferno appareret, If God could be seen, and known in
hell, hell in an instant would be heaven.

How many heavens are there in heaven? how is heaven multiplied to every soul
in heaven, where infinite other happinesses are crowned with this, this fight,
and this knowledge of God there? And how shall all those heavens be renewed to
us every day, Qui non mir abimur hodie, Idem.
that shall be as glad to see, and to know God, millions of ages after every
days seeing and knowing, as the first hour of looking upon his face. And as
this seeing, and this knowing of God crowns all other joys, and glories, even
in heaven, so this very crown is crowned; 2 Pet. 1.4.
There grows from this a higher glory, which is, participes erimus Divinae
naturae, (words, of which Luther says, that both Testaments afford none equal
to them) That we shall be made partakers of the Divine nature; Immortal as the
Father, righteous as the Son, and full of all comfort as the Holy Ghost.

Let me dismiss you, with an easy request of S. Augustine; Fieri non potest
ut seipsum non diligat, qui Deum diligit; That man does not love God, that
loves not himself; do but love your selves: Imo solus se diligere novit, qui
Deum diligit, Only that man that loves God, has the art to love himself; do
but love your selves; for if he love God, he would live eternally with him,
and, if he desire that, and endeavor it earnestly, he does truly love himself,
and not otherwise. And he loves himself, who by seeing God in the Theater of
the world, and in the glass of the creature, by the light of reason, and
knowing God in the Academy of the Church, by the Ordinances thereof, through
the light of faith, endeavors to see God in heaven, by the manifestation of
himself, through the light of Glory, and to know God himself, in himself, and
by himself, as he is all in all; Contemplatively, by knowing as he is known,
and Practically, by loving, as he is loved.

SERMON XXIV. Preached upon Easter Day. 1629.
JOB 4.18. Rehold, he put no trust in his Servants, And his Angels he charged
with folly.


WE celebrate this day, the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus,
Blessed for ever; and in His, all ours; All, that is, the Resurrection of all
Persons; All, that is, the Resurrection of all kinds, whether the Resurrection
from calamities in this world, Ezechiels Resurrection, where God says to him,
Putasne vivent? Son of man do thou think, Ezekiel. 8.6.
these scattered Bones can live again? or the Resurrection from sin, S. John's
Resurrection, Apo. 20.5. 1 Cor. 15.
Blessed is he that has his part in the first Resurrection: Or of the
Resurrection to Glory, S. Paul's Resurrection, that is, more argued, and more
particularly established, by that Apostle, then by the rest. This Resurrection
to glory, is the consummation of all the others; therefore we look especially
at this; and in this, our qualification in this state of glory, is thus
expressed by our Savior Christ himself, Erimus sicut Angeli, In the
Resurrection, Luke 20.36.
we shall be as the Angels. And that we might not flatter our selves in a
dream of a better estate, then the Angels have, in this text we have an
intimation, what their state and condition is, Behold, he put no trust in his
Servants, and his Angels he charged with folly.

In our handling of these words, these shall be our two parts; De quibus, and
De quo; Divisio.
Of whom these words are spoken, and then of what; First, what is positively
said, and then, what is consequently inferred; what proposed, and what
concluded; what of the Angels, and then, what of us, who shall be like the
Angels. In the first, the Persons of whom these words are spoken, because,
though our Interpreters vary in opinions, yet even from their various opinions,
there arise good instructions, we shall rather Problematically inquire, then
Dogmatically establish, first, whether these words were spoken of Angels, or
no; whether this word Angel, in this text, be not (as it is in many other
places of Scriptures, and in the nature of the Word it self) communicable to
other servants, and other messengers then those, whom ordinarily we intend,
when we say Angels; and then secondly, if the words be spoken of Angels, then,
whether of Good or Bad Angels, of those which stand now, or those which fell at
first; and again, if of those that stand, then what degree of perfection they
have, and what that which we use to call their Confirmation, is, how it accrues
to them, and how it works in them, if even of them it be said, Behold, he put
no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charged with folly. In our second
part, what was inferd upon these premises, what was concluded out of these
propositions, what reflected upon us, by this assimilation of ours to the
Angels, because it is a matter of much weight, we shall first, in our entrance
into that part, consider the weight of the testimony, in the Person that gives
it; for it is not Job himself that speaks these words; It is but one of his
friends; but Elephaz, but the Temanite, a Gentile, a stranger from the Covenant
and the Church of God, and yet his words are part of the Word of God. And then
for the matter that is inferd, from our assimilation to the state of Angels,
will be fairly collected, that if those Angels stand, but by the support of
Grace, and not by any thing inseparably inhering in their nature, when we are
at our best, in heaven, we shall do but so neither; much less whilst we are
upon earth, have we in us any impossibility of falling, by any thing already
done for us; Our standing is merely from the grace of God, and therefore let
no man ascribe any thing to himself; and Let him that stands take heed lest
he fall; for, God has done no more for the best of us, here nor hereafter,
then for those Angels, and of them we hear here, He put no trust in his
Servants, and his Angels he charged with folly.

First then, 1 Part. An Angeli.
for our first Disquisition, in our first part, De quibus, the persons of whom
these words are spoken. Amongst all our Expositors of this book of Job, (which
are very many) and amongst all Authors, Ancient and Modern, which have had
occasion in their Sermons and Tractates to reflect upon this text, (which are
many more, infinite) I have never observed more then one, that denies these
words to be spoken of Angels, or that there is any mention, any intention, any
intimation of Angels, in these words. And, (which is the greater wonder) this
one single man, who thus departs from all, and prefers himself above all, is
no Jesuit neither; It is but a Capuccin, but Bolduc upon this Book of Job, and
yet he adventures to say, That that Person of whom it is said in this text, He
put no trust in his Servants, and He charged his Angels with folly, is not God;
and that they of whom it is said, He trusted not his Servants, and his Angels
he charged with folly, are not Angels; But that all that Eliphaz intended in
all this passage of Job, was no more but this, That no great Person must trust
in any kind of Greatness, particularly not in great retinues, and dependances,
of many servants, and powerful instruments, for that was Jobs own case, and
yet he lost them all. The doctrine truly is good; neither should I suddenly
condemn his singularity, if it were well grounded. For, though in the
exposition of Scriptures, singularity always carry a suspicion with it,
singularity is Indicium, (as we say in the Law) some kind of evidence, It is
Semi-probatio, a kind of halfe-proofe against that man, that holds an opinion,
or induces an interpretation different from all other men; yet as these which
we call Indicia, in the Law, work but so, as that they may bring a man to his
oath, or, in some cases, to the rack, and to torture, but are not, alone
sufficient to condemn him; So if we find this singularity in any man, we take
from thence just occasion to question and sift him, and his Doctrine, the more
narrowly, but not only upon that, presently to condemn him. For this was S.
Augustines case; S. Augustine induced new Doctrines, in diverse very important
points, different from all that had written before him; but, upon due
examination, for all his singularity, the Church has found reason to adhere to
him, in those points, ever since his reasons prevailed. In our single Capuccins
case here in our text, it is not so.

And therefore here we must continue that complaint, which we are often put to
make, of the iniquity of the Roman Church to us; If the Fathers seem to agree
in any point, wherein we differ from them, they cry out, we depart from the
Fathers; If we adhere to the Fathers, in any point, in which they differ from
them, then they cry out, we forsake the Church; Still they press us with their
Trent-Canon, You must interpret Scriptures according to the unanime consent of
the Fathers, and yet they suffer a single Capuccin of their own, to depart
from the Fathers, and Sons, from the Ancient and Modern Expositors in their
own Church, And, I may add, from the Holy Ghost too, from the evident purpose
and meaning of the place, in more places, then any Author, whom I have seen,
and in this, more then in any other place, when he says, with such assurance,
that in these words, He put no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charged
with folly, there is no mennon, no intention of God, or Angels, but it is only
spoken of men, of the infidelity of servants, and of the insecurity of Masters
relying upon such dependancies.

We take this then, Ande Angelis Bo^^.
as All do, All, (for this single Capuccin makes no considerable exception,
more then a molehill to the roundnesse of the earth) to be spoken of Angels,
which was our first problem and disquisition; And our second is, being spoken
of Angels, of what Angels they are spoken, Good or Bad, of those that fell, or
those that stood. Here we meet with the same rub as before, singularity. For,
amongst all our Expositors upon this book, I have not observed any other then
Calvin, to interpret this place, of the good Angels, of those that stand
confirmed in grace. Not that Calvin is to be left alone, in that opinion, as
though he were the only man, that thought that the good Angels, considered in
themselves, might be defective in the offices committed unto them by God; for,
it is evident that Origin in diverse of his Homilies upon the book of Numbers,
in his twentieth, and twenty two, and four, and twenty sixth, and in his
thirteenth Homily upon S. Luke, And as evident that S. Hierom himself upon the
first verse of the sixth Chapter of Micheas, thought and taught, That those good
Angels whom God appoints for the tuition of certain men, and certain places,
in this world, shall give an account at the day of Judgment, of the execution
of their office, whether the men committed to them, have not fallen sometimes
by their fault, and their dereliction; for so does he (and not he only)
understand that place, That we shall judge the Angels; 1 Cor. 6.3.
As also those words in the beginning of the Revelation, which S. John is
commanded by Christ, to write to the Angels of certain Churches, that Father,
S. Hierom interprets not only of figurative, and Metaphorical Angels, the
Bishops of those Churches, but literally of the Angels of Heaven.

So then Calvin is from any singularity in that, That the good Angels
considered in themselves, may be defective; but because he may be singular in
interpreting this Text, of good Angels, (as for ought I have observed he is)
this singularity of his, may be a just reason of suspending our assent, but not
a just reason presently to condemn his exposition. The Church must beas just
to him, as it was to S. Augustine, that is, to examine his grounds. And truly,
his ground is fair; his ground is firm. It is this, that though this seem to
derogato from the honor of Angels, that being confirmed, they should be
subject to weakness, yet, says he, we must not pervert, nor force any place
of Scripture, for the honor of the Angels. For indeed, the perverting, and
forcing of Scriptures, for the over-honouring of Saints, has induced a chain
of Heresies in the Roman Church. And that this is a forcing of Scripture, to
understand this Text of fallen Angels, Calvin argues rationally, That those
Angels which are spoken of here, are called the servants of God; And devils are
but his slaves, not his servants; They execute his will, but against their
will; Good Angels are the servants of God; Nor shall we easily find that
Title, The servant of God, applied to ill persons in the Scriptures. Therefore,
(as he notes usefully) God does not charge Angels in this Text, with rebellion,
or obstination, or any heinous crime, but only with folly, weakness,
infirmity, from which, in all degrees, none but God himself can be free. Though
therefore there be no such necessity of accepting this exposition, as should
produce that confident asseveration which he comes to, Dubium non est, It can
admit no doubt, but this place must be thus understood, (for, by his favor, it
may admit a doubt) yet neither is there any such newness in it, (because it is
grounded upon Truth, and all Truth is ancient) but that it may very well be
received; And therefore, as the sense that is most fit to advance his purpose
that speaks it, (which is one principal thing to be considered in every
place) as the sense that most conduces to Eliphaz his end, and to prove that
which he intends to Job, without laying obligation upon any to think so, or
imputation upon any that does not think so, we accept this interpretation of
these words; that they are spoken of Angels, (which was our first) and of good
Angels, (which was our second disquifition) and now proceed to our third, what
their confirmation is, and how it works, if for all that, God put no trust in
those servants, but charged those Angels with folly.

That Moses did speak nothing of the fall, or of the confirmation of Angels,
Confirmati^.
may justly seem a convenient reason to think, that he meant to speak nothing
of the creation of Angels neither. If Moses had intended to have told us of the
creation of Angels, he would have told us of their fall, and confirmation too;
as having told us so particularly of the making of man, he tells us as
particularly of the fall of man, and the restitution of man, by the promise of
a Messiah in Paradise.

And therefore, that the Angels are wrapped up in that word of Moses, The
Heavens, and that they were made when the heavens were made, or that they are
wrapped up in that word of Moses, The Light, and that they were made, when
Light was made, is all but conjecturall, and cloudy: Neither does any article
of that Creed, which we call the Apostles, direct us upon any consideration of
Angels. That they were created long before this world, all the Greek Fathers of
the Eastern Church did constandy think; And in the Western Church, amongst the
Latin Fathers, S. Jerome himself was so clear in it, as to say, Sex millia,
nostri orbis, nondum implentur anni, Our world is not yet six thousand years
old, Et quantas aternitates, quantas saeculorum origines, says that Father,
what infinite revolutions of ages, what infinite eternities, did the Powers,
and Principalities, and Thrones, and Angels of God, serve God in before?
Theodoret that thinks not so, thinks it not against any article of Faith, to
think that it was so. Aquinas, that thinks not so, will not call it an error,
to think so, out of a reverence to Athanasius, and Nazianzen, who did think so;
for that is an indelible character, which S. Jerome has imprinted printed upon
those two Fathers, That no man ever durst impute error to Athanasius, or
Nazianzen. Therefore S. Augustine says moderately, and with that discreet and
charitable temper which becomes every man, in matters that are not
fundamental, Vt volet, unusquisq accipiat; I forbid no man, says he, either
opinion, That the Angels were made before the world, or with it; Dum non Deo
coaeternos, and de vera foelicitate securos non ambigat; Only this I forbid
him, that he do not believe the Angels to be coeternall with God; For, if they
were never made, but subsist of themselves, then they are God, If they be not
creatures, they are Creators; And then, this I forbid him too, says he, That
he do not think the Angels now in any danger of falling. So that S. Augustine
makes this, matter of faith, That the Angels cannot fall; Nor has S. Augustine
any adversary in that point; we only inquire how they acquired this
Infallibility, and assurance in their station. For, if they were made so long
before this world, and fell when this world was made, since they that had stood
so long, fell then, why may not they that stand yet, fall now? They are
supported and established by a confirmation, says the School; And that is our
present and ordinary answer; and it is enough; But how, or when was this
confirmation sealed upon them, or how does it work in them, if God do not yet
trust these servants, but charge these Angels with folly?

That the Angels were created Viatores, Viatores.
and not Beati, in a possibility of everlasting blessedness, but not in
actual possession of it, admits no doubt, because some of them did actually
fall. Of whom S. Augustine says, Beatae vitae dulcedinem nongustaverunt, nec
fastidiverunt acceptam; The Angels had not already fed upon Manna, and then
were weary of that; Non ex eo quod acceperant, ceciderunt, sed ex eo, quod, si
subdi Deo voluissent, accepissent, They fell not from that which they were come
to, but from that, to which, if they had applied themselves to God, they should
have come. So that then, they were not created in a state of blessedness, but
in a way to it; and there was in them Pinguedo spiritus (as S. Jerome says
elegantly) they were mere spirits; In O^^am.
but if we compare them with God, there was a certain fleshlinesse, says he, a
certain fatness, a slipprinesse of falling into a worse state, for any thing
that was in their nature; and the nature of those that fell, and those that
stood, is all one, neither is their nature that do stand, changed by the
benefit of their confirmation. Hence is it, that the Fathers are both so
evident, and so concurrent in that assertion, That an Angel is a spirit,
Gratia, and non Natura immortalitatem suscipiens, Damasc. Just. Mart.
that is, Immortal, but Immortal by additionall Grace, and not by Nature.
Take it in the eldest; Immortalitas eorum ex aliena voluntate pendet, they have
an Immortality, but dependant upon the will of another. And agreeably to the^
another, Cyrill Alex.
Quia ortum habuerunt, occidere possunt, Because the Angels were produced of
nothing, they may be reduced to nothing; for, Solus Deus naturaliter
immortalis, says that Father, Only God is immortal in himself, and by nature.
And bring it from the elder to later Fathers, still we shall meet that which
was said before by them, and S. Bernard says after, Non creati, sed facti
immortales, they were not created at first, but made immortal after. Which S.
Hierome carries even to a spiritual death, the death of sin; Licet non
peccent, peccati tamen sunt capaces, says he; though Angels do not sin, if
they were left to themselves, they might fin; As S. Ambrose expresses the same
thing elegantly, Non in praejudicium trahas, you must not draw that into
consequence, nor conclude so, Non moritur Gabriel, Vriel, Raphael non moritur,
That the Angel Gabriel does not die, Raphael, Vriel does not die, therefore an
Angel, and considered in his own nature, cannot die; for such an impossibility
of dying, as in the soul of man, all agree to be in Angels; for, We shall be
like the Angels, which cannot die, says Christ. But how this Immortality, and
Infallibility accrues to them, and works in them, is still under our
disquisition, since In these his servants God puts no trust, but charges these
Angels with folly.

We have in the Ecclesiastical Story, An. Christi 512.
a story of Alamandurus, a King of the Saracens, who having been converted, and
baptized, and catechized in the true faith, was after attempted by some Bishops
in his Court, of the Eutychian heresy. The Eutychian heresy was, That the
divine nature in Christ, the Godhead, suffered as well as the Humane; and the
good King, providing a Packet of Intelligence to be delivered him, or something
to be whispered in his ear in the presence of those heretical Bishops, upon
reading thereof he told them, that he had received news, That Michael the
Archangell was dead; And when those Bishops rejected that with a scorn, Alas
Sir, Gabriel cannot die, Angels cannot die, The King replied, if an Angel
cannot die, if an Angel be impassible, why would you make me believe, that the
Godhead it self, the Divine Nature suffered in Christ? So we see, that the
piety of a religious King was able to maintain his holy station, even against
the real practices of heretical Court Bishops. A pious and religious King
should not easily be suspected of that levity, to hearken to impious and
heretical motions, though there were good evidence, that that were practiced
upon him; much less, when the fears in himself, and in those which should
practice upon him, are but imaginary, and proceed, (as by Gods grace they do)
rather out of zeal that it may not be so, then out of evidence that it is so.
Zeal distempered, (and God knows, zeal is not always well tempered) will
think an Alamandurus, a constant and impregnable King, easily shaked; and zeal
distempered will think an Athanasius, a Nazianzen, an Eutychian Bishop. Woe,
when Gods sword is in the Devils hand! zeal is Gods sword; uncharitableness
is the Devils. When God gave a flaming sword to the Cherubims in Paradise, they
make good that place, but that sword killed no body, wounded no body. God gives
good men zeal; zeal to make good their station, zeal to conserve the
integrity and the sincerity of Religion, but this zeal should not wound, not
defame any man. Faith comes by hearing, by hearing Sermons, and God sends us
many of them; Charity goes out by hearing, by hearing rumors, and the Devil
sends many of them. God continue our faith, and restore our charity.

That Angels are impassible, that they cannot sin, that they cannot die, all
say; but that, if they were left to themselves, without the support of
additionall grace, they might do both; not only the Ancient Fathers, but, both
the first School, from Damascen, and the middle School, from Lombard, and the
later School, (if we except only those Authors that have writ since the
Lateran Council, I mean the later Lateran Council, in our Fathers times,
(under Leo the tenth) in which Council, it was first determined, that the soul
of man (and consequently Angels) was immortal by nature) do weigh down the
scale on that side, That God does not so trust in those servants, nor so
discharge them, of all weakness, but that they might fall, but for this
support of grace, which is their Confirmation. Now how is this conferd upon
them?

In Christ certainly; In Christ the Father reconciled to himself all things in
earth, In Christo. Coloss. 1.12.
and in heaven. How? Not as a Redeemer; for those that fell, and thereby needed
a redemption, never were, never shall be redeemed; but as a Mediator, an
Intercessor in their behalf, that those that do stand, may stand for ever.
For, therefore, says S. Augustine, do the Angels refuse sacrifice at our
hands, Quia and ipsis nohiscum sacrificium norunt, Because they know that there
is one sacrifice offered to God, for them, and for us too, that is Christ
Jesus, a propitiation for them, and us; For us, by way of redemption; for them,
by way of Mediation, and Intercession. In such a sense, as S. Augustine
confesses that God had forgiven him the sins he never did, because but for his
grace he should have done them, the Angels are well said to have received a
reconciliation in Christ, because, but for his mediation, they might have
fallen into Gods displeasure. Upon those words, that God showed Adam his
judgments, Quae judicia? says that Bishop Catharinus, Eech^. 27.12.
what judgments did God show Adam? Iudicia pessimorum spirituum, says he, the
better to contain Adam in his duty, God declared to him, the judgment that he
had executed upon those disobedient Angels. So that, as Adam, if he had made a
right use of Gods grace, had been immortal in his body, and yet not immortal
then, by nature, as our bodies in the state of glory in the resurrection, shall
be immortal, and yet not immortal then by nature; so no Angel, after this
Confirmation, (that is, the mediation of Christ applied to him) shall fall:
For, Quis Catholicus ignorant, Aug.
nullum novum Diabolum ex bonis Angelis futurum? Who can pretend to be a
Catholic, and believe, that ever there shall be any new Devil from amongst
the good Angels? And yet, by the way, many of the Ancient Fathers thought that
those words, That the sons of God saw the daughters of men to be fair, and
fell in love with them, were meant of good Angels, who fell in love with those
women, that were committed to their charge, and that they sinned in so doing,
and that they never returned to heaven, but fell to the first fallen Angels: So
that those Fathers have more then implied a possibility of falling into sin,
and punishment for sin, in the good Angels.

But this none says now; nor with any probability ever did. It is enough that
they stand confirmed, confirmed by the grace of God in Christ Jesus; so that
now, being in possession of the sight of God, and the light of G^ry, their
understanding is perfectly illustrated, so that they can apprehend nothing
erroneously, and therefore their will is perfectly rectified, so that they can
desire nothing irregularly, and therefore they cannot sin, and therefore they
cannot die; for all sin is from the perverseness of the will, and all disorder
in the will from error in the understanding; In heaven they are, and we, by
our assimilation to them, shall be free from both, and impeccable, and
impassible, by the continual grace of God; Though if they, or we were left to
our selves, even there, God could put no trust in his servants, nor leave his
Angels uncharged with folly. And so we have done with the pieces, which
constitute our first part, De quibus, of whom these words are spoken; First,
that they were spoken of Angels, rejecting that single Capuccin, who only
denies it; and then, of good Angels, accepting Calvin's interpretation, because,
though he be singular in applying this Text to that Doctrine, yet in the
Doctrine it self, he has authority enough, and fair reasons for the Text it
self; and lastly, how that which we call Confirmation in those Angels accrewes
to them, and how it works in them. And so we pass to our second Part, what is
inferred upon these premises, what concluded upon these propositions, what by
our assimilation to Angels, reflects upon us.

And here, 2. Part. Testis Eliphaz.
because the matter is of much consideration, we proposed first to be
considered, the weight and validity of the testimony, in the person of him that
gives it; for many times the credit of the restimony depends much upon the
credit of the witness. And here, it is not Job himself, it is but Eliphaz,
Eliphaz the Temanite, an Alien, a stranger to the Covenant, and Church of God.
But surely no greater a stranger, then those secular Poets, whose sentences S.
Paul cites not only in his Epistles, but in his Sermons too. Certainly not so
great a stranger, as the Devil, and yet in how many places of Scripture, are
words spoken by the Devil himself inserted into the Scriptures, and thereby,
so far made the word of God, as that the word of God, the Bible, were not
perfect norintire to us, if we had not those words of those Poets, those words
of the Devil himself in it? How can I doubt but that God can draw good out of
ill, and make even some sin of mine, some occasion of my salvation, when the
God of truth can make the word of the father of lies, his word? There is but
one place in all this Book of Job cited in the New Testament; Job 5.13.
that is, He takes the wise in their own craft; and those words are not
spoken by Job himself, but by this very friend of Job, this Eliphaz, that
speaks in our Text; 1 Cor. 3.19.
and yet they are cited, in the phrase, and manner, in which holy Scripture is
ordinarily cited, It is written, says the Apostle there, and so the Holy
Ghost, that spoke in S. Paul, has canonized the words spoken by Eliphaz.

But besides the credit which these words have, Visio.
a posteriori, that they are after inserted into the word of God, (which is
another manner of credit, and authentiquenesse, then that which the Canonists
speak of, that when any sentence of a Father is cited, and inserted into a
Decretall Epistle of a Pope, or any part of the Canon Law, that sentence is
thereby made authentical, and canonical) these words have their credit a
priori, for, before be spoke them to Job, he received them in a vision from
God. I had a vision in the night, Ver. 12.
says he, and fear, and trembling came upon me, and a spirit stood before me,
and I heard this voice.

Neither is there any necessity, no nor reason, to charge Eliphaz with a false
relation, or counterfaiting a revelation from God, which he had not had, as
some Expositors have done. For, howsoever in some argumentations, and applyings
of things to Jobs particular case, we may find some errors in Eliphaz, in modo
probandi, in the manner of his proceeding, yet we shall not find him to
proceed upon false grounds; and therefore, we believe Eliphaz to have received
this that he says, from God, in a vision, and for the instruction of a man,
more in Gods favor then himself, of Job. Balaam had the reputation of a great
Wizard, and yet God made his Ass wiser then he, and able to instruct and
catechize him. Generally we are to receive our instructions from Gods
established Ordinances, from his ordinary means afforded to us, in his Church:
And where those means, sufficient in themselves, are duly exhibited to us, we
are not to hearken after revelations, nor to believe every thing, that may have
some such appearance, to be a revelation.

But yet, we are not so to conclude God in his Law, as that he should have no
Prerogative, nor so to bind him up in his Ordinances, as that he never can, or
never does work by an extraordinary way of revelation. Neither must the
profusion of miracles, the prodigality and prostitution of miracles in the
Roman Church, (where miracles for every natural disease may be had, at some
Shrine, or miracle-shop, better cheap, then a Medicine, a Drugge, a Simple at
an Apothecaries) bring us to deny, or distrust all miracles, done by God upon
extraordinary causes, and to important purposes. Eliphaz was a profane person,
and yet received a Vision from God, and for the instruction of Job himself.

What was it? we see ver. 17. Shall mortal man be more just then God, Quid.
shall a man be more pure then his Maker? Why? Did this Doctrine need this
solemnity, this preparation, that Eliphaz gives it, v. 8. That it was a thing
told him in secret, and such a secret, that he was able to comprehend but a
little at once of it? Is there any such incomprehensiblenesse, any such
difficulty in this Doctrine, That no mortal man is more just then God, no man
more pure then his Maker, but that the shallowest capacity may receive it, and
the shortest memory retain it? Needs this a Revelation, an extraordinary
conveyance? For the general knowledge it does not; Every man will say, he
knows mortal man cannot be more just then God, nor any man purer then his
Maker; But, for the particular consideration it does. Every justifying a sin,
is a making mortal man more just then God; when I come to say, With what
justice can God punish a nights, or an hours sin, with everlasting torments?
Every murmuring at Gods corrections is a making man purer then God; when I come
to say, Does not God depart farther from the purity of his nature, when he is
an angry, and a vindicative God, then I from mine, when I am an amorous, or
wanton man? We that are but mortal men, must not think, says Eliphaz, to make
our selves purer then our Maker; for, they, who in their nature, are much purer
then we, the Angels, are far short of that, for, God put no trust in those
servants, and those Angels he charged with folly.

So then, though Eliphaz his premises reach to the Angels, and their state,
his inference and his last purpose falls upon us, who, by Gods goodness, become
capable of succession into the place of the Angels that are fallen, and of an
association, and assimilation to those Angels that stand. And our assimilation
is this, That as they have in their station, we also shall have in ours, a
faithful certitude, that we shall never fall out of the arms and bosom of
our gracious God. But then, there arises to us a sweeter relish in considering
this stability, this perpetuity, this infallibility to consist in the
continual succession, and supply of grace, then in any one act, which God has
done for them, or us. I conceive a more effectual delight, when I consider God
to have so wrought the confirmation of Angels, that he has taken them into a
state of glory, and a fruition of his sight, and to perpetuate that state unto
them, perpetually superinfuses upon them more and more beams of that glory,
then if I should consider God to have confirmed them, with such a measure of
grace, at once, as that he could not withdraw, or they could forfeit that
grace. For, as there is no doubt made by the Fathers, nor by the School, but
that that light which the Apostles saw at the Transfiguration of Christ, was
that very light of glory, which they see now in Heaven, and yet they lost the
sight of that light again; so is there no violation of any Article of our
Faith, if we concur in opinion with them, who say, That S. Paul in his
ecstasy, in his rapture into the third heaven, did see that very light of
glory, which constitutes the Beatificall Vision, and yet did lose that light
again.

Truly to me, this consideration, That as his mercy is new every morning, so
his grace is renewed to me every minute, That it is not by yesterdaies grace
that I live now, but that I have Panem quotidianum, and Panem horarium, My
daily bread, my hourly bread, in a continual succession of his grace, That
the eye of God is open upon me, though I wink at his light, and watches over
me, though I sleep, That God makes these returns to my soul, and so studies
me in every change, this consideration, infuses a sweeter verdure, and imprints
a more cheerful tincture upon my soul, then any taste of any one Act, done
at once, can minister unto me. God made the Angels all of one natural
condition, in nature all alike; and God gave them all such grace, as that
thereby they might have stood; and to them that used that grace aright, he gave
a farther, a continual succession of grace, and that is their Confirmation;
Not that they cannot, but that they shall not fall; not that they are safe in
themselves, but by Gods preservation safe; for, otherwise, He puts no trust in
those Servants, and those Angels he charges with folly.

This is our case too; ours that are under the blessed Election, and good
purpose of God upon us; if we do not fall from him, it is not of our selves;
for left to our selves, we should: For, John 5.
so S. Augustine interprets those words of our Savior, Pater operatur, My
Father works still; God has not accomplished his work upon us, in one Act,
though an Election; but he works in our Vocation, and he works in our
Justification, and in our Sanctification he works still. And, if God himself
be not so come to his Sabbath, and his rest in us, but that he works upon us
still for all that Election, shall any man think to have such a Sabbath, such
a rest, in that Election, as shall slacken our endeavor, to make sure our
Salvation, and not work as God works, to his ends in us? Hence then we banish
all self-subsistence, all attributing of any power, to any faculty of our own;
either by preoperation, in any natural or moral disposing of our selves,
before Gods preventing grace dispose us, or by such a cooperation, as should
put God and man in Commission together, or make grace and nature Colleagues in
the work, or that God should do one half, and man the other; or any such
post-operation, That I should think to proceed in the ways of godliness, by
virtue of Gods former grace, without imploring, and obtaining more, in a
continual succession of his concomitant grace, for every particular action: In
Christ I can do all things; I need no more but him; without Christ, I can do
nothing; not only not have him, but not know that I need him; for I am not
better then those Angels, of whom it is said, He put no trust in those
Servants, and those Angels he charged with folly.

And as we banish from hence all self-subsistence, all opinion of standing by
our selves, so do we also all impeccability, and all impossibility of falling
in our selves, or in any thing, that God has already done for us, if he should
discontinue his future grace, and leave us to our former stock. They that were
raised from death to life again, Dorcas, Lazarus, and the rest, were subject
to sin, in that new life, which was given them. They that are quickened by the
soul of the soul, Election it self, are subject to sin, for all that. God
sees the sins of the Elect, and sees their sins to be sins; and in his
Ephemerides, his journals, he writes them down, under that Title, sins, and he
reads them every day, in that book, as such; and they grow greater and greater
in his sight, till our repentance have washed them out of his sight. Casuists
will say, that though a dead man raised to life again, be not bound to his
former marriage, yet he is bound to that Religion, that he had invested in
Baptism, and bound to his former religious vows, and the same obedience to
Superiors as before. We were all dead in Adam; and he that is raised again,
even by Election, though he be not so married to the world, as others are, not
so in love with sin, not so under the dominion of sin, yet he is as much bound
to an obedience to the Will of God declared in his Law, and may no more presume
of a liberty of sinning before, nor of an impunity of sin after, then he that
pretends no such Election, to confide in. Prospe^.
For, this is excellently said, to be the working of our election, by Prosper,
the Disciple of S. Augustines Doctrines, and the Echo of his words, Vt fiat
permanendi voluntaria, foelixque necessitas, That our assurance of salvation by
perseverance, is necessary, and yet voluntary; Consider it in Gods purpose,
easily it cannot, consider it in our selves, it might be resisted. For we are
no better then those Angels, and, In those servants he put no trust, and those
Angels he charged with folly.

But such as they are, Numerus. ^^^ 130.7.
we shall be: And, since with the Lord there is Copiosa Redemptio, Plenteous
Redemption, that overflowing mercy of our God, those super-superlative Merits
of our Savior, that plenteous Redemption, may hold even in this particular
blessedness, in our assimilation to them, That as, though there fell great
numbers of Angels, yet great, and greater then they that fell, stood, So though
The way to Heaven be narrow, and the gate strait, (which is said by Christ, to
excite our industry, and are rather an expression arising out of his mercy,
lest we should slacken our holy endeavors, then any intimidation, or
commination) (for though the way be narrow, and the gate strait, yet the room
is spacious enough within) why, by this plenteous redemption, may we not hope,
(...) 12.^.
that many more then are excluded, shall enter there? Those words, The dragons
tail drew the third part of the stars from Heaven, the Fathers generally
interpret of the fall of Angels with Lucifer; and it was but a third part; And
by Gods grace, whose mercy is overflowing, whose merits are super-abundant,
with whom there is plenteous redemption, the serpent gets no farther upon us. I
know some say, that this third part of the stars, is meant of eminent persons,
illustrated and assisted with the best means of salvation, and, if a third of
them, how many meanlier furnished, fall? But, those that we can consider to be
best provided of means of salvation, nextto these, are Christians in general;
and so may this plenteous Redemption be well hoped to work, that but a third
part of them, of Christians, shall perish; and then the God of this plenteous
Redemption having promised us, that the Christian Religion shall be carried
over all the world, still the number of those that shall be saved is enlarged.

Apply to thy self that which S. Cyril says of the Angels, Tristaris, quia
aliqui vitam amiserunt? Does it grieve thee, that any are fallen? At plures
meliorem statum apud Deum obtinent, Let this comfort thee, even in the
application thereof to thy self, that more stood then fell. As Elisha said to
his servant, in a danger of surprisall, Fear not, 2 King 6.16.
for they that be with us, are more then they that are with them, so, if a
suspicion of the paucity of them that shall be saved, make thee afraid, look
up upon this overflowing mercy of thy God, this super-abundant merit of thy
Savior, this plenteous Redemption, and thou may find, find in a fair
credulity, and in a well regulated hope, more with thee, then with them that
perish. Live so, in such a warfare with tentations, in such a colluctation with
thy concupiscences, in such a jealousy, and suspicion of thine indifferent,
nay, of thy best actions, as though there were but one man to be saved, and
thou would be that one; But live and die in such a sense of this plenteous
Redemption of thy God, as though neither thou, nor any could lose salvation,
except he doubted of it. I doubt not of mine own salvation; and in whom can I
have so much occasion of doubt, as in my self? When I come to heaven, shall I
be able to say to any there, Lord! how got you hither? Was any man less likely
to come thither then I? There is not only an Only God in heaven; But a Father,
a Son, a Holy Ghost in that God; which are names of a plurality, and sociable
relations, conversable notions. There is not only one Angel, a Gabriel; But to
thee all Angels cry alond; and Cherubim, and Seraphim, are plural
terminations; many Cherubs, many Seraphs in heaven. There is not only one
Monarchall Apostle, a Peter, but The glorious company of the Apostles praise
thee. There is not only a Proto-Martyr, a Stephen, but The noble army of
Martyrs praise thee. Who ever amongst our Fathers, thought of any other way to
the Moluccaes, or to China, then by the Promontory of Good hope? Yet another
way opened it self to Magellan; a Strait; it is true; but yet a way thither;
and who knows yet, whether there may not be a North-East, and a North-West way
thither, besides? Go thou to heaven, in an humble thankfulness to God, and
holy cheerfulness, in that way that God has manifested to thee; and do not
pronounce too bitterly, too desperately, that every man is in an error, that
thinks not just as thou think, or in no way, that is not in thy way. God
found folly, weakness in his Angels, yet more stood then fell; God finds
weakness, wickedness in us, yet he came to call, not the righteous, but
sinners to repentance; and who, that comes in that capacity, a Repentant
sinner, can be shut out, or denied his part in this Resurrection?

The key of David opens, and no man shuts. The Son of David, is the key of
David, Christ Jesus; He has opened heaven for us all; let no man shut out
himself, by diffidence in Gods mercy, nor shut out any other man, by
overvaluing his own purity, in respect of others. But forbearing all
lacerations, and tearings, and woundings of one another, with bitter
invectives, all exasperations by odious names of subdivision, let us all study,
first the redintegration of that body, of which Christ Jesus has declared
himself to be the head, the whole Christian Church, and pray that he would,
and hope that he will enlarge the means of salvation to those, who have not yet
been made partakers of it. That so, he that called the gates of heaven strait,
may say to those gates, Psalm. 24.7.
Elevamini portae aeternales, Be ye lifted up, ye eternal gates, and be ye
enlarged, that as the King of glory himself is entered into you, for the farther
glory of the King of glory, not only that hundred and four and forty thousand
of the Tribes of the children of Israel, but that multitude which is spoken or
in that place, which no man can number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, Apoc.
7.19.
and People, and friends, may enter with that acclamation, Salvation to our
God, which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever. And unto this
City of the living God, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the innumerable company of Angels, to the
general assembly, and Church of the first b^^n, which are written in heaven,
and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and
to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then that of Abel, Blessed God bring us all, for thy Sons
sake, and by the operation of thy Spirit. Amen.

SERMON XXV. Preached at S. Paul's, upon Easter Day. 1630.
MAT. 28.6. He is not here, for he is risen, as he said; Come, See the place
where the Lord lay.


THese are words spoken by an Angel of heaven, to certain devout Women, who,
not yet considering the Resurrection of Christ, came with a pious intention to
do an office of respect, and civil honor to the body of their Master, which
they meant to embalme in the Monument where they thought to find it. How great
a compass God went in this act of the Resurrection? Here was God, the God of
life, dead in a grave, And here was man, a dead man, risen out of the grave;
Here are Angels of heaven employed in so low an office, as to catechize Women,
and Women employed in so high an office, as to catechize the Apostles. I chose
this verse out of the body of the Story of the Resurrection, because in this
verse the act of Christ's rising, (which we celebrate this day) is expressly
mentioned, Surrexit enim, for he is risen: Which word stands as a Candle, that
shows it self, and all about it, and will minister occasion of illustrating
your understanding, of establishing your faith, of exalting your devotion in
some other things about the Resurrection, then fall literally within the words
of this verse. For, from this verse we must necessarily reflect, both upon the
persons (they to whom, and they by whom the words were spoken) and upon the
occasion given. I shall not therefore now stand to divide the words into their
parts and branches, at my first entering into them, but handle them, as I shall
meet them again anon, springing out, and growing up from the body of the Story;
for the Context is our Text, and the whole Resurrection is the work of the day,
though it be virtually, implicitly contracted into this verse, He is not here,
for he is risen, as he said; Come, and see the place where the Lord lay.

Our first consideration is upon the persons; Mulieres.
and those we find to be Angelical women, and Evangelical Angels: Angels
made Evangelists, to preach the Gospel of the Resurrection, Mal. 3.1. Apoc.
1.20.
and Women made Angels, (so as John Baptist is called an Angel, and so as the
seven Bishops are called Angels) that is, Instructers of the Church; And to
recompense that observation, that never good Angel appeared in the likeness of
woman, here are good women made Angels, that is, Messengers, publishers of the
greatest mysteries of our Religion. For, howsoever some men out of a petulancy
and wantonness of wit, and out of the extravagancy of Paradoxes, and such
singularities, have called the faculties, and abilities of women in question,
even in the root thereof, in the reasonable and immortal soul, yet that one
thing alone has been enough to create a doubt, (almost an assurance in the
negative) whether S. Ambroses Commentaries upon the Epistles of S. Paul, be
truly his or no, that in that book there is a doubt made, whether the woman
were created according to Gods Image; Therefore, because that doubt is made in
that book, the book it self is suspected not to have had so great, so grave, so
constant an author as S. Ambrose was; No author of gravity, of piety, of
conversation in the Scriptures could admit that doubt, whether woman were
created in the Image of God, that is, in possession of a reasonable and an
immortal soul.

The faculties and abilities of the soul appear best in affairs of State, and
in Ecclesiastical affairs; in matter of government, and in matter of
religion; and in neither of these are we without examples of able women. For,
for State affairs, and matter of government, our age has given us such a
Queen, as scarce any former King has equalled; And in the Venetian Story, I
remember, that certain Matrons of that City were sent by Commission, in quality
of Ambassadors, to an Empress with whom that State had occasion to treat;
And in the Stories of the Eastern parts of the World, it is said to be in
ordinary practice to send women for Ambassadors. And then, in matters of
Religion, women have evermore had a great hand, though sometimes on the left,
as well as on the right hand. Sometimes their abundant wealth, sometimes their
personal affections to some Churchmen, sometimes their irregular and
indiscreet zeal has made them great assistants of great Heretics; as S.
Hierome tells us of Helena to Simon Magus, Hieror.
and so was Lucilia to Donatus, so another to Mahomet, and others to others.
But so have they been also great instruments for the advancing of true
Religion, as S. Paul testifies in their behalf, at Thessolonica, Of the chief
women, not a few; Great, and Many. For, Acts 17.4.
many times women have the proxies of greater persons then themselves, in their
bosoms; many times women have voices, where they should have none; many times
the voices of great men, in the greatest of Civil, or Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, have been in the power and disposition of women.

Hence is it, that in the old Epistles of the Bishops of Rome, when they needed
the Court, (as, at first they needed Courts as much, as they brought Courts to
need them at last) we find as many letters of those Popes to the Emperors
Wives, and the Emperors Mothers, and Sisters, and women of other names, and
interests in the Emperors favors and affections, as to the Emperors
themselves. S. Hierome writ many letters to diverse holy Ladies; for the most
part, all of one stock and kindred; and a stock and kindred so religious, as
that I remember, the good old man says, That if Jupiter were their Cousin, of
their kindred, he believes Jupiter would be a Christian; he would leave being
such a God as he was, to be their fellow servants to the true God.

Now if women were brought up according to S. Hieromes instructions in those
letters, that by seven years of age, they should be able to say the Psalms
without book; That as they grew in years, they should proceed in the knowledge
of Scriptures, That they should love the Service of God at Church, but not sine
Matre, not go to Church when they would, but when their Mother could go with
them, Nec quaererent celebritatem Ecclesiarum, They should not always go to
the greatest Churches, and where the most famous Preachers drew most company;
If women have submitted themselves to as good an education as men, God forbid
their sex should prejudice them, for being examples to others. Their sex? no,
nor their sins neither: for, it is S. Hieromes note, That of all those women,
that are named in Christ's pedigree in the Gospel, there is not one, (his only
Blessed Virgin Mother excepted) upon whom there is not some suspicious note of
incontinency. Of such women did Christ vouchsafe to come; He came of woman so,
as that he came of nothing but woman; of woman, and not of man. Neither do we
read of any woman in the Gospel, that assisted the persecutors of Christ, or
furthered his afflictions; Even Pilats wife dissuaded it. Woman, as well as
man, was made after the Image of God, in the Creation; and in the Resurrection,
when we shall rise such as we were here, her sex shall not diminish her glory:
Of which, she receives one fair beam, and inchoation in this Text, that the
purpose of God, is, even by the ministry of Angel s, communicated to women.
But what women? for, their preparation, their disposition is in this Text too;
such women, as were not only devout, but sedulous, diligent, constant,
perseverant in their devotion; To such women God communicated himself; which is
another Consideration in these persons.

As our Savior Christ was pleased, that one of these women should be
celebrated by name, for another act upon him, Mary Magdalen, Maria.
and that wheresoever his Gospel was preached, her act should be remembered, so
the rest, with her, are worthy to be known and celebrated by their names;
Therefore we consider, Quae, and quales; first who they were, and then what they
were; their names first, and then their conditions. Bodin de repub. l. 6. c. 4.
There is an Historical relation, and observation, That though there be diverse
Kingdoms in Europe, in which the Crowns may fall upon women, yet, for some
ages, they did not, and when they did, it was much at one time, and all upon
women of one name, Mary. It was so with us in England, and in Scotland it was
so; so in Denmark, and in Hungary it was so too; all four, Mary's. Though
regularly women should not preach, yet when these Legati a latere, these Angels
from heaven did give Orders to women, and made them Apostles to the Apostles,
the Commission was to women of that name, Mary; for, though our Expositors
dispute whether the Blessed Virgin Mary were there then, when this passed at
the Sepulcher, yet of Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James, there can be
no doubt. Indeed it is a Noble, and a Comprehensive name, Mary. It is the name
of woman, in general; Genesis 2.23.
For, when Adam says of Eve, She shall be called Woman, in the Arabique
Translation, there is this name, She shall be called Mary; and the Arabique is,
perchance, a dialect of the Hebrew. But in pure, and Original Hebrew, the word
signifies Exaltation, and whatsoever is best in the kind thereof. This is the
name of that sister of Aaron, Exodus 15.20.
and Moses, that with her Quire of women assisted at that Eucharisticall
sacrifice, that Triumphant song of Thanksgiving, upon the destruction, the
subversion, the submersion of Egypt, in the Red Sea. Her name was Miriam; and
Miriam and Mary is the same name in women, as Iosuah and Jesus is the same name
to men. The word denotes Greatness, not only in Power, but in Wisdom, and
Learning too; and so signifies often Prophets, and Doctors; and so falls
fitliest upon these blessed women, who, in that sense, were all made Mary's,
Messengers, Apostles to the Apostles; in which sense, even those women were
made Mary's, (that is, Messengers of the Resurrection) who, no doubt, had other
names of their own. There was amongst them, the wife of Chusa, a great man in
Herod's Court, Luke 8.3. and 24.10.
his Steward; and her name was Ioanna, Ioane. So that here was truly a Pope
Ioane, a woman of that name, above the greatest men in the Church. For the
dignity of the Papacy, they venture to say, that whosoever was S. Peter's
Successor in the Bishopric of Rome, was above any of the Apostles, that
over-lived Peter; as S. John did; Here was a woman, a Pope Ioane, Superior to
S. Peter himself, and able to teach him. But though we found just reason to
celebrate these women by name, we meant not to stay upon that circumstance; we
shut it up with this prayer, That that blessing which God gave to these Mary's,
which was, to know more of Christ, then their former teachers knew, he will
also be pleased to give to the greatest of that name amongst us, That she may
know more of Christ, then her first teachers knew. And we pass on, from the
Names, to the Conditions of these women.

And first we consider their sedulity; sedulity, that admits no intermission,
no interruption, no discontinuance, Saeduls.
no tepidity, no indifferency in religious offices. Consider we therefore their
sedulity if we can. I say, if we can; because if a man should sit down at a
Bee-hive, or at an Ant-hill, and determine to watch such an Ant, or such a Be,
in the working thereof, he would find that Be, or that Ant so sedulous, so
serious, so various, so concurrent with others, so contributary to others, as
that he would quickly lose his marks, and his sight of that Ant, or that Be;
So if we fix our consideration upon these devout women, and the sedulity of
their devotion, so as the several Evangelists present it unto us, we may
easily lose our sight, and hardly know which was which, or, at what time she or
she came to the Sepulcher. They came in the end of the Sabbath, as it begun to
dawne, Mat. 28.1.
toward the first day of the week, says S. Matthew; They came very early in
the morning, upon the first day of the week, Mark 16.1. Luke 24.1. John 20.1.
the Sun being then risen, says S. Mark; They prepared their Spices, and
rested the Sabbath, and came early the next day, says S. Luke; They came the
first day, when it was yet dark, says S. John. From Friday Evening, till
Sunday morning they were sedulous, Ath^nas.
busy upon this service; so sedulous, as that Athanasius thinks these women
came four several times to the Sepulcher, and that the four Evangelists have
relation to their four commings; Hierome.
and S. Hierome argues upon this seeming variety in the Evangelists, thus, Non
mendacii signum, sed sedulae visitationis officium, This variety argues no
uncertainty in the Evangelists, but testifies the sedulity of those women they
speak of; Dum crebro abeunt and recurrunt, says he, whilst they make many
accesses, and returns, Nec patiuntur a Sepulchro diu, aut longius abesse, and
cannot endure to be far distant, or long absent from their devout exercise.

Beloved, true devotion is a serious, a sedulous, an impatient thing. He that
said in the Gospel, Luke 18.11.
I fast twice a week, was but a Pharisee; He that can reckon his devout
actions, is no better; He that can tell how often he has thought upon God to
day, has not thought upon him often enough. It is S. Augustines holy Circle,
to pray, that we may hear Sermons profitably, and to hear Sermons that we
learn to pray acceptably. Devotion is no Marginall note, no interlineary
gloss, no Parenthesis that may be left out; It is no occasional thing, no
conditional thing; I will go, if I like the Preacher, if the place, if the
company, if the weather; but it is of the body of the Text, and lays upon us
an Obligation of fervor and of continuance. This we have in this example of
these, not only Evangelical, but Euangelisticall (preaching) women; And thus
much more, that as they were sedulous and diligent after, so they were early,
and begun betimes; for, howsoever the Evangelists may seem to vary, in the
point of time, when they came, they all agree they came early, which is another
exaltation of Devotion.

They were women of quality, and means. They came with Christ from Galilee,
Mant.
and they came upon their own charges; and more then so; for, says the text,
Luke 8.3.
They ministered to Christ of their substance. Women of quality may be up and
ready early enough for Gods service, if they will. If they be not, let them but
seriously ask themselves that question, whether upon no other occasion, no
entertainment, no visit, no letter to or from another, they could have made
more haste; And if they find they could, I must say in that case, as
Tertullian said, They have put God and that man into the balance, and waighed
them together, and found God too light. That Mighty, that weighty, that
ponderous God, that blasts a State with a breath, that melts a Church with a
look, that molders a world with a touch, that God is waighed down with that
man; That man, whose errand, if it be but conversation, is vanity, but, if it
be sin, is nothing, waighs down God. The world will needs think one of these
Mary's, (Magdalen) to have been guilty of such entertainments as these, of
Incontinency, and of that in the lowest (that is, the highest) kind,
Prostitution; perchance she was; But, I would there were that necessity of
thinking so, that because she was a Woman, and is called a sinner, therefore
that must be her sin, as though they were capable of no other sin; Alas, it is
not so. There may be women, whom even another sin, the sin of Pride, and
over-valuation of themselves may have kept from that sin, and yet may well be
called sinners too; There may be found women, whom only their scorn of others,
has kept honest, and yet are sinners, though not in that sin. But yet, even
this woman; Mary Magdalen, be her sin what you will, came early to Christ;
early, as soon as he afforded her any light. Christ says, in the person of
Wisdom, I love them that love me, and they that seek me early, Prove. 8.17.
shall find me; And a good soul will echo back that return of David, O God,
thou art my God, Psalm. 63.1.
early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee; and double that echo with Esaias, With my soul have I desired thee in the
night, with my spirit with in me, Esaias 26.9.
will I seek thee early.

Now, what is this early seeking of God. First, there is a general rule given
by Solomon, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; submit thy self to a
religious discipline betimes. But then, in that there is a Now inserted into
that rule of Solomon's, (Remember Now thy Creator, in the days of thy youth,)
there is an intimation, that there is a youth in our age, and an earliness
acceptable to God, in every action; we seek him early, if we seek him at the
beginning of every undertaking. If I awake at midnight, and embrace God in mine
arms, that is, receive God into my thoughts, and pursue those meditations, by
such a having had God in my company, I may have frustrated many tentations that
would have attempted me, and perchance prevailed upon me, if I had been alone,
for solitude is one of the devils scenes; and, I am afraid there are persons
that sin oftener alone, then in company; but that man is not alone that has God
in his sight, in his thought. Thou preventedst me with the blessings of
goodness, says David to God. Psalm. 21.3.
I come not early enough to God, if I stay till his blessings in a prosperous
fortune prevent me, and lead me to God; I should come before that. The days of
affliction have prevented me, Job 30.27.
says Job. I come not early enough to God, if I stay till his Judgments
prevent me, and whip me to him; I should come before that. But, if I prevent
the night watches, Psalm. 119.147.
and the dawning of the morning, If in the morning my prayer prevent thee O
God, Psalm. 88.13.
(which is a high expression of David's, That I should wake before God wakes,
and even prevent his preventing grace, before it be declared in any outward
act, that day) If before blessing or cross fall upon me, I surrender my self
entirely unto thee, and say, Lord here I lie, make thou these sheets my sheets
of penance, in inflicting a long sickness, or my winding sheet, in delivering
me over to present death, Here I lie, make thou this bed mine Altar, and bind
me to it in the cords of decrepitnesse, and bedridnesse, or throw me off of it
into the grave and dust of expectation, Here I lie, do thou choose whether I
shall see any to morrow in this world, or begin my eternal day, this night,
Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done; when I seek God, merely for love of him,
and his glory, without relation to his benefits or to his corrections, this is
that early seeking, which we consider in those blessed Women, whose sedulity
and earnestness, when they were come, and acceleration and earliness, in
their coming, having already considered, pass we now to the Ad quid, to what
purpose, and with what intention they came, for in that alone, there are diverse
exaltations of their devotion.

In the first verse of this Chapter it is said, Ad quid.
They came to see the Sepulcher; Even to see the Sepulcher was an act of love,
and every act of love to Christ, is Devotion. There is a love that will make
one kiss the case of a picture, though it be shut; There is a love that will
melt ones bowels, if he do but pass over, or pass by the grave of his dead
friend. But their end was not only to see the Sepulcher, but to see whether
the Sepulcher were in such state, as that they might come to their end, which
was, To embalme their Masters body. But this was done before; and done to their
knowledge; for, that all the Evangelists testify; Luke 23.55.
particularly, S. Luke, The women followed, and beheld the Sepulcher, and how
the body was laid. How, that is, how abundantly it was embalmed by Nicodemus.
How, that is, how decently and orderly it was wound and bound up, according to
the manner of the Jews funerals. What then intended these women to do more
then was done already?

That cannot be well admitted, Theophy. Genesis 50.1.
which Theophylact says, That as Jacobs body was embalmed forty days in
Egypt, so they intended to re-embalme our Saviors body, formerly embalmed by
Nicodemus. For, that was only done upon such bodies as were exenterated and
embowelled, and then filled up, and plastered about with spices and gums, to
preserve them from putrefaction, when they were to be carried into remote
parts; But of these re-embalmings and post-unctions after the body had been
laid in the Sepulcher, I know not, who may have read of them; I have not.
Neither seems it to have been possible in this case; not possible for these
women to have come to the body of Chrrist. For, if that be the true winding
sheet of Christ which is kept in Savoy, it appears, that that sheet stuck so
close to his body, as that it did, and does still retain the dimensions of his
body, and the impressions and signatures of every wound that he had received in
his body. So that it would have been no easy matter for those women to have
pulled off that sheet, if it had had no other glue, no other gum, but his
own precious blood to hold it; Chiffletius de Linters Sepulchr. cap. 25.
But, if (as their more wary Authors say) Christ's body were carried loose, in
that sheet, which is showed in Savoy, from the Cross to the Sepulcher, and
then taken out of that sheet, and embalmed by Nicodemus, and wrapped up in
other linen, upon those spices and gummes which he bestowed upon it, and then
buried according to the manner of the jews, whose manner it was to swathe the
bodies of the dead, John 11.44.
just as we swathe the bodies of children, all over, (for, so Lazarus came out
bound hand and foot with grave-cloathes) how could it fall into the
imagination of these women, that they could come to embalme the body of Christ,
so swathed, so wound, so bound up, as that body was; for, certainly, it was the
body, and not the grave-cloathes that they meant to embalme.

Truly I have often wondered, that amongst our very many Expositors of the
Gospels, (which I can pronounce of some scores) no one has touched upon this
doubt. They all make good use of their piety, and devout officiousness toward
their dead Master, but of the impossibility of coming to that body, and of the
irregularity, and impertinency of undertaking that, and proceeding so far in
that, which could not possibly be done, I find no mention. Chrysolog.
What shall be said of this? That may be said, which Chrysologus says, (though
not of this, for of this none says any thing) Saeva passionis procella
turbaverat, That a bitter storm of passion and consternation, had so
disordered them, as that no faculty of theirs performed the right function;
Calvin
And that which Calvin says, of the same case, which Chrysologus intends, Prae
fervore caecutiebant, Vehemence and earnestness had discomposed them, amazed
them, amuzed them so, as that they discerned nothing clearly, did nothing
orderly. This, these, and some other Authors say, of some other
inconsiderations in these Women, particularly, of the removing of the stone of
the Sepulcher. For, they had prepared their gumms, and they were come upon
their way, before they ever thought of that. Mark 16.3.
Then they stop, and say to one another, Who shall roll us away the stone from
the door of the Sepulcher; we never thought of that. So also did they fall
under the rebuke and increpation of the Angel for another supine
inconsideration; Luke 24.5. Mat 16.16. Acts 3.15. John 5.26. John 1.4. John
6.35. John 11.25.
Quid quaeritis vivum? Why seek ye the living amongst the dead? Why him, who
is The Son of the living God? Why him, who is The Prince of life? Why him, Who
has life in himself? Why him who is Life it self? Why him, who is The Bread
of life to us? Why him, who is this life and the next too, (I am the life, and
the Resurrection) Why him, who by his death has made you a path of life, Psalm.
16.11.
(Thou will show me the path of life) Why seek ye the living among the dead?
What makes you think of arming him with your gummes against putrefaction, who
had told you before, that he was not subject to putrefaction, but would rise
again. So also in such another inconsideratio^ we may deprehend one of these
women, Mary Magdalen; when the Angel had told her at the Sepulcher, He is not
here, for he is risin, as he said, yet when she came to Peter, she said nothing
of the Resurrection, John 20.2
never thought of that, but poured her self out in that lamentation, Tulerunt
Dominu^, They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we know not
where they have laid him; Whereas if she had considered it advisedly, she must
necessarily have known from the Angels words, that no man had taken away the
Lord, that no man had laid him any where else, but that by his own power he was
risen again. But as in this storm of passion they left Christ's promise, That he
would rise, unconsidered, and left the rolling of the stone from the door of
the Sepulcher, unconsidered, so in this storm they also left unconsidered the
impossibility of coming to Christ's body to do that office; Their devotion was
awake, their consideration was in a slumber. But what though? Did they
therefore lose all benefit of their plous and devout intention? That is
another, and our next Consideration.

As Luther says, that if the marriage bed be kept undefiled, that is, Fructus
bujus pietatis.
from strange persons, and from such sins as are opposed against the very
purpose of marriage, God pardons Maritales ineptias, some levities, and
half-wantonnesses in married folks; so Calvin says of our present case, Deus
non impat at, Because these good women were transported with a zealous piety
toward Christ, God did not impure this in consideration unto them. For, though
zeal without discretion produce ill effects, yet not so ill as discretion
without zeal, worldly wisdom without Religion, for that is an evident
preferring of thy worldly safety before the glory of God. When Moses makes that
prayer to God in a holy fury and excess, Dele me, If thou will not forgive
their sin, blot me I pray thee, Exodus 32.32. Romans 5.3.
out of the book thou have written, (which was the excess of S. Paul too, in
his Anathema; I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren) God proceeds not to any sharper rebuke toward Moses, then this. Take
heed what you say in your inconsiderate prayer, you may sin in a prayer, and,
Whosoever has sinned against me, (says God there) him will I blot out of my
book; yet it concerns but others, take heed you draw it not upon your selves.
And such a charitable interpretation it becomes us to give of those prayers for
the dead, which we find in the ancient Fathers; August. Anrbros.
In S. Augustine for his mother Monica, in S. Anbrose for his Master
Theodosius; They prayed inconsiderately, and upon consideration they retracted
their prayers; at least, gave such Expositions of them, as that then they were
no prayers, but vehement, and indeed, exorbitant declarations of piety mixed
with passion. And so beloved, behooves it thee to do in thine own behalf, if at
any time having cast thy self into the posture of prayer, upon thy knees, and
entered into thy prayer thou have found thy self withdrawn, transported, strayed
into some deviations, and by-thoughts; Thou must not think all that devotion
lost; much less, that prayer to be turned into sin; for, God, who has put all
thy tears into his Bottle, all thy words into his Register, all thy sighs into
his bosom, will also spread that zeal with which thou entredst into thy
prayer, over thy whole prayer, and where that (thine own zeal) is too short,
Christ Jesus himself will spread his prayer over thine, and say, Give him, O
Father, that which he has asked faithfully in my name, and, where he has
fallen into any deviations or negligences, Father forgive him, though he knew
not what he said.

In our case in hand, for all their inconsideration, their misgovernment, their
mistaking, the Angel does not forbear to comfort them; Nolite timere, says
he, Do not ye fear. In illis perseveret pavor, in quibus permanet
incredulitas, says S. Hierome, Hieron,
in the person of this Angel to these women; I cannot blame ye, if ye fear;
such unexpected changes, such violent earthquakes, such unnatural darknesses
and eclipses, such rentings of the Temple, such cleaving of grave-stones may
well occasion fear in you, but recollect your selves, In illis perseveret, Let
them continue in fear, who continue in unbelief, and have no God to comfort
themselves in. Cur vos pertimescitis, qui vestros concives videtis, (says S.
Gregory also, in, and to the same persons) Let those mercenary soldiers, Greger
who are hired to watch the Sepulcher, fear, and never recover, Cur vos, why
should you fear, who see none but us, Concives, your fellow-Citizens, in the
City, and service of God, if your conversation be in heaven, as it is, if ye do
truly seek that Jesus, who is risen from hence, that he might go thither? And
as though this comfort from the Angel were not enough, he multiplies this
comfort in person unto them; he meets them, and says, Ver. 9.
Avete, first salutes them, and then inlarges himself unto them; as long as the
root of their actions was piety and zeal, he casts no cloud of discouragement
upon them, Hieron.
he occasions no jealousy or suspicion of his good purpose toward them, in
them, but he maintains and exalts their holy confidence. Peccata non nocent,
ubi non placent; Even our sins are forgiven, when we leave delighting in them;
much more our inconsiderations, and mistakings, when we recollect, and rectify
our selves. For, all this withholds not the Angel from proceeding to a farther
establishment of these devout, though weak women, in other particulars arising
out of the very words, Non est hic, He is not here, for he is risen.

Non hic per praesentiam carnis, Non hic.
qui, per praesentiam Majestatis nusquam abest; He is not here, Gregor.
so as you thought to have found him here; so, as that you may anoint and
embalme his body, he is not here: But, so as the secret sinner would wish him
away, God is away no where. Job 24.15. Psalm. 11.2.
No adulterer that has waited for the twilight, no whispering Calumniator that
has shot his arrow of slander In occulto, and wounded the righteous in secret,
can say, Non est hic, God is not here, God sees not this. For even in the ways
of death and hell (in all thy sinful courses) though God be a God of pure eyes
and cannot behold evil, he sees thee. Psalm. 139.8.
He sees thee in thy way thither, and when thou shall make thy bed in hell,
that is, enter into that perpetual prison, there will he be, felt though not
seen. But could the Angel intend this for a comfort to these women, Non est
hic, He is not here? Alas, might these poor souls say, we see that well
enough, He is not here, but, where is he? From this arises the occasion of
theirs, and all our comfort, Surrexit enim, He is not here, for he is risen.

First; Enim.
this For, (for he is risen) this particle of argumentation, the Angel opposes
prophetically, and by way of prevention, both against that heresy of Rome,
That the body of Christ may be in diverse places at once, by the way of
Transubstantiation, and against that dream of the Ubiquetaries, That the body
of Christ must necessarily be in all places at once, by communication of the
divine Nature. For, if the Angel argue fairly, logically, sincerely, (He is
not here, for he is risen) then there is no necessity, there is no possibility
of this omni-presence, or this multi-presence, for then the Angels argument
might have been denied, and they might have replied, What though he be risen,
he may be here too, for he may be in diverse places; But the Angel concludes us
in this for, He cannot be here, for he is risen; Because he is risen, he cannot
be here in the Sepulcher, so, as that you may embalm his body, Because he is
ascended, he cannot be here, here in the Sacrament, so, as you may break or eat
that body.

But is there such a comfort exhibited in this Surrexit, Surrexit.
he is risen, as may recompense the discomfort that arises from the Non est
hic, That he is not here? Abundantly, superabundantly there is; in these two
channels and derivations of comfort; First, that he in whom we had placed our
comfort, and our hope, is, by this his rising, declared to be the Son of God.
Acts 13.33
God has fulfilled his promise, in that he has raised Jesus from the dead, as
it is written in the second Psalm, says S. Paul in his Sermon at Antioch.
Now, what is written in that Psalm, which S. Paul cites there, to our present
purpose? This; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. But is not this
Hodie genui, This this days begetting intended rather of the eternal
filiation and generation of the Son of God, then of this days work, the
Resurrection? Those words of that Psalm may well admit that interpretation,
Hilar.
and so many have taken them. But, with S. Hilary, most of the ancients have
applied them to the Resurrection, as the application of S. Paul himself
directly binds us to do, That the Hodie genui, This days generation, is this
days manifestation that Christ was the Son of God. Calvin.
Calvin enlarges it farther; That every declaration of the Son by the Father,
is a generation of the Son: So his baptism, and the voice then, so his
Transfiguration, and the voice then, Mat. 3.17. Mat. 17.3.
were each of them, a Hodie genui, a generation of the Son that day. But
especially (says Calvin) do those words of the Psalm belong to this day,
because the Resurrection was the most evident actual declaration that Christ
was the Son of God, Romans 1.4.
for, He was declared to be the Son of God by the Resurrection from the dead,
says the Apostle expressly. But how? wherein was he declared? There were others
that were raised from the dead by Prophets in the old Testament, by Christ and
his Apostles in the new, and yet not thereby declared to be such Sons of God,
Essential Sons; no nor any Sons of God, not Sons by adoption; for we are not
sure that all those that were miraculously raised from the dead, were
effectually saved at last. Therefore the comfort in our case is in that word of
the Angel, Surrexit, He is risen; For so all our Translators, and Expositors do
constantly carry it, not in a Suscitatus (as all the rest are) That he was
raised, but in this Surrexit, He is risen, risen of himself. For so he
testifies of himself, Destroy this Temple, and in three days Ego suscitabo, I
will raise it up again; John 2.19
Not that the Father should, but that he would; so also, Ego pono, and Ego
sumo, says Christ, I lay down, and I take again my soul; Not that it is given,
or taken by another. John 10.17. Nyssen.
And therefore Gregory Nyssen suspects, that for the infirmity of the then
hearers, the Apostles thought it scarce safe, to express it often in that
phrase, He rose, or He raised himself, and therefore, for the most part, return
to the Suscitatus est, that He was raised, lest weak hearers might be
scandalized with that, that a dead man had raised himself of his own power. And
therefore the Angel in this place enlarges the comfort to these devout women,
in a full measure, when he opens himself in that word Surrexit, He is risen,
risen of himself.

This then is one piece of our evidence, and the foundation of all, Nos.
that we cannot be deceived, because he, in whom we trust, is, by this his own
rising, declared to be the Son of God; And another, and a powerful comfort is
this, Romans 4.25. 2 Cor. 4.14.
That he being risen for our justification, we are also risen in him. He that
raised the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by the same Jesus. He shall;
there is our assurance; but that is not all; for there is a con-resuscitavit,
Ephesians. 2.6.
He has quickened us together, and raised us together, and made us to sit
together in heavenly places; not together with one another, but together with
Christ. There is our comfort collected from this surrexit, He is risen,
equivalent to the discomfort of the non est hic, he is not here; That this his
rising declares him to be the Son of God, who therefore can, and will, and to
be that Jesus, an actual Redeemer, and therefore has already raised us. To
what? To that renovation, to that new creation, which is so excellently
expressed by Severianus, as makes us sorry we have no more of his; Mutatur
ordorerum, Severianus.
The whole frame and course of nature is changed; Sepulchrum non mortuum, sed
mortem devorat, The grave, (now, since Christ's Resurrection, and ours in him)
does not bury the dead man, but death himself; My Bell tolls for death, and my
Bell rings out for death, and not for me that dye; for I live, even in death;
but death dies in me, and has no more power over me.

I was crucified with Christ upon Friday, says Chrysologus, Et hodie resurgo,
Chrysologus.
to day I rose with him again; Et gloria resurrection is sepelivit injuriam
morientis, The ingloriousnesse of having been buried in the dust, is
recompensed in the glory I rise to, Liber inter mortuos; that which David
says, and, (by S. Augustines application) of Christ, Psalm. 88.5. August.
is true of me too; Christ was, and I am Liber inter mortuos, free amongst the
dead, undetainable in the state of death. For, says S. Peter, It was not
possible he should be holden of it. Acts 2.24.
Not possible for Christ, because of the prediction of so many Prophets, whose
words had an infallibility in them; not possible especially, because of the
Union of the Divine Nature: Not possible for me neither, because God has
afforded me the marks of his Election, and thereby made me partaker of the
Divine Nature too. 2 Pet. 1.4.
But yet these things might, perchance, not fall into the consideration of
these women; They did not; but they might, they should have done; for, as the
Angel tells them here, Christ had told them of this before; Sicut dixit, he is
risen, as he said.

Even the Angel himself referres himself to the word; Sicut dixit; Sicut dixit.
The Angel himself desires not to be believed, but as he grounds himself upon
the word, sicut dixit. Let therefore no Angel of the Church, not that
super-Arch-angell of the Roman Church, proceed upon an ipse dixit, upon his
own pectorall word, and determination, for the Angel here referres us to the
sicut dixit, the former word. God will be content that we doubt, and suspend
our assent to any revelation, if it do not concern some duty delivered in
Scripture before; And to any miracle, if it do not conduce to the proof of
some thing commanded in Scripture before. Sicut dixit, is an Angelical issue,
As he said.

But, how often soever Christ had spoken of this Resurrection to others, Vobie.
these women might be ignorant of it. For, all that is said, even by Christ
himself, is not said to all; nor is all, written for all, that is written by
the Holy Ghost. No man must suspect that he knows not enough for salvation, if
he understand not all places of Scripture. But yet these women could not well
be ignorant of this, because being Disciples and followers of Christ, though
Christ had never spoken of the Resurrection to them, they were likely to have
heard of it from them, to whom Christ had spoken of it. It was Cleophas his
question to Christ, (though he knew him not then to be so, when they went
together to Emaus) Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem? that is, have thou
been at Jerusalem, and is this, Luke 24.16.
The death of Christ, strange to thee? So may we say to any that professes
Christianity; Art thou in the Christian Church, and is this, The Resurrection
of Christ, strange to thee? Are there any amongst us, that thrust to
Fore-noones, and After-noones Sermons, that pant after high, and
un-understandable Doctrines, of the secret purposes of God, and know not this,
the fundamental points of Doctrine? Even these women's ignorance, though they
were in the number of the Disciples of Christ, makes us afraid, that some such
there may be; and therefore blessed be they that have set on foot that blessed
way of Catechizing, that after great professions, we may not be ignorant of
small things. These things these women might have learnt of others, who were to
instruct them. Luke 24.^^.
But for their better assurance, the Angel tells them here, that Christ
himself had told them of this before; Remember, says he, how Christ spoke to
you whilst he was with you in Galile.

We observe, that Christ spoke to his Disciples, of his Resurrection, five
times in the Gospel; Now, these women could not be present at any of the five
but one, which was the third; Mat. 17.22.
And, before that, it is evident that they had applied themselves to Christ,
and ministered unto him. The Angel then remembers them, what Christ said to
them there. Luke 24.6.
It was this; The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men,
and Crucified, and the third day, rise again; And they remembered his words,
says the Text there; Then they remembered them, when they heard of them again;
but not till then.

Which gives me just occasion to note first the perverse tenderness, and the
supercilious, and fastidious delicacy of those men, that can abide no
repetitions, nor endure to hear any thing which they have heard before; when
as even these things which Christ himself had preached to these women, in
Galile, had been lost, if this Angel had not preached them over again to them
at Jerusalem; Remember how he spoke to you, says he to them. And why should
thou be loath to hear those things which thou have heard before, when, till
thou heardst them again, thou did not know, that is, not consider that ever
thou had heard them? So have we here also just occasion to note their
impertinent curiosity, who though the sense be never so well observed, call
every thing a salfification, if the place be not rightly cyphard, or the word
exactly cited; and magnify one another for great Text men, though they
understand no Text, because they cite Book, and Chapter, and Verse, and Words
aright; whereas in this place, the Angel referres the women to Christ's words,
and they remember that Christ spoke those words, and yet if we compare the
places, Mat. 17.22. Luke 24.6.
(that where Christ speaks the words, and that where the Angel repeats them)
though the sense be entirely the same, yet the words are not altogether so.
Thus the Angel erects them in the consternation; Remember what was promised,
that in three days he would rise; The third day is come, and he is risen, as
he said; and, that your senses may be exercised as well as your faith, Come and
see the place, where the Lord lay.

Even the Angel calls Christ Lord; Dominus Angeli. Heb. 1.6.
and his Lord; for, the Lord, (and the Angel calls him so) is Lord of all, of
men, and Angels. When God brings his Soninto the world, (says the Apostle) he
says, let all the Angels of God worship him. And when God caries his Son out
of the world, by the way of the Cross, they have just cause to worship him
too, Col^^^. 1.20.
for, By the blood of his Cross are all things reconciled to God, both things
in earth, and things in heaven, Men and Angels. Therefore did an Angel minister
to Christ before he was, Luke 1. Mat. 1. Luke 2. Mat. 4. Luke 22. Acts 1.10.
in the Annunciation to his blessed Mother, that he should be; And an Angel to
his imaginary Father Joseph, before he was born; And a Quire of Angels to the
Shepherds at his birth; An Angel after his tentation, And in his Agony, and
Bloody-sweat, more Angels; Angels at his last step, at his Ascension, and here,
at his Resurrection Angels minister unto him. The Angels of heaven acknowledged
Christ to be their Lord. In the beginning some of the Angels would be Similes
Altissimo, like to the most High; But what a transcendent, what a
super-diabolicall, what a prae-Luciferian pride is his, that will be supra
Altissimum, 2 These. 2.4.
superior to God; That not only exalts himself above all that is called
God, (Kings are called Gods, and this Arch-Monarch exalts himself above all
Kings) but above God literally, and in that wherein God has especially
manifested himself to be God, to us, that is in prescribing us a Law, how he
will be obeyed; for, in dispensing with this Law, and adding to, and
withdrawing from this law, he exalts himself above God, as our Lawgiver. And,
(as it is also said there) He exalts himself, and opposes himself against
God. There is no trusting of such neighbors, as are got above us in power.
This man of sin has made himself superior to God, and then, an enemy to God;
for God is Truth, and he opposes him in that, for he is heresy and falsehood;
and God is Love, and he opposes him in that, for he is envy, and hatred, and
malice, and sedition, and invasion, and rebellion.

The Angel confesses Christ to be The Lord, his Lord, Dominus mortuus.
and he confesses him to be so then when he lay dead in the grave, Come, seethe
place where the Lord lay. A West Indian King having been well wrought upon for
his Conversion to the Christian Religion, and having digested the former
Articles, when he came to that, He was crucified, dead, and buried, had no
longer patience, but said, If your God be dead and buried, leave me to my old
god, the Sun, for the Sun will not dye. But if he would have proceeded to
the Article of the Resurrection, he should have seen, that even then, when
he lay dead, he was GOD still; Then, when he was no Man, he was GOD still;
Nay, then when he was no man, he was God, and Man, in this true sense, That
though the body and soul were divorced from one another, and that during that
divorce, he were no man, (for it is the union of body and soul that makes a
man) yet the Godhead was not divided from either of these constitutive parts of
man, body or soul. Psalm. 22.7. 1 Cor. 4.13. Ier. 19.8.
Even then, when a man is no man, he may be a Christian; when I am a worm and
no man, when I am the offscouring of the world, when I am the reproach, the
proverb, the hissing of men, yet, as my Savior, when he lay in the grave, was
the same Christ, so in this grave of oppression and persecution, I am the same
Christian, as in my Baptism.

Let nothing therefore that can fall upon thee, dispoyle thee of the dignity
and constancy of a Christian; howsoever thou be severed from those things,
which thou make account do make thee up, severed from a wife by divorce, from
a child by death, from goods by fire, or water, from an office by just, or by
unjust displeasure, (which is the heavier but the happier case) yet never think
thy self severed from thy Head Christ Jesus, nor from being a lively member of
his body. Job 30.29.
Though thou be a brother of Dragons and a companion of Owls, Though thy Harp
be turned into mourning, and thine Organ into the voice of them that weep,
nay, Though the Lord kill thee, yet trust in him. Job 13.15.
Thy Savior when he lay dead in the grave, was still the same Lord, Thou, when
thou art enwrapped, and enterred in confusion, art still the same Christian. To
this meditation the Angel carries us, in keeping up Christ's style at the
highest, then when he was at the lowest, And to some other particulars he
carries these Women, in that which remains, Come and see the place.

It is not nothing, certainly not merely nothing, Locus Sacer.
that God does so often direct us to frequent his Sanctuary, and his holy
places. Not nothing, that Solomon, into that Instrument which passed between
God and him, for the Consecration of the Temple, inserted that Covenant, That
not only they which came to that Temple, but they, 1 King. 8.
who being necessarily absent, prayed toward the Temple, might be heard; which
is, (not inconveniently) assigned for a reason of Ezechias his turning to the
wall to pray, in his sick bed, Esaias 38.2. Dan. 6.12.
and of Daniels opening of his windows, when he prayed in his private chamber,
because, in so doing, they looked toward Jerusalem, where the Temple was. When
Naaman being recovered from his bodily leprosy, recovered from his spiritual
leprosy too, and resolved to worship none but the true God, he was loath to
worship the true God, 2 King. 5.17.
in an unholy place, and therefore desired some of that earth to build an Altar
upon. Pharaoh was come to be content that Moses and his people should sacrifice
to their true God, Exodus 8.25.
so they would sacrifice in Egypt; But, Moses durst not accept of those
conditions. Pharaoh grew content that they should go out of Egypt to Sacrifice,
so they would not go far, Ver. 28.
but keep within his limits; but Moses durst not accept those conditions; nor
any conditions less then those, in which God had determined him, which was,
Exodus 3.18.
To go three days journey into the Wilderness. We know that God is alike in
all places, but he does not work in all places alike; God works otherwise in
the Church, then in an Army; and diversely in his diverse Ordinances in the
Church; God works otherwise in Prayer then in Preaching, and otherwise in the
Sacraments then in either; and otherwise in the later, then in the first
Sacrament. The power is the same, and the end is the same, but the way is not
so. Athanasius, scarce three hundred years after Christ, found the Church in
possession of that Custom (and he takes knowledge of it, A hanas. 9.37.
as of a precept from the Apostles themselves) That the Congregation should
pray toward the East, to testify (says that Father) their desire of
returning to the Country, which they had lost, Paradise. Places of profane and
secular use should not be made equal with holy places; nor should holy
actions, and motions, and gestures, and positions of the body in divine
service, be submitted to scorn and derision. They have their use; either in a
real exaltation of Devotion, or for a peaceable conservation of uniformity,
and decency, or for a reverentiall obedience to lawful Authority; and any of
these is enough, to authorize things in their use, which in themselves and in
their own nature are indifferent. And though the principal purpose of the
Angel, in showing these women the place, were to assure them, that Christ was
risen, yet may there also be an intimation of the help and assistance that we
receive from holy places, in this their Ecce locus, Come, and see the place.

But this is far, Perogrinationes.
very very far from that superstitious fixing of God to the freehold, which
they have induced in the Roman Church, and upon which, they have super-induced
their meritorious Pilgrimages to certain places. Consider a little the
Pilgrimage of these Pilgrimages, how they have gone on. Innocent the third, in
the Lateran Council, about four hundred years since, gave free pardon of all
sins to all men, that went or contributed to the recovery of the holy land. Now
these expeditions were not with any hope of recovering that land, but
principally to carry the powerfullest persons, and the activest spirits into
those remote parts, that so these parts might be left the more open to the
Inundation of that Sea of Rome, and the invasions of that Bishop. After this,
these Indulgences were enlarged, and communicated to all that went to
Jerusalem, not only as Soldiers, but as Pilgrims. And, after that by Boniface
the eighths liberality the way was shortened, and they had as much that came but
to Rome, as they that went to Jerusalem. As, a little before, by Clement the
sixth, there was a power given to every man, that went such a Pilgrimage, to
deliver four souls out of Purgatory, which he would, and a commandment given
to the Angels of Heaven, to carry their souls that dyed in that Pilgrimage,
immediately to Heaven, without touching upon Purgatory.

These abuses made that learned and devout Man, Gerson.
Gerson, the Chancellor of Paris, in his time, (as, let them deny it with what
stiffness they will, nothing is more demonstrable, nor more evidently
demonstrated, Then that in all times, some great men amongst themselves have
opposed their Superstitions) This, I say, made Gerson say, (though he durst say
no more) Abnegare non possumus, None of us all can deny, but that many things
are induced upon color of Religion, quorum sanctior esset omissio, which he
shall be more holy that forbeares, then he that performs them. In detestation
of this local and stationary salvation of these meritorious pilgrimages to
certain places, some of the blessed Fathers spoke much, long before they were
come to that enormous abuse, in which the later times exceeded. S. Hierom had
occasion to say much of it, by a solicitation from Polinus, Epist. 13.
and he says this, Quanti hodieportant funera sua? How many men carry
Sepulchers to the Sepulcher, when they carry themselves to Jerusalem? Non
Hierosolymis vixisse, says he, To have lived well at Jerusalem is
praiseworthy, but not to have lived there. Non audeo concludere, I dare not
shut up that God, whom the Heavens cannot contain, in a corner of the earth;
and Jerusalem is but so. Et de Britannia, and de Hierosolymis aequaliter patet
aula coelestis, Heaven is as near England, (says S. Hierom) as it is to
Jerusalem. And Christ, (says he) was then in Jerusalem, in that holy place,
when he said, Abeamus hinc, John 14.31.
Let us go from hence; as holy as the place was, he made haste out of it; for,
(as that Father adds) it is a place full of mutinous Soldiers, of licentious
prostitutes, of Players and Jesters; and these are the elements of the
holiness of that place.

Gregory Nyssen (in the same time with Hierom) had a particular occasion to
deliver his opinion of these pilgrimages to Jerusalem; Nyssen.
for he had been there himself, though not as a Pilgrim. Sunt aliqui, There
are some that make it a part of Religion, to have been at Jerusalem, Sin
praeter praeceptum Domini, But, says he, if Christ never commanded it, (that
is his Rule) I know not what can justify that man, that makes himself the
Rule of his Religion. Christ never called that, Blessedness, says he, to have
been at Jerusalem, nor ever called this Jerusalem the way to Heaven; why any
man should do so, when Christ did not, Qui mentem habet, consideret, (says
that Father) Let him that is not distracted, consider. Nay, says he, there is
not only no certain profit, but evident danger to a chaste soul, in the
unchaste conversation of those Pilgrims, and he exemplifies, and particularizes
wherein; but we forbear that. Shall I be asked then, why I went to Jerusalem?
says that Father; I went into those parts out of necessity, says he, being
called to a Council held in those parts; And, being so near, I was chosen as
an Arbitrator between some Churches, which were then at variance, which
differences were to be composed at Jerusalem, and so I went thither. Howsoever,
let no man be encouraged to go thither for my being there, (for I was never the
better Christian for having been there) but let every man think and believe me
to be the more competent witness, and judge of the dangers, because I saw
them. I believed that Christ was risen, before I saw the empty Sepulcher; And
though (I thank God for it) I lost none of my faith at Jerusalem, yet I
increased it not there. Si perverse vivas; live Christianly, or thou art as far
from Christ in the Sepulcher, and from all benefit of his Resurrection, as they
that were hired to watch the Sepulcher, and to seal the Sepulcher to prevent
the Resurrection, or as if he that lay in the Sepulcher had never dyed.
Chrysostom.
When we have remembered you of that which S. Chrysostom (of the same time with
Jerome and Nyssen) says, That there were some so vain, as to go to Arabia to
kiss that dunghill where Job sat to be visited by his impertinent friends,
you have testimony enough, concurrence enough for the detestation of these
hypocritical Pilgrimages, and the manifold superstitions that grow from this
tree; and grew to a far greater inexcusablenesse, when all was transferred to
Rome, where, both the Indulgences were larger, and the pestilent infections of
the place more contagious then at Jerusalem.

Now, to bind up our sheafe, and lay it so upon you, that you may easily carry
it, Conclusio.
you have seen, That women, though weak, are capable of religious offices;
Cursed be he that does the work of God (that is, any godly work) negligently.
You have likewise seen upon what their devotion was carried; upon things which
could not entirely be done; Non hic, that Christ was not there, and yet comfort
in that; God raises comfort out of all things, even out of discomfort it self
to the godly. You have heard the reason added, Quia surrexit, for he is risen;
And if this be a good reason, there is no Transubstantiation, no Ubiquitisme,
for then Christ might have been there, though he were risen. He is risen, risen
for our Instification, therefere we are risen in him. And this, Sicut dixit, As
he had said before; Sicut dixit vobis, As he had said to you; Though all
Scriptures be not proposed to all, The Lord, His Lord; How rebellious is that
man of sin, that makes Christ his servant, and pretense of religion his
instrument? He avows him to be the Lord, Ecce locus, not to incline them to
superstitious pilgrimages, but yet to a holy reverence, and estimation of
places consecrated to Gods service. And if these Meditations have raised you
from the bed of sin, in any holy purpose, this is one of your Resurrections,
and you have kept your Easter Day well. To which, he, whose name is Amen, say
Amen, our blessed Savior Christ Jesus, in the power of his Father, and in the
operation of his Spirit.

SERMON XXVI. Preached upon Easter Day.
1 THESE. 4.17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be ever
with the Lord.


IN this Epistle, our Apostle (according to his manner in all his Epistles)
first establishes those to whom he writes, in those matters of faith, in which
he had formerly instructed them; and then, rectifies them in matter of manners,
of holiness of life, and the ways and fruits of sanctification. In this last
part of this Chapter, he involves, he wraps up both together; a Fundamental
point, the Resurrection of the dead, and then, an instruction for manners
arising out of that, That they mourn not intemperately for the dead, as they do
(says he) which have no hope of seeing them again, who are gone. For we know,
that they which are gone, are gone but into another room of the same house,
(this world, and the next, do but make up God a house) they are gone but into
another Pue of the same Church, (the Militant and the Triumphant do but make up
God a Church.) Ver. 14.
If we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again (says our Apostle) even so,
them also, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him: with him; For,
howsoever they have lien ingloriously in the dust all this while, all this
while they have been with God, and he shall bring them with him. But the
Thessalonians were not so hard in believing the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.35.
as curious in enquiring the order of the Resurrection. And as among the
Corinthians some inquired de modo, How are the dead raised, and with what body
do they come? So among the Thessalonians some inquired, de Ordine, in what
order, for precedence, shall the last scean of this last act of man, be
transacted? What difference between them that were dead thousands of years
before, and them whom Christ shall find alive at his second coming? Them the
Apostle satisfies; We that are alive, shall not prevent them that are asleep,
we shall not enter into heaven before them; The dead in Christ shall first
rise, says he; and then, (then enters our Text) Then we which are alive, and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
in the air, and so shall be ever with the Lord.

Then. Divisie.
When? This Then in our text, is an apprehensive, and a comprehensive word. It
reaches to, and lays hold upon that which the Apostle says before the text,
in the fifteenth and sixteenth verses. Then, when the dead in Christ are first
risen, and risen by Christ's coming down from heaven, in clamore, in a shout,
in the voice of the Archangel, and in the Trumpet of God, Then, when that is
done, We that are alive, and remain, shall be wrought upon, and all being
joined in one body, They, and we together, shall be caught up in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord. So that, in
these words we shall have three things to consider, which will constitute three
parts in this exercise. First, the raising of those that were dead before.
Secondly, the changing of them who are alive then; And lastly, our union in our
exaltation, and possession of the kingdom of God, We, together with them,
shall be caught up.

Neither of these three parts will be swallowed down in a generality; There
must pass a Mastication, a re-division into more particular branches upon them
all. For, in the first, which the first word of our Text, Then induces, which
is the raising of them who were dead before, we shall consider first, That the
dead are not forgotten, though they have dwelt long in the house of
forgetfulness, nor lost, though they have lain long in the dust of dispersion,
nor neglected, nor deferred, that others might be preferred before them, which
shall be alive then, for, says the Apostle, We shall not prevent them, but
they shall rise first; How shall they rise? For, that is also a second
consideration, induced by our first word. Then, Then when they shall be raised
in virtute Christi, in the power of Christ, for, says the Text, The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven to raise them. And how shall he exercise, how
shall he execute, and declare his power in their raising? It shall be In
clamore, with a shout, and in the voice of the Archangel, and the Trumpet of
God. And in these three Branches, That the dead shall rise first, That they
shall rise in the power of Christ, That that power shall be thus expressed, In
a shout, in the voice of the Arch-angell, in the Trumpet of God, we shall
determine that first Part. When that is done, and done so, we shall be wrought
upon, We that are alive and remain then; where we shall first see, that some
shall be alive, and remain then, when Christ comes, And then consider their
state and condition, how they being then clothed with bodies of corruption
shall be capable of that present entrance into glory; and in that disquisition
we shall end our second Part. And then, in our third and last part, The
glorious Union of these two Armies, Those which were dead, and those which are
alive, we shall consider first, That here is no mention at all, of any
Resurrection of the wicked, but only of them that sleep in Christ; They shall
rise; And then, those that are to partake of this glory, are thus proceeded
with; They are caught up, Rapiuntur; Caught up in the Clouds, In Nubibus;
Exalted into the Air, In Era; There to meet the Lord, Obviam Domino; And so
to be with the Lord for ever. We shall be, and be with the Lord, and be with
the Lord for ever; which are blessed and glorious gradations, if we may have
time to insist upon them; which we may best hope for this day of all others;
for, this day, we have two days in one. This day both Gods Sons arose; The Sun
of his Firmament, and the Son of his bosom. And if one Sun do set upon us,
the other will stay, as long as our devotion last. God went not from Abraham,
till Abraham had no more to say; Genesis 18. ult.
No more will Christ from us.

First then, for our first Branch of our first part, the rising of the dead, 1
Part.
the first man that was laid in the dust of the earth, Abel, loses nothing by
lying so long there; He loses nothing, that men of later ages gain; For, if we
live to the coming of Christ to Judgment, we shall not prevent them, we shall
have no precedence of them, that were dead ages before. No man is superannuated
in the grave, that he is too old to enter into heaven, where the Master of the
house is The ancient of days. No man is bedridden with age in the grave, that he
cannot rise. It is not with God, as it is with man; we do, but God does not
forget the dead; and, as long as God is with them, they are with him. Psalm.
56.9.
As he puts all thy tears into his bottles, so he puts all the grains of thy
dust into his Cabinet, and the winds that scatter, the waters that wash them
away, carry them not out of his sight. He remembers that we are but dust; but
dust then when we lie in the grave; Psalm. 103.14.
and yet he remembers us. But his memory goes farther then so, He remembers
that we were but dust alive, at our best; They dye, says David, and they
return to their own dust. It is not an entering into a new state, when they
dye, but a returning to their old, They return to dust; Psalm. 104.29.
And it is not to that dust which is cast upon them, in the grave, (for that
may be another man's dust) but to that dust which they carried about them in
their bodies, They return, and to dust; and to their own dust.

Nor is dust so inglorious a thing, but that God gives a dignity to dust, when
he admits it into comparison to express the multiplication, the accumulation
of his blessings upon Abraham, I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth;
not for weakness, Genesis 13.16.
but for infiniteness; And so, to the same purpose of expressing greatness,
Balaam uses this Metaphore of dust, Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the
number of the fourth part of Israel? Numb. 23.10.
Neither does Abraham think it any diminution to lie in the dust of the earth,
when he is dead, for he professes that he walks in the dust of the earth, in
himself, whilst he is aliye, Genesis 18.27.
I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord being but dust. And when David
seems to fear the dust of death, (lighten mine eyes, lest they sleep the sleep
of death) it is not that he suspects any detriment to himself by death, that he
shall be the worse by dying, Psalm, 13.1.
but that God may lose of his glory, when (as he adds there) the enemy shall
say, we have prevailed against him. For, as in the Primitive Church, those that
seem prayers for the dead, at Funerals, are, indeed, but thanksgivings to
God, in their behalf that are departed; so, as often as David expresses himself
in that Patheticall manner, Awake, O Lord, why sleep thou? arise, Psalm.
44.23.
and cast us not off for ever, it is a thanksgiving that he has not, and a
prayer that he would not forget them. When he says, Will God be favorable no
more? he means, Psalm. 77.7.
I am sure he will. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail
for ever? Has God forgot to be gracious? Has he shut up his mercy in anger?
All these imply a kind of confidence that he has not.

And, as it is in that Resurrection of which David speaks most literally in
those places, (that is, The Resurrection from the calamities and oppressions of
this world) so is it in the Resurrection from the dust of the grave too; Psalm.
22.15. and 19.
Thou have brought me to the dust of the grave; but, be not thou far from me;
That is, when thou shall bring me to the dust of the grave, thou will not be
far from me. And, when he says, (in appearance) by way of expostulation,
Psalm. 39.10.
and jealousy, and suspicion, Will God show wonders to the dead? shall the
dead arise and praise him? shall his loving kindness be declared in the grave,
or his faishfulnesse in destruction? All these passionate interrogatories, and
vehement expostulations may safely be resolved into these Doctrinall
propositions, Yes, God will show wonders to the dead, The dead shall rise and
praise him, His loving kindness shall be declared in the grave, Psalm. 74.19.
and his faithfulness in destruction. For, God will not forget the
Congregation of his poor for ever. The poor of this world, are our poor;
Gods poor are they that lie in the dust, the dust of the grave, the dead; of
whom, God has a greater Congregation under ground, then of the living upon the
face of the earth; And, God will not forget the congregation of his poor for
ever. Finitus est eorum pulvis; That which we translate, Their Extortioner is
at an end, Esaias 16.4.
their Oppressor is at an end, is in S. Hierome, Their dust is at an end; that
is, there comes a time, when the dust of the grave shall oppress them no
longer. When? Truly, that time is virtually, and in an infallibility come
already; as those other words of the same Prophet, may admit an accommodation
in the person of Christ, Esaias 26.19.
Thy dead men shall live; When? Together with my dead body they shall rise.
Consider, by occasion of those words, a promise, long before Christ's
Resurrection, that all they which slept in Christ should rise in him, with my
dead body they shall rise; And then consider the performance of this promise in
the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.6.
Consurrexerunt, together with Christ, all that slept in him, (nay, all that
fell asleep since he waked, all that dyed since he rose) did arise. Virtually,
and infallibly they did. And, for the actual accomplishment of this
Resurrection in every individual person, they that were laid in the grave in
the first ages, lose no time. For, there is no time of entering into heaven,
till the Lord come to fetch us; And then, they that are dead, shall be so far
from being pretermitted, as that they shall first be raised before any thing be
done upon us. But how shall they be raised, by what power? (for that is a
second Consideration induced also by this first word of our Text, Then, when
the Lord shall have descended from heaven to raise them; Then when they are
raised, In virtute Christi, in the virtue and power of Christ.

Then, In virtute Christi. Mat. 13.43.
(says our blessed Savior, speaking of the Resurrection) then, shall the
righteous shine forth as the Sun; And wheresoever we are called the Sun,
compared, assimilated to the Sun, Christ is our Zodiake; In him we move, from
the beginning to the end of our Circle. And therefore, as the last point of our
Circle, our resurrection determines in him, in Christ; so, the first point of
our Circle, our first adoption began in him, in Christ too. And, if I were
adopted in Christ, (in Christ who is a Redeemer of sinners) I was adopted in
the condition, and in the consideration of a sinner, and such a sinner as
should, as would lay hold upon this Christ, this Redeemer. Christ is the
Resurrection; so Christ is the Adoption; If there be a Resurrection in him,
there were some dead before; If there bean Adoption in him, there are some
sinners before. The first look that God casts upon us, is in Christ, and
therefore the first consideration that he takes of us, is, as we are sinners;
He adopts none but penitent sinners, he reproves none but impenitent sinners.
In him also the dead are raised; that is, in that power, which he was raised
by, The power of God. For, still that phrase is ingeminated, iterated,
multiplied, Suscitavit Deus, Mat. 28.6.
suscitatus a Deo, God raised Christ from the dead, and Christ was raised from
the dead by God. And when it is said by the Angel to the women, Surrexit, He
is risen, (risen of himself, as the word sounds) And when by those two which
went with Christ to Emaus, Luke 24.34.
it is said at their return to Jerusalem, to the eleven Apostles, surrex it
vere, He is risen indeed, (risen of himself, as the word sounds) yet that
phrase and expression, He is risen, if there were no more in it, but that
expression, and that phrase, would not conclude Christ's rising to have been in
virtute propria, in his own power. For, of Dorcas who was raised from the dead,
A^^ 9.4^. (...) 11.
it is said, Resedit, she sat up, and of Lazarus, Prodiit, he came forth; and
yet, these actions thus ascribed to themselves, were done in virtute aliena, in
the power of another. Christ's Resurrection was not so, In virtute aliena, in
the power of another, if you consider his whole person, God and Man, but it was
aliena a filio Mariae; Christ as the Son of Mary rose not by his own power. It
was by his own; but his own, because he was God, as well as man. Nor could all
the Magic in the world have raised him sooner, then by that his power, (his,
as God) he (that is, that person, God and man) was pleased to rise. So sits he
now at the right hand of his Father in heaven; nor can all the Consecrations of
the Roman Priests either remove him from thence, or multiply him to a bodily
being any where else, till his time of coming to Judgment, come. Then, and not
till then, The Lord himself shall descend from heaven, in clamore, says the
Text, in a shout, with the voice of the Arch-angell, and with the Trumpet of
God, which circumstances constitute our third, and last Branch of this first
Part, The dead shall rise first, They shall rise in the power of Christ,
(therefore Christ is God; for Christ himself rose in the power of God) and that
power shall be thus declared, In a shout, in the voice of the Arch-Angell, in
the Trumpet of God.

The dead hear not Thunder, nor feel they an Earth quake. In clamore.
If the Canon batter that Church walls, in which they lie buried, it wakes not
them, nor does it shake or affect them, if that dust, which they are, be thrown
out, but yet there is a voice, which the dead shall hear; The dead shall
hear, the voice of the Son of God, John 5.25.
(says the Son of God himself) and they that hear shall live; And that is the
voice of our Text. It is here called a clamor, a vociferation, a shout, and
varied by our Translators, and Expositors, according to the origination of the
word, to be clamor hortatorius, and suasorius, and jussorins, A voice that
carries with it a penetration, (all shall hear it) and a persuasion, (all
shall believe it, and be glad of it) and a power, a command, (all shall obey
it.) Since that voice at the Creation, Fiat, Let there be a world, was never
heard such a voice as this, Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead. That was spoken to
that that was merely nothing, and this to them, who in themselves shall have
no cooperation, no concurrence to the hearing or answering this voice.

The power of this voice is exalted in that it is said to be the voice of the
Archangel. In voce Archangeli.
Though legions of Angels, millions of Angels shall be employed about the
Resurrection, to recollect their scattered dust, and recompact their ruined
bodies, yet those bodies so recompact, shall not be able to hear a voice. They
shall be then but such bodies, as they were when they were laid down in the
grave, when, though they were entire bodies, they could not hear the voice of
the mourner. But this voice of the Archangel shall enable them to hear; The
Archangel shall re-infuse the several souls into their bodies, and so they
shall hear that voice, Surgite mortui, Arise ye that were dead, and they shall
arise. And here we are eased of that disputation, whether there be many
Archangels, or no, for, if there be but one, yet this in our text, is he, for,
it is not said, In the voice of An Archangell, but of The Archangell; if not
the Only, yet he who comprehends them all, Colos. 1.16.
and in whom they all consist, Christ Jesus.

And then, the power of this voice is exalted to the highest in the last word,
that it is, Tuba Dei.
Tuba Dei, The Trumpet of God. For, that is an Hebraisme, and in that language,
it constitutes a superlative, to add the name of God to any thing. As in Saul's
case, when David surprised him, in his dead sleep, it is said, that Sopor
Domini, 2 Samuel 26.12.
The sleep of the Lord was upon him, that is, the heaviest, the deadest sleep
that could be imagined, so here, The Trumpet of God is the loudest voice that
we conceive God to speak in.

All these pieces, that it is In clamore, In a cry, in a shout, that it is In
the voice of the Archangell, that it is In the Trumpet of God, make up this
Conclusion, That all Resurrections from the dead, must be from the voice of
God, and from his loud voice; In clamore.
It must be so, even in thy first Resurrection, thy resurrection from sin, by
grace here; here, thou need the voice of God, and his loud voice. And
therefore, though thou think thou hear sometimes Gods sibilations, (as the
Prophet Zechary speaks) Gods soft and whispering voice, (in ward remorses of
thine own; and motions of the Spirit of God to thy spirit) yet think not thy
spiritual resurrection accomplished, till, in this place, thou hear his loud
voice; Till thou hear Christ descending from Heaven, (as the text says) that
is, working in his Church; Till thou hear him In clamore, in this cry, in this
shout, in this voice of Penetration, of persuasion, of power, that is, till
thou feel in thy self in this place a liquefaction, a colliquation, a melting
of thy bowels under the commination of the Judgments of God upon thy sin, and
the application of his mercy to thy Repentance.

And then, In voce Archangeli.
this thou must hear In voce Archangeli, In the voice of the Archangel. S.
John in the beginning of the Revelation, calls every Governor of a Church an
Angel. And much respect and reverence, much faith, and credit behooves it thee
to give to thine Angel, to the Pastor of that Church, in which God has given
thee thy station; for, he is thine Angel, Mal. 2.7.
thy Tutelar, thy guardian Angel. Men should seek the Law at the mouth of the
Priest, says God in Malachi; (of that Priest that is set over him) For, the
lips of the Priest, (of every Priest, to whom the souls of others are
committed) should preserve knowledge, should be able to instruct and rectify
his flock, Quia Angelus Domini Exercituum, because every such Priest is the
Angel of the Lord of Hosts. Hearken thou therefore, to that Angel, thine
Angel. But here thou art directed above thine Angel to the Archangell. Acts
20.28. Ephesians. 5.23.
Now, not the governor of any particular Church, but he Who has purchased the
whole Church with his blood, He who only is head of the whole Church, Christ
Jesus, is this Archangell; Hear him. It is the voice of the Archangell, (that
is, the trne and sincere word of God) that must raise thee from the death of
sin, to the life of grace. If therefore any Angel differ from the Archangell,
and preach other then the true and sincere word of God, Gal. 1.8.
Anathema, says the Apostle, let that Angel be accursed. And take thou heed
of over-affecting, overvaluing the gifts of any man so, as that thou take the
voice of an Angel, for the voice of the Archangell, any thing that that man
says, for the word of God.

Yet thou must hear this voice of the Archangell in the Trumpet of God. In
Tuba Dei.
The Trumpet of God is his loudest Instrument; and his loudest Instrument is
his public Ordinance in the Church; Prayer, Preaching, and Sacraments; Hear
him in these, In all these; come not to hear him in the Sermon alone, but come
to him in Prayer, and in the Sacrament too. For, except the voice come in the
Trumpet of God, (that is, in the public Ordinance of his Church) thou can
not know it to be the voice of the Archangell. Pretended services of God, in
schismatic Conventicles, are not in the Trumpet of God, and therefore not
the voice of the Archangell, and so, not the means ordained for thy spiritual
resurrection. And, as our last resurrection from the grave, is rooted in the
personal resurrection of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.17.
( For, if Christ be not raised from the dead, we are yet in our sins, (says
the Apostle) But why so? Because, to deliver us from sin, Christ was to destroy
all our enemies; Now, the last enemy is Death; and last time that Death and
Christ met, (upon the Cross) Death overcame him, and therefore, except he be
risen from the power of Death, we are yet in our sins) as we root our last
resurrection in the person of Christ, so do we our first resurrection in him,
in his word, exhibited in his Ordinance, for, that is the voice of the
Archangell in the Trumpet of God. And as the Apostle says here, Ver. 15.
This we say unto you, by the word of the Lord, that thus the last resurrection
shall be accomplished by Christ himself, so, this we say to you, by the Word
of the Lord, (by the harmony of all the Scriptures) thus, and no other way, By
the pure word of God, delivered and applied by his public Ordinance, by
Hearing, and Believing, and Practicing, under the Seals of the Church, the
Sacraments, is your first resurrection from sin, by grace, accomplished. So
have you then those three branches, which constitute our first part; That they
that are dead before us, shall not be prevented by us, but they shall rise
first; That they shall be raised by the power of Christ, that is, the power of
God in Christ; That that power, working to their resurrection shall be declared
in a mighty voice, the voice of the Archangell, in the Trumpet of God. And
then, then when they who were formerly dead, are first raised, and raised by
this Power, and this power thus declared, then shall we, we who shall be then
alive and remain, be wrought upon; which is our second, and our next general
part.

When the Apostle says here, 2. Part. Nos.
Nos qui vivimus, We that are alive, and remain, would he not be thought to
speak this of himself, and the Thessalonians to whom he writes? Do not the
words import that? That he, and they should live till Christ's coming to
Judgment? Some certainly had taken him so; But he complains that he was
mistaken; We beseech you brethren, 2 These. 2.2.
be not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled, by word or letter, as from us,
that the day of the Lord is at hand; so at hand, as that we determine it in our
days, in our life. So that the Apostle speaks here, but Hypothetically; he
does but put a case, That if it should be Gods pleasure to continue them in the
world, till the coming of his Son Christ Jesus, thus and thus they should be
proceeded withal; for, thus and thus shall they be proceeded with, says he,
that shall then be alive. Our blessed Savior has such a manner of speech, of
an ambiguous sense, in S. Matthew, Mat. 16.28.
That there were some standing there, that should not taste of death, till they
saw the Son of man coming in his Kingdom. And this might give them just
occasion to think, that that Kingdom into which the Judgment shall enter us,
was at hand; For, the words which Christ spoke immediately before those, were
evidently, undeniably spoken of that last, and everlasting kingdom of glory,
The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, etc.
Then follows, Some standing here shall live to see this. And yet Christ did not
speak this of that last kingdom of glory; but either he spoke it of that
manifestation of that kingdom which was showed to some of them, (to Peter, and
James, and John) in the Transfiguration of Christ, (for the Transfiguration was
a representation of the kingdom of glory) or else he spoke it of that
inchoation of the kingdom of glory, which shined out in the kingdom of grace,
which all the Apostles lived to see, in the personal coming of the Holy
Ghost, and in his powerful working in the conversion of Nations in their life
time.

And this is an inexpressible comfort to us, That our blessed Savior thus
mingles his Kingdoms, that he makes the Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of
Glory, all one; the Church, and Heaven all one; and assures us, That if we see
him In hoc speculo, in this his Glass, in his Ordinance, in his Kingdom of
Grace, we have already begun to see him facie ad faciem, face to face, in his
Kingdom of Glory; If we see him Sicuti manifestatur, as he looks in his Word,
and Sacraments, in his Kingdom of Grace, we have begun to see him, Sicuti est,
As he is, in his Essence, in the Kingdom of Glory; And when we pray, Thy
Kingdom come; and mean but the Kingdom of Grace, he gives us more then we
ask, an inchoative comprehension of the Kingdom of Glory, in this life. This
is his inexpressible mercy, that he mingles his Kingdoms, and where he gives
one, gives both. So is there also a fair beam of comfort exhibited to us in
this Text, That the number reserved for that Kingdom of Glory, is no small
number. For though David said, The Lord looked down from heaven, and saw not
one that did good, no not one, Psalm. 14.2.
(there it is less then a few) though when the times had better means to be
better, when Christ preached personally upon the earth, when one Centurion had
but replied to Christ, Sir, Mat. 8.10.
you need not trouble your self to go to my house, if you do but say the word
here, my servant will be well, Christ said in his behalf, Verily I have not
found so great faith, no not in Israel; When Christ makes so much of this
single grain of Mustard Seed, this little faith, as to prefer it before all the
faith of Israel, surely faith went very low in Israel at that time, Nay, when
Christ himself says, speaking of his last coming, after so many ages
preaching of the Gospel, When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon
earth, Luke 18.8.
any faith? We have I say, a blessed beam of comfort shining out of this text,
that it is no small number that is reserved for that Kingdom; For, whether the
Apostle speak this of himself and the Thessalonians, or of others, he speaks
not as of a few, but that by Christ's having preached the narrowness of the
way, and the straitness of the gate, our holy industry and endeavor is so
much exalted, (which was Christ's principal end in taking those Metaphors of
narrow ways, and strait gates, not to make any man suspect an impossibility of
entering, but to be the more industrious and endeavorous in seeking it) that as
he has sent workmen in plenty, (abundant preaching) so he shall return a
plentiful harvest, a glorious addition to his Kingdom, both of those which
slept in him before, and of those which shall be then alive, fit, all together,
to be caught up in the clouds to meet him, and be with him for ever; for these
two armies imply no small number. Now, of the condition of these men, who shall
be then alive, and how being clothed in bodies of corruption, they become
capable of the glory of this text, in our first distribution, we proposed that
for a particular consideration, and the other branch of this second part, and
to that, in that order, we are come now.

I scarce know a place of Scripture, more diversely read, Immutabimur.
and consequently more variously interpreted then that place, which should most
enlighten us, in this consideration presently under our hands; which is that
place to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.51.
Non omnes dormiemus, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. The
Apostle professes there to deliver us a mystery, (Behold, I show you a mystery)
but Translators and Expositors have multiplied mystical clouds upon the words.
S. Chrysostom reads these words as we do, Chrysostom.
Non dormiemus, We shall not all sleep, but thereupon he argues, and concludes,
that we shall not all die. The common reading of the ancients is contrary to
that, Omnes dormiemus, sed non, etc. We shall all sleep, but we shall not all
be changed. The vulgat Edition in the Roman Church differs from both, and as
much from the original, as from either, Omnes resurgemus, We shall all rise
again, but we shall not all be changed. S. Hierome examines the two readings,
and then leaves the reader to his choice, as a thing indifferent. S. Augustine
does so too, and concludes aque Catholicos esse, That they are as good
Catholics that read it the one way, as the other. But howsoever, that which
S. Chrysostom collects upon his reading, may not be maintained. He reads as we
do; and without all doubt aright, We shall not all sleep; But what then?
Therefore shall we not all die? To sleep there, is to rest in the grave, to
continue in the state of the dead, and so we shall not all sleep, not continue
in the state of the dead. But yet, Statutum est, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.27.
as verily as Christ was once offered to bear our sins, so verily is it
appointed to every man once to die; Romans 5.12.
And, as verily as by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
so verily death passed upon all men, for that all men have sinned; So the
Apostle institutes the comparison, so he constitutes the doctrine, in those two
places of Scripture, As verily as Christ dyed for all, all shall die, As verily
as every man sins, every man shall die.

In that change then, which we who are then alive, shall receive, (for though
we shall not all sleep, we shall all be changed) we shall have a present
dissolution of body and soul, and that is truly a death, and a present
redintegration of the same body and the same soul, and that is truly a
Resurrection; we shall die, and be alive again, before another could consider
that we were dead; but yet this shall not be done in an absolute instant; some
succession of time, though undiscernible there is. It shall be done In raptu,
in a rapture; but even in a rapture there is a motion, a transition from one to
another place. It shall be done says he, In ictuoculi, In the twinkling of an
eye; But even in the twinkling of an eye, there is a shutting of the eie-lids,
and an opening of them again; Neither of these is done in an absolute instant,
but requires some succession of time. The Apostle, in the Resurrection in our
text, constitutes a Prius, something to be done first, and something after;
first those that were dead in Christ shall rise first, and then, Then when that
is done, after that, not all at once, we that are alive shall be wrought upon,
we shall be changed, our change comes after their rising; so in our change
there is a Prius too, first we shall be dissolved, (so we die) and then we
shall be re-compact, (so we rise again) This is the difference, they that sleep
in the grave, put off, and depart with the very substance of the body, it is no
longer flesh, but dust, they that are changed at the last day, put off, and
depart with, only the qualities of the body, as mortality and corruption; It is
still the same body, without resolving into dust, but the first step that it
makes, is into glory.

Now transfer this to the spiritual Resurrection of thy soul by grace, here.
Here, Grace works not that Resurrection upon thy soul, in an absolute instant.
And therefore suspect not Gods gracious purpose upon thee, if thou be not
presently, thoroughly recovered. God could have made all the world in one day,
and so have come sooner to his Sabbath, his rest; but he wrought more, to give
us an example of labor, and of patience, in attending his leisure in our
second Creation, this Resurrection from sin, as we did in our first Creation,
when we were not made till the sixth day. But remember too, that the last
Resurrection, from death, is to be transacted quickly, speedily; And in thy
first, thy spiritual Resurrection from sin, make haste. The last is to be done
In raptu, in a rapture; Let this rapture in the first Resurrection be, to tear
thy self from that company and conversation that leads thee into tentation. The
last is to be done Inictu oculi, In the twinkling of an eye; Let that, in thy
first Resurrection be, The shutting of thine eyes from looking upon things in
things, upon creatures in creatures, upon beauty in that face that misleads
thee, or upon honor in that place that possesses thee; And let the opening of
thine eyes be, to look upon God in every object, to represent to thy self the
beauty of his holiness, and the honor of his service in every action. And in
this rapture, and in this twinkling of an eye, will thy Resurrection soon,
though not suddenly, speedily, though not instantly be accomplished. And if God
take thee out of the world, before thou think it thoroughly accomplished, yet he
shall call thine inchoation, consummation, thine endeavor, performance, and
thy desire, effect. For all Gods works are entire, and done in him, at once,
and perfect as soon as begun; And this spiritual Resurrection is his work, and
therefore quickened even in the Conception, and borne even in the quickening, and
grown up even in the birth, that is, perfected in the eyes of God, as soon as
it is seriously intended in our heart. And farther we carry not your
consideration upon those two Branches which constitute our second Part, That
some shall be alive at Christ's coming, That they that are alive, shall receive
such a change, as shall be a true death, and a true Resurrection, And so shall
be caught up into the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so be with the
Lord for ever; which are the Circumstances of our third, and last Part.

In this last part, we proposed it for the first Consideration, 3 Part.
Resurrectio justorum.
that the Apostle determines the Consideration of the Resurrection in those
two, Them, and Us, They that slept in Christ, and We that expect the coming of
Christ. Of any Resurrection of the wicked, here is no mention. Not that there
is not one; but that the resurrection of the wicked conduced not to the
Apostles purpose, which was to minister comfort in the loss of the dead,
because they were to come again, and to meet the Lord, and to be with him for
ever; whereas, in the Resurrection of the wicked, who are only to rise, that
they may fall lower, there is no argument of comfort. And therefore our Savior
Christ determines his Commission in that, This is the Fathers will that sent
me, John 6.39.
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day. This was his not losing, if it were raised again;
but, he has only them in charge to raise at the last day, whom the Father had
given him; given him so, as that they were to be with him for ever; for others
he never mentions.

And upon this, much, very much depends. For, Chiliasts.
this forbearing to mention the resurrection of the wicked with the righteous,
gave occasion to many in the Primitive Church, to imagine a twofold, a former
and a later Resurrection; which was furthered by their mistaking of those words
in S. John, Apoc. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection; which words,
being intended of the Resurrection from sin, by grace, in this life, the
Chiliasts, the Millenarians, interpreted of this Resurrection in our Text, That
at Christ's coming, the righteous should rise, and live a thousand years, (as
S. John says) in all temporal abundances, with Christ here, in recompense of
those temporal calamities, and oppressions, which here they had suffered; and
then, after those thousand years, so spent with Christ, in temporal
abundances, should follow the resurrection of the wicked; and then the wicked,
and the righteous should be disposed and distributed and settled in those
Mansions, in which they should remain for ever. And of this error, (as very
many of the Fathers persisted in it to the end) S. Augustine himself had a
touch, and a tincture, at beginning. And this error, S. Hierome also, (though
truly, I think, S. Hierome was never touched with it himself) out of a
reverence to those many, and great men, that were, ( Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Lactantius, and the rest) would never call an Heresy, nor an Error, nor by
any sharper name, then an opinion, which is no word of heavy detestation.

And as those blessed Fathers of tender bowels, Pagani.
enlarged themselves in this distribution, and apportioning the mercy of God,
that it consisted best with the nature of his mercy, that as his Saints had
suffered temporal calamities in this world, in this world they should be
recompensed with temporal abundances, so did they enlarge this mercy farther,
and carry it even to the Gentiles, to the Pagans that had no knowledge of
Christ in any established Church. You shall not find a Trumegistus, a Numa
Pompilius, a Plato, a Socrates, for whose salvation you shall not find some
Father, or some Ancient and Reverend Author, an Advocate. In which liberality
of Gods mercy, those tender Fathers proceed partly upon that rule, That in
Trismegistus, and in the rest, they find evident impressions, and testimonies,
that they knew the Son of God, and knew the Trinity; and then, say they, why
should not these good men, believing a Trinity, be saved? and partly they go
upon that rule, which goes through so many of the Fathers, Facienti quod in se
est, That to that man who does as much as he can, by the light of nature, God
never denies grace; and then, say they, why should not these men that do so be
saved? And, upon this ground, S. Dionyse, the Areopagite says, That from the
beginning of the world, God has called some men of all Nations, and of all
sorts, by the ministry of Angels, though not by the ministry of the Church. To
me, to whom God has revealed his Son, in a Gospel, by a Church, there can be
no way of salvation, but by applying that Son of God, by that Gospel, in that
Church. Nor is there any other foundation for any, nor other name by which any
can be saved, but the name of Jesus. But how this foundation is presented, and
how this name of Jesus is notified to them, amongst whom there is no Gospel
preached, no Church established, I am not curious in inquiring. I know God can
be as merciful as those tender Fathers present him to be; and I would be as
charitable as they are. And therefore humbly embracing that manifestation of
his Son, which he has afforded me, I leave God, to his unsearchable ways of
working upon others, without farther inquisition.

Neither did those tender Fathers then, Angeli lopsi in Coelis.
(much less the School after) consist in carrying this overflowing, and
inexhaustible mercy of God, upon his Saints, after their Resurrection, in
temporal abundances, nor upon the Gentiles, who had no solemn, nor clear
knowledge of Christ, Psalm. 138.2. Psalm. 17.7.
(which is Magnificare misericordiam, to magnify, to extend, to stretch the
mercy of God) but, Mirificant misericordiam, (as David also speaks) they
stretch this mercy miraculously, for, they carry this mercy even to hell it
self. For, first, for the Angels that fell in heaven, from the time that they
committed their first sin, to the time that they were cast down into hell, they
whom we call the more subtle part of the School, say, That In illa mo^^ la,
during that space, between their falling into their sin, and their expulsion
from heaven, the Angels might have repented, and been restored, for, so long,
say they, those Angels were but in statu viatorum, in the state and condition
of persons, as yet upon their way, (as all men are, as long as they are alive)
and not In termino, in their last, and determined station. And that which is so
often cited out of Damascen, concerning the fall of Angels, Quod hominibus mors
est, Angelis casus, That as death works upon man, and concludes him, and makes
him impenitible for ever, so works the fall upon the Angels, and concludes them
for ever too, they interpret to have been intended by Damascen, not of the
Angels fall in heaven, but their fall from heaven; for, till then, they were
not, say they, Intermino, in their last state, and, so, not impenitible. Apoc.
12.7.
And those Ancients, which expound that battle in heaven, between Michael and
the Dragon, and their several Angels, to have been fought at that time, after
their fall, and between Lucifers rebellion, and his expulsion, (as the Ancients
abound much in that sense of that place) argue rationally, That that battle,
(what kind of battle soever it were) must necessarily have spent some time.
They conceive it to have been a battle of Disputation, of Argumentation, of
Persuasion; and that those good Angels which are so glad of our Conversion,
would have been infinitely glad to have reduced their rebellious brethren to
their obedience. And, during that time, (which could not be a sudden instant)
they were not Inadeptivi gratiae, Hiesolom.
incapable of repentance, and of mercy. S. Cyril comes toward it, comes near
it; nay, if it be well observed, goes beyond it; Of Gods longanimity and
patience toward man, (says he) we have in part spoken; Quanta ille Angelis
condonaverit, nescimus; how great transgressions he has forgiven in the
Angels, we know not; only this we know, says he, Solus qui peccdre non possit
Jesus est, There is none impeccable, none that cannot sin, Man nor Angel, but
only Christ Jesus.

Nay after the expulsion of the Angels, Angels lapsi in Infernum.
not only after their fall in Heaven, but their fall from Heaven, many of the
Ancients seem loath to exclude all ways of Gods mercy, even from hell it
self. De statu moti, sed non irremediabiliter moti, says Origin, The Angels
are fallen, fallen even into hell, but not so irrecoverably fallen, Vt
Institutionibus bonorum Angelorum non possint restitui, But that by the
counsel and labor of the good Angels, they may be restored again. Origin is
thought to be single, singular in this doctrine, Ephesians. 3.10.
but he is not. Even S. Ambrose, interpreting that place, That S. Paul says He
was made a Minister of the Gospel, Vt innotesceret, to the intent that the
wisdom of God, might by the Church, be made known to Powers and
Principalities, interprets it of fallen Angels; That they, the fallen Angels
might receive benefit by the preaching of the Gospel in the Church. Prudentius
says not so, but this he does say, That upon this day, when our blessed
Savior arose from hell, Poenarum celebres sub Styge feriae, And, Suppliciis
mitibus, Nee forvent solito flumina sulphur, Some relaxation, some ease in
their torments, at some time, some very good men have imagined, even in hell.
And more then that; they have not absolutely cried down (for, so much it
deserves) that fable of Traian; That after that Emperor had been some time in
hell, yet, upon the prayers of Pope Gregory, he was removed to Heaven. (...)
Nay, more then that; (for, that was but of one man) But, an Author of our age,
and much esteemed in the Roman Church, delivers as his own opinion, (and
thinks he has the subtiler part of the School on his side) That that, which
is so often said, (from hell there is no redemption) is only to be understood
of them, whom God sends to hell, as to their last place; to them, certainly
there is no redemption. But, says he, God may send souls of the heathen, who
had not the benefit of any Christian Church, and yet were good moral men, to
burn out certain errors, or ignorances, or sins in hell, and then remove them
to Heaven; for, for so long time, they are but Viatores, they are but in their
way, and not concluded.

Beloved, that we might have something in the balance to weigh down the
curelty, and the petulancy, and the pertinacy of those men, who in these later
times have so attenuated the mercy of God, as that they have almost brought it
to nothing, (for there is no mercy where there is no misery, and they place all
mercy to have been given at once, and that, before man was fallen into misery
by sin, or before man was made) and have pronounced, that God never meant to
show mercy to all them, nor but to a very few of them, to whom he pretended to
offer it, that we might have something in the balance to weigh against these
unmercifull men, I have staid thus long upon these over-mercifull men, that
have carried mercy upon the Saints of God, in temporal abundances after the
Resurrection, and upon the Heathen who never heard Gospel preached, and upon
the Angels fallen in Heaven, and upon those Angels fallen from Heaven into
hell, and upon the souls of men there, not only in the ease of their
torments, but in their translation from thence to Heaven. That so our later men
might see, that the Ancients thought God so far from beginning at Hate, (That
God should first, for his glory, hate some, and then make them that he might
execute his hate upon them) as that they thought god implacable, inexorable,
irreconciliable to none; therefore to these unmercifull, have we opposed these
overmercifull men.

But yet, to them we must say, Numquid Deus indiget mendacio vestro, Job 13.7.
ut pro eo Ioquamini dolos? Shall we lie for God, or speak deceitfully for
him? deceive your souls, with over-extending his mercy? we may derive mercy
from hell, though we carry not mercy to hell. Gehenna non solum eorum, qui
puniendi, causa facta, Origin.
sed and eorum, qui salvandi; Hell was not only made for their sakes, who were
to suffer in it, but for theirs, who were to be warned by it; and so there is
mercy in hell. Cooperatur regno, says S. Chrysostom, elegantly, Hell has a
cooperation with Heaven, Chrysostom.
It works upon us, in the advancement of our Salvation, as well as Heaven; Nec
saevitiaeres est, sed misericordiae, Hell is not a monument of Gods cruelty,
but of his mercy, Et nisi fuisset intentata gehenna, in gehennam omnes
cecidissemus, If we were not told of hell, we should all fall into hell; and,
so there is mercy in hell. And therefore, says the same Father, Out of an
unspeakeable wisdom, and Fatherly care, (as Fathers will speak loudest to
their Children, and look angerliest, and make the greatest rods, when they
intend not the severest correction) Christus saepius gehennam comminatus est,
quam regnum pollicitus, Christ in his Gospel, has oftener threatened us with
hell, then promised us Heaven. We are bound to praise God, says he, as much
for driving Adam out of Paradise, as for placing him there, Et agere gratias
tam progehenna, quam pro regno, And to give him thanks, as well for hell, as
for Heaven. For, whether he cauterise or foment, whether he draw blood, or
apply Cordials, he is the same Physician, and seeks but one end, (our
spiritual health) by his diverse ways. For us, who by this notification of
hell, escape hell, Psalm. 118.17.
We shall not dye, but live; that is, not dye so, but that we shall live
again; Therefore is death called a sleep, ( Lazarus sleeps, says Christ.)
And Coemiteria are Dormitoria, John 11.11.
Churchyards are our beds. And in those beds, (and in all other beds of death)
(for, the dead have their beds in the Sea too, and sleep even in the restless
motion thereof) the voice of the Archangel, and the Trumpet of God shall awake
them that slept in Christ before, and they and we shall be united in one body;
for, as our Apostle says here, Heb. 11.39.
We shall not prevent them, so he says also, That they shall not be made
perfect without us. Though we live to see Christ, we shall not prevent them,
though they have attended Christ five thousand years in the grave, they shall
not prevent us, but united in one body, Rapiemur, They and we shall be caught,
etc.

Rapiemur, We shall be caught up. This is a true Rapture, Rapiemur.
in which we do nothing our selves. Our last act toward Christ, is as our
first; In the first act of our Conversion we do nothing; nothing in this last
act, our Resurrection, but Rapimur, we are caught. In everything, the more
there is left to our selves, the worse it is done; that that God does entirely,
is entirely good. S. Paul had a Rapture too; He was caught up into Paradise; 2
Cor. 12.4.
but whether in the body, or out of the body, he cannot tell. We can tell, that
this Rapture of ours, shall be in body and soul, in the whole man. Man is but
a vapor; but a glorious, and a blessed vapor, when he is attracted, and
caught up by this Sun, the Son of Man, the Son of God. O what a blessed
alleviation possesses that man! and to what a blessed levity, (if without
levity we may so speak) to what a cheerful lightness of spirit is he come,
that comes newly from Confession, and with the seal of Absolution upon him!
Then, when nothing troubles his conscience, then, when he has disburdened his
soul of all that lay heavy upon it, then, when if his Confessor should
unjustly reveal it to any other, yet God will never speak of it more to his
conscience, not upbraid him with it, not reproach him for it, what a blessed
alleviation, what a holy cheerfulness of spirit is that man come to? How much
more in the endowments which we shall receive in the Rapture of this text,
where we do not only divest all sins past, (as in Confession) but all
possibility of future sins; and put on, not only incorruption, but
incorruptiblenesse; not only impeccancy, but impeccability. And, to be
invested with this endowment, Rapiemur, We shall be caught up, and Rapiemur in
Nubibus, We shall be caught up in the Clouds.

We take a Sar to be the thickest, In Nubibus.
and so the impurest, and ignoblest part of that sphere; and yet, by the
illustration of the Sun, it becomes a glorious star. Clouds are but the beds,
and wombs of distempered and malignant impressions, of vapors, and
exhalations, and the furnaces of Lightnings and of Thunder; yet by the presence
of Christ, and his employment, these clouds are made glorious Chariots to bring
him and his Saints together. Psalm. 135.7.
Those Vapors and Clouds which David speaks of, S. Augustine interprets of the
Ministers of the Church; that they are those Clouds. Those Ministers may have
clouds in their understanding and knowledge, (some may be less learned then
others) and clouds in their elocution and utterance, (some may have an
unacceptable deliverance) and clouds in their aspect, and countenance, (some
may have an unpleasing presence) and clouds in their respect and maintenance,
(some may be oppressed in their fortunes) but still they are such clouds as are
sent by Christ to bring thee up to him. And as the Children of Israel received
direction and benefit, Exodus 13.21.
as well by the Pillar of Cloud, as by the Pillar of Fire, so do the Children
of God in the Church, as well by Preachers of inferior gifts, as by higher. In
Nubibus; Christ does not come in a Chariot, and send Carts for us. Acts 1.11.
He comes as he went; This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven, say the
Angels at his Ascension. Luke 24.50.
In what manner did they see him go? He was taken up, and a Cloud received him
out of their sight. So he went, so he shall return, so we shall be taken up,
In the Clouds, to meet him in the Air.

The Transfiguration of Christ was not acted upon so high a Scene, In era.
as this our access to Christ shall be. That hill was not so high, nor so
near to the Heaven of Heavens, as this region of the air shall be. Nor was
the Transfiguration so eminent a manifestation of the glory of Christ, as this
his coming in the air to Judgment shall be. And yet Peter that saw but that,
Mat. 17.14.
desired no more, but thought it happiness enough to be there, and there to
fix their Tabernacles. But in this our meeting of Christ in the air, we shall
see more then they saw in the Transfiguration, and yet be but in the way of
seeing more, then we see in the air then; we shall be presently well, and yet
improving. The Kings presence makes a Village the Court; but he that has
service to do at Court, would be glad to find it in a lodgeable and convenient
place. I can build a Church in my bosom; I can serve God in my heart, and
never cloth my prayer in words. God is often said to hear, and answer in the
Scriptures, when they to whom he speaks, have said nothing. I can build a
Church at my beds side; when I prostrate my self in humble prayer there, I do
so. I can praise God cheerfully in my Chapel, cheerfully in my parish
Church, as David says, Psalm. 26.12.
In Ecclesiis, plurally, In the Congregations, In every Congregation will I
bless the Lord; But yet, I find the highest exaltations, and the noblest
elevations of my devotion, Psalm. 35.18.
when I give thanks in the great Congregation, and praise him among much
people, for, so me thinks, I come nearer and nearer to the Communion of Saints
in Heaven. Apoc. 21.22.
Where it is therefore said that there is no Temple, (I saw no Temple in
Heaven) because all Heaven is a Temple, And because the Lord God Almighty, and
the Lamb, (who fill all Heaven) are, Obviam Domino.
(as S. John says there) the Temple thereof.

So far toward that, as into the Air, this text carries us, Obviam Domino, To
meet the Lord. The Lord requires no more, not so much at our hands, as he does
for us. When he is come from the right hand of his Father in heaven, into the
air to meet us, he is come farther then we are to go from the grave to meet
him. But we have met the Lord in many a lower place; in many unclean actions
have we met the Lord in our own hearts, and said to our selves, Surely the
Lord is here, and sees us, Genesis ^9.9.
and (with Joseph) How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
my God? and yet have proceeded, gone forward in the accomplishment of that sin.
But there it was Obviam Jesus, Obviam Christo, We met a Jesus, We met a Christ,
a God of mercy, who forgave us those sins. Here in our text, it is Obviam
Domino, We must meet the Lord; He invests here no other name but that; He has
laid aside his Christ, and his Jesus, names of Mercy, and Redemption, and
Salvation, and comes only in the name of power, The Lord, The Judge of quick
and dead. In which Judgment he shows no mercy; All his mercy is exercised in
this life; and he that has not received his portion of that mercy before his
death, shall never receive any. There he judges only by our works, Whom have
thou fed, whom have thou clothed? Then in judgment we meet the Lord, the Lord
of power, and the last time that ever we shall meet a Jesus, a Christ, a God of
mercy, is upon our deathbed; but there we shall meet him so, as that when we
meet him in another name, The Lord, in the air, yet by the benefit of the
former mercy received from Jesus, We shall be with the Lord for ever.

First Erimus, We shall Be, we shall have a Being. Erimus.
There is nothing more contrary to God, and his proceedings, then annihilation,
to Be nothing, Do nothing, Think nothing. It is not so high a step, to raise
the poor out of the dust, Psalm. 113.7.
and to lift the needy from the dunghill, and set him with Princes, To make a
King of a Beggar is not so much, as to make a Worm of nothing. Whatsoever God
has made thee since, yet his greatest work upon thee, was, that he made thee;
and howsoever he extend his bounty in preferring thee, yet his greatest
largeness, is, in preserving thee in thy Being And therefore his own name of
Majesty, is Jehovah, which denotes his Essence, his Being. And it is usefully
moved, and safely resolved in the School, that the devil himself cannot
deliberately wish himself nothing. Suddenly a man may wish himself nothing,
because that seems to deliver him from the sense of his present misery; but
deliberately he cannot; because whatsoever a man wishes, must be something
better then he has yet; and whatsoever is better, is not nothing. Nihil
contrarium Deo, August.
There is nothing truly contrary to God; To do nothing, is contrary to his
working; but contrary to his nature, contrary to his Essence there is nothing.
For whatsoever is any thing, even in that Being, and therefore because it is,
has a conformity to God, and an affinity with God, who is Being, Essence it
self. In him we have our Being, says the Apostle. Act. 17.28.
But here it is more then so; not only In illo, but Cum illo, not only In him,
but With him, not only in his Providence, but in his Presence.

The Hypocrite has a Being, and, in God, but it is not with God, Cum illc.
Esaias 29.13.
Qua cor long, With his lips he honors God, but removes his heart far from
him. And God sends him after his heart, that he may keep him at that distance,
(as S. Gregory reads and interprets that place of Esaias) Redite praevaricatores
ad cor, Return O sinners, follow your own heart, Esaias 46.8.
and then I am sure you and I shall never meet. Our Savior Christ delivers
this distance plainly, Discedite a me, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire. Mat. 25.42.
Where the first part of the sentence is incomparably the heaviest, the
departing worse then the fire; the intensnesse of that fire, the air of that
brimstone, the anguish of that worm, the discord of that howling, and gnashing
of teeth, is no comparable, no considerable part of the torment, in respect of
the privation of the sight of God, the banishment from the presence of God, an
absolute hopelesnesse, an utter impossibility of ever coming to that, which
sustaines the miserable in this world, that though I see no Sun here, I shall
see the Son of God there. The Hypocrite shall not do so; we shall Be, and Be
with him, and Be with him for ever; which is the last thing that does fall
under ours, or can fall under any consideration.

Of S. Hierome, S. Augustine says, Quae Hicronymus neseivit, Semper.
nullus hominum unquam seivit; That that S. Hierome knew not, no man ever knew.
And S. Cyril, to whom S. Augustine said that, said also to S. Augustine, in
magnifying of S. Hierome, That when a Catholic Priest disputed with an
Heretic, and cited a passage of S. Hierome, and the Heretic said Hierome
lied, instantly he was struck dumb; yet of this last and everlasting joy and
glory of heaven, in the fruition of God, S. Hierome would adventure to say
nothing, no not then, when he was divested of his mortal body, dead; for, as
soon as he dyed at Bethlem, he came instantly to Hippo, S. Augustines
Bishopric, and though he told him, Hieronymi anima sum, I am the soul of that
Hierome, to whom thou art now writing about the joys and glory of heaven, yet
he said no more of that, but this, Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum
mare? Can thou hope to pour the whole Sea into a thimble, or to take the
whole world into thy hand? And yet, that is easier, then to comprehend the joy
and the glory of heaven in this life. Nor is there any thing, that makes this
more incomprehensible, then this Semper in our text, the Eternity thereof, That
we shall be with him for ever. For, this Eternity, this Everlastingnesse is not
only incomprehensible to us in this life, but even in heaven we can never know
it experimentally; and all knowledge in heaven is experimental; As all
knowledge in this world is causall, (we know a thing, if we know the cause
thereof) so the knowledge in heaven, is effectual, experimental, we know it,
because we have found it to be so.

The endowments of the blessed, (those which the School calls Dotes beatorum)
are ordinarily delivered to be these three, Visio, Dilectio, Fruitio, The sight
of God, the love of God, and the fruition, the enjoying, the possessing of God.
Now, as no man can know what it is to see God in heaven, but by an
experimental and actual seeing of him there, nor what it is to love God
there, but by such an actual and experimental love of him, nor what it is to
enjoy and possess God, but by an actual enjoying, and an experimental
possessing of him, So can no man tell what the eternity, and everlastingnesse
of all these, is, till he have passed through that eternity, and that
everlastingnesse; and that he can never do; for, if it could be passed
through, then it were not eternity. How barren a thing is Arithmetique? (and
yet Arithmetique will tell you, how many single grains of sand, will fill this
hollow Vault to the Firmament) How empty a thing is Rhetorique? (and yet
Rherorique will make absent and remote things present to your understanding)
How weak a thing is Poetry? (and yet Poetry is a counterfeit Creation, and
makes things that are not, as though they were) How infirm, how impotent are
all assistances, if they be put to express this Eternity? The best help that I
can assign you, is, to use well Aeternum vestrum, your own Eternity; as S.
Gregory calls our whole course of this life, Aeternum nostrum, our Eternity;
Aequum est, ut qui in aeterno suo peccaverit, in aeterno Dei puniatur, says
he; It is but justice, that he that has sinned out his own Eternity, should
suffer out Gods Eternity. So, if you suffer out your own Eternity, in
submitting your selves to God, in the whole course of your life, in surrendering
your will entirely to his, and glorifying of him in a constant patience, under
all your tribulations, It is a righteous thing with God, (says our Apostle, in
his other Epistle to these Thessalonians) To recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
and to you, that are troubled rest with us, says he there; with us, who
shall be caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall
be with the Lord for ever. Amen.

SERMON XXVII. Preached to the LL. upon Easter Day, at the Communion, The KING
being then dangerously sick at New Market.
PSALM. 89.47. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death?


AT first, God gave the judgment of death upon man, when he should
transgress, absolutely, Morte morieris, Thou shall surely dye: The woman in
her Dialogue with the Serpent, she mollifies it, Ne forte moriamur, perchance,
if we eat, we may die; and then the Devil is as peremptory on the other side,
Nequaquam moriemini, do what you will, surely you shall not die; And now God in
this Text comes to his reply, Quis est homo, shall they not die? Give me but
one instance, but one exception to this rule, What man is he that lives, and
shall not see death? Let no man, no woman, no devil offer a Ne forte,
(perchance we may dye) much less a Nequaquam, (surely we shall not dye) except
he be provided of an answer to this question, except he can give an instance
against this general, except he can produce that man's name, and history, that
has lived, and shall not see death. We are all conceived in close Prison; in
our Mothers wombes, we are close Prisoners all; when we are borne, we are borne
but to the liberty of the house; Prisoners still, though within larger walls;
and then all our life is but a going out to the place of Execution, to death.
Now was there ever any man seen to sleep in the Cart, between Newgate, and
Tyborne? between the Prison, and the place of Execution, does any man sleep?
And we sleep all the way; from the womb to the grave we are never thoroughly
awake; but pass on with such dreams, and imaginations as these, I may live as
well, as another, and why should I dye, rather then another? but awake, and
tell me, says this Text, Quis homo? who is that other that thou talkest of?
What man is he that lives, and shall not see death?

In these words, we shall first, for our general humiliation, consider the
unanswerablenesse of this question, There is no man that lives, and shall not
see death. Secondly, we shall see, how that modification of Eve may stand,
forte moriemur, how there may be a probable answer made to this question, that
it is like enough, that there are some men that live, and shall not see death:
And thirdly, we shall find that truly spoken, which the Devil spoke
deceitfully then, we shall find the Nequaquam verified, we shall find a
direct, and full answer to this question; we shall find a man that lives, and
shall not see death, our Lord, and Savior Christ Jesus, of whom both S.
Augustine, and S. Hierome, do take this question to be principally asked, and
this Text to be principally intended. Ask me this question then, of all the
sons of men, generally guilty of original sin, Quis homo, and I am
speechless, I can make no answer; Ask me this question of those men, which
shall be alive upon earth at the last day, when Christ comes to judgment, Quis
homo, and I can make a probable answer; forte moriemur, perchance they shall
die; It is a problematicall matter, and we say nothing too peremptorily. Ask
me this question without relation to original sin, Quis homo, and then I will
answer directly, fully, confidently, Ecce homo, there was a man that lived, and
was not subject to death by the law, neither did he actually die so, but that
he fulfilled the rest of this verse; Eruit animam de inferno, by his own
power, he delivered his soul from the hand of the grave. From the first, this
lesson rises, General doctrines must be generally delivered, All men must die:
From the second, this lesson, Collateral, an unrevealed doctrines must be
soberly delivered, How we shall be changed at the last day, we know not so
clearly: From the third, this lesson arises, Conditional Doctrines must be
conditionally delivered, If we be dead with him, we shall be raised with him.

First then, 1. Part. Quis homo?
for the generality, Those other degrees of punishment, which God inflicted
upon Adam, and Eve, and in them upon us, were as absolutely, and illimitedly
pronounced, as this of death, and yet we see, they are many ways extended, or
contracted; To man it was said, In sudore vultus, In the sweat of thy brows,
thou shall eat thy bread, and how many men never sweat, till they sweat with
eating? To the woman it was said, Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he
shall rule over thee: and how many women have no desire to their husbands, how
many overruled them? Hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and sickness are
denounced upon all, and yet if you ask me Quis homo? What is that man that
hungers and thirsts not, that labors not, that sickens not? I can tell you of
many, that never felt any of these; but contract the question to that one of
death, Quis homo? What man is he that shall not taste death? And I know none.
Whether we consider the Summer Solstice, when the day is sixteen hours, and
the night but eight, or the Winter Solstice, when the night is sixteen hours,
and the day but eight, still all is but twenty four hours, and still the
evening and morning make but a day: The Patriarchs in the old Testament had
their Summer day, long lives; we are in the Winter, short lived; but Quis homo?
Which of them, or us come not to our night in death? If we consider violent
deaths, casual deaths, it is almost a scornful thing to see, with what
wantonness, and sportfulness, death plays with us; We have seen a man Canon
proof in the time of War, and slain with his own Pistol in the time of peace:
We have seen a man recovered after his drowning, and live to hang himself. But
for that one kind of death, which is general, (though nothing be in truth
more against nature then dissolution, and corruption, which is death) we are
come to call that death, natural death, then which, indeed, nothing is more
unnatural; The generality makes it natural; Moses says, that Man's age is
seventy, Psalm. 90.10.
and eighty is labor and pain; and yet himself was more then eighty, and in a
good state, and habitude when he said so. No length, no strength enables us to
answer this Quis homo? What man? etc.

Take a flat Map, a Globe in plano, and here is East, and there is West, as far
asunder as two points can be put: but reduce this flat Map to roundnesse, which
is the true form, and then East and West touch one another, and are all one: So
consider man's life aright, to be a Circle, Pulvis es, and in pulverem
rever^eris, Dust thou art, and to dust thou must return; Nudus egressus, Job 1.
Nudus revertar, Naked I came, and naked I must go; In this, the circle, the
two points meet, the womb and the grave are but one point, they make but one
station, there is but a step from that to this. This brought in that custom
amongst the Greek Emperors, that ever at the day of their Coronation, they
were presented with several sorts of Marble, that they might then bespeak
their Tomb. And this brought in that Custom into the Primitive Church, that
they called the Martyrs days, wherein they suffered, Natalitia Martyrum, their
birth days; birth, and death is all one.

Their death was a birth to them into another life, into the glory of God; It
ended one Circle, and created another; for immortality, and eternity is a
Circle too; not a Circle where two points meet, but a Circle made at once; This
life is a Circle, made with a Compass, that passes from point to point; That
life is a Circle stamped with a print, an endless, and perfect Circle, as
soon as it begins. Of this Circle, the Mathematician is our great and good
God; The other Circle we make up our selves; we bring the Cradle, and Grave
together by a course of nature. Every man does; Mi Gheber, says the Original;
It is not Ishe, which is the first name of man, in the Scriptures, and
signifies nothing but a sound; a voice, a word, a Musical air dies, and
evaporates, what wonder if man, that is but Ishe, a sound, dye too? It is not
Adam, which is another name of man, and signifies nothing but red earth; Let it
be earth red with blood, (with that murder which we have done upon our selves)
let it be earth red with blushing, (so the word is used in the Original) with
a conscience of our own infirmity, what wonder if man, that is but Adam, guilty
of this self-murder in himself, guilty of this in-borne frailty in himself, dye
too? It is not Enos, which is also a third name of man, and signifies nothing
but a wretched and miserable creature; what wonder if man, that is but earth,
that is a burden to his Neighbors, to his friends, to his kindred, to
himself, to whom all others, and to whom himself desires death, what wonder if
he dye? But this question is framed upon none of these names; Not Ishe, not
Adam, not Enos; but it is Mi Gheber, Quis vir; which is the word always
signifying a man accomplished in all excellencies, a man accompanied with all
advantages; fame, and good opinion justly conceived, keeps him from being
Ishe, a mere sound, standing only upon popular acclamation; Innocence and
integrity keeps him from being Adam, red earth, from bleeding, or blushing at
any thing he has done; That holy and Religious Art of Arts, which S. Paul
professed, That he knew how to want, and how to abound, keeps him from being
Enos, miserable or wretched in any fortune; He is Gheber, a great Man, and a
good Man, a happy Man, and a holy Man, and yet Mi Gheber, Quis homo, this man
must see death.

And therefore we will carry this question a little higher, from Quis homo, to
Quis deorum, Which of the gods have not seen death? Ask it of those, who are
Gods by participation of Gods power, of those of whom God says, Ego dixi, dii
est is, and God answers for them, and of them, and to them, You shall dye like
men; Ask it of those gods, who are gods by imputation, whom Creatures have
created, whom Men have made gods, the gods of the Heathen, and do we not know,
where all these gods dyed? Sometimes diverse places dispute, who has their
tombs; but do not they deny their godhead in confessing their tombs? do they
not all answer, that they cannot answer this text, Mi Gheber, Quis homo, What
man, Quis deorum, What god of man's making has not seen death? As Justin martyr
asks that question, Why should I pray to Apollo or Esculapius for health, Qui
apud Chironem medicinam didicerunt, when I know who taught them all that they
knew? so why should I look for Immortality from such or such a god, whose
grave I find for a witness, that he himself is dead? Nay, carry this
question higher then so, from this Quis homo, to quid homo, what is there in
the nature and essence of Man, free from death? The whole man is not, for the
dissolution of body and soul is death. The body is not; I shall as soon find
an immortal Rose, an eternal Flower, as an immortal body. And for the
Immortality of the Soul, It is safelier said to be immortal, by preservation,
then immortal by nature; That God keeps it from dying, then, that it cannot
dye. We magnify God in an humble and faithful acknowledgment of the
immortality of our souls, but if we ask, quid homo, what is there in the
nature of Man, that should keep him from death, even in that point, the
question is not easily answered.

It is every man's case then; every man dies; Videbit.
and though it may perchance be but a mere Hebraisme to say, that every man
shall see death, perchance it amounts to no more, but to that phrase, Gustare
mortem, To taste death, yet thus much may be implied in it too, That as every
man must dye, so every man may see, that he must dye; as it cannot be avoided,
so it may be understood. A beast dies, but he does not see death; S. Basil
says, he saw an Ox weep for the death of his yoke fellow; Basil orat. de
Morte.
but S. Basil might mistake the occasion of that Oxes tears. Many men dye too,
and yet do not see death; The approaches of death amaze them, and stupifie
them; they feel no colluctation with Powers, and Principalities, upon their
death bed; that is true; they feel no terrors in their consciences, no
apprehensions of Judgment, upon their death bed; that is true; and this we
call going away like a Lamb. But the Lamb of God had a sorrowful sense of
death; His soul was heavy unto death, and he had an apprehension, that his
Father had forsaken him; And in this text, the Chalde Paraphrase expresses it
thus, Videbit Angelum mortis, he shall see a Messenger, a forerunner, a power
of Death, an executioner of Death, he shall see something with horror, though
not such as shall shake his moral, or his Christian constancy.

So that this Videbunt, They shall see, implies also a Viderunt, they have
seen, that is, they have used to see death, to observe a death in the decay of
themselves, and of every creature, and of the whole World. Almost fourteen
hundred years ago, Cyprian ad Demetrianum.
S. Cyprian writing against Demetrianus, who imputed all the wars, and
deaths, and unseasonablenesses of that time, to the contempt, and irreligion of
the Christians, that they were the cause of all those ils, because they would
not worship their Gods, Cyprian imputes all those distempers to the age of the
whole World; Canos videmus in pueris, says he, We see Children borne
gray headed; Capilli deficiunt, antequam crescant, Their hair is changed,
before it be grown. Nec aetas in senectute desinit, sed incipit asenectute,
We do not dye with age, but we are borne old. Many of us have seen Death in
our particular selves; in many of those steps, in which the moral Man
expresses it; Seneca.
We have seen Mortem infantiae, pueritiam, The death of infancy in youth; and
Pueritiae, adolescentiam, and the death of youth in our middle age; And at last
we shall see Mortem senectutis, mortem ipsam, the death of age in death it
self. But yet after that, a step farther then that Moral man went, Mortem
mortis in morte Jesus, We shall see the death of Death it self in the death of
Christ. As we could not be clothed at first, in Paradise, till some Creatures
were dead, (for we were clothed in beasts skins) so we cannot be clothed in
Heaven, but in his garment who dyed for us.

This Videbunt, this future sight of Death implies a viderunt, they have seen,
they have studied Death in every Book, in every Creature; and it implies a
Vident, they do presently see death in every object, They see the houre-glasse
running to the death of the hour; They see the death of some profane thoughts
in themselves, by the entrance of some Religious thought of compunction, and
conversion to God; and then they see the death of that Religious thought, by an
inundation of new profane thoughts, that overflow those. As Christ says, that
as often as we eat the Sacramental Bread, we should remember his Death, so
as often, as we eat ordinary bread, we may remember our death; Bern. Aug.
for even hunger and thirst, are diseases; they are Mors quotidiana, a daily
death, and if they lasted long, would kill us. In every object and subject, we
all have, and do, and shall see death; not to our comfort as an end of misery,
not only as such a misery in it self, as the Philosopher takes it to be, Mors
omnium miseriarum, That Death is the death of all misery, because it destroys
and dissolves our being; Prove. 16.14.
but as it is Stipendium peccati, The reward of sin; That as Solomon says,
Indignatio Regis nuncius mortis, The wrath of the King, is as a messenger of
Death, so Mors nuncius indignationis Regis, We see in Death a testimony, that
our Heavenly King is angry; for, but for his indignation against our sins, we
should not dye. And this death, as it is Malum, ill, (for if ye weigh it in the
Philosophers balance; it is an annihilation of our present being, and if ye
weigh it in the Divine Balance, it is a seal of Gods anger against sin) so
this death is general; of this, this question there is no answer, Quis homo,
What man, etc.

We pass then from the Morte moriemini, 2 Part.
to the forte moriemini, from the generality and the unescapablenesse of death,
from this question, as it admits no answer, to the Forte moriemini, perchance
we shall dye; that is, to the question as it may admit a probable answer. Of
which, we said at first, that in such questions, nothing becomes a Christian
better then sobriety; to make a true difference between problematicall, and
dogmaticall points, between upper buildings, and foundations, between
collateral doctrines, and Doctrines in the right line: Aug.
for fundamental things, Sine haesitatione credantur, They must be believed
without disputing; there is no more to be done for them, but believing; for
things that are not so, we are to weigh them in two balances, in the balance of
Analogy, and in the balance of scandal: we must hold them so, as may be
analogall, proportionable, agreeable to the Articles of our Faith, and we must
hold them so, as our brother be not justly offended, nor scandalized by them;
we must weigh them with faith, for our own strength, and we must weigh them
with charity, for others weakness. Certainly nothing endangers a Church more,
then to draw indifferent things to be necessary; I mean of a primary
necessity, of a necessity to be believed De fide, not a secondary necessity, a
necessity to be performed and practiced for obedience: Without doubt, the Roman
Church repents now, and sees now that she should better have preserved her
self, if they had not denied so many particular things, which were
indifferently and problematically disputed before, to be had necessarily De
fide, in the Council of Trent.

Taking then this Text for a problem, Quis homo, What man lives, and shall not
see Death? we answer, It may be that those Men, whom Christ shall find upon the
earth alive, at his return to Judge the World, shall dye then, and it may be
they shall but be changed, and not dye. That Christ shall judge quick and dead,
is a fundamental thing; we hear it in S. Peter's Sermon, Acts 10.42.
to Cornelius and his company, and we say it every day in the Creed, He shall
judge the quick and the dead. But though we do not take the quick and the
dead, August. Chrysostom.
as Augustine and Chrysostom do, for the Righteous which lived in faith, and
the unrighteous, which were dead in sin, Though we do not take the quick
and the dead, as Ruffinus and others do, for the soul and the body, (He shall
judge the soul, which was always alive, and he shall the body, which was dead
for a time) though we take the words (as becomes us best) literally, yet the
letter does not conclude, but that they, whom Christ shall find alive upon
earth, shall have a present and sudden dissolution, and a present and sudden
reunion of body and soul again. Saint Paul says, Behold I show you a mystery;
Therefore it is not a clear case, and presently, 1 Cor. 15.51.
and peremptorily determined; but what is it? We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed. But whether this sleeping be spoke of death it self, and
exclude that, that we shall not die, or whether this sleep be spoke of a rest
in the grave, and exclude that, we shall not be buried, and remain in death,
that may be a mystery still. S. Paul says too, 1 These. 4.17.
The dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive, and remain,
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air. But whether that may not still be true, that S. Augustine says, that
there shall be Mors in raptu, August.
An instant and sudden disunion, and reunion of body and soul, which is
death, who can tell? So on the other side, when it is said to him, in whom all
we were, to Adam, Pulvis es, Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19. 1 Cor. 15.22. Romans 5.12.
and into dust thou shall return, when it is said, In Adam all die, when it is
said, Death passed upon all men, for all have sinned, Why may not all those
sentences of Scripture, which imply a necessity of dying, admit that
restriction, Nisi dies judicii nature ae cursum immutet, Pet. Mar.
We shall all die, except those, in whom the coming of Christ shall change the
course of Nature.

Consider the Scriptures then, and we shall be absolutely concluded neither
way; Consider Authority, and we shall find the Fatherrs for the most part one
way, and the School for the most part another; Take later men, and all those
in the Roman Church; Then Cajetan thinks, that they shall not die, and
Catharin is so peremptory, Cajetan. Catharinus.
that they shall, as that he says of the other opinion, Falsam esse
confidenter asserimus, and contra Scripturas sat is manifestas, and omnino sine
ratione; It is false, and against Scriptures, and reason, says he; Take later
men, and all those in the reformed Church; Calvin.
and Calvin says, Quia aboletur prior natura, censetur species mortis, sed non
migrabit anima a corpore: S. Paul calls it death, because it is a destruction
of the former Being; but it is not truly death, says Calvin; and Luther
says, Luther.
That S. Paul's purpose in that place is only to show the suddenness of Christ's
coming to Judgment, Non autem inficiatur omnes morituros; nam dormire, est
sepeliri: But S. Paul does not deny, but that all shall die; for that sleeping
which he speaks of, is burial; and all shall die, though all shall not be
buried, says Luther.

Take then that which is certain; It is certain, a judgment thou must pass:
If thy close and cautelous proceeding have saved thee from all informations in
the Exchequer, thy clearness of thy title from all Courts at Common Law, thy
moderation from the Chancery, and Star Chamber, If height of thy place, and
Authority, have saved thee, even from the tongues of men, so that ill men dare
not slander thy actions, nor good men dare not discover thy actions, no not to
thy self, All those judgments, and all the judgments of the world, are but
interlocutory judgments; There is a final judgment, In judicantes and
judicatos, against Prisoners and Judges too, where all shall be judged again;
Datum est omne judicium, All judgment is given to the Son of man, John 5.
and upon all the sons of men must his judgment pass. A judgment is certain,
and the uncertainty of this judgment is certain too; perchance God will put
off thy judgment; thou shall not die yet; but who knows whether God in his
mercy, do put off this judgment, till these good motions which his blessed
Spirit inspires into thee now, may take root, and receive growth, and bring
forth fruit, or whether he put it off, for a heavier judgment, to let thee
see, by thy departing from these good motions, and returning to thy former
sins, after a remorse conceived against those sins, that thou art inexcusable
even to thy self, and thy condemnation is just, even to thine own conscience.
So perchance God will bring this judgment upon thee now; now thou may die;
but whether God will bring that judgment upon thee now, in mercy, whilst his
Graces, in his Ordinance of preaching, work some tenderness in thee, and gives
thee some preparation, some fitness, some courage to say, Veni Domine Jesus,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, come now, or whether he will come now in
judgment, because all this can work no tenderness in thee, who can tell?

Thou hear the word of God preached, as thou hear an Oration, with some
gladness in thy self, if thou can hear him, and never be moved by his
Oratory; thou think it a degree of wisdom, to be above persuasion; and when
thou art told, that he that fears God, fears nothing else, thou think thy
self more valiant then so, if thou fear not God neither; Whether or why God
defers, or hastens the judgment, we know not; This is certain, this all S.
Paul's places collineate to, this all the Fathers, and all the School, all the
Cajetans, and all the Catharins, all the Luthers, and all the Calvin's agree in,
A judgment must be, and it must be In ictu oculi, In the twinkling of an eye,
and Fur in nocte, A thief in the night. Make the question, Quis homo? What man
is he that lives, and shall not pass this judgment? or, what man is he that
lives, and knows when this judgment shall be? So it is a Nemo scit, A
question without an answer; but ask it, as in the text, Quis homo? Who lives,
and shall not die? so it is a problematicall matter; and in such things as are
problematicall, if thou love the peace of Sion, be not too inquisitive to know,
nor too vehement, when thou think thou do know it.

Come then to ask this question, 3. Part.
not problematically, (as it is contracted to them that shall live in the last
days) nor peremptorily of man, (as he is subject to original sin) but at
large, so, as the question may include Christ himself, and then to that Quis
homo? What man is he? We answer directly, here is the man that shall not see
death; And of him principally, August.
and literally, S. Augustine (as we said before) takes this question to be
framed; Vt quaeras, dictum, non ut desperes, says he, this question is moved,
to move thee to seek out, and to have thy recourse to that man which is the
Lord of Life, not to make thee despair, that there is no such man, in whose
self, and in whom, for all us, there is Redemption from death: For, says he,
this question is an exception to that which was said before the text; which is,
Wherefore have thou made all men in vain? Consider it better, says the Holy
Ghost, here, and it will not prove so; Man is not made in vain at first, though
he do die now; for, Perditio tua ex te, This death proceeds from man himself;
and Quare moriemini domus Israel? Why will ye die, o house of Israel? God made
not death, ^ap. 1.13.
neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living; The Wise man says
it, and the true God swears it, As I live says the Lord, I would not the
death of a sinner. God did not create man in vain then, though he die; not in
vain, for since he will needs die, God receives glory even by his death, in the
execution of his justice; not in vain neither, because though he be dead, God
has provided him a Redeemer from death, in his mercy; Man is not created in
vain at all; nor all men, so near vanity as to die; for here is one man, God
and Man Christ Jesus, which lives, and shall not see death. And conformable to
S. Augustines purpose, (...)
speaks S. Hierome too, Scio quod nullus homo carneus evadet, sed novi Deum
sub velamento carnis latentem; I know there is no man but shall die; but I know
where there is a God clothed in man's flesh, and that person cannot die.

But did not Christ die then? Shall we join with any of those Heretics,
which brought Christ upon the stage to play a part, and say he was born, or
lived, or dyed, In phantasmate, In appearance only, and representation; God
forbid; so all men were created in vain indeed, if we had not a regeneration in
his true death. Where is the contract between him, and his Father, that
Oportuit pati, All this Christ ought to suffer, and so enter into glory: Is
that contract void, and of none effect? Must he not die? Where is the
ratification of that contract in all the Prophets? (...) 53.4.9.
Where is Esays Vere languores nostros tulit, Surely he has born our sorrows;
and, he made his grave with the wicked in his death; Is the ratification of the
Prophets cancelled? Shall he not, must he not die? Where is the consummation,
and the testification of all this? Where is the Gospel, Consummatum est? And
he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost? Is that fabulous? Did he not die? How
stands the validity of that contract, Christ must die; the dignity of those
Prophecies, Christ will die; the truth of the Gospel, Christ did die, with
this answer to this question, Here is a man that lives and shall not see
death? Very well; For though Christ Jesus did truly die, so as was contracted,
so as was prophesied, so as was related, yet he did not die so, as was
intended in this question, so as other natural men do die.

For first, Christ dyed because he would dye; other men admitted to the dignity
of Martyrdom, are willing to dye; but they dye by the torments of the
Executioners, they cannot bid their souls go out, and say, now I will dye.
And this was Christ's case: (...) 10.15.
It was not only, I lay down my life for my sheep, but he says also, No man
can take away my soul; And, I have power to lay it down; And De facto, he did
lay it down, he did dye, before the torments could have extorted his soul from
him; Many crucified men lived many days upon the Cross; The thieves were
alive, long after Christ was dead; and therefore Pilate wondered, that he was
already dead. His soul did not leave his body by force, (...)
but because he would, and when he would, and how he would; Thus far then
first, this is an answer to this question, Quis homo? Christ did not die
naturally, nor violently, as all others do, but only voluntarily.

Again, the penalty of death appertaining only to them, who were derived from
Adam by carnal, and sinful generation, Christ Jesus being conceived
miraculously of a Virgin, by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, was not
subject to the Law of death; and therefore in his person, it is a true answer
to this Quis homo? Here is a man, that shall not see death, that is, he need
not see death, he has not incurred Gods displeasure, he is not involved in a
general rebellion, and therefore is not involved in the general mortality, not
included in the general penalty. He needed not have dyed by the rigor of any
Law, all we must; he could not dye by the malice, or force of any Executioner,
all we must; at least by natures general Executioners, Age, and Sickness; And
then, when out of his own pleasure, and to advance our salvation, he would dye,
yet he dyed so, as that though there were a disunion of body and soul, (which
is truly death) yet there remained a Nobler, and faster union, then that of
body and soul, the Hypostaticall Union of the Godhead, not only to his
soul, but to his body too; so that even in his death, both parts were still,
not only inhabited by, but united to the Godhead it self; and in respect of
that inseparable Union, we may answer to this question, Quis homo? Here is a
man that shall not see death, that is, he shall see no separation of that,
which is incomparably, and incomprehensibly, a better soul then his soul, the
Godhead shall not be separated from his body.

But, that which is indeed the most direct, and literal answer, to this
question, is, That whereas the death in this Text, is intended of such a death,
as has Dominion over us, and from which we have no power to raise our selves,
we may truly, and fully answer to his Quis homo? here is a man, that shall
never see death so, but that he shall even in the jaws, and teeth of death,
and in the bowels and womb of the grave, and in the sink, and furnace of hell
it self, retain an Almighty power, and an effectual purpose, to deliver his
soul from death, by a glorious, a victorious, and a Triumphant Resurrection:
So it is true, Christ Josus dyed, else none of us could live; but yet he dyed
not so, as is intended in this question; Not by the necessity of any Law, not
by the violence of any Executioner, not by the separation of his best soul,
(if we may so call it) the Godhead, nor by such a separation of his natural,
and humane soul, as that he would not, or could not, or did not resume it
again.

If then this question had been asked of Angels at first, Quis Angelus? what
Angel is that, that stands, and shall not fall? though as many of those Angels,
as were disposed to that answer, Erimus similes Altissimo, We will be like God,
and stand of our selves, without any dependence upon him, did fall, yet
otherwise they might have answered the question fairly, All we may stand, if we
will; If this question had been asked of Adam in Paradise, Quis homo? though
when he harkned to her, who had harkned to that voice, Erit is sicut Dii, You
shall be as Gods, he fell too, yet otherwise, he might have answered the
question fairly so, I may live, and not dye, if I will; so, if this question be
asked of us now, as the question implies the general penalty, as it considers
us only as the sons of Adam, we have no other answer, but that by Adam sin
entered upon all, and death by sin upon all; as it implies the state of them
only, whom Christ at his second coming shall find upon earth, we have no
other answer but a modest, non liquet, we are not sure, whether we shall dye
then, or no; we are only sure, it shall be so, as most conduces to our good,
and Gods glory; but as the question implies us to be members of our Head,
Christ Jesus, as it was a true answer in him, it is true in every one of us,
adopted in him, Here is a man that lives, and shall not see death.

Death and life are in the power of the tongue, says Solomon, in another
sense; Prove. 18.21.
and in this sense too, If my tongue, suggested by my heart, and by my heart
rooted in faith, can say, Non moriar, non moriar; If I can say, (and my
conscience do not tell me, that I belie mine own state) if I can say, That
the blood of my Savior runs in my veins, That the breath of his Spirit
quickens all my purposes, that all my deaths have their Resurrection, all my
sins their remorses, all my rebellions their reconciliations, I will harken no
more after this question, as it is intended de morte naturali, of a natural
death, I know I must die that death, what care I? nor de morte spirituali, the
death of sin, I know I do, and shall die so; why despair I? but I will find
out another death, mortem raptus, 2 Cor. 12.
a death of rapture, Acts 9. Greg.
and of ecstasy, that death which S. Paul died more then once, The death which
S. Gregory speaks of, Divina contemplatio quoddam sepulchrum animae, The
contemplation of God, and heaven, is a kind of burial, and Sepulcher, and
rest of the soul; and in this death of rapture, and ecstasy, in this death of
the Contemplation of my interest in my Savior, I shall find my self, and all
my sins enterred, and entombed in his wounds, and like a Lily in Paradise, out
of red earth, I shall see my soul rise out of his blade, in a candor, and in
an innocence, contracted there, acceptable in the sight of his Father.

Though I have been dead, 1 Timothy 5.6.
in the delight of sin, so that that of S. Paul, That a Widow that lives in
pleasure, is dead while she lives, be true of my soul, that so, viduatur,
gratia mortua, when Christ is dead, not for the soul, but in the soul, that
the soul has no sense of Christ, Viduatur anima, the soul is a Widow, and no
Dowager, she has lost her husband, and has nothing from him; Esaias 28.15.
yea though I have made a Covenant with death, and have been at an agreement
with hell, and in a vain confidence have said to my self, that when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come to me, yet God shall
annull that covenant, he shall bring that scourge, that is, some medicinal
correction upon me, and so give me a participation of all the stripes of his
son; he shall give me a sweat, that is, some horror, and religious fear, and
so give me a participation of his Agony; he shall give me a diet, perchance
want, and penury, and so a participation of his fasting; and if he draw blood,
if he kill me, all this shall be but Mors raptus, a death of rapture toward
him, into a heavenly, and assured Contemplation, that I have a part in all his
passion, yea such an entire interest in his whole passion, as though all that
he did, or suffered, had been done, and suffered for my soul alone; 2 Cor. 6.9.
Quasi moriens, and ecce vivo: some show of death I shall have, for I shall
sin; and some show of death again, for I shall have a dissolution of this
Tabernacle; Sed ecce vivo, still the Lord of life will keep me alive, and that
with an Ecce, Behold, I live; that is, he will declare, and manifest my blessed
state to me; I shall not sit in the shadow of death; no nor I shall not sit in
darkness; his gracious purpose shall evermore be upon me, and I shall ever
discern that gracious purpose of his; I shall not die, nor I shall not doubt
that I shall; If I be dead within doors, (If I have sinned in my heart) why,
Suscitavit in domo, Mar. 9.23.
Christ gave a Resurrection to the Rulers daughter within doors, in the house;
If I be dead in the gate, (If I have sinned in the gates of my soul) in mine
Eyes, Luke 7.11.
or Ears, or Hands, in actual sins, why, Suscitavit in porta, Christ gave a
Resurrection to the young man at the gate of Naim. If I be dead in the grave,
(in customary, and habitual sins) why, John 11.
Suscitavit in Sepulchro, Christ gave a Resurrection to Lazarus in the grave
too. If God give me mortem raptus, a death of rapture, of ecstasy, of fervent
Contemplation of Christ Jesus, a Transfusion, a Transplantation, a
Transmigration, a Transmutation into him, (for good digestion brings always
assimilation, certainly, if I come to a true meditation upon Christ, I come to
a conformity with Christ) this is principally that Pretiosa mors Sanctorum,
Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints, by which they
are dead and buried, and risen again in Christ Jesus: precious is that death,
by which we apply that precious blood to our selves, and grow strong enough by
it, to meet David's question, Quis homo? what man? with Christ's answer, Ego
homo, I am the man, in whom whosoever abides, shall not see death.

SERMONS Preached upon WHITSUNDAY.
SERMON XXVIII. Preached at S. Paul's, upon Whitsunday. 1627.
JOHN 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.


THis day is this Scripture fulfilled in your cares, says our Savior Christ,
having read for his Text, that place of Esaias, Esaias 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. And that day which we celebrate now, was
another Scripture fulfilled in their ears, and in their eyes too; For all
Christ's promises are Scripture; They have all the Infallibility of Scripture;
And Christ had promised, that that Spirit which was upon him, when he preached,
should also be shed upon all his Apostles. And upon this day he performed that
promise, when, Acts 2.1.
They being all with one accord, in one place, there came a sound from heaven,
as of a rushing mighty wind, and filled the house, and there appeared unto
them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost. And this very particular day, in which we
now commemorate, and celebrate that performance of Christ's promise, in that
Mission of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, are all these Scriptures performed
again, in our ears, and eyes, and in our hearts; For in all those
Congregations that meet this day, to this purpose, every Preacher has so much
of this Unction (which Unction is Christ) upon him, as that the Spirit of the
Lord is upon him, and has anointed him to that service; And every
Congregation, and every good person in the Congregation, has so much of the
Apostle upon him, as that he feels This Spirit of the Lord, this Holy Ghost,
as he is this cloven tongue, that sets one stem in his ear, and the other in
his heart, one stem in his faith, and the other in his manners, one stem in
his present obedience, and another in his perseverance, one to rectify him in
the errors of life, another to establish him in the agonies of death; For the
Holy Ghost, as he is a Cloven tongue, opens as a Compass, that reaches over
all our Map, over all our World, from our East to our West, from our birth to
our death, from our cradle to our grave, and directs us for all things, to all
persons, in all places, and at all times; The Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, etc.

The blessed Spirit of God then, the Holy Ghost, the third person in the
Trinity, Divisio.
(and yet, not Third so, as that either Second or First, Son or Father, were
one minute before him in that Co-eternity, that enwraps them all alike) this
Holy Ghost is here designed by Christ, in his Person, and in his Operation; Who
he is, and what he does; From whence he comes, and why he comes; And these two,
He, and His office, will constitute our two parts in this text. In the first
of which, (which will be the exercise of this day) we shall direct you upon
these several Considerations: First, that the Person designed for this
Mission, and true Consolation, is the Holy Ghost; You shall not be without
comfort, says Christ; But mistake not false comforts for true, nor deceitful
comforters for faithful; It is the Holy Ghost, or it is none; His Comfort, or
no comfort, Him the Father will send, sais Christ, in a second branch; though
the Holy Ghost be God, equal to the Father, and so have all Missions, and
Commissions in his own hand, yet he applies himself, accommodates himself to
order, and he comes when he has a Mission from the Father: and this Father,
says Christ, (which is a third branch in this part) sends him in my name;
Though he have as good interest in the name of Adonai, which is all our
Powerful name, and in the name of Ieh^vah, which is all our Essential name,
as I, or my Father have, (the holy Ghost is as much Adonai, and as much
Ichovah, as we are) yet he is sent in my Name, that is, to proceed in my way,
to perfect my work, and to accomplish that Redemption, by way of Application,
which I had wrought, by way of Satisfaction.

And then lastly, that which qualifies him for this Mission, for this
Employment, is his Title, and Addition in this Text, That he is the Comforter;
Discomfortable doctrines (of a primary impossibility of Salvation, to any man,
And that impossibility originally rooted in God, and in Gods hating of that
man, and hating of that man, not only before he was a sinful man, but before
he was any man at all, not only before an actual making, but before any
intention to make him in Gods mind; That God cannot save that man, because he
meant to damn him, before he meant to make him) are not the way, in which the
Holy Ghost is sent by the Father, in the Sons Name; For they that sent him, and
he that comes, intend all that is done, in that capacity, as he is a Comforter,
as he is the Comforter. And this is the Person, and this will be the extent of
our first part; It is the Holy Ghost; No deceiving Spirit. He, though as high
as the Highest, respects order, attends a Mission, stays till he be sent. And
thirdly, he comes in another name, in another way, to perfect another work.
And he does all, in the quality and denomination of a Comforter, not
establishing, not countenancing any discomfortable Doctrines.

First then, 1. Part. Spiritus sanctus.
the Person into whose hands this whole work is here recommended, is the Holy
Ghost, The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost. The manifestation of the
mysterle of the Trinity was reserved for Christ. Some intimations in the Old,
but the publication only in the New Testament; Some irradiations in the Law,
but the illustration only in the Gospel; Some emanation of beams, as of the
Sun before it is got above the Horizon, in the Prophets, but the glorious
proceeding thereof, and the attaining to a Meridianall height, only in the
Evangelists. And then, the doctrine of the Trinity, thus reserved for the time
of the Gospel, at that time was thus declared; So God loved the World, as that
he sent his Son; So the Son loved the World, as that he would come into it, and
die for it; So the Holy Ghost loved the World, as that he would dwell in it,
and enable men, in his Ministry, and by his gifts, to apply this mercy of the
Father, and this merit of the Son, to particular souls, and to whole
Congregations. The mercy of the Father, that he would study such a way for the
Redemption of our souls, as the death of his only Son, (a way which no man
would ever have thought of, of himself, nor might have prayed for, if he could
have imagined it) this Mercy of the Father is the object of our Thankfulness.
The Merit of the Son, That into a man but of our nature, and equal to us in
infirmities, there should be superinfused such another nature, such a divinity,
as that any act of that Person, so composed of those two natures, should be
even in the rigor of Justice, a sufficient ransom for all the sins of all the
Werld, is the object of our admiration. But the object of our consolation
(which is the subject of this Text) is this, That the Holy Ghost, by his
presence, and by inanimating the Ordinances of Christ, in the Ministry of the
Gospel, applies this mercy, and this merit to me, to thee, to every soul that
answers his motions.

In that Contract that past between Solomon and Hiram, for commerce and trade
between their Nations, 1 K^^g. 5.
That Solomon should send him Corn and Oil, and Hiram should send him Cedar,
and other rich materials for Building, that people of God received an honor,
and an assurance, in that present Contract, for future trade and commerce. So
did the World, in that Contract, which past between the Father and the Son,
That the Father should send down God, and the World should deliver up Man, The
nature of Man to be assumed by that Son, and so a Redemption should be wrought
after, in the fullness of Time. And then, in the performance of this Contract,
when Hiram sent down those rich materials from Libanon to the Sea, and by Sea
in Flotes, to the place assigned, Ver. 9.
where Solomon received them, that people of God received a real profit, in
that actual performance of that, which was but in contract before. So did the
World too, when in the fullness of Time, and in the place assigned by God in
the Prophet Micah, which was Bethlem, the Son of God came in our flesh, and
after dyed for us; His Blood was the Substance, the Materials of our ransom,
and actually, and really delivered, and deposited for us; which was the
performance of the former Contract between his Father, and him. But then was
the dignity of that people of God accomplished, when those rich Materials, so
sent, were really employed in the building of the Temple; when the Altar, and
the Oracle, were clothed with that Gold; when the Cherubim, and the
Olive Trees, and the other Figures were made of that rich stuff, which was
provided; when certain chief Officers, and three thousand three hundred
Underofficers, Ver. 15. Ver. 14.
were appointed to over-see the Work, and ten thousand that attended by monthly
courses, and seven score and ten thousand, that were always resident upon the
Work. And so is our comfort accomplished to us, when the Holy Ghost distributes
these materials, the Blood, and the Merits of Christ, upon several
Congregations, and that by his higher Officers, Reverend and Vigilant Bishops,
and others that have part in the Government of the Church, and then, by those,
who like Solomon's ten thousand, performed the service by monthly courses, and
those, who like his seven score and ten thousand, are always resident upon
fixed places, that salvation of souls, so decreed at first by the Father, and
so accomplished after by the Son, is, by the Holy Ghost, shed, and spread upon
particular men.

When, as the world began in a community, that every thing was every bodies,
but improved it self, to a propriety, and came to a Meum and Tuum, that every
man knew his own; so, that which is Salus Domini, The Salvation of the Lord,
as it is in the first Decree, and that which is Salus Mundi, The Salvation of
the World, as it is in the accomplishment of the Decree by Christ, may be Mea,
and Tua, My Salvation, and thy Salvation, as it is applied by the Holy Ghost,
in the Ministry of the Church. Salvation in the Decree, is as the Bezar stone
in the maw of that creature; there it grows. Salvation in Christ's death, is as
that Bezar in the Merchants, or Apothecaries provision; But salvation in the
Church, in the distribution, and application thereof, by the Holy Ghost, is as
that Bezar working in my veins, expelling my peccant humors, and rectifying
my former defects.

The last work, the Seal, and Consummation of all, is of the Holy Ghost. And
therefore, as the Manifestation of the whole Trinity seems to have been
reserved for Christ, so Christ seems to have reserved the Manifestation of the
Holy Ghost, for his last Doctrine. For this is the last Sermon that Christ
preached; And this is a Sermon recorded only by that last Evangelist, who, as
he considered the Divine Nature of Christ, more then the rest did, and so took
it higher, so did he also consider the future state, and succession of the
Church, more then the rest did, and so carried it lower. For, S. John was a
Prophet, as well as an Evangelist. Therefore in this last, and lasting
Evangelist, and in this last Sermon, Christ declares this last work, in this
world, that is, the Consummation of our Redemption, in the application of the
Holy Ghost. For herein consists our comfort, that it is He, the Holy Ghost,
that ministers this comfort.

Christ had told them before, that there should be a Comforter sent; Ver. 16.
But he did not tell them then, that that Comforter was the Holy Ghost. Here he
does; at last he does; and he ends all in that; that we might end and determine
our comfort in that too, This God gives me, by the Holy Ghost. For we mistake
false comforts for true. We comfort our selves in things, that come not at all
from God; in things which are but vanities, and conduce not all to any true
comfort. And we comfort our selves in things, which, though they do come from
God, yet are not signed, nor sealed by the Holy Ghost. For, Wealth, and Honor,
and Power, and Favor, are of God; but we have but stolen them from God, or
received them by the hand of the Devil, if we be come to them by ill means.
And if we have them from the hand of God, by having acquired them by good
means, yet if we make them occasions of sin, in the ill use of them after, we
lose the comfort of the Holy Ghost, which requires the testimony of a rectified
conscience, that all was well got, and is well used. Therefore as Christ puts
the Origination of our Redemption upon the Father, (I came but to do my
Fathers will) and as he takes the execution of that Decree upon himself, (I am
the way, and the truth, and the life, and the Resurrection; I am all) so he
puts the comfort of all, upon the Holy Ghost: Discomfort, and Disconsolation,
Sadness and Dejection, Damnation, and Damnation aggravated, and this
aggravated Damnation multiplied upon that soul, that finds no comfort in the
Holy Ghost.

If I have no Adventure in an East-Indian Return, though I be not the richer,
yet neither am I poorer then I was, for that. But if I have no comfort from the
Holy Ghost, I am worse, then if all mankind had been left in the Putrefaction
of Adams loins, and in the condemnation of Adams sin. For then, I should have
had but my equal part in the common misery; But now having had that
extraordinary favor, of an offer of the Holy Ghost, if I feel no comfort in
that, I must have an extraordinary condemnation. The Father came near me, when
he breathed the breath of life into me, and gave me my flesh. The Son came
near me, when he took my flesh upon him, and laid down his life for me. The
Holy Ghost is always near me, always with me; with me now, if now I shed any
drops of his dew, his Manna upon you; With me anon, if anon I turn any thing
that I say to you now, to good nourishment in my self then, and do then, as I
say now; With me when I eat, or drink, to say Grace at my meal, and to bless
Gods Blessings to me; With me in my sleep, to keep out the Tempter from the
fancy, and imagination, which is his proper Scene, and Sphere, That he
triumph not in that, in such dreams as may be effects of sin, or causes of
sin, or sins themselves. The Father is a Propitious Person; The Son is a
Meritorious Person; The Holy Ghost is a Familiar Person; The Heavens must open,
to show me the Son of Man at the right hand of the Father, as they did to
Steven; But if I do but open my heart to my self, I may see the Holy Ghost
there, and in him, all that the Father has Thought and Decreed, all that the
Son has Said and Done, and Suffered for the whole World, made mine. Accustom
your selves therefore to the Contemplation, to the Meditation of this Blessed
Person of the glorious Trinity; Keep up that holy cheerfulness, which Christ
makes the Ballast of a Christian, and his Freight too, to give him a rich
Return in the Heavenly Jerusalem. Be always comforted; and always determine
your comfort in the Holy Ghost; For that is Christ's promise here, in this first
Branch, A Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost; And Him (says our second Branch)
the Father shall send.

There was a Mission of the Son, Missio.
God sent his Son. There was a Mission of the Holy Ghost; This day God sent the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost. But between these two Missions, that of
the Son, and this of the holy Ghost, we consider this difference, that the
first, the sending of the Son, was without any merit preceding; There could be
nothing but the mere mercy of God, to move God to send his Son. Man was so far
from meriting that, that (as we said before) he could not, nor might, if he
could, have wished it. But for this second Mission, the sending of the holy
Ghost, there was a preceding merit. Christ, by his dying had merited, that
mankind, who by the fall of Adam, had lost, (as S. August. speaks)
Possibilitatem boni, All possibility of Redintegration, should, not only be
restored to a possibility of Salvation, but that actually, that that was done,
should be pursued farther, and that by this Mission, and Operation of the holy
Ghost, actually, really, effectually, men should be saved. So that, as the work
of our Redemption falls under our consideration, that is, not in the Decree, but
in the execution of the Decree, in this Mission of the holy Ghost into the
World, Man has so far an interest, (not any particular man, but Man, as all
Mankind was in Christ) as that we may truly say, The holy Ghost was due to us.
Lu^^ 24.
And as Christ said of himself, Nonne haec oportuit pati? Ought not Christ to
suffer all this? Was not Christ bound to all this, by the Contract between him
and his Father? to which Contract himself had a Privity; it was his own Act;
He signed it; He sealed it; so we may say, Nonne hunc oportuit mitti? Ought not
the holy Ghost to be sent? Had not Christ merited that the holy Ghost should be
sent, to perfect the work of the Redemption? So that, in such a respect, and
in such a holy and devout sense we may say, that the holy Ghost is more ours,
then either of the other Persons of the Trinity; Because, though Christ be so
ours, as that he is our selves, the same nature, and flesh, and blood, The holy
Ghost is so ours, as that we, we in Christ, Christ in our nature merited the
holy Ghost, purchased the holy Ghost, bought the holy Ghost; Which is a
sanctified Simony, and has a fair, and a pious truth in it, We, we in Christ,
Christ in our nature, bought the holy Ghost, that is, merited the holy Ghost.

Christ then was so sent, A Patre.
as that, till we consider the Contract, (which was his own Act) there was no
Oportuit pati, no obligation upon him, that he must have been sent. The Holy
Ghost was so sent, as that the Merit of Christ, (of Christ, who was Man, as
well as God) which was the Act of another, required, and deserved that he
should be sent. Therefore he was sent A Patre, By the Father. Now, not so by
the Father, as not by the Son too; For, there is an Ego mittam, If I depart, I
will send him unto you. But, John 16.7.
clean thorough Christ's History, in all his proceedings, still you may
observe, that he ascribes all that he does, as to his Superior, to his Father;
though in one Capacity, as he was God, he were equal to the Father, yet to
declare the meekness and the humility of his Soul, still he makes his
recourse to his inferior state, and to his lower nature, and still ascribes
all to his Father: Thouh he might say, and do say there, I will send him, yet
every where, the Father enters; I will send him, says he; Whom? Luke 24.49.
I will send the Promise of my Father. Still the Father has all the glory, and
Christ sinks down to his inferior state, and lower nature.

In the World it is far otherwise; Here, men for the most part, do all things
according to their greatest capacity; If they be Bishops, if they be
Counselors, if they be Justices, nay if they be but Constables, they will do
every thing according to that capacity; As though that authority, confined to
certain places, limited in certain persons, and determined in certain times,
gave them always the same power, in all actions; And, because to some purposes
he may be my superior, he will be my equal no where in nothing. Christ still
withdrew himself to his lower capacity; And, howsoever worldly men engrosse
the thanks of the world to themselves, Christ cast all the honor of all the
benefits that he bestowed upon others, upon his Father; And in his Veruntamen,
(Yet not my will, but thine O Father be done) He humbled himself, as low as
David in his Non nobis Dominc, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
Name be all glory given. They would have made him King; He would not; and
Judge, to divide the Inheritance; and he would not. He sent the Holy Ghost; And
yet, he says, I will pray the Father to send him. So the Holy Ghost was sent
by them both; Father and Son; But not so, as that he was subject to a joint
command of both, or to a diverse command of either, or that he came
unwillingly, or had not a hand even in his own sending. But, howsoever he were
perfect God, and had alwales an absolute power in himself, and had ever a
desire to assist the salvation of man, yet he submitted himself to the Order
of the Decree; He disordered nothing, prevented nothing, anticipated nothing,
but staid, till all that which lay upon Christ, from his Incarnation, to his
Ascension, was executed, and then in the due and appointed time, issued his
Mission.

It is a blessed Termination, Mission; It determines and ends many words in our
Language; Missio.
as Permission, Commission, Remission, and others, which may afford good
instruction, that as the Holy Ghost, did for his, so we may be content to stay
Gods leisure, for all those Missions. A consideration, which, I presume, S.
Bernard, who evermore embraced all occasions of exalting devotion from the
melodious fall of words, would not have let pass; Nor S. Augustine, for all
his holy and reverend gravity, would have thought Nimis juvenile, Too light a
consideration to have insisted upon. And therefore I may have leave, to stay
your meditations a little, upon this Termination, these Missions.

You may have a Permission; Many things are with some circumstances Permitted,
Permissio. Mat. 19.8.
which yet in discretion are better forborne. Moses permitted divorces, but
that was for the hardness of their hearts; and Christ withdrew that
Permission. S. Paul says, he had a Permission; Liberty to forbear working
with his own hands, 1 Cor. 9.6.
and so to live upon the Church; but yet he did not. What Permission soever
thou have, by which thou may lawfully ease thy self, yet forbear, till thou
see, that the glory of God, and the good of other men, may be more advanced by
the use, then by the forbearance of that indulgence, and that Permission, and
afford not thy self all the liberty that is afforded thee, but in such cases.
The Holy Ghost staid so for his Mission; so stay thou for the exercise of thy
Permission.

Thou may have a Commission too; In that of the Peace, Commissio.
in that for Ecclesiastical causes, thou may have part. But be not hasty in
the execution of these Commissions; Come to an Inquisition upon another man; so
as thou would wish God to enquire into thee. Satan had a Commission upon Job;
but he procured it so indirectly, on his part, by false suggestions against
him, and executed it so uncharitably, as that he was as guilty of wrong and
oppression, as if he had had no Commission. Thou can not assist in the
execution of those Commissions, of which thou art, till thou have taken the
oaths of Supremacy, and of Allegiance to thy Sovereign. Do it not, till thou
have sworn all that, to thy Super-soveraigne, to thy God, That in all thy
proceedings, his glory, and his will, and not thine own passion, or their
purposes, upon whom thou dependest, shall be thy rule. The holy Ghost staid for
his Mission; stay thou for thy Commission, till it be sealed over again in
thine own bosom; sealed on one side, with a cleerenesse of understanding, and
on the other, with a rectitude of conscience; that thou know what thou should
do, and do that.

There is also a Remission; Remissio.
a Remission of sins. It is an Article of Faith, therefore believe it. Believe
it originally, and meritoriously in Christ; and believe it instrumentally, and
ministerially in the power, constituted by Christ, in the Church. But believe
it not too hastily, in the execution and in the application thereof to thine
own case. A transitory sin, a sin that spent a few minutes in the doing
thereof, was by the penitential Canons, (which were the rule of the Primitive
Church) punished with many years penance. And do thou think, to have
Remission of thy seventy years sins, for one sigh, one groan, then, when that
sigh, and that groan may be more in contemplation of the torment due to that
sin, then for the sin it self; Nay more, that thou can sin that sin no
longer, then for that sin? Have thou sought thy Remission at the Church, that
is, August.
in Gods Ordinances established in the Church? In qua remittuntur, extra quam
non remittuntur peccata, In which Ordinances, there is an Infallibility of
Remission, upon true repentance, and in a contempt or neglect of which
Ordinances, all Repentance is illusory, and all Remission but imaginary. Hieron.
For, Quodammodo ante diem Iudicii, judicant, God refers causes to the Church,
to be prepared, and mature there, before the great Hearing; and so, has given
the Church a Power to judge, before the day of Judgment. And therefore, August.
Nemo sibi dicat, occulte ago, apud Deum ago, Let no man say, I repent in
secret; God sees that I repent; It was scarce in secret, that thou did sin;
and will thou repent but in secret? At least let us know thy repentance by the
amendment of thy life, and we shall not much press the knowing of it any
other way. Only remember that the holy Ghost staid for his Mission; Presume
not thou of thy Remission, till thou have done, not only something toward it,
that might induce it from God, that is, Repentance, but something by it, that
may testify it to man, that is, amendment of life.

There is a Manumission also, Manumission.
an emancipation, an enfranchisement from the tyranny, from the thraldom of
sin. That which some Saints of God, particularly S. Paul, have importuned at
Gods hand, so vehemently, so impatiently, as he did, to be delivered from the
messenger of Satan, and from the provocations of the flesh, expressed with that
passion, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.22.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He comes immediately there
to a thanksgiving, I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; But his
thanksgiving was not for a Manumission; he had not received a deliverance from
the power, and oppresssion of tentation; But he had here, as he had every
where, an intimation from the Spirit of God, of that Gratia mea sufficit, That
God would be as watchful over him with his grace, as the Devil could be with
his tentations. And if thou come to no farther Manumission then this, in this
life, that is, to be delivered, though not from tentations by his power, yet in
tentations, by his grace, or by his mercy, after tentations have prevailed upon
thee, attend Gods leisure for thy farther Manumission, for the holy Ghost staid
for his Mission.

There falls lastly into this harmonious consort, Dismissio.
occasioned by this Mission of the Holy Ghost, a Dismission; A dismissing out
of this world; Not only in Simeons Nunc dimittis, To be content that we might,
but in S. Paul's Cupio dissolvi, To have a desire that we might be dissolved,
and be with Christ. But, whether the encumbrances of this World, Psalm. 120.5.
extort from thee David's groan, Heu mihi! Woe is me, that I so journe so long
here! Or a slipperinesse contracted by former habits of sin, make every thing a
tentation to thee, so that thou can not perform Jobs covenant with thine
eyes, of not looking upon a maid, nor stop at Christ's period, which is, Look,
but do not lust, but that every thing is a tentation to thee, and to be out of
this haile-shot, this batrery of tentations, thou would feign come to a
dismission, to a dissolution, to a transmigration, Or whether a vehement desire
of the fruition of the presence and face of God in Heaven, constitute this
longing in thee, yet all these reasons arise in thy self, and determine in thy
self, and are referred but to thine own ease, and to thine own happiness,
and not primarily, to the glory of God, and therefore, since the Holy Ghost
staid for his Mission, stay thou for thy Dismission too.

Gather up these scattered ears, and bind up this loose sheafe; Recollect
these pieces of this branch. The Holy Ghost was sent by the Son, but the Son,
in his exemplar humility, ascribes all to the Father. The Holy Ghost had
absolute power to come at his pleasure, but he staid the order of the Decree,
and Gods leisure for his Mission. Do thou so too, for thy Permission, exercise
not all thy liberty; And for thy Commission, execute not all thy authority; And
for thy Remission, presume not upon thy pardon too soon; And for thy
Manumission, hope not for an exemption from tentations, till death; And for thy
Dismission, practice not, nay wish not thy death, only in respect of thine own
ease, no, nor only in respect of thine own salvation. In this act of the Holy
Ghost, That he staid his Mission, we have one instruction, that we rely not
upon our selves, but accommodate our selves to the disposition of others; And
then another in the next, That the Father should send him in the Sons name, The
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name.

The Holy Ghost comes not so in another name, as that he has not a full
interest, In nomine meo.
in all the names of Power, and of Wisdom, and of Essence it self, that are
attributed to God. For (not to extend to the particular attributes) the
Radical name, the name of Essence, That name, The name, Jehovah, is given to
the Holy Ghost. Jehovah says to Esaias, Go, and tell this people, this and this.
And then S. Paul making use of those words in the Acts, says, Well said the
Holy Ghost by the Prophet Esaias; So that Esayes Jehovah, Esaias 6.9. Acts 28.5.
is S. Paul's Holy Ghost. And yet, the Holy Ghost being in possession of the
highest names, and of the highest power employed in those names, comes in the
name of another. How much more then may the powerfullest men upon earth, the
greatest Magistrates, the greatest Monarchs, (who though they be by God himself
called gods, are but representative gods, but metaphorical gods, and God
knows, sometimes but ungodly gods) confess, that they are sent in another
name, inanimated with another power, and least of all, their own, or made that
that they are, for themselves? How much more are we, we considered in nature,
and not in office, men and not Magistrates, Worms and not men, Serpents and
not Worms, (For we are (as S. Chrysostom speaks) Spontanei daemones, Serpents
in our own bosoms, devils in our own loins) bound to confess, that all the
faculties of our soul, are in us, In nomine alieno, In the name of another?

That will, which we call Freewill, is so far from being ours, as that not only
that Freedom, but that Will it self is from another, from God. Not only the
rectitude of the faculty, but the faculty it self is his. Nay, though God have
no part in the perverseness and the obliquity of my will, but that that
perverseness, and that obliquity are entirely mine own, yet I could not have
that perverseness, and that obliquity, but from him, so far, as that that
faculty, in which my perverseness works, is his, and I could not have that
perverse will from my self, if I had not that will it self from God first. And
that very perverseness, and obliquity of the will, is so much his, as that,
though it were not his, but mine, in the making, yet when it is made by me, he
makes it his; that is, he makes it his instrument, and makes his use of it, so
far, as to suffer it to flow out into a greater sin, or to determine in a
lesser sin, then at first I, in my perverseness, intended. When I intended but
an approach to a sin, and meant to stop there, to punish that exposing of my
self to tentation, God suffers me to proceed to the act of that sin; And when I
intend the act it self, God interrupts me, and cuts me off, by some intervening
occasion, and determines me upon some approach to that sin, that by going so
far in the way of that sin, I might see mine own infirmity, and see the power
of his mercy, that I went no farther. The faculties of my soul are his, and
the substance of my soul is his too; And yet, as I pervert the faculties, I
subvert the substance; I damnifie the faculties, but I damn the substance it
self.

It would taste of uncharitableness, to cast more coals of fire upon the
devil himself, then are upon him in hell now; Or not to assist him with our
prayers, if it were not declared to us, that he is incapable of mercy. If the
devil were now but under the guiltiness of that sin which he committed at
first, and not under such an execution of judgment for that sin, as induced,
or at least declared an obstination, an obduration, a desperation, and
impenitiblenesse, if the devil were but as the worst sinner in this world can
be, but In via, and not In exilio, In the way to destruction, and not under
destruction it self, we might pray for the devil himself. And these poor
souls of ours, these glorious souls of ours, none of ours, but Gods own souls,
which now at worst, God loves better then ever he did the devil when he was at
best, when he was an Angel uncorrupted, and better then he does those Angels
which stand uncorrupted still, (for he has not taken the nature of Angels, but
our nature upon him) we think those souls our own, to do what we list with, and
when we have usurpt them, we damn them. As Pirates take other men's subjects,
and then make them slaves, we usurp the faculties of the soul, and call the
will ours, we usurp the soul it self, and call it ours, and then deliver all to
everlasting bondage. Would the King suffer his picture to be used, as we use
the Image of God in our souls? or his Hall to be used, as we use the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, our Bodies? We have nothing but that which we have received;
and when we come to think that our own, we have not that; For God will take all
from that man, that sacrifices to his own nets. When thou come to Church,
come in another name: When thou give an Alms, give it in another name;
that is, feel all thy devotion, and all thy charity to come from God; For, if
it be not in his name, it will be in a worse; Thy devotion will contract the
name of hypocrisy, and thine Alms the name of Vainglory.

The Holy Ghost came in another name, in Christ's name; but not so, as
Montanus, the Father of the Montanists, came in the Holy Ghosts name. Montanus
said he was the Holy Ghost; The Holy Ghost did not pretend to be Christ. There
is a man, the man of sin, at Rome, that pretends to be Christ, to all uses. And
I would he would be content with that, and stop there, and not be a
Hyper-Christus, Above Christ, more then Christ. I would he would no more
trouble the peace of Christendom, no more occasion the assassinating of
Christian Princes, no more bind the Christian liberty, in forbidding Meats,
and Marriage, no more slacken and dissolve Christian bands, by Dispensations,
and Indulgences, then Christ did. But if he will needs be more, if he will
needs have an addition to the name of Christ, let him take heed of that
addition, which some are apt enough to give him, however he deserve it, that he
is Antichrist.

Now in what sense the Holy Ghost is said to have come in the name of Christ,
S. Basil gives us one interpretation; that is, that one principal name of
Christ belongs to the Holy Ghost. For Christ is Verbum, The Word, and so is the
Holy Ghost, says that Father, Quia interpres filii, sicut filius patris,
Because as the Son manifested the Father, so the Holy Ghost manifests the Son;
S. Augustine gives another sense; Societas Patris and Filii, est Spiritus
Sanctus, The Holy Ghost is the union of the Father and the Son. As the body is
not the man, nor the soul is not the man, but the union of the soul and body,
by those spirits, through which, the soul exercises her faculties in the Organs
of the body, makes up the man; so the union of the Father and Son to one
another, and of both to us, by the Holy Ghost, makes up the body of the
Christian Religion. And so, this interpretation of S. Augustine, comes near to
the fullness, in what sense the Holy Ghost came in Christ's name. John 17.12.
For when Christ says, I am come in my Fathers name, that was, to execute his
Decree, to fulfill his Will, for the salvation of man, by dying; so when Christ
says here, the Holy Ghost shall come in my name, that is, to perfect my work,
to collect and to govern that Church, in which my salvation, by way of
satisfaction, may be appropriated to particular souls by way of application.
And for this purpose, to do this in Christ's name, his own name is Paracletus,
The Comforter, which is our last circumstance, The Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost.

The Comforter is an Evangelical name. The Comforter.
Athanasius notes, that the Holy Ghost is never called Paracletus, The
Comforter, in the old Testament. He is called Spiritus Dei, The Spirit of God,
in the beginning of Genesis; And he is called Spiritus sanctus, The holy
Spirit, and Spiritus principalis, The principal Spirit, in diverse places of
the Psalms, but never Paracletus, never the Comforter. A reason of that may
well be, first, that the state of the Law needed not comfort; and then also,
that the Law it self afforded not comfort, so there was no Comforter. Their Law
was not opposed by any enemies, as enemies to their Law. If they had not (by
that warrant which they had from God) invaded the possession of their
neighbors, or grown too great to continue good neighbors, their neighbors
had not envyed them that Law. So that in the state of the Law, in that respect,
they were well enough, and needed no Comforter. Whereas the Gospel, as it was
sowed in our Saviors blood, so it grew up in blood, for diverse hundreds of
years; and therefore needed the sustentation, and the assurance of a
Comforter. And then, for the substance of the Law, it was Lex interficiens, non
perficiens, says S. Augustine, A Law that told them what was sin, and punished
them if they did sin, but could not confer Remission for sin; which was a
discomfortable case. Whereas the Gospel, and the Dispensation of the Gospel in
the Church, by the Holy Ghost, is Grace, Mercy, Comfort, all the way, and in
the end. Therefore Christ, v. 17. calls the Holy Ghost, Spiritum veritatis, The
Spirit of truth; In which he opposes him, and preferres him, above all the
remedies, and all the comforts of the Law. Not that the Holy Ghost in the Law,
did not speak truth, but that he did not speak all the truth, in the Law.
Origin expresses it well, The Types and Figures of the Law, were true Figures,
and true Types of Christ, in the Gospel; but Christ, and his Gospel is the
truth it self, prefigured in those Types. Therefore the Holy Ghost, is
Paracletus, The Comforter, in the Gospel, which he was not in the Law.

In the Records, and Stories, and so in the Coins, and Medals of the Roman
Emperors, we see, that even then, when they had gotten the possession of the
name of Emperors, yet they forbore not to add to their style, the name of
Consul, and the name of Pontifex maximus; still they would be called Consuls,
which was an acceptable name to the people, and Highpriests, which carried a
reverence toward all the world. Where Christ himself is called by a name
appliable to none but Christ, by a name implying the whole nature, and merit of
Christ, that is, The Propitiation of the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2.
yet there, in that place, he is called by the name of this Text too,
Paracletus, the Comforter. He would not forbear that sweet, that acceptable,
that appliable name, that name that concerns us most, and establishes us best,
Paracletus, the Comforter. And yet, he does not take that name, in that full,
and whole sense, in which himself gives it to the Holy Ghost here. For there
it is said of Christ, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father;
There, Paracletus, though placed upon Christ, is but an Advocate; But here,
Christ sends Paracletum, in a more entire, and a more internal, and more
viscerall sense, A Comforter. Upon which Comforter, Christ imprints these two
marks of dignity, First, The Father shall send you another Comforter; Another,
then my self. For, Ver. 16.
howsoever Christ were the Fountain of comfort, yet there were many drammes,
many ounces, many talents of discomfort mingled, in that their Comforter was
first to depart from them by death, and being restored to them again by a
Resurrection, was to depart again, by another Transmigration, by an Ascension.
And therefore the second mark by which Christ dignifies this Comforter, is,
That he shall abide with us for ever. And in the performance of that promise,
he is here with you now.

And therefore, as we begun with those words of Esaias, which our Savior applied
to himself, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me,
Esaias 61.1.
to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort all them that mourn; So the
Spirit of the Lord is upon all us of his Ministry, in that Commandment of
his, in the same Prophet, Consolamini, Esaias 40.1.
consolamini, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, and speak comfortably unto
Jerusalem. Receive the Holy Ghost, all ye that are the Israel of the Lord, in
that Doctrine of comfort, that God is so far from having hated any of you,
before he made you, as that he hates none of you now; not for the sins of your
Parents; not for the sins of your persons; not for the sins of your youth; not
for your yester-dayes, not for your yester-nights sins; not for that highest
provocation of all, your unworthy receiving his Son this day. Only consider,
that Comfort presumes Sadness. Sin does not make you incapable of comfort; but
insensiblenesse of sin does. In great buildings, the Turrets are high in the
Air; but the Foundations are deep in the Earth. The Comforts of the Holy Ghost
work so, as that only that soul is exalted, which was dejected. As in this
place, where you stand, there bodies lie in the earth, whose souls are in
heaven; so from this place, you carry away so much of the true comfort of the
Holy Ghost, as you have true sorrow, and sadness for your sins here. Almighty
God erect this building upon this Foundation; Such a Comfort, as may not be
Presumption, upon such a Sorrow, as may not be Diffidence in him. And to him
alone, but in three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
Honor, etc.

SERMON XXIX. Preached at S. Paul's upon Whitsunday. 1628.
JOHN 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.


WE Eipasse from the Person to his working; we come from his coming, to his
operation, from his Mission, and Commission, to his Executing thereof, from the
Consideration, who he is, to what he does. His Specification, his Character,
his Title, Paracletus, The Comforter, passes through all. Therefore our first
comfort is, Docebimur, we shall be Taught, He shall teach you; As we consider
our selves, The Disciples of the Holy Ghost, so it is a mere teaching, for,
we, in our selves are merely ignorant; But wen we consider the things we are to
be taught, so it is but a remembering, a refreshing of those things, which
Christ in the time of his conversation in this world, had taught before; He
shall bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
These two then, The comfort in the Action, (we shall be Taught) and the comfort
in the Way and Manner, (we shall not be subject to new Doctrines, but taught by
remembering, by establishing us in things formerly Fundamentally laid) will be
our two parts at this time. And in each of these, these our steps; First. in
the first we shall consider the persons, that is, the Disciples, who were to
learn; not only they who were so, when Christ spoke the words, but we, All,
who to the end of the world, shall seek and receive knowledge from him; Vos,
ye; first Vos ignorantes, you who are naturally ignorant, and know nothing, so
as you should know it of your selves, (which is one Discomfort) And yet, Vos,
ye, Vos appetentes, you that by nature have a desire to know, (which is another
Discomfort, To have a desire, and no means to perform it) Vos docebimini, ye,
ye that are ignorant, and know nothing; ye, ye that are hungry of knowledge,
and have nothing to satisfy that hunger, ye shall be fed, ye shall be taught;
(which is one comfort) And then Ille docebit, He shall teach you, He, who
cannot only infuse true, and full knowledge in every capacity that he finds,
but dilate that capacity where he finds it, yea create it, where he finds
none, The Holy Ghost, who is not only A Comforter, but The Comforter, and not
only so, but Comfort it self, He shall teach you; And in these we shall
determine our first Part.

In our second Part, The Way and Manner of this Teaching, (By bringing to our
remembrance all things whatsoever Christ had said unto us) there is a great
largeness, but yet there is a limitation of those things which we are to
learn of the Holy Ghost; for they are Omnia, All things whatsoever Christ has
taught before; But then, Sola ea, Only those things which Christ had taught
before, and not new Additaments in the name of the Holy Ghost. Now this
largeness extending it self to the whole body of the Christian Religion, (for
Christ taught all that) all that being not reducible to that part of an hour,
which will be left for this exercise, as fittest for the celebration of the day
in which we arenow, we shall bind our selves to that particular consideration,
what the Holy Ghost, being come from the Father, in Christ's Name, that is,
Pursuing Christ's Doctrine, has taught us of Himself, concerning Himself;
That so ye may first see some insolences and injuries offered to the Holy
Ghost by some ancient Heretics, and some of later times, by the Church of
Rome; For, truly, it is hard to name, or to imagine any one sin, nearer to that
emphaticall sin, that superlative sin, The sin against the Holy Ghost, then
some offers of Doctrines, concerning the Holy Ghost, that have been obtruded,
though not established, and some that have been absolutely established in that
Church. And when we shall have delivered the Holy Ghost out of their hands, we
shall also deliver him into yours, so as that you may feel him to shed
himself upon you all here, and to accompany you all home, with a holy peace,
and in a blessed calm, in testifying to your souls, that He, that Comforter,
who is the holy Ghost, whom the Father has sent in his Sons name, has taught
you all things, that is, awakened your memories, to the consideration of all
that is necessary to your present establishment. And to these diverse
particulars, which thus constitute our two general parts, in their order thus
proposed, we shall now proceed.

As when our Savior Christ received that confession of all the Disciples, 1
Part.
in the mouth of S. Peter, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God, Christ
replied thereunto some things, Mat. 16.18.
which had a more special, and a more personal respect to Peter, then to the
rest, yet were intended of the rest too; so when Christ in this text, promises
the Comforter, he does that most immediately, and most personally to them, to
whom he then spoke, but he intends it to us also, and the holy Ghost shall
teach us: us, that are in our selves Ignorant, Ignorantes.
which is our first Discomfort. The Schools have made so many Divisions, and
sub-divisions, and re-devisions, and post-divisions of Ignorance, that there
goes as much learning to understand ignorance, as knowleg. One, much elder then
al they, and elder (as some will have it) then any but some of the first
Secretaries of the Holy Ghost in the Bible, that is Trismegistus, has said as
much as all, Nequitia animae Ignorantia, Ignorance is not only the
drowsiness, the silliness, but the wickedness of the soul: Not only
dis-estimation in this world, and damnification here, but damnation in the next
world, proceeds from ignorance. And yet, here in this world, knowledge is but
as the earth, and ignorance as the Sea; there is more sea then earth, more
ignorance then knowledge; and as if the sea do gain in one place, it loses in
another, so is it with knowledge too; if new things be found out, as many, and
as good, that were known before, are forgotten and lost. What Anatomist knows
the body of man thoroughly, or what Casuist the soul? What Politician knows the
distemper of the State thoroughly; or what Master, the disorders of his own
family? Princes glory in Arcanis, that they have secrets which no man shall
know, and, God knows, they have hearts which they know not themselves;
Thoughts and purposes indigested fall upon them and surprise them. It is so in
natural, in moral, in civil things; we are ignorant of more things then we
know; And it is so in divine and supernatural things too; for, for them, the
Scripture is our only light, and of the Scripture, S. Augustine professes,
Plur a se nescire quam scire, That there are more places of Scripture, that he
does not, then that he does understand.

Hell is darkness; and the way to it, is the cloud of Ignorance; hell it self
is but condensed Ignorance, multiplied Ignorance. To that, David ascribes all
the distempers of the world, They do not know, neither will they understand,
they walk on in darkness; and therefore, Psalm. 82.5.
(as he adds there) All the foundations of all the earth are out of course. He
that had made the most absolute conquest of Ignorance in this world, Solomon,
is the best Judge of it, the best Counselor against it; and he says, As thou
know not how thy bones grew in thy Mother, Eccles. 11.5.
even so thou know not the works of God, who works all. We are all equally
Ignorant of all, of natural, of spiritual things. What though? This; That man
knows not his time, Eccles. 9.12.
but is snared in an evil time, If he knew his time, no time would be evil
unto him. Yet though he know not the present time, but let that pass
inconsiderately, yet if he consider the future, he may recover. But he does not
that, he cannot do that; Eccles. 10.14.
Man cannot tell what shall be, says Solomon; But may he not learn? No. For,
who can tell him? says he there. For, he knows not how to go to the City; In
vulgar, in trivial things, he is ignorant of his end, and ignorant of his way.
Been facere nesciverunt, says the Prophet, Ier. 4.22.
They have no knowledge to do good; and what follows? Erubescere nescierunt,
They are not ashamed when they have done evil. Nesciunt cujus spiritus sunt;
Luke 9.15.
It was Christ's increpation upon his own Disciples, They knew not of what
spirit they were, They discerned not between a zealous and a vindicative
spirit. Nescitis quid petatis, was Christ's increpation upon his Disciples too,
You know not what you ask. And yet this Nequitia animae, Mat. 20.22.
this wickedness of the soul, this pestilence of the soul, Ignorance, have
men ventured to call The mother of devotion. But miserable Comforters are they,
in respect of the Comforter, the Holy Ghost: for, as that Cum perver so
perverteris, is spoken of God, Psalm. 18.27.
That God will learn of the froward, to be froward, so God will learn of the
ignorant, to be ignorant; ignorant of us; and to those that do not study him
here, he will say hereafter, Nescio vos, I know not you. This then is our first
discomfort, of our selves we are ignorant; and yet there is a greater vexation
then this, that naturally we have a desire of knowledge, and naturally no
means to attain to it.

Ignorance may be said to work, Appetentes.
as an in-appetency in the stomach, and as an insipidnesse, a tastlesnesse in
the palate; But the desire of knowledge, without means to attain to it, is as
a hunger in a dearth, or in a wilderness. Ignorance is a kind of slumbering,
or stupidity, but this desire without means, is a continual racking, a
continual pressing; a far greater vexation, and torment; ignorance may work as
a Lethargy, but this desire as a frenzy. Esaias 37.3.
This is the day of trouble, (says Ezechias in the bitterness and passion of
his soul) and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, for the Children are come to the
birth, and there is not strength to bring them forth. To a barrenness, that
is, never to have conceived, there belonged, amongst that people, a kind of
shame and contempt, (and that is our case in ignonorance, which is the
barrenness of the soul) But to come to the throws of Childbirth, and then not
to have strength, or not to have help to be delivered, that is the dangerous,
that is the deadly torment; and that represents our soul, in this desire of
knowledge, without means to attain to it. And yet, this vexation no man can
divest; It is an hereditary, a natural impression in man; every man naturally,
says the Philosopher, desires to know, to learn. And yet, nature that
imprinted that desire in every man, has not given every man, not any man, in
nature, means to satisfy that desire; for, even by nature man has a desire
to know supernatural things. Solomon was extended with this desire of
knowledge, 1 King. 3.11.
but he found no satisfaction, till upon petition, and contracting all his
desires into that One, Dan. 9.23.
he obtained it of God. Daniel was Vir desideriorum, A man composed of desires,
Dan. 10.2.
and of solicitude: He professes that he mourned three full weeks, He eat no
pleasant bread, Ver. 8.
neither came flesh or wine into his mouth, nor oil upon his body; His
comeliness was turned into corruption, and he retained no strength, till God by
his Angel satisfied his desire of knowledge. Consider the anxiety and torture,
under which that Eunuch was in the Chariot, Acts 8.
till he was taught the meaning of the Prophet Esaias. And consider the way that
God took; God sent an Angel, and that Angel sent Philip to him. Instruction is
from God, but yet by the Ministry of man, Philip asks him, Do thou
understand? He would have a confession of his impotency from himself. Alas,
How can I, says he, except some man shouldguide me? And Philip guides him; and
then how soon he comes to that holy cheerfulness, Ver. 36.
and dilatation of the soul, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God, Hieron.
and, See, here is water, what does hinder me, that I be baptized? Nec sanctior
sum hoc Eunucho, nec studiosior, says S. Hierom of himself; I cannot have
more desire to learn then he had; yet, in my self, I have no more means
neither; and therefore must be under the same pain, till the same hand, the
hand of God relieve me. The soul of man cannot be considered under a thicker
cloud, then Ignorance, nor under a heavier weight, then desire of knowledge.
And therefore, for our deliverance in both, our Savior Christ here comforts us
with The Comforter; you, you that are in the darkness of Ignorance, you, you
that are under the oppression of a hunger of knowledge, you shall be satisfied,
for, He that comes from my Father, in my name, He shall teach you.

That which the Vulgat reads, Doeebit.
Eccles. 6.9. Desider are quod nescias, To desire to know that which thou
know not yet, our Translation calls, The wandering of the desire, and in the
Original it is, The walking, the pilgrimage of the Soul; the rest lesnesse,
and irresolution of the Soul. And when man is taught that which he desired to
know, then the Soul is brought home, and laid to rest. Desire is the travail,
knowledge is the Inn; desire is the wheel, knowledge is the bed of the Soul.
Therefore we affect society and conversation to know present things; Therefore
we assist our selves with History, to know things past, and with Astrology,
and sometimes with worse Arts, to know future things. The name of Master, of
Teacher, that passes through the Scripture, is Rabbi, and Rabbi in the root
thereof signifies, Magnum, and Multum; It is a word that denotes Greatness;
And truly no man should be greater in our eyes, nor be thought to have laid
greater obligations upon us, Esaias 19.20.
then he that has taught us. When Christ is promised thus, The Lord shall send
them a Savior, and a Great one, there is this word Rabbi: The Lord shall send
them a Savior, which shall be Rabbi a great Teacher; Christ was a Savior, as
he paid God a ransom for all; As he made man capable of this Salvation, he was
this Rabbi, this Teacher; and in this capacity, did those two Disciples of John
Baptist, who first applied themselves to Christ, apply themselves, Magister ubi
habitas? Master, John 1.38.
where dwell thou? where may we come to School to thee? where may we be
taught by thee? S. Paul has showed us the duty of all true disciples, in the
practice of the Galatians; You received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ
Jesus, and I bear you record, Gal. 4.14.
that if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and
have given them to me. I thank him that brings me a candle, when it grows dark,
and him that assists me with a spectacle, when my sight grows old; But to him
that has given the eyes of my soul, light and spectacles, how much a greater
debtor am I? I will not dispute against nature, nor natural affections, nor
dispute against Allegiance, nor civil obligations, nor dispute against
gratitude, nor retribution of Benefits; But I willingly pronounce, that I
cannot owe more to any Benefactor, to my Father, to my Prince, then I do to
them that have taught me; nor can there be a deeper ingratitude, then to turn
thy face from that man, or from his children, that has taught thee. This
Christ presents for the first Comfort, Doccbimini, You are ignorant, but that
cloud shall be dispersed, you would learn, but have no help, but that defect
shall be supplied, you shall be taught: And then, this comfort shall be exalted
to you, in the person of the Teacher, Ille docebit, He whom the Father will
send in my name, He shall teach you.

Quintilian requires no more of a Schoolmaster, but that either he be learned,
Ille.
or do not think himself to be so, if he be not: Because if he overvalue
himself, he will admit no Usher, no assistant. Here we have a master that is
both absolute in himself, and yet undertaken for by others too; The Father
sends him, and in the Sons name, that is, to perfect the Sons work. Tertullian
(a man of adventurous language) calls him Tertium numen divinitatis, and
tertium nomen majestatis: The Holy Ghost has but a third place, but the same
Godhead, but a third name, yet the same Majesty, as the first, The Father, or
the second, The Son. Porphyry that denied the Trinity, is convinced by S.
Cyril, to have established a Trinity, because he acknowledged first Deum
summum, and then, Conditorem omnium, and after them, Animam mundi; One that is
a supreme God, One that was the Creator of all things, and One that quickens
and inanimates all, and is the soul of the whole world: And this soul of the
world is the Holy Ghost, who does that office to the soul of every Christian,
which the soul it self does to every natural man, informs him, directs him,
instructs him, makes him be that he is, and do that he does. And therefore as
Tertullian calls Christ by the Holy Ghosts name, (for he calls Christ Spiritum
Dei, because, as the office of our spirits is to unite the body and the soul,
so Christ has united God and man in one Emanuel) S. Basil gives the Holy Ghost
Christ's name, for he calls the Holy Ghost Verbum Dei, The word of God, because
he undertakes the Pedagogy of the soul, to be the souls Schoolmaster, and to
teach it as much of God as concerns it, that is, Christ crucified. Therefore
when the Holy Ghost was first sent, he was sent but to testify of Christ; At
Christ's Baptism (which was his first sending) he was sent but to establish an
assurance, and a belief, that that Christ was the Son of God, in whom he was
well pleased; And this he did but as a witness, not as a Teacher; for the
voice that wrought this, and taught this, came not from the Dove, not from the
Holy Ghost, but from above; The Holy Ghost said nothing then. But when the Holy
Ghost in performance of Christ's promise in this Text, was sent as a Teacher,
then he came in the form of Tongues, and they that received him, were thereby
presently enabled to speak to others.

This therefore is the coming, and this is the teaching of the Holy Ghost,
Acts 2.3.
promised and intended in this Text, and performed upon this Day, that he by
his power enables and authorizes other men to teach thee; That he establishes a
Church, and Ordinances, and a Ministry, by which thou may be taught how to
apply Christ's Merits to thy soul. He needed not to have invested, and taken the
form of a Tongue, if he would have had thee think it enough to hear the Spirit
at home, alone; but to let thee see, that his way of teaching should be the
ministry of men, he came in that organ of speech, the Tongue. And therefore
learn thou by hearing, what he says: And that that he says, he says here;
here in his Ordinance. And therefore hear what he has declared, inquire not
what he has decreed; Hear what he has said, there, where he has spoken, ask
not what he meant in his unrevealed will, of things whereof he has said
nothing; For they that do so, mistake Gods mind often. God protests, It never
came into my mind, that they should sin thus; God never did it, God never
meant it, that any should sin necessarily, Ier. 32.35.
without a willing concurrence in themselves, or be damned necessarily, without
relation to sin willingly committed. Therefore is S. Augustine vehement in that
expostulation, Quis tam stulte curiosus est, qui filium suum mittat in scholam,
ut quid magister cogitat, discat? Does any man put his son to school, to learn
what his Master thinks? The Holy Ghost is sent to Teach; he teaches by
speaking; he speaks by his Ordinance, and Institution in his Church. All
knowledge, and all zeal, that is not kindled by him, by the Holy Ghost, and
kindled here, at first is all smoke, and then all flame; Zeal without the Holy
Ghost, is at first, cloudy ignorance, all smoke; and after, all crackling and
clambering flame, Schismatic rage, and distemper. Here we, we that are
naturally ignorant, we, we that are naturally hungry of knowledge, are taught,
a free School is opened unto us, and taught by him, by the Holy Ghost speaking
in his Delegates, in his Ministers; (which were the pieces that constituted our
first part) And the second, to which we are now come, is the manner of the Holy
Ghosts coming, and teaching in his Ordinance, that is, by remembering, He shall
bring to your remembrance, etc.

They had wont to call Pictures in the Church, 2 Part. Reminiscentia.
the lay-mans book, because in them, he that could not read at all, might
read much. The ignorantest man that is, even he that cannot read a Picture,
even a blind man, has a better book in himself; In his own memory he may
read many a history of Gods goodness to him. Quid ab initio, How it was in
the beginning, is Christ's Method; To determine things according to former
precedents; And truly the Memory is oftener the Holy Ghosts Pulpit that he
preaches in, then the Understanding. How many here would not understand me, or
not rest in that which they heard, if I should spend the rest of this hour in
repeating, and reconciling that which diverse authors have spoken diversely of
the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, or the manner of Christ's
descent into Hell, or the manner of the concurrence, and joynt-working of the
grace of God, and the free will of man, in men's actions? But is there any man
amongst us that is not capable of this Catechism, Remember to morrow but those
good thoughts which you have had within this hour, since you came hither now:
Remember at your last hour, to be but as good as you are this minute; I would
scarce ask more in any man's behalf, then that he would always be as good, as
at some times he is; If he would never sink below himself, I would less care,
though he did not exceed himself: If he would remember his own holy purposes at
best, he would never forget God; If he would remember the comfort he had in
having overcome such a tentation yesterday, he would not be overcome by that
tentation to day. The Memory is as the conclusion of a Syllogism, which being
inferred upon true propositions, cannot be denied: He that remembers Gods
former blessings, concludes infallibly upon his future. Therefore Christ places
the comfort of this Comforter, the Holy Ghost, in this, that he shall work upon
that pregnant faculty, the Memory; He shall bring things to your remembrance;
And then, Omnia, All those things which I have said unto you.

Christ gave the Holy Ghost to the Apostles, Omnia. Mat. 18.18. John 20.22.
John 15.15.
when he gave them the power of absolution in his life time. He gave them the
Holy Ghost more powerfully, when after his Resurrection, He breathed on them,
and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. He opened himself to them, in a large
fullness, when he said, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made
known unto you; But in a greater largeness then that, when upon this day,
according to the promise of this Text, the holy Ghost was sent unto them; for
this was in the behalf of others. And upon this fullness, out of Tertullian it
is argued, Nihilignorarunt, crgo nihil non docuerunt, As the Apostles were
taught all things by Christ, so they taught the Church all things. There is
then the sphere, and the compass, and the date of our knowledge; not what was
thought or taught in the tenth, or fourteenth Century: but what was taught in
Christ, and in the Apostles time. Christ taught all things to his Apostles, and
the Holy Ghost brought all things to their remembrance that he had taught them,
that they might teach them to others, and so it is derived to us.

But it is Omnia and Sola; Sola. John 15.26.
It is All, but it is Only those things. He shall testify of me, says Christ
concerning the Holy Ghost; Now the office of him that testifies, of a witness,
is to say all the truth, but nothing but the truth. When the Roman Church
charges us, not that all is not truth, which we teach, but that we do not teach
all the truth, And we charge them, not that they do not teach all the truth,
but that all is not truth that they teach, so that they charge us with a
defective, we them with a superfluous religion, our case is the safer, because
all that we affirm, is by confession of all parts true, but that which they
have added, requires proof, and the proof lies on their side; and it rests
yet unproved. And certainly many an Indian, who is begun to be catechized, and
dies, is saved, before he come to believe all that we believe; But whether any
be saved that believe more then we believe, and believe it as equally
fundamental, and equally necessary to salvation, with that which we from the
express word of God do believe, is a Problem, not easily answered, not safely
affirmed. Truly I had rather put my salvation upon some of those ancient
Creeds, which want some of the Articles of our Creed, (as the Nicene Creed
does, and so does Athanasius) then upon the Trent Creed, that has as many more
Articles as ours has. The office of the Holy Ghost himself, the Spirit of all
comfort, is but to bring those things to remembrance, which Christ taught, and
no more.

They are many; too many, for many revolutions of an houre-glasse. Spiritus
Sanctus.
Therefore we proposed at first, That when we should come to this Branch, for
the proper celebration of the day, we would only touch some things, which the
Holy Ghost had taught of himself, that so we might detect, and detest such
things, as some ancient, and some later Heretics had said of the Holy Ghost.
Now those things which the ancient Heretics have said, are sufficiently
gainsaid by the ancient Fathers. The Montanists said the Holy Ghost was in
Christ, and in the Apostles, but in a far higher exaltation in Montanus, then
in either; but Tertullian opposed that. Manes was more insolent then the
Montanist, for he avowed himself to be the Holy Ghost, and S. Augustine
overthrew that. Hierarchas was more modest then so, and did but say, That
Melchisedech was the Holy Ghost, and S. Cyprian would not endure that. The
Arrians said the Holy Ghost was but Creatura Creaturae, made by the Son, which
Son himself was but made in time, and not eternally begotten by the Father;
but Liberius, and many of the Fathers opposed that; as a whole general
Council did Macedonius, when he refreshed many Errors formerly condemned,
concerning the Holy Ghost; and few of these have had any Resurrection, any
repulullation, or appeared again in these later days. But in these later
times, two new Herefies have arisen concerning the Holy Ghost.

About four hundred years since, Euangelium Spiritus Sancti.
came out that famous infamous Book in the Roman Church, which they called
Euangelium Spiritus Sancti, The Gospel of the Holy Ghost; in which, was
pretended, That as God the Father had had his time in the government of the
Church, in the Law, And God the Son his time, in the Gospel, so the Holy Ghost
was to have his time; and his time was to begin within fifty years after the
publishing of that Gospel, and to last to the end of the world; and therefore
it was called Euangelium aeternum, The everlasting Gospel. By this Gospel, the
Gospel of Christ was absolutely abrogated, and the power of governing the
Church, according to the Gospel of Christ, utterly evacuated; for, it was
therein taught, that only the literal sense of the Gospel had been committed
to them, who had thus long governed in the name of the Church, but the
spiritual and mystical sense was reserved to the Holy Ghost, and that now the
Holy Ghost would set that on foot: And so, (which was the principal intention
in that plot) they would have brought all Doctrine, and all Discipline, all
Government into the Cloister, into their religious Orders, and overthrown the
Hierarchy of the Church, of Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons, and Cathedral
and Collegiate Churches, and brought all into Monasteries. He that first
opposed this Book was Waldo, he that gave the name to that great Body, that
great power of Men, who attempted the Reformation of the Church, and were
called the Waldenses, who were especially defamed, and especially persecuted
for this, that they put themselves in the gap, and made themselves a Bank,
against this torrent, this inundation, this impetuousnesse, this multiplicy of
Friars, and Monks, that surrounded the world in those times. And when this Book
could not be dissembled, and being full of blasphemy against Christ, was
necessarily brought into agitation, yet all that was done by them, who had the
government of the Church in their hands then, was but this, That this Book,
this Gospel of the Holy Ghost should be suppressed and smothered, but without
any noise, or discredit; and the Book which was writ against it, should be
solemnly, publicly, infamously burnt. And so they kindled a War in Heaven,
greater then that in the Revelation, Rev. 12.7.
where Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and his Angels; For,
here they brought God the Son into the field, against God the Holy Ghost, and
made the Holy Ghost divest, dethrone, disseise, and dispossess the Son of
his Government.

Now when they could not advance that Heresy, Scrinium pectoris.
when they could not bring the Holy Ghost to that greatness, when they could
not make him King to their purposes, that is, King over Christ, They are come
to an Heresy clean contrary to that Heresy, that is, to imprison the Holy
Ghost, And since they could not make him King over Christ himself, they have
made him a Prisoner, and a flave to Christ's Vicar, and shut him up there, In
scrinio pectoris, (as they call it) in that close imprisonment, in the breast
and bosom of one man, that Bishop: And so, the Holy Ghost is no longer a Dove,
a Dove in the Ark, a Dove with an Olive Branch, a Messenger of peace, but now
the Holy Ghost is in a Bull, in Bulls worse then Phalaris his Bull, Bulls of
Excommunication, Bulls of Rebellion, and Deposition, and Assassinates of
Christian Princes. The Holy Ghost is no longer Omni-present, Psalm. 139.7.
as in David's time, (Whither shall I goefrom thy Spirit?) but he is only
there, whither he shall be sent from Rome in a Cloak-bagge, and upon a
Post-horse, as it was often complained in the Council of Trent. The Holy Ghost
is no longer Omniscient, to know all at once, 1 Cor. 2.10..
as in S. Paul's time, when the Spirit of God searched all things, yea the deep
things of God, but as a Sea-Captaine receives a Ticket, to be opened when he
comes to such a height, and thereby to direct his future course, so the Holy
Ghost is appointed to ask the Popes Nuntio, his Legate, what he shall declare
to be truth. So the Holy Ghost was sent into this Kingdom, by Leo the tenth,
with his Legate, that brought the Bull of Declaration for Hcnry the eights
Divorce; but the Holy Ghost might not know of it, that is, not take knowledge
of it, not declare it to be a Divorce, till some other conditions were
performed by the King, which being never performed, the Holy Ghost remained in
the case of a new created Cardinal, Ore clauso, he had novoyce; and so the
Divorce, though past all debatements, and all consents, and all determinations
at Rome, was no Divorce, because he that sent the Holy Ghost from Rome, forbad
him to publish and declare it. So that the style of the Court is altered from
the Apostles time; Acts 15.28.
Then it was, Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and nobis, It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us; First to the Holy Ghost, before others; and when it is
brought to others, it is to us, to others in the plural, to many others. But
now it is Visum est mihi, and Spiritui Sancto, It seems good unto me, to one
man alone; and when it does so, it shall seem good to the Holy Ghost too. And
of these two Heretical violences to the Holy Ghost, we complain against that
Church, first, that they put the Holy Ghost in a Rebellion against the Son of
God, from whom he proceeds; And then, (as for the most part, the end of them,
who pretend right to a Kingdom, and cannot prove it, is to lie in Prison) That
they have imprisoned the Holy Ghost in one man's breast, and not suffered that
wind to breathe where it will, as Christ promised the Holy Ghost should do:
For neither did the Holy Ghost bring any such thing to their remembrance, as
though Christ had taught any such Doctrine, neither can they that teach it,
come nearer the sin, The unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, then thus to
make him a supplanter of Christ, or supplanted by Antichrist.

But we hold you no longer in this ill Air, Charismata Spiritus.
blasphemous and irksome contumelies against the Holy Ghost: we promised at
first, to dismiss you at last, in a perfume, with the breath of the Holy Ghost
upon you; and that is, to excite you to a rectified sense, and knowledge,
August.
that he offers himself unto you, and is received by you. Facies Dei est, qua
nobis innotescit; That is always the face of God to us, by which God
vouchsafes to manifest himself to us: So, his Ordinance in the Church, is his
face. And Lux Dei, qua nobis illucescit, The light of God to us, is that light
by which he shines upon us; Lex Dei, Lux Dei, his word, in his Church. And
then, the Evidence, the Seal, the Witness of all, that this face which I see
by this light, is directed upon me for my comfort, is, The Testimony of the
Holy Ghost, when that Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that he is in us.
And therefore in his blessed Name, and in the participation of his power, I say
to you all, Accipite Spiritum sanctum, Receive ye the holy Ghost. Not that I
can give it you, 2 Cor. 3.5.
but I can tell you, that he offers to give himself to you all. Our
sufficiency is of God, says the Apostle; Acknowledge you a sufficiency in us,
a sufficient power to be in the Ministry; for, (as the Apostle adds) He has
made us able Ministers of the New Testament: Not able only in faculties and
gifts requisite for that function, (those faculties and gifts, whether of
nature, or of acquisition, be, in as great measure, in some that have not that
function) but able, by his powerful Ordinance, (as it is also added there) to
minister, not the letter, (not the letter only) but The Spirit, the Spirit of
the New Testament, that is, the holy Ghost to you. Therefore as God said to
Moses, I will come down, Numb. 11.17
and talk with thee, and I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and put
it upon them, God, in his Spirit does come down to us in his Ministry, and
talk with us, his Ministers at home, that is, assist us in our Meditations,
and lucubrations, and preparations, for this service here, and then, here, in
this place, he takes of that Spirit from us, and sheds upon you, imparts the
gifts of the holy Ghost to you also, and makes the holy Ghost as much yours, by
your hearing, as he made him ours, by our study: Be not deceived by the letter,
by the phrase of that place; God does not say there, that he will take of the
Spirit from us, and give it you, that is, fill you with it, and leave us
without it; but he will take of that Spirit, that is, impart that Spirit so to
you, as that by us, and our present Ministry, he will give you that that shall
be sufficient for you, to day, and yet call you to us again in his Ordinance,
another day. Learn as much as you can every day, and never think that you
have learnt so much, as that you have no more need of a Teacher; for though you
need no more of that man, (you may be perchance as learned as he) yet you need
more of that Ordinance: We give you the holy Ghost then, when we open your eyes
to see his offers.

Those words of the Apostle, Our selves have the first fruits of the Spirit,
Romans 8.23.
S. Ambrose interprets so, Our selves, we the Ministers of God, have the first
fruits of the Spirit, the pre-possession, the pre-inhabitation, but not the
sole possession, nor sole inhabitation of the Holy Ghost; but we have grace for
grace, the Spirit therefore, to shed the Spirit upon you; that that precious
Ointment, Psalm. 133.2.
(the Holy Ghost is this Unction) which was poured upon the Head, upon Christ,
may run down, upon Aarons beard, and from those gray, and grave, and reverend
hairs of his Ministers, may also go down to the skirts of his garments, to
every one of you, who do not only make up the garment, that is, the visible,
but the mystical body it self of Christ Jesus. Ver. 3.
The dew of Hermon descends upon the mountains of Sion; But the waters that
fall upon the mountains, fall into the valleys too from thence; The Holy
Ghost falls, through us, upon you also, so, as that you may, so, as that you
must find it in your selves. The Holy Ghost was the first Person, that was
declared in the Creation, The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters,
Genesis 1.2.
that was the first motion. This is eternal life, to know God, and him whom he
sent, Christ Jesus. But this you cannot do, but by him whom they both sent,
the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 12.3.
No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. John Baptist
who was to baptize Christ, was filled with the holy Ghost from the womb. You,
who were baptized in Christ, were filled, (in your measure) with the holy
Ghost, from that womb, from the time that the Church conceived you in Baptism.

And therefore, as the Twelve said to the multitude, Acts 6.3.
Look ye among ye seven men full of the holy Ghost, So we say to the whole
Congregation, Look every man to himself, that he be one of the seven, one of
that infinite number, which the holy Ghost offers to fall upon; That as ye were
baptized in the holy Ghost, and as your bodies are Temples of the holy Ghost,
so your souls may be Priests of the holy Ghost, and you, altogether a lively
and reasonable sacrifice to God, in the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 1.13.
That as you have been sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, you may find
in your selves the performance of that promise, find the seal of that
promise, in your love to the Scriptures; for, (as S. Chrysostom argues
usefully) Christ gave the Apostles no Scriptures, but he gave them the holy
Ghost in stead of Scriptures; But to us, who are weaker, he has given both,
The holy Ghost in the Scriptures; and, if we neglect either, we have neither;
If we trust to a private spirit, and call that the holy Ghost, without
Scripture, or to the Scriptures without the holy Ghost, that is, without him,
there, where he has promised to be, in his Ordinance, in his Church, we have
not the seal of that Promise, the holy Ghost. Find then that promise in your
holy love, and sober study of the Scriptures, and find the performance, the
fruits thereof in your conversation, and then you have an Autumn better then
any worldly Spring, A vintage, a gathering of those blessed fruits, Gal. 5.22.
The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meckenesse, temperance; where (by the way) these are not
called severally the fruits of the Spirit, as though they were so many several
fruits, which might be had one without another, but collectively, all together,
they are called the fruit; It is not Love alone, nor Joy alone, no nor Faith
alone, that is the fruit of the holy Ghost; Love; but not love alone, but that
love, when between the holy Ghost and you, you can joy in that love, and not
repent it; Joy, but not joy alone, but that joy, when between the holy Ghost
and you, you can find peace in that joy, that you be not the sadder after, for
having been so merry before, this, these, these and all the rest together are
the fruit of the holy Ghost; and therefore labor to have them all, or you
lack all.

And then lastly, as we pursuing Gods Ordinance, have been able to say to you
Accipite Spiritum sanctum, Behold the holy Ghost in your selves, behold he
appeared to you, when he moved you to come hither, behold he appeared to you,
as often as he has opened the window of the Arc, your hearts, to take in this
Dove, this hour, so we may say unto you, as we say in the School, There is an
infusion of the holy Ghost; liquor is infused into a vessel, if that vessel
hold it, though it do but cover the bottom and no more: The holy Ghost is
infused into you, if he have made any entry, if he cover any part, if he have
taken hold of any corrupt affection. There is also a diffusion of the holy
Ghost; Liquor is diffused into a vessel, when it fills all the parts of the
vessel, and leaves no emptiness, no dryness: The holy Ghost is diffused into
you, if he overspread you, and possess you all, and rectify all your
perversnesses. But then, in the School, we have also an effusion of the holy
Ghost; And liquor is effused then, when it so fills the vessel, as that that
overflowes, to the benefit of them, who will participate thereof. Receive
therefore the holy Ghost, so, as that the holy Ghost may overflow, flow from
your example, to the edification of others; That you may go home, and say to
your children, receive ye the holy Ghost, in the Spirit of contentment, and
acquiescence, and thankfulness to God, and me, in that portion that I can
leave you, And say to your servants, receive ye the holy Ghost, in the spirit
of obedience, and fidelity, And say to your neigh bours, receive ye the holy
Ghost, in the spirit of peace and quiemesse, And say to your Creditors, receive
ye the holy Ghost in the spirit of patience, and tenderness, and compassion,
and for bearing, And to your debtors, receive ye the holy Ghost in the spirit
of industry, and labor in your calling. You see, Preaching it self, even the
Preaching of Christ himself, had been lost, if the holy Ghost had not brought
all those things to their remembrance. And if the holy Ghost do bring these
things, which we preach to your remembrance, you are also made fishers of men,
and Apostles, and (as the Prophet speaks) Salvatores mundi, Obad. 1.21.
men that assist the salvation of the world, by the best way of preaching, an
exemplar life, and holy convesation. Amen.

SERMON XXX. Preached upon Whitsunday. Part of the Gospel of the Day.
JOHN 14.20. At that day shall ye know, That I am in my Father, and you in me,
and I in you.


THe two Volumes of the Scriptures are justly, and properly called two
Testaments, for they are Testatio Mentis, The attestation, the declaration of
the will and pleasure of God, how it pleased him to be served under the Law,
and how in the state of the Gospel. But to speak according to the ordinary
acceptance of the word, the Testament, that is, The last Will of Christ Jesus,
is this speech, this declaration of his, to his Apostles, of which this text is
a part. For, it was spoken, as at his Deathbed, his last Supper: And it was
before his Agony in the garden, so that (if we should consider him as a mere
man) there was no inordinatenesse, no irregularity in his affection; It was
testified with sufficient witnesses, and it was sealed in blood, in the
Institution of the Sacrament. By this Will then, as a rich, and abundant, Ver. 3.
and liberal Testator, having given them so great a Legacy, as a place in the
kingdom of heaven, yet he adds a codicill, he gives more, he gives them the
evidence by which they should maintain their right to that kingdom, that is,
the testimony of the Spirit, The Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom he promises to
send to them; Ver. 16.
And still more and more abundant, he promises them, that that assurance of
their right shall not be taken from them, till he himself return again to give
them an everlasting possession, That he may receive us unto himself, and that
where he is, we may also be. The main Legacy, Ver. 3.
the body of the gift is before: That which is given in this Text, is part of
that evidence by which it appears to us that we have right, and by which that
right is maintained, and that is knowledge, that knowledge which we have of our
interest in God, and his kingdom here; At that day ye shall know, etc.

And in the giving of this, we shall consider, first, the Legacy it self, this
knowledge, Cognoscetis, Ye shall know; And secondly, the time when this Legacy
grows due to us, In illo die, At that day ye shall know; And thirdly, how much
of this treasure is devised to us, what portion of this heavenly knowledge is
bequeathed to us, and that is in three great sums, in three great mysteries;
First, ye shall know the mystery of the Trinity, of distinct persons in the
Godhead; Ego in patre, That I am in my Father; And then the mystery of the
Incarnation of God, who took our flesh, Vos in me, That you are in me; And
lastly, the mystery and working of our Redemption, in our Sanctification, Ego
in vobis, That Christ (by his Spirit, the Holy Ghost) is in us.

Nequitia animae ignoratio, says Trismegistus; 1. Part. Cognoscetis.
He does not say it is the infirmity of the soul, or the impotency of the
soul, but the iniquity, the wickedness of the soul consists in this, that we
are ignorant of those ways, and those ends, upon which we should direct, and
by which we should govern our purposes: And if ignorance be the corruption, and
dissolution, certainly knowledge is the redintegration, and consolidation of
the soul. From this corruption, from this ignorance God delivered his people
at first, in some measure, by the Law; that is, he gave them thereby a way to
get out of this ignorance; he put them to School; Lex Paedagogus, says the
Apostle, The Law was their Schoolmaster. But in the state of the Gospel, in
the shedding of the beams, of the streams of his grace in the blood of Christ
Jesus we are graduats, and have proceeded so far, as to a manifestation of
things already done, and so our faith is brought in a great part, to consist in
matter of fact, and that which was but matter of prophecy to them (in the old
Testament, they knew not when it should be done) to us in the New, is matter of
History, and we know when it was done: In the old times God led his people,
sometimes with clouds, sometimes with fire, some lights they had, but some
hidings, some withdrawings of those lights too, the mysteries of their
salvation were not fully revealed unto them: To us, all is holy fire, all is
evident light, all is in the Epiphany, in the manifestation of Christ, and in
the presence of the Holy Ghost, who is delivered over to us, to remain with us,
Vsque ad consummationem, Till the end of the world. God has buried and hidden
from us the body of Moses; he has removed that cloud, that veil, the
ceremony, the letter of the Law. Yea he has hidden that which benighted us
more, and kept us in more ignorance of him, our infinite sins, which are clouds
of witnesses to our Consciences, he has hidden them in the wounds of his Son
our Savior, so that there remains nothing but clearness, evident clearness;
The Gospel being brought to us all, in that Christ is actually and really
come, and Christ being brought to me, in that he is appliable in the Church to
every particular soul; so that this Legacy that is given in this text, is not
only in a possibility, and in a probability, and in a verisimilitude, but in an
assurance, and in an infallibility, in a knowledge, we know it is thus, and
thus.

We shall therefore consider this knowledge, first, as it is opposed to
ignorance, secondly, as it is opposed to inconsideration, and thirdly, as it is
opposed to conclealing, to smothering: First, we must have it, and then we must
know that we have it, and after that we must publish it, and declare it, so
that others may know that we know it. Now, Ignorantia.
as there is a profitable, a wholesome, a learned ignorance, which is a modest,
and a reverent abstinence from searching into those secrets which God has not
revealed in his word, (whereupon S. Augustine says usefully, Libenter
ignoremus, quae ignorare nos vult Deus, Let not us desire to know that which
God has no will to reveal) So also there is an unprofitable, an infectious,
indeed an ignorant knowledge, which puffes, and swells us up: that, of which the
Prophet says, Stultus factus est omnis homo, a scientia; Jer. 12.
Every man's knowledge makes him a fool, when it makes him undervalue, and
despise another. And this is one strange and incurable effect of this opinion
of wit and knowledge, that whereas every man murmurs, and says to himself,
such a man has more land then I, more money then I, more custom, more
practice then I, (when perchance, in truth it is not so) yet every man thinks,
that he has more wit, more knowledge then all the world beside, when, God
knows, it is very far from being so. When the Prophet in that place, calls this
confident believer in his own wisdom, Fool, he has therein fastened upon him
a name of the greatest reproach to man, which the Holy Ghost, in the mouth of a
Prophet, could choose; As it appears best in those gradations which Christ
makes, Mat. 5.22.
where, Whosoever is angry, is made culpable of judgment, whosoever says
Racha, (that is, expresses his anger in any contumelious speech) is subject to
a Council, but whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to be punished in
hell fire. For, by calling him Fool, says S. Chrysostom there, he takes from
him that understanding, by which he is a man, and so, says he, despoiles him
of all interest in the creature, in this life, and all interest in God, in the
life to come. It is the deepest indignation, the highest abomination that Job
in his anguish conceived, Job 19.
Stulti despiciebant me, They that are but fools themselves, despised me; And
after that again, They are the children of fools, and yet I am their song, and
their talk: And in that comparison which God himself instituted, and proposed
in Deuteronomie, They have moved me to jealousy, Deuteronomy. 30.
with that which is not God, and I will move them to jealousy, with those who
are no people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation, God
intimates so much, That a Fool is no more a man, then an Idol is a God.

Now this foolishness which we speak of, against which God gives us this
Legacy of knowledge, is not that bluntness, that dullness, that narrowness of
understanding, which is opposed to sharpness of wit, or readiness of
expressing, and delivering any matter, for very many very devout and godly men,
lack that sharpness, and that readiness, and yet have a good portion of
spiritual wisdom, and knowledge. Neither is this foolishness, that
weakness, or inability, to amasse and gather together particulars, as they
have fallen out in former times, and in our times, and thereby to judge of
future occurrences by former precedents, (which is the wisdom of Statesmen,
and of civil contemplation, to build up a body of knowledge, from reading
stories, or observing actions) for this wisdom Solomon calls vanity, and
vexation; Nor is this foolishness, that precipitation, that over-earnestnesse,
that animosity, that heat which some men have, and which is opposed to
discretion; for sometimes zeal it self has such a heat, and such a
precipitation in it, and yet that zeal may not be absolutely condemned, but
may be sometimes of some use; The dull man, the weak man, the hasty man is not
this fool, Prove. 28.
but (as the Wiseman, who knew best, has told us,) The fool is he that
trusts in his own heart. And therefore, against this foolishness of trusting
in our own hearts, of confiding, and relying upon our own plots and devices,
and from sacrificing to our own nets, (as the Prophet Habakkuk speaks) from
this attributing of all to our own industry, from this ignorance, that all
blessings, spiritual and temporal too, proceed from God, and from God only,
and from God manifested in Christ, and from Christ explicated in the
Scriptures, and from the Scriptures applied in the Church, (which is the sum
of all religion) God has given us this Legacy of knowledge, Cognoscetis, At
that day you shall know, as knowledge is opposed to ignorance.

As it is opposed to inconsideration, Inconsideratio.
it is a great work that it does too: for, as God has made himself like man in
many things, in taking upon him, in Scriptures, our lineaments and proportion,
our affections and passions, our apparel and garments, so has God made
himself like man, in this also, that as man does, so he also takes it worse to
be neglected, then to be really injured; Some of our sins do not offend God so
much, as our inconsideration, a stupid passing him over, as though that we did,
that which we had, that which we were, appertained not to him, had no emanation
from him, no dependence upon him. As God says in the Prophet, of lame, and
blemished, and unperfect Sacrifices, Offer it unto any of your Princes, and see
if they will accept it at your hands; So I say to them that pass their lives
thus inconsiderately, Offer that to any of your Princes, any of your
Superiors; Dares an officer that receives instructions from his Prince, when
he leaves his commandments unperformed, say, I never thought of it? Dares a
Subject, a Servant, a Son say so?

Now beloved, this knowledge, as it is opposed to inconsideration, is in this,
that God by breeding us in the visible Church, multiplies unto us so many helps
and assistances in the word preached, in the Sacraments, in other Sacramental,
and Rituall, and Ceremonial things, which are auxiliary, subsidiary reliefes,
and refreshings to our consideration, as that it is almost impossible to fall
into this inconsideration. Here God shows this inconsiderate man, his book of
creatures, which he may run and read; that is, he may go forward in his
vocation, and yet see that every creature calls him to a consideration of God.
Every Ant that he sees, asks him, Where had I this providence, and industry?
Every flower that he sees, asks him, Where had I this beauty, this fragrancy,
this medicinal virtue in me? Every creature calls him to consider, what great
things God has done in little subjects. But God opens to him also, here in his
Church, his Book of Scriptures, and in that Book, every word cries out to him;
every merciful promise cries to him, Why am I here, to meet thee, to wait upon
thee, to perform Gods purpose toward thee, if thou never consider me, never
apply me to thy self? Every judgment of his anger cries out, Why am I here,
if thou respect me not. if thou make not thy profit, of performing those
conditions, which are annexed to those judgments, and which thou might
perform, if thou would consider it? Yea, here God opens another book to
him, his manual, his bosom, his pocket book, his Vade Mecum, the Abridgement
of all Nature, and all Law, his own heart, and conscience: And this book,
though he shut it up, and clasp it never so hard, yet it will sometimes burst
open of it self; though he interline it with other studies, and knowledges,
yet the Text it self, in the book it self, the testimonies of the conscience,
will shine through and appear: Though he load it, and choke it with
Commentaries and questions, that is, perplexe it with Circumstances, and
Disputations, yet the matter it self, which is imprinted there, will present
it self: yea, though he tear some leaves out of the Book, that is, wilfully,
yea studiously forget some sins that he has done, and discontinue the reading
of this book, the survay and consideration of his conscience, for some time,
yet he cannot lose, he cannot cast away this book, that is so in him, as that
it is himself, and evermore calls upon him, to deliver him from this
inconsideration, by this open and plentiful Library, which he carries about
him. Consider, beloved, the great danger of this inconsideration, by
remembering, That even that only perfect man, Christ Jesus, who had that great
way of making him a perfect man, as that he was perfect God too, even in that
act of deepest devotion, in his prayer in the garden, by permitting himself,
out of that humane infirmity, which he was pleased to admit in himself,
(though far from sin) to pass one petition in that prayer, without a debated
and considered will, in his Transeat Calix, If it be possible, let this Cup
pass, he was put to a re-consideration, and to correct his Prayer,
Veruntamen, Yet not my will, but thine be done. And if then our best acts of
praying, and hearing, need such an exact consideration, consider the richness,
and benefit of this Legacy, knowledge, as this knowledge is opposed to
inconsideration.

It is also opposed to concealing and smothering; Occultatio.
It must be published to the benefit of others. Paulum sepultae distat inertiae
celata virtus, says the Poet; Virtue that is never produced into action, is
scarce worthy of that name. For that is it, which the Apostle, in his Epistle
to that Church, which was in Philemons house, Philem. 6.
does so much praise God for, That the fellowship of thy faith may be made
fruitful, and that whatsoever good thing is in you through Jesus Christ, may
be known: That according to the nature of goodness, and to the root of
goodness, God himself, this knowledge of God may be communicated, and
transfused, and shed, and spread, and derived, and digested upon others. And
therefore certainly, as the Philosopher said of civil actions, Etiam simulare
Philosophiam, Philosophia est, That it was some degree of wisdom, to be able
to seem wise; so, though it be no degree of religion, to seem religious, yet
even that may be a way of reducing others, and perchance themselves: when a man
makes a public, an outward show of being religious, by coming ordinarily to
Church, and doing those outward duties, though this be hypocrisy in him, yet
sometimes other men receive profit by his example, and are religious in
earnest, and, sometimes, Appropinquat and nescit, (as S. Augustine confesses
that it was his case, when he came out of curiosity, and not out of devotion,
to hear S. Ambrose preach) what respect soever brought that man hither, yet
when God finds him here, in his house, he takes hold of his conscience, and
shows himself to him, though he came not to see him. And if God do thus
produce good out of the hypocrite, and work good in him, much more will he
provide a plentiful harvest, by their labors, who having received this
knowledge from God, assist their weaker brethren, both by the Example of their
lives, and the comfort of their Doctrine.

This knowledge then, 2. Part. In die.
which to work the intended effect in us, is thus opposed to ignorance, and to
inconsideration, and to concealing, (which were the pieces that constitute our
first Part) in the second Part, which is the time when this Legacy accrues to
us, is to be given us, In die illo, at that day, At that day shall ye know,
etc. It is the illumination, the illustration of our hearts, and therefore well
referred to the Day; The word it self affords cheerfulness. For when God
inflicted that great plague, to kill all the firstborn in Egypt, Exodus 12.
Luke 20.
that was done at Midnight: And when God would intimate both deaths at once,
spiritual, and temporal, he says, O fool, this night they will fetch away
thy soul. Against all supply of knowledge, he calls him fool; and against all
sense of comfort in the day, he threatens night.

It was In die, Illo.
and In die illo, in the day, and at a certain day, and at a short day. For,
after Christ had made his Will at this supper, and given strength to his Will,
by his death, and proved his Will by his Resurrection, and left the Church
possessed of his estate, by his Ascension, within ten days after that, he poured
out this Legacy of knowledge. For, though some take this day mentioned in the
Text, Calvin.
to be Tanqnam unius diei tenor, a dato Spiritu, ad Resurrectionem; from the
first giving of the Holy Ghost, to the Resurrection; And others take this day,
Osiand.
to be from his Resurrection, to the end of his second Conversation upon
earth, till his Ascension; and S. Augustine refer it, Ad perfectam visionem
in Coelis, to the perfect fruition of the sight of God in Heaven, yet the most
useful, and best followed acceptance is, This Day of the coming of the Holy
Ghost.

That day we celebrate this day; and we can never find the Christian Church
(so far as we can judge by the evidence of Story) to have been without this
festival day. The reason of all Festivals in the Church, was, and is, Ne
volumine temporum, ingrata subrepat oblivio, August.
Lest after many ages involved, and wrapped up in one another, Gods particular
benefits should be involved, and wrapped up in unthankfulness. And the
benefits received this day, were such, as should never be forgotten: for,
without this day, all the rest had been evacuated, and uneffectuall: If the
Apostles by the coming of the Holy Ghost had not been established in an
infallibility in themselves, and in an ability, to deal with all Nations, by
the benefit of tongues, the benefit of Christ's passion had not been derived
upon all Nations. And therefore, to This day, and to Easterday, all public
Baptismes, in the Primitive Church, were reserved; None were baptized (except
in cases of necessity) but upon one of these two days: for, as there is an
Exaltation, a Resurrection given us in Baptism, represented by Easter; so
there belongs to us a confirmation, an establishing of grace, and the increase
thereof, represented in Pentecost, in the coming of the Holy Ghost. As the
Jews had an Easter in the memory of their deliverance from Egypt, and a
Pentecost in the memory of the Law given at Mout Sinai; So at Easter we
celebrate the memory of that glorious Passover, when Christ passed from the
grave, and hell, in his Resurrection, and at this Feast of Pentecost we
celebrate his giving of the Law to all Nations, and his investing and
possessing himself of his Kingdom, the Church: for this is Festum Adoptionis,
as S. Chrysostom calls it; The cheerful feast of our Adoption, in which, the
Holy Ghost convaying the Son of God to us, enables us to be the Sons of God,
and to cry Abba, Father.

This then is that day, Acts 2.
when the Apostles being with one accord, and in one place, (that is, in one
faith, and in one profession of that faith, not only without Heresy, but
without Schism too) the Holy Ghost as a mighty wind, filled them all, and
gave them utterance; As a wind, to note a powerful working; And he filled
them, to note the abundance; And he gave them utterance, to infer that which
we spoke of before, The Communication of that knowledge, which they had
received, to others. This was that Spirit, whom it concerned the Apostles so
much to have, as that Christ himself must go from them, to send him to them;
If I go not away, says Christ, the Comforter will not come to you. How great
a comfort must this necessarily be, which must so abundantly recompense the
loss of such a comfort; as the presence of Christ was? This is that Spirit,
who though he were to be sent by the Father, and sent by the Son, yet he comes
not as a Messenger from a Superior, for he was always equal to Father and
Son: But the Father sent him, and the Son sent him, as a tree sends forth
blossoms, and as those blossoms send forth a sweet smell, and as the Sun
sends forth beams, by an emanation from it self; He is Spiritus quem nemo
interpretari potest, says S. Chrysostom; he has him not, that does not see
he has him, nor is any man without him, who, in a rectified conscience, thinks
he has him: Illo Prophetae illustrantur, Illo idiotae condiuntur, says the
same Father, The Prophets, as high as their calling was, saw nothing without
this Spirit, and with this Spirit, a simple man understands the Prophets. And
therefore does S. Basil attribute that to the Holy Ghost, which seems to be
peculiar to the Son; he calls him Verbum Dei, because says he, Spiritus
interpres Filii, sicut Filius Patris, As the Son has revealed to us the will
of the Father, and so is the Word of God to us, so the Holy Ghost applies the
promises, and the merits of the Son to us, and so is the Word of God to us too,
and enables us to come to God, in that voice of his blessed Servant, S.
Augustine, O Deus, secretissime, and patentissime, Though nothing be more
mysterious then the knowledge of God in the Trinity, yet nothing is more
manifest unto us, then, by the light of this person, the Holy Ghost, so much of
both the other Persons, as is necessary for our Salvation, is.

Now, it is not only to the Apostles, that the Holy Ghost is descended this
day, but, as S. Chrysostom says of the Annunciation, Non ad unam tantum
animam, It is not only to one Person, that the Angel said then, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and overshadow thee, but, says he, that Holy Ghost has
said, Super omnem, Joel 2.
I will pour out my self upon all men, so I say of this day, This day, if you
be all in this place, (concentred, united here in one Faith, and one Religion)
If you be of one accord, (that is, in perfect charity) The Holy Ghost shall
fill you all (according to your measure, and his purpose) and give you
utterance, in your lives and conversations. Qui ita vacat orationibus, Origin.
ut dignus fiat illo vehementi Spiritu, semper habet diem Pentecostes: He
that-loves the exercise of prayer so earnestly, as that in prayer he feels
this vehemence of the Holy Ghost, that man dwells in an everlasting Whitsunday:
for so he does, he has it always, that ever had it aright: Oditeos Deus, qui
unam putant diem, festum Domini; God hates that man, says Origin also, that
celebrates any Holy Day of his, but one day: that never thinks of the
Incarnation of Christ, but upon Christmas Day, nor upon his Passion, and
Resurrection, but upon Easter, and Good Friday. If you deal so with your
souls, as with your bodies, and as you cloth your selves with your best
habits to day, but return again to your ordinary apparel to morrow: so for
this day, or this hour, you divest the thought of your sins, but return after
to your vomit, you have not celebrated this day of Pentecost; you have not
been truly in this place, for your hearts have been visiting your profits, or
pleasures; you have not been here with one accord, you have not truly and
sincerely joined with the Communion of Saints; Christ has sent no Comforter to
you this day, neither will he send any, till you be better prepared for him.
But if you have brought your sins hither in your memory, and leave them here in
the blood of your Savior, always flowing in his Church, and ready to receive
them, if you be come to that heavenly knowledge, that there is no comfort but
in him, and in him abundant consolation, then you are this day capable of this
great Legacy, this knowledge, which is all the Christian Religion, That Christ
is in the Father, and you in him, and he in you.

We are now come to our third part, Our portion in this Legacy, 3 Part.
the measure of the knowledge of these mysteries, which we are to receive: of
which, S. Chrysostom says well, Scientiae magnum argumentum est, nolle omnia
scire, It is a good argument, that that man knows much, who desires not to
know all; In pursuing true knowledge, he is gone a good way, that knows where
to give over. When that great Manichean Felix would needs prove to S.
Augustine, that Manes was the holy Ghost, because it was said that the holy
Ghost should teach all truths, and that Manes did so, because he taught many
things that they were ignorant of before, concerning the frame, and motion, and
nature of the heavens and their stars, S. Augustine answered, Spiritus sanctus
facit Christianos, non Mathematicos, The Holy Ghost makes us Christians, not
Mathematicians. If any man think, by having his station at Court, that it is
enough for him to have studied that one book, and that if in that book, The
knowledge of the Court, he be come to an apprehension, by what means and
persons businesses are likeliest to be carried, If he by his foresight have
provided perspective glasses, to see objects a far off, and can make Almanacks
for next year, and tell how matters will fall out then, and think that so he
has received his portion, as much knowledge as he needs, Spiritus sanctus
facit Christianos, non Politicos, He must remember that the Holy Ghost makes
Christians, and not Politians. So if a man have a good foundation of a fortune
from his Parents, and think that all his study must be, to proceed in that,
and still to add a Cyphar more to his accounts, to make tens, hundreds, and
hundreds, thousands, Spiritus sanctus facit Christianos, non Arithmeticos, The
Holy Ghost makes Christians, and not such Arithmeticians. If men who desire a
change in Religion, and yet think it a great wisdom, to disguise that desire,
and to temporise, lest they should be made less able to effect their purposes,
if they should manifest themselves; but yet hope to see that transmutation of
Religion, from that copper, which they esteem ours to be, to that gold, which,
(perchance for the venality thereof) they esteem theirs: If others, who are
also working in the fire, (though not in the fire of envy and of powder, yet in
the fire of an indiscreet zeal, and though they pretend not to change the
substance of the metal, the body of our Religion, yet they labor to blow away
much of the ceremony, and circumstances, which are Vehicula, and Adminicula, if
not Habitacula Religionis, They are, though not the very fuel, yet the
bellows of Religion) If these men, I say, of either kind, They who call all
differing from themselves, Error, and all error damnable; or they, who, as
Tertullian expresses their humor, and indisposition prophetically, Qui vocant
prostrationem Disciplinae, simplicitatem, which call the abolishing and
extermination of all Discipline and Ceremony, pureness and holiness; If they
think they have received their portion of this legacy, their measure of true
knowledge, in laboring only to accuse, and reform, and refine others,
Spiritus sanctus facit Christianos, non Chymistas, The holy Ghost makes men
Christians, and not Alchymists. To contract this, If a man know ways enough to
disguise all his sins, If no Exchequer take hold of his usurious contracts, no
High Commission of his licentiousness, no Star Chamber of his misdemeanors, If
he will not to sleep, till he can hold up his eyes no longer, for fear his
sins should meet him in his bed, and vex his conscience there, If he will not
come to the Sacrament, but at that time of the year, when Laws compel him, or
good company invite him, or other civil respects and reasons provoke him, If
he have avoydances, to hide his sins from others, and from himself too, by such
disguisings, This is all but Deceptio visus, a blinding of his own internal
eyes, and Spirtus sanctus facit Christianos, non Circulatores, The Holy Ghost
makes men Christians, and not Jugglers.

This knowledge then which we speak of, is to know the end and the way, Heaven
and Christ, The Kingdom to which he is gone, and the means which he has
taught us to follow. Now, in all our ways, in all our journies, a moderate
pace brings a man most surely to his journies end, and so does a sober
knowledge in matters of Divinity, and in the mysteries of Religion. And
therefore the Fathers say, that this coming of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, this day, though it were a vehement coming, did not give them all
kind of knowledge, a knowledge of particular Arts, and Sciences; But he gave
them knowledge enough for their present work, and withal a faithful
confidence, that if at any time, they should have to do, with learned
Heathens, with Philosophers, the Holy Ghost would either instantly furnish
them, with such knowledge, as they had not before, (as we see in many
relations in the Ecclesiastical Story, That men spoke upon the sudden, in
diverse cases, otherwise, then in any reason their education could promise or
afford) or else he would blunt the sharpness of the Adversaries weapons, and
cast a damp upon their understandings, as we see he did in the Council of
Nice, when after many disputations, amongst the great Men of great estimation,
the weakest Man in the Council rose up, and he, o^ whom his own party were
afraid, lest his discourse should disadvantage the cause, overthrew, and
converted, that great Advocate, and defender of Arius, whom all the rest could
never shake; for though this man said no more then other men had said, yet God
at this time disposed the understanding, and the abilities of the Adversaries,
otherwise then before; sometimes God will have glory, in arming his friends,
sometimes in disarming his enemies, sometimes in exalting our abilities, and
sometimes in evacuating or enfeebling theirs.

And so, as the Apostles were, as many of us, as celebrate this day, as they
did, are filled with the Holy Ghost, that is, with so much knowledge, as is
necessary to Gods purpose in us. Enough for our selves, if we be private men,
and enough for others, if we have charge of others: private men shall have
knowledge enough where to seek for more, and the Priest shall have enough to
communicate his knowledge to others. And though this knowledge were delivered
to the Apostles, as from a print, from a stamp, all at once, and to us, but as
by writing, letter after letter, syllable after syllable, by Catechismes,
chismes, and Sermons, yet both are such knowledges, as are sufficient for each.
As the glory of heaven shall fall upon us all, and though we be not all of
equal measure, and capacity, yet we shall be equally full of that glory; so
the way to that glory, this knowledge, shall be manifest to us all, and
infallible to us all, though we do not all know alike; The simplest soul that
hears me, shall know the way of his salvation, as well as the greatest of
those Fathers, whom he hears me cite; And upon us all (so disposed) the holy
Ghost shall fall, as he did here, in fire, and In tongues; In fire, to inflame
us in a religious zeal, and in Tongues, to utter that in confession, and in
profession, that is, to glorify God, both in our words, and in our actions.
This then is our portion in this Legacy, A sober seeking after those points of
knowledge which are necessary for our salvation, and these, in this text,
Christ derived into these three, That I am in my Father, That you are in me,
That I am in you.

The first of these is the knowledge of distinction of persons, and so of the
Trinity. Ego in Paetre. Trinitas.
Principale munus scientiae est, cognoscere Trinitatem, says Origin: The
principal use and office of my knowledge, is to know the Trinity; for, to know
an unity in the Godhead, that there is but one God, natural reason serves our
turn: and to know a creation of the world of nothing, reason serves us too; we
know by reason, that either neither of them is infinite, if there be two Gods,
(and then neither of them can be God) or if both be infinite, (which is an
impossibility) one of them is superfluous, because whatsoever is infinite, can
alone extend to all. So also we can collect infallibly, that if the world were
not made of nothing, yet that of which the world shall be pretended to have
been made of, must have been made of nothing, or else it must be something
eternal, and untreated; and whatsoever is so, must necessarily be God it self.
To be sure of those two, an unity in the Godhead, and a creation of the world,
I need no Scriptures; but to know this distinction of Persons, That the Son is
in the Father, I need the Scriptures, and I need more then the Scriptures, I
need this Pentecost, this coming, this illustration of the holy Ghost, to
inspire a right understanding of these Scriptures into me. For, if this
knowledge might be had without Scriptures, why should not the heathen believe
the Trinity, as well as I, since they lack no natural faculties which
Christians have? And if the Scriptures themselves, without the operation of the
holy Ghost, should bring this clearness, why should not the Jews and the
Arians conform themselves to this doctrine of the Trinity, as well as I, since
they accept those Scriptures, out of which I provethe Trinity to mine own
conscience? We must then attend his working in us; we must not admit such a
vexation of spirit, as either to vex our spirit, or the Spirit of God; by
inquiring farther then he has been pleased to reveal.

If you consider that Christ says here, You shall know That I am in the
Father, and does not say, You shall know How I am in the Father, and this to
his Apostles themselves, and to the Apostles after they were to be filled with
the holy Ghost, which should teach them all truth, it will out off many
perplexing questions, and impertinent answers which have been produced for the
expressing of the manner of this generation, and of the distinction of the
persons in the Trinity; you shall know That it is, you shall not ask How it is.
It is enough for a happy subject to enjoy the sweetness of a peaceable
government, though he know not Arcana Imperii, The ways by which the Prince
governes; So is it for a Christian to enjoy the working of Gods grace, in a
faithful believing the mysteries of Religion, though he inquire not into Gods
bedchamber, nor seek into his unrevealed Decrees. It is Odiosa and exitialis
vocula, Quomodo, says Luther, A hateful, a damnable Monosyllable, How, How
God does this or that: for, if a man come to the boldness of proposing such a
question to himself, he will not give over till he find some answer: and then,
others will not be content with his answer, but every man will have a several
one. When the Church fell upon the Quomodo in the Sacrament, How, in what
manner the body of Christ was there, we see what an inconvenient answer it fell
upon, That it was done by Transubstantiation; That satisfied not, (as there was
no reason it should) And then they fell upon others, In, Sub, and Cum, and none
could, none can give satisfaction. And so also have our times, by asking
Quomodo, How Christ descended into Hell, produced so many answers, as that some
have thought it no Article at all, some have thought that it is all one thing
to have descended into hell, and to have ascended into heaven, and that it
amounts to no more, then a departing into the state of the dead. But Servate
depositum, Make much of that knowledge which the holy Ghost has trusted you
withal, and believe the rest. No man knows how his soul came into him; whether
there by infusion from God, or by generation from Parents, no man knows so, but
that strong arguments will be produced on the other side; And yet no man doubts
but he has a soul. No man knows so, as that strong arguments may not be
brought on the other side, how he sees, whether by reception of species from
without, or by emission of beams from within; And yet no man doubts whether he
see or no. The holy Ghost shall tell you, when he tells you the most that ever
he shall tell you, in that behalf, That the Son is in the Father, but he will
not tell you how.

Our second portion in this Legacy of knowledge, Incarnatio.
is, That we are in Christ; And this is the mystery of the Incarnation. For
since the devil had so surprised us all, as to take mankind all in one lump,
in a corner, in Adams loins, and poisoned us all there in the fountain, in the
root, Christ, to deliver us as entirely, took all mankind upon him, and so
took every one of us, and the nature, and the infirmities, and the sins, and
the punishment of every singular man. So that the same pretense which the
devil has against every one of us, you are mine, for you sinned in Adam, we
have also for our discharge, we are delivered, for we paid our debt in Christ
Jesus. In all his tentations, send him to look upon the Records of that
process, of Christ's passion, and he shall find there, the names of all the
faithful recorded: That such a day, that day when Christ dyed, I, and you, and
all that shall be saved, suffered, dyed, and were crucified, and in Christ
Jesus satisfied God the Father, for those infinite sins which we had committed:
And now, Second death, which is damnation, has no more title to any of the
true members of his mystical body, then corruption upon natural, or violent
death, could have upon the members of his natural body.

The assurance of this grows from the third part of this knowledge, Redemptio.
That Christ is in us; for that is such a knowledge of Christ's general
Redemption of mankind, as that it is also an application of it to us in
particular. For, for his Incarnation, by which we are in him, Cyril.
that may have given a dignity to our humane nature; But Quae beneficiorum
magnitudo fuisset erganos, si hominem solummodo, quem assumpserat, salvaret?
What great benefit (how ever the dignity had been great to all mankind) had
mankind had, if Christ had saved no more then that one person whom he assumed?
The largeness and bounty of Christ is, to give us of his best treasure,
knowledge, and to give us most at last, To know Christ in me. For, to know that
he is in his Father, this may serve me to convince another, that denies the
Trinity; To know that we are in Christ, so as that he took our nature, this may
show me an honor done to us, more then the Angels; But what gets a lame wretch
at the poole, how sovereign soever the water be, if no body put him in? What
gets a naked beggar by knowing that a dead man has left much to pious uses, if
the Executors take no knowledge of him? What get I by my knowledge of Christ in
the Father, and of us in Christ so, if I find not Christ in me?

How then is Christ in us? Here the question De modo, How it is, is lawful:
for, he has revealed it to us. It is, by our obedience to his inspiration, and
by our reverent use of those visible means, which he has ordained in his
Church, his Word and Sacraments: As our flesh is in him, by his participation
thereof, so his flesh is in us, by our communication thereof; And so is his
divinity in us, by making us partakers of his divine nature, and by making us
one spirit with himself, which he does at this Pentecost, that is, whenever
the holy Ghost visits us with his effectual grace: for this is an union, in
which, Christ in his purpose has married himself to our souls, inseparably,
and Sine solutione vinculi, Without any intention of divorce on his part: But
if we will separate him a mensa and toro, If either we take the bed of
licentiousness, or the board of voluptuousness, or if when we eat or drink,
or sleep or wake, we do not all to the glory of God, if we separate, he will
divorce.

If then we be thus come to this knowledge, let us make Ex scientia
conscientiam, Enlarge science into conscience: for, Conscientia est Syllogismus
practicus, Conscience is a Syllogism that comes to a conclusion; Then only
has a man true knowledge, when he can conclude in his own conscience, that his
practice, and conversation has expressed it. Who will believe that we know
there is a ditch, and know the danger of falling into it, and drowning in it,
if he see us run headlong toward it, and fall into it, and continue in it? Who
can believe, that he that separates himself from Christ, by continuing in his
sin, has any knowledge, or sense, or evidence, or testimony of Christ's being
in him? As Christ proceeds by enlarging thy knowledge, and making thee wiser
and wiser, so enlarge thy testimony of it, by growing better and better, and
let him that is holy, be more holy. If thou have passed over the first heats
of the day, the wantonnesses of youth, and the second heat, the fire of
ambition, if these be quenched in thee, by preventing venting grace, or by
repenting grace, be more and more holy, for thine age will meet another sin of
covetousness, or of indevotion, that needs as much resistance. God staid not
in any less degree of knowledge toward thee, then in bringing himself to
thee; Do not thou stay by the way neither; not in the consideration of God
alone, for that Coeli enarrant, all creatures declare it; stay not at the
Trinity; Every coming to Church, nay thy first being brought to Church, at thy
Baptism, is, and was a profession of that; stay not at the Incarnation; That
the Devil knows, and testifies; But come to know that Christ is in thee, and
express that knowledge in a sanctified life: For though he be in us all, in
the work of his Redemption, so as that he has poured out balm enough in his
blood, to spread over all mankind, yet only he can enjoy the cheerfulness of
this unction, and the inseparablenesse of this union, who, (as S. Augustine
pursues this contemplation) Habet in memoria, and servat in vita, who always
remembers that he stands in the presence of Christ, and behaves himself worthy
of that glorious presence; Qui habet in Sermonibus, and servat in operibus,
That has Christ always at his tongues end, and always at his fingers ends,
that loves to discourse of him, and to act his discourses; Que habet audiendo,
and servat faciendo, That hears Gods will here in his house, and does his will
at home in his own house; Qui habet faciendo, and servat perseverando, who
having done well from the beginning, persevers in well doing to the end, he,
and he only shall find Christ in him.

SERMON XXXI. Preached at S. Paul's, upon Whitsunday. 1629.
GENESIS 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.


THe Church of God celebrates this day the third Person of the Holy, Blessed,
and Glorious Trinity, The Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is the God, the Spirit of
Comfort; A Comforter; not one amongst others, but the Comforter; not the
principal, but the entire, the only Comforter; and more then all that, The
Comfort it self. That is an attribute of the Holy Ghost, Comfort; And then the
office of the Holy Ghost is to gather, to establish, to illumine, to govern
that Church which the Son of God, from whom together with the Father, the Holy
Ghost proceeds, has purchased with his blood. So that, as the Holy Ghost is
the Comforter, so is this Comfort exhibited by him to us, and exercised by him
upon us, in this especially, that he has gathered us, established us,
illumined us, and does govern us, as members of that body, of which Christ
Jesus is the Head; that he has brought us, and bred us, and fed us with the
means of salvation, in his application of the merits of Christ to our souls,
in the Ordinances of the Church.

In this Text is the first mention of this Third Person of the Trinity; And it
is the first mention of any distinct Person in the Godhead; In the first
verse, there is an intimation of the Trinity, in that Bara Elohim, That Gods,
Gods in the plural are said to have made heaven, and earth; And then, as the
Church after having celebrated the memory of All Saints, together in that one
day, which we call All Saints day, begins in the celebration of particular
Saints, first with Saint Andrew, who first of any applied himself to Christ out
of Saint John Baptists School after Christ's Baptism; so Moses having given us
an intimation of God, and the three Persons altogether in that Bara Eloim,
before, gives us first notice of this Person, the Holy Ghost, in particular,
because he applies to us the Mercies of the Father, and the Merits of the Son,
and moves upon the face of the waters, and actuates, and fecundates our souls,
and generates that knowledge, and that comfort, which we have in the knowledge
of God. Now the moving of the Holy Ghost upon the face of the waters in this
Text, cannot be literally understood of his working upon man; for man was not
yet made; but when man is made, that is, made the man of God in Christ; there,
in that new Creation the Holy Ghost begins again, with a new moving upon the
face of the waters in the Sacrament of Baptism, which is the Conception of a
Christian in the womb of the Church.

Therefore we shall consider these words, And the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the waters; first, literally in the first, and then spiritually in the
second Creation; first how the Holy Ghost moved upon the face of the Waters in
making this world for us, And then how he moves upon the face of the Waters
again, in making us for the other world. In which two several parts we shall
consider these three terms in our Text, both in the Macrocosme, and
Microcosme, the Great and the Lesser world, man extended in the world, and the
world contracted, and abridged into man; first, Quid Spiritus Dei? what this
Power, or this Person, which is here called the Spirit of God, is, for whether
it be a Power, or a Person, has been diversely disputed; And secondly, Quid
ferebatur? what this Action, which is here called a Moving, was; for whether a
Motion, or a Rest, an Agitation, or an Incubation, of that Power, or that
Person, has been disputed too; And lastly, Quid super faciem aquarum? what the
subject of this Action, the face of the waters, was; for, whether it were a
stirring, and an awakening of a power that was naturally in those waters, to
produce creatures, or whether it were an infusing a new power, which till then
those waters had not, has likewise been disputed. And in these three, the
Person, the Action, the Subject, considered twice over, in the Creation first,
and in our regeneration in the Christian Church after, we shall determine all
that is necessary for the literal, and for the spiritual sense of these
words, And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

First then, 1 Part. Aug Con. 11.2
undertaking the consideration of the literal sense, and after, of the
spiritual, we join with S. Augustine, Sint castae deliciae meae Scripturae
tuae; Lord I love to be conversant in thy Scriptures, let my conversation with
thy Scriptures be a chaste conversation; that I discover no nakedness therein;
offer not to touch any thing in thy Scriptures, but that, that thou have
vouchsafed to unmask, and manifest unto me: Nec fallar in eis, nec fallam ex
eis; Lord, let not me mistake the meaning of thy Scriptures, nor mis-lead
others, Ibid.
by imputing a false sense to them. Non frustra scribuntur, says he; Lord,
thou have writ nothing to no purpose; thou would be understood in all: But
not in all, by all men, at all times; Confiteor tibi quicquid invenero in
libris tuis; Lord, I acknowledge that I receive from thee, whatsoever I
understand in thy word; for else I do not understand it. This that blessed
Father meditates upon the word of God; he speaks of this beginning of the Book
of Genesis; and he speaks lamenting, Scripsit Moses and abiit, a little Moses
has said, C. 3.
and alas he is gone; Si hic esset, tonerem eum, and per te rogarem, If Moses
were here, I would hold him here, and beg of him, for thy sake to tell me thy
meaning in his words, of this Creation. But says he, since I cannot speak
with Moses, Te, quo plenus vera dixit, Veritas, rogo, I beg of thee who art
Truth it self, as thou enabledst him to utter it, enable me to understand what
he has said. So difficult a thing seemed it to that intelligent Father, to
understand this history, this mystery of the Creation. But yet though he found;
that diverse senses offered themselves, he did not doubt of finding the Truth:
C. 18.
For, Deus meus lumen oculorum meorum in occulto, says he, O my God, the light
of mine eyes, in this dark inquisition, since diverse senses, arise out of these
words, and all true, Quid mihi obest, si alindego sensero, quam sensit alius,
eum sensisse, qui scripsit? What hurt follows, though I follow another sense,
then some other man takes to be Moses sense? for his may be a true fense, and
so may mine, and neither be Moses his. C. 30.
He passes from prayer, and protestation, to counsel, and direction; In
diversitate sententiarum verarum, concordiam pariat ipsa veritas, Where diverse
senses arise, and all true, (that is, that none of them oppose the truth) let
truth agree them. But what is Truth? God; And what is God? Charity; Therefore
let Charity reconcile such differences. 1.12. C. 30.
Legitime lege ut amur, says he, let us use the Law lawfully; Let us use our
liberty of reading Scriptures according to the Law of liberty; that is,
charitably to leave others to their liberty, if they but differ from us, and
not differ from Fundamental Truths.

Si quis quaerat ex me, quid horum Moses senserit, If any man ask me, which of
these, which may be all true, Moses meant, Non sum sermones isti^^onfessiones,
Lord, says he, Ibid.
This that I say is not said by way of Confession, as I intend it should, if I
do not freely confess, that I cannot tell, which Moses meant; But yet I can
tell, that this that I take to be his meaning is true; and that is enough. Let
him that finds a true sense of any place, rejoice in it, Let him that does not
beg it of thee, Vtquid mihi molest us est? Why should any man press me, to
give him the true sense of Moses here, or of the holy Ghost, in any dark place
of Scripture? Ego illuminem ullum hominen, venientem in mundum? 1.13. C. 10.
says he; Is that said of me, that I am the light, that enlightened every man,
any man, John 1.9.
that comes into this world? So far I will go, says he, so far will we, in
his modesty and humility accompany him, as still to propose, Quod luce
veritatis, quod fruge utilitatis excellit, such a sense as agrees with other
Truths, that are evident in other places of Scripture, and such a sense as may
conduce most to edisication. For to those two, does that heavenly Father reduce
the four Elements, that make up a right exposition of Scripture; which are,
first, the glory of God, such a sense as may most advance it; secondly, the
analogy of faith, such a sense as may violate no confessed Article of
Religion; and thirdly, exaltation of devotion, such a sense, as may carry us
most powerfully upon the apprehension of the next life; and lastly, extension
of charity, such a sense, as may best hold us in peace, or reconcile us, if we
differ from one another. And within these limits we shall contain our selves,
The glory of God, the analogy of faith, the exaltation of devotion, the
extension of charity. In all the rest, that belongs to the explication or
application, to the literal, or spiritual sense of these words, And the
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, to which, having stopped a
little upon this general consideration, the exposition of dark places, we
pass now.

Within these rules we proceed to enquire, who this Spirit of God is, or what
it is; Spiritus.
whether a Power, or a Person. The Jews who are afraid of the Truth, lest they
should meet evidences of the doctrine of the Trinity, and so of the Messiah,
the Son of God, if they should admit any spiritual sense, admit none, but
cleave so close to the letter, as that to them the Scripture becomes Liter a
occidens, A killing Letter, and the savor of death unto death. They therefore,
in this Spirit of God are so far from admitting any Person, that is, God, as
they admit no extraordinary operation, or virtue proceeding from God in this
place; but they take the word here (as in many other places of Scripture it
does) to signify only a wind, and then that that addition of the name of God
(The Spirit of God) which is in their Language a denotation of a vehemence, of
a high degree, of a superlative, (as when it is said of Saul, Sopor Domini, A
sleep of God was upon him, it is intended of a deep, a dead sleep) inforces,
induces no more but that a very strong wind blew upon the face of the waters,
and so in a great part dried them up. And this opinion I should let fly away
with the wind, if only the Jews had said it. But Theodoret has said it too,
and therefore we afford it so much answer, That it is a strange anticipation,
that Wind, which is a mixed Meteor, to the making whereof, diverse occasions
concur with exhalations, should be thus imagined, before any of these causes
of Winds were created, or produced, and that there should be an effect before a
cause, is somewhat irregular. In Lapland, the Witches are said to sell winds to
all passengers; but that is but to turn those winds that Nature does produce,
which way they will; but in our case, the Jews, and they that follow them,
dream winds, before any winds, or cause of winds was created; The Spirit of
God here cannot be the Wind.

It cannot be that neither, which some great men in the Christian Church have
imagined it to be; Operatio Dei, The power of God working upon the waters, (so
some) or, Efficientia Dei, A power by God infused into the waters; so others.
August.
And to that S. Augustine comes so near, as to say once in the negative,
Spiritus Dei hic, res dei est, sed non ipse Deuteronomy est, The Spirit of God in this
place is something proceeding from God, but it is not God himself; And once in
the affirmative, Posse esse vitalem creaturam, qua universus mundus movetur;
That this Spirit of God may be that universal power, which sustaines, and
inanimates the whole world, which the Platoniques have called the Soul of the
world, and others intend by the name of Nature, and we do well, if we call The
providence of God. Spiritus Sanctus.


But there is more of God, in this Action, then the Instrument of God, Nature,
or the Viceroy of God, Providence; for as the person of God, the Son was in
the Incarnation, so the person of God, the Holy Ghost was in this Action;
though far from that manner of becoming one and the same thing with the
waters, which was done in the Incarnation of Christ, who became therein perfect
man. That this word the Spirit of God, is intended of the Person of the Holy
Ghost, in other places of Scripture, is evident, undeniable, unquestionable,
and that therefore it may be so taken here. Where it is said, The Spirit of God
shall rest upon him, Esaias 11.2.
(upon the Messiah) where it is said by himself, The Lord and his Spirit is
upon me, And, the Lord and his Spirit has anointed me, there it is certainly,
and therefore here it may be probably spoken of the Holy Ghost personally. It
is no impossible sense, it implies no contradiction; It is no inconvenient
sense, it offends no other article; it is no new sense; nor can we assign any
time, when it was a new sense: Basil.
The eldest Fathers adhere to it, as the ancientest interpretation. Saint Basil
says not only, Constantissime asseverandum est, We must constantly maintain
that interpretation, (for all that might be his own opinion) not only
therefore, Quia verius est, (for that might be, but because he found it to be
the common opinion of those times) but Quia a majoribus nostris approbatum,
because it is accepted for the true sense, by the Ancients; The Ancients, says
that ancient Father Basil; which reason prevails upon S. Ambrose too, Ambrose.
Nos cum sanctorum, and fidelium sententia congruentes, We believe, and believe
it, because the Ancients believed it to be so, that this is spoken generally of
the Holy Ghost. Hieron.
S. Basil, and S. Ambrose assume it, as granted, S. Hierom disputes it, argues,
concludes it, Vivificator, ergo Conditor, ergo Deus; This Spirit of God gave
life, therefore this Spirit was a Creator; therefore God. S. Augustine prints
his seal deep; Secundum quod ego intelligere possum, ita est, as far as my
understanding can reach, it is so; and his understanding reached far. But he
adds, Nec ullomodo, etc. Neither can it possibly be otherwise. Tertui. Cypt.
We cannot tell, whether that Poem which is called Genesis, be Tertullians, or
Cyprians; It has been thought an honor to the learnedest of the Fathers, to
have been the Author of a good Poem; In that Poem this text is paraphrased
thus, Immensusque Deus super aequora vastameabat; God, God personally moved
upon the waters. Truly the later School is (as they have used it) a more
Poetical part of divinity, then any of the Poems of the Fathers are, (take in
Lactantius his Poem of the Phoenix, and all the rest) and for the School, there
Aquinas says, Secundum Sanctos, intelligimus Spiritum sanctum, As the holy
Fathers have done, we also understand this personally of the Holy Ghost.

To end this, these words do not afford such an argument for the Trinity, or
the third Person thereof, the Holy Ghost, as is strong enough to convert, or
convince a Jew, because it may have another sense; but we, who by Gods abundant
goodness have otherwise an assurance, Psalm. 104.30. Job 26.13.
and faith in this doctrine, acknowledge all those other places, Thou sendest
forth thy Spirit, and they are created, By his spirit he has garnished the
Heavens, and the rest of that kind, to be all but echoes from this voice,
returns from Job, and from David, and the rest, of this doctrine of all
comfort, first, and betimes delivered from Moses, that there is a distinct
person in the Godhead, whose attribute is goodness, whose office is
application, whose way is comfort. And so we pass from our first, That it is
not only the Power of God, but the Person of God, To the second, in this
branch, His Action, Ferebatur.

The Action of the Spirit of God, Ferebatur.
the Holy Ghost, in this place, is expressed in a word, of a double, and very
diverse signification; for it signifies motion, and it signifies rest. And
therefore, Psalm. 139.2.
as S. Augustine argues upon those words of David, Thou know my down
sitting, and my uprising, That God knew all that he did, between his down
sitting and his uprising; So in this word which signifies the Holy Ghosts first
motion, and his last rest, we comprehend all that was done in the production,
and creation of the Creatures. Deuteronomy. 32.11. Hier.
This word, we translate, As the Eagle fluttereth over her young ones, so it is
a word of Motion; And S. Hierom upon our Text expresses it by Incubabat, to sit
upon her young ones, to hatch them, or to preserve them, so it is a word of
rest. And so, the Jews take this word to signify, Cyprian.
properly the birds hatching of eggs. S. Cyprian unites the two significations
well, Spiritus sanctus dabat aquis motum, and limitem; The Holy Ghost enabled
the waters to move, and appointed how, and how far they should move. The
beginnings, and the ways, and the ends, must proceed from God, and from God
the Holy Ghost: That is, by those means, and those declarations, by which God
does manifest himself to us, for that is the office of the holy Ghost, to
manifest and apply God to us. Now the word in our Text is not truly Ferebatur,
The Spirit moved, which denotes a thing past; but the word is Movens, Moving, a
Participle of the present; So that we ascribe first Gods manifestation of
himself in the creation, and then the continual manifestation of himself in
his providence, to the holy Ghost; for God had two purposes in the creation, Vt
sint, ut maneant, That the creature should be, and be still; August.
That it should exist at first, and subsist after; Be made, and made permanent.
God did not mean that Paradise should have been of so small use when he made
it; he made it for a perpetual habitation for man. God did not mean that man
should be the subject of his wrath when he made him; he made him to take
pleasure in, and to shed glory upon him. The holy Ghost moves, he is the first
author; the holy Ghost perpetuates, settles, establishes, he is our rest, and
acquiescence, and center; Beginning, Way, End, all is in this word, Recaph; The
Spirit of God moved, and rested. And upon what? And the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters.

S. Augustine observing aright, That at this time, of which this Text is
spoken, Facies aquarum.
The waters enwrapped all the whole substance, the whole matter, of which all
things were to be created, all was surrounded with the waters, all was
embowelled, and enwombed in the waters; And so the holy Ghost moving, and
resting upon the face of the waters, moved, and rested, did his office upon the
whole Mass of the world, and so produced all that was produced; and this
admits no contradiction, no doubt, but that thus the thing was done, and that
this, this word implies. But whether the holy Ghost wrought this production of
the several creatures, by himself, or whether he infused, and imprinted a
natural power in the waters, and all the substance under the waters, to
produce creatures naturally of themselves, has received some doubt. It need
not: for the work ascribed to the holy Ghost here, is not the working by
nature, but the creating of nature; Not what nature did after, but how nature
her self was created at first. In this action, this moving, and resting upon
the face of the waters, (that is, all involved in the waters) the Spirit of
God, the holy Ghost, hatched, produced then all those creatures; For no power
infused into the waters, or earth then, could have enabled that earth, then to
have produced Trees with ripe fruits, in an instant, nor the waters to have
brought forth Whales, in their growth, in an instant. The Spirit of God
produced them then, and established and conserves ever since, that seminall
power which we call nature, to produce all creatures (then first made by
himself) in a perpetual Succession.

And so have you these words, And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters, literally, historically: And now these three terms, The Spirit of God,
Moved, Upon the face of the waters, You are also to receive in a spiritual
sense, in the second world, the Christian Church: The Person, the Action, the
Subject, the holy Ghost, and him moving, and moving upon the waters, in our
regeneration.

Here, as before, our first Term, and Consideration, is the name, The Spirit
of God; 2. Part. Spiritus sanctus.
And here God knows, we know too many, even amongst the outward professors of
the Christian religion, that in this name, The Spirit of God, take knowledge
only of a power of God, and not of a person of God; They say it is the working
of God, but not God working. Mira profunditas eloquiorum tuorum; The waters in
the creation, Aug. Confess. 12. c. 14.
were not so deep as the word of God, that delivers that creation. Ecce, ante
nos superficies blandiens pueris, says that Father; We, we that are but babes
in understanding, as long as we are but natural men, see the superficies, the
top, the face, the outside of these waters, Sed mira profunditas, Deus meus,
mira profunditas, But it is an infinite depth, Lord my God, an infinite depth
to come to the bottom. The bottom is, to profess, and to feel the distinct
working of the three distinct persons of the Trinity, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. Rara anima, quae cum de illa loquitur, sciat quid loquatur, Not one man,
C. 30.
not one Christian amongst a thousand, who when he speaks of the Trinity, knows
what he himself means. Natural men will write of lands of Pygmies, and of
lands of giants; and write of Phoenixes, and of Unicornes; But yet advisedly
they do not believe, (at least confidently they do not know) that there are
such Giants, or such Pygmies, such Unicorns or Phoenixes in the world.
Christians speak continually of the Trinity, and the holy Ghost, but alas,
advisedly, they know not what they mean in those names. The most know nothing,
for want of consideration; They that have considered it enough, and spent
thoughts enough upon the Trinity, to know as much as needs be known thereof,
Contendunt and dimicant, C. 11.
and nemo sine pace vidit istam visionem, They dispute, and they wrangle, and
they scratch, and wound one another reputations, and they assist the common
enemy of Christianity by their uncharitable differences, Et sine pace, And
without peace, and mildness, and love, and charity, no man comes to know the
holy Ghost, who is the God of peace, Id. l. 11.2. and 22.
and the God of love. Da quod amo; amo enim, nam and hoc tu dedisti; I am loath
to part from this father, and he is loath to be parted from, for he says this
in more then one place; Lord thou have enamoured me, made me in love; let me
enjoy that that I love; That is, the holy Ghost: That as I feel the power of
God (which sense, is a gift of the holy Ghost) I may without disputing rest in
the belief of that person of the Trinity, that that Spirit of God, that moves
upon these waters, is not only the power, but a person in the Godhead.

This is the person, Ferebatur.
without whom there is no Father, no Son of God to me, the holy Ghost. And his
action, his operation is expressed in this word, Ferebatur, The Spirit of God
moved; Which word, as before, is here also a comprehensive word, and denotes
both motion, and rest; beginnings, and ways, and ends. We may best consider
the motion, the stirring of the holy Ghost in zeal, and the rest of the holy
Ghost in moderation; If we be without zeal, we have not the motion; If we be
without moderation, we have not the rest, the peace of the holy Ghost. The
moving of the holy Ghost upon me, is, as the moving of the mind of an
Artificer, upon that piece of work that is then under his hand. A Jeweller, if
he would make a jewel to answer the form of any flower, or any other figure,
his mind goes along with his hand, nay prevents his hand, and he thinks in
himself, a Ruby will conduce best to the expressing of this, and an Emeraud of
this. The holy Ghost undertakes every man amongst us, and would make every man
fit for Gods service, in some way, in some profession; and the holy Ghost sees,
that one man profits most by one way, another by another, and moves their zeal
to pursue those ways, and those means, by which, in a rectified conscience,
they find most profit. And except a man have this sense, what does him most
good, and a desire to pursue that, the holy Ghost does not move, nor stir up a
zeal in him.

But then if God do afford him the benefit of these his Ordinances, in a
competent measure for him, and he will not be satisfied with Manna, but will
needs have Quails, that is, cannot make one meal of Prayers, except he have a
Sermon, nor satisfied with his Gomer of Manna, (with those Prayers which are
appointed in the Church) nor satisfied with those Quails which God sends, (the
preaching of solid and fundamental doctrines) but must have birds of Paradise,
unrevealed mysteries out of Gods own bosom preached unto him, howsoever the
holy Ghost may seem to have moved, yet he does not rest upon him; and from the
beginning, the office and operation of the holy Ghost was double; He moved, and
rested upon the waters in the creation; he came, and tarried still upon Christ
in his Baptism: He moves us to a zeal of laying hold upon the means of
salvation which God offers us in the Church; and he settles us in a peaceful
conscience, that by having well used those means, we are made his. A holy
hunger and thirst of the Word and Sacraments, a remorse, and compunction for
former sins, a zeal to promove the cause, and glory of God, by word, and deed,
this is the motion of the holy Ghost: And then, to content my self with Gods
measure of temporal blessings, and for spiritual, that I do serve God
faithfully in that calling which I lawfully profess, as far as that calling
will admit, (for he, upon whose hand-labour the sustentation of his family
depends, may offend God in running after many working days Sermons) This peace
of conscience, this acquiescence of having done that that belongs to me, this
is the rest of the Spirit of God. And this motion, and this rest is said to be
done Super faciem, And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters,
which is our last consideration.

In the moving of the Spirit of God upon the waters, Facies aquarum.
we told you before, it was disputed, whether the Holy Ghost did immediately
produce those creatures of himself, or whether he did fecundate, and
inanimate, and enable those substances, (the water, and all contained under the
waters) to produce creatures in their diverse specifications. In this moving of
the Spirit of God upon the waters, in our regeneration, it has also been much
disputed, How the Holy Ghost works, in producing man's supernatural actions;
whether so immediately, as that it be altogether without dependence, or
relation to any faculty in man, or man himself have some concurrence, and
cooperation therein. There we found, that in the first creation, God wrought
otherwise for the production of creatures, then he does now; At first he did it
immediately, entirely, by himself; Now, he has delegated, and substituted
nature, and imprinted a natural power in every thing to produce the like. So
in the first act of man's Conversion, God may be conceived to work otherwise,
then in his subsequent holy actions; for in the first, man cannot be conceived
to do any thing, in the rest he may: not that in the rest God does not all;
but that God finds a better disposition, and souplenesse, and maturity, and
mellowing, to concur with his motion in that man, who has formerly been
accustomed to a sense, and good use of his former graces, then in him, who in
his first conversion, receives, but then, the first motions of his grace.

But yet, even in the first creation, the Spirit of God did not move upon that
nothing, which was before God made heaven and earth: But he moved upon the
waters; though those waters had nothing in themselves, to answer his motion,
yet he had waters to move upon: Though our faculties have nothing in themselves
to answer the motions of the Spirit of God, yet upon our faculties the Spirit
of God works; And as out of those waters, those creatures did proceed, though
not from those waters, so out of our faculties, though not from our faculties,
do our good actions proceed too. All in all, is from the love of God; but
there is something for God to love; There is a man, there is a soul in that
man, there is a will in that soul; and God is in love with this man, and this
soul, and this will, Aug.
and would have it. Non amor ita egenus and indigus, ut rebus quas diligit
subjiciatur, says S. Aug. excellently: The love of God to us is not so poor a
love, as our love to one another; that his love to us should make him subject
to us, as ours does to them whom we love; but Superfertur, says that Father,
and our Text, he moves above us; He loves us, but with a Powerful, a
Majesticall, an Imperial, a Commanding love; He offers those, whom he makes
his, his grace; but so, as he sometimes will not be denied. So the Spirit moves
spiritually upon the waters; He comes to the waters, to our natural faculties;
but he moves above those waters, He inclines, he governes, he commands those
faculties; And this his motion, upon those waters, we may usefully consider, in
some diverse applications and assimilations of water, to man, and the diverse
uses thereof toward man. We will name but a few; Baptism, and Sin, and
Tribulation, and Death, are called in the Scripture, by that name, Waters; and
we shall only illustrate that consideration, how this Spirit of God, moves
upon these Waters, Baptism, Sin, Tribulation, and Death, and we have done.

The water of Baptism, is the water that runs through all the Fathers;
Baptismus.
All the Fathers that had occasion to dive, or dip in these waters (to say any
thing of them) make these first waters, in the Creation, the figure of
baptism. Tertul.
There Tertullian makes the water, Primam sedem Spiritus Sancti, The progress,
and the settled house, The voyage, and the harbor, The circumference, and the
center of the Holy Ghost: And therefore S. Hierome calls these waters, Matrem
Mundi, The Mother of the World; Hieron.
and this in the figure of Baptism. Nascentem Mundum in figura Baptismi
parturiebat, The waters brought forth the whole World, were delivered of the
whole World, as a Mother is delivered of a child; and this, In figura
Baptismi, To fore-shew, that the waters also should bring forth the Church;
That the Church of God should be borne of the Sacrament of Baptism: So says
Damascen, Damase. Basil.
And he establishes it with better authority then his own, Hoc Divinus
asseruit Basilius, says he, This Divine Basil said, Hoc factum, quia per
Spiritum Sanctum, and aquam voluit renovare hominem; The Spirit of God wrought
upon the waters in the Creation, because he meant to do so after, in the
regeneration of man. And therefore Pristinam sedem recognoscens conquiescit,
Terrul.
Till the Holy Ghost have moved upon our children in Baptism, let us not think
all done, that belongs to those children; And when the Holy Ghost has moved
upon those waters, so, in Baptism, let us not doubt of his power and effect
upon all those children that dye so. We know no means how those waters could
have produced a Menow, a Shrimp, without the Spirit of God had moved upon them;
and by this motion of the Spirit of God, we know they produce Whales, and
Leviathans. We know no ordinary means of any saving grace for a child, but
Baptism; neither are we to doubt of the fullness of salvation, in them that
have received it. And for our selves, Mergimur, and emergimus, Aug.
In Baptism we are sunk under water, and then raised above the water again;
which was the manner of baptizing in the Christian Church, by immersion, and
not by aspersion, till of late times: Affectus, and ameres, says he, our
corrupt affections, Idem.
and our inordinate love of this world is that, that is to be drowned in us;
Amor securitatis, A love of peace, and holy assurance, and acquiescence in Gods
Ordinance, is that that lifts us above water.

Therefore that Father puts all upon the due consideration of our Baptism: And
as S. Hierome says, Hier.
Certainly he that thinks upon the last Judgment advisedly, cannot sin then,
Aug.
So he that says with S. Augustine, Proceed in confessionc, fides mea, Let me
make every day to God, this confession, Domine Deus meus, Sancte, Sancte,
Sancte Domine Deus meus, O Lord my God, O Holy, Holy, Holy Lord my God; In
nomine tuo Baptizatus sum, I consider that I was baptized in thy name, and what
thou promisedst me, and what I promised thee then, and can I sin this sin? can
this sin stand with those conditions, those stipulations which passed between
us then? The Spirit of God is motion, the Spirit of God is rest too; And in the
due consideration of Baptism, a true Christian is moved, and settled too; moved
to a sense of the breach of his conditions, settled in the sense of the Mercy of
his God, in the Merits of his Christ, upon his godly sorrow. So these waters
are the waters of Baptism.

Sin also is called by that name in the Scriptures, Aquae peccatum.
Water. The great whore sits upon many waters; she sits upon them, as upon
Eggs, and hatches Cockatrices, venomous and stinging sins; Apoc. 17. Aqum.
and yet pleasing, though venomous; which is the worst of sin, that it
destroys, and yet delights; for though they be called waters, yet that is said
also, That the inhabitants of the earth were made drunk with the wine. Ver. 2.
Sin is wine at first, so far as to allure, to intoxicate: It is water at
last, so far as to suffocate, to strangle. Christ Jesus way is to change
water into wine; sorrow into joy: The Devils way is to change wine into water;
pleasure, and but false pleasure neither, into true bitterness. The watrish
wine, which is spoken of there, and called fornication, is idolatry, and the
like. And in such a respect, Jer. 2.18.
God says to his people, What have thou to do in the way of Egypt? In the way
of Egypt we cannot choose but have something to do; some conversation with men
of an Idolatrous religion, we must needs have. But yet, What have thou to do
in the way of Egypt, to drink of the waters of Sihor? Or what have thou to do
in the ways of Assyria, to drink the waters of the River? Though we be bound
to a peaceable conversation with men of an Idolatrous persuasion, we are not
bound to take in, to drink, to taste their errors. For this facility, and this
indifferency to accompany men of diverse religions, in the acts of their
religion, Ver. 13.
this multiplicity will end in a nullity, and we shall hew to our selves
Cisternes, broken Cisternes, that can hold no water; We shall scatter one
religion into many, and those many shall vanish into none. Praise we God
therefore, that the Spirit of God has so moved upon these waters; these
sinful waters of superstition and idolatry, wherein our Forefathers were
overwhelmed; that they have not swelled over us; Ecclus. 43.20.
For, then the cold North-winde blows, and the water is congealed into Ice;
Affliction overtakes us, damps us, stupifies us, and we find no Religion to
comfort us.

Affliction is as often expressed in this word, Tribulatio. Esaias 43.2.
Waters, as sin. When thou passest through waters I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. But then, the Spirit of God
moves upon these waters too; and grace against sin, and deliverance from
affliction, is as often expressed in waters, as either. Where God takes another
Metaphore for judgment, Ezekiel. 36.5. Ver. 25.
yet he continues that of water for his mercy; In the fire of my jealousy have
I spoken against them, (speaking of enemies; but then speaking of Israel) I
will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean. This is his way,
and this is his measure; He sprinkles enough at first to make us clean; even
the sprinkling of Baptism cleanses us from original sin; but then he sets
open the windows of heaven, and he inlarges his Floodgates, Esaias 44.3.
I will pour out water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: To
them that thirst after him, he gives grace for grace; that is, present grace
for an earnest of future grace; of subsequent grace, and concomitant grace, and
auxiliant grace, and effectual grace; grace in more forms, more notions, and
in more operations, then the School it self can tell how to name.

Thus the Spirit of God moves upon our waters. Mat. 14.
By faith Peter walked upon the waters; so we prevent occasions of tentation to
sin, and sink not in them, but walk above them. By godly exercises we swim
through waters; so the Centurion commanded that they that could swim, Acts
27.43.
should cast themselves into the sea; Men exercised in holiness, can meet a
tentation, or tribulation in the face, and not be shaked with it; weaker men,
men that cannot swim, must be more wary of exposing themselves to dangers of
tentation; A Court does some man no harm, when another finds tentation in a
Hermitage. By repentance we sail through waters; by the assistance of Gods
ordinances in his Church, (which Church is the Arc) we attain the harbor,
peace of conscience, after a sin; But this Arc, this help of the Church we
must have. God can save from dangers, though a man went to Sea without art,
Sine rate, says the Vulgat, without a Ship. Wisd. 14.4.
But God would not that the work of his Wisdom should be idle; God has
given man Prudentiam navifactivam, says our Holkot upon that place, and he
would have that wisdom exercised. God can save without Preaching, and
Absolution, and Sacraments, but he would not have his Ordinance neglected.

To end all with the end of all, Death comes to us in the name, Mors. 2 Samuel
14.14.
and notion of waters too, in the Scriptures. The Widow of Tekoah said to David
in the behalf of Absalon, by the Counsel of Ioab, The water of death
overslowes all; We must needs dye, says she, and are as water spilt upon the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again: yet God devises means, that his
banished, be not expelled from him. So the Spirit of God moves upon the face of
these waters, the Spirit of life upon the danger of death. Consider the love,
more then love, the study, more then study, the diligence of God; he devises
means, that his banished, those whom sins, or death had banished, be not
expelled from him. I sinned upon the strength of my youth, and God devised a
means to reclaim me, an enfeebling sickness. I relapsed after my recovery,
and God devised a means, an irrecoverable, a helpless Consumption to reclaim
me; That affliction grew heavy upon me, and weighed me down even to a
diffidence in Gods mercy, and God devised a means, the comfort of the Angel of
his Church, his Minister, The comfort of the Angel of the great Counsel, the
body and blood of his Son Christ Jesus, at my transmigration. Yet he lets his
correction proceed to death; I do dye of that sickness, and God devises a
means, that I, though banished, banished into the grave, shall not be expelled
from him, a glorious Resurrection. We must needs dye and be as water spilt upon
the ground, but yet God devises means, that his banished shall not be expelled
from him.

And this is the motion, and this is the Rest of the Spirit of God upon those
waters in this spiritual sense of these words, He brings us to a desire of
Baptism, he settles us in the sense of the obligation first, and then of the
benefits of Baptism. He suffers us to go into the way of tentations, (for
Coluber in via, and every calling has particular tentations) and then he
settles us, by his preventing, or his subsequent grace. He moves, in submitting
us to tribulation, he settles us in finding, that our tribulations, do best of
all conform us to his Son Christ Jesus. He moves in removing us by the hand of
Death, and he settles us in an assurance, That it is he that now lets his
Servants depart in peace; And he, who as he does presently lay our souls in
that safe Cabinet, the Bosom of Abraham, so he keeps an eye upon every
grain, and atome of our dust, whither soever it be blown, and keeps a room
at his own right hand for that body, when that shall be reunited in a blessed
Resurrection; And so The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

SERMON. XXXII. Preached upon Whitsunday.
1 COR. 12.3. Also no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost.


WE read that in the Tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 20.16.
which is, by interpretation Filius dextrae, The Son of the right hand, there
were seven hundred left handed Men, that could sling stones at a hairs
breadth, and not fail. S. Paul was of that Tribe; and though he were from the
beginning, in the purpose of God, Filius dextrae, A man ordained to be a
dextrous Instrument of his glory, yet he was for a time a left handed man, and
took sinister ways, and in those ways, a good markman, a laborious and
exquisite persecutor of Gods Church; And therefore it is, that Tertullian says
of him, Paulum mihi etiam Genesis olim repromisit, I had a promise of Paul in
Moses; Gen 49.
Then, when Moses said, Jacob blessed Benjamin thus, Benjamin shall ravin as a
Wolf, In the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide
the spoilc, that is, At the beginning Paul shall scatter the flock of Christ,
but at last, he shall gather, and reunite the Nations to his service: Acts
9.1. Chrysostom.
As he had breathed threatenings, and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, so he became Os orbi sufficiens, A mouth loud enough for all the world to
hear: And as he had drawn and sucked the blood of Christ's mystical body, the
Church, so, in that proportion that God enabled him to, he recompensed that
damage, Colos. 1.14.
by effusion of his own blood, He fulfilled the sufferings of Christ, in his
flesh, as himself says, to the Colossians; And then he bequeathed to all
posterity these Epistles, which are, as S. Augustine calls them, Vbera Ecclesia,
The Paps, the Breasts, the Udders of the Church, Numb. 13.24.
And which are, as that cluster of Grapes of the Land of Canaan, which was
borne by two; for here, every couple, every pair, may have their load, Jew and
Gentile, Learned and Ignorant, Man and Wife, Master and Servant, Father and
Children, Prince and People, Counsel and Client, how distinct soever they
think their callings to be toward the world, yet here every pair must
equally submit their necks to this sweet and easy yoke, of confessing Jesus
to be the Lord, and acknowledging that Confession to proceed from the working
of the Holy Ghost, for No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, without the Holy
Ghost.

In which words, Divisio.
these shall be the three things, that we will consider now; first, The
general impotency of man, in spiritual duties, Nemo potest, no man can do
this, no man can do any thing; secondly, How, and what those spiritual duties
are expressed to be, It is a profession of Jesus to be the Lord, to say it, to
declare it; And thirdly, the means of repairing this natural impotency, and
rectifying this natural obliquity in man, That man by the Holy Ghost may be
enabled to do this spiritual duty, to profess sincerely Jesus to be the Lord.
In the first we shall see first, the universality of this flood, the generality
of our loss in Adam, Nemo, none, not one, has any, any power; which notes
their blasphemy, that exempt any person from the infection of sin: And
secondly, we shall see the impotency, the infirmity where it lies, It is in
homine, no man; which notes their blasphemy, that say, Man may be saved by his
natural faculties, as he is man: And thirdly, by just occasion of that word,
Potest, he can, he is able, we shall see also the laziness of man, which,
though he can do nothing effectually and primarily, yet he does not so much as
he might do; And in those three, we shall determine our first part. In the
second, what this spiritual duty, wherein we are all so impotent, is, It is
first, an outward act, a profession; not that an outward act is enough, but
that the inward affection alone is not enough neither; To think it, to believe
it, is not enough, but we must say it, profess it: And what? why, first, That
Jesus is; not only assent to the history, and matter of fact, that Jesus was,
and did all that is reported, and recorded of him, but that he is still that
which he pretended to be; Caesar is not Caesar still, nor Alexander, Alexander;
But Jesus is Jesus still, and shall be for ever. This we must profess, That he
is; And then, That he is the Lord; He was not sent hither as the greatest of
the Prophets, nor as the greatest of the Priests; His work consists not only
in having preached to us, and instructed us, nor in having sacrificed himself,
thereby to be an example to us, to walk in those ways after him; but he is
Lord, he purchased a Dominion, he bought us with his Blood, He is Lord; And
lastly, he is The Lord, not only the Lord Paramount, the highest Lord, but The
Lord, the only Lord, no other has a Lordship in our souls, no other has any
part in the saving of them, but he: And so far we must necessarily enlarge our
second consideration. And in the third part, which is, That this cannot be done
but by the holy Ghost, we shall see, that in that But, is first employed an
exclusion of all means but one; And therefore that one must necessarily be hard
to be compassed, The knowledge and discerning of the holy Ghost, is a difficult
thing; And yet, as this But has an exclusion of all means but one, so it has
an inclusion, an admission, an allowance of that one, It is a necessary duty;
nothing can effect it, but the having of the holy Ghost, and therefore the holy
Ghost may be had: And in those two points, The hardness of it, And the
possibility of it, will our last consideration be employed.

For the first branch of the first part, The generality, that reaches to us
all, 1. Part. Generalitas.
and to us all over; to all our persons, and to all our faculties; Perdidimus
per peccatum, bonum possibilitatis, says S. Augustine, We have lost our
possession, and our possibility of recovering, by Adams sin. Adam at his best
had but a possibility of standing; we are fallen from that, and from all
possibility of rising by any power derived from him: We have not only by this
fall broke our arms, or our legs, but our necks; not our selves, not any other
man can raise us; Every thing has in it, as Physicians use to call it,
Natural Balsamum, A natural Balsamum, which, if any wound or hurt which that
creature has received, be kept clean from extrinsique putrefaction, will heal
of it self. We are so far from that natural Balsamum, as that we have a
natural poison in us, Original sin: for that, original sin, (as it has
relation to God, as all sin is a violating of God) God being the God of mercy,
and the God of life, because it deprives us of both those, of mercy, and of
life, in opposition to mercy, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.12.
it is called anger and wrath (We are all by nature the children of wrath) And
in opposition to life, it is called death, Death enters by sin, and death is
gone over all men; And as original sin has relation to our souls, It is
called that indeleble foulness, and uncleanness which God discovers in us
all, Jer. 2.22.
(Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity
is marked before me, says the Lord) And which every man finds in himself, as
Job did, If I wash my self in Snow-water, Job 9.
and purge my hands never so clean, yet mine own clothes shall make me filthy.
As it has relation to our bodies, so it is not only called Lex carnis, A law
which the flesh cannot disobey, And Lex in membris, A law written and imprinted
naturally in our bodies, and inseparably inherent there, but it is a law that
has got Posse comitatus, All our strength, and munition into her own hands,
all our powers, and faculties to execute her purposes against us, and (as the
Apostle expresses it fully) Has force in our members, to bring forth fruits
unto death. Romans 7.5.


Consider our original weakness, as God looks upon it, so it is inexcusable
sin; consider it, as our souls suffer by it, so it is an indeleble foulness;
consider it as our bodies contribute to it, and harbor it, and retain it, and
so it is an unquenchable fire, and a brand of hell it self; It has banished me
out of my self, It is no more I that do any thing, but sin that dwells in me:
It does not only dwell, but reign in these mortal bodies; not only reign, but
tyrannize, and lead us captives under the law of sin, which is in our members.
Ver. 23.
So that we have utterly lost Bonum possibilitatis, for as men, we are out of
all possibility, not only of that victorious, and triumphant gratulation and
acclamation to our selves, as for a delivery, I thank God through Jesus Christ,
but we cannot come to that sense of our misery, Ver. ult.
as to cry out in the Apostles words, immediately preceding, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Now as this death has invaded every part and faculty of man, understanding,
and will, and all, (for though original sin seem to be contracted without our
will, yet Sicut omnium natura, ita omnium voluntates fuere originaliter in
Adam, says S. Augustine, As the whole nature of mankind, and so of every
particular man, was in Adam, so also were the faculties, and so the will of
every particular man in him) so this death has invaded every particular man;
Death went over all men, for as much as all men had sinned. And therefore they
that do blasphemously exempt some persons from sin, they set them not above the
Law, but without the Law: They outlaw them, in taking from them the benefit of
the new Law, the Gospel, and of the author of that Law, Christ Jesus, who came
a Physician to the sick, and was sent only to save sinners; for them that are
none, it is well that they need no Redeemer, for if they did, they could have
no part in ours, for he came only to redeem sinners, and they are none. God
brought his Son out of Egypt, not out of Goshen in Egypt; not out of a
privileged place in Egypt, but out of Egypt; God brought his Son Christ
Jesus out of the Virgin Mary without sin, but he brought not her so, out of her
mother. If they might be believed that the blessed Virgin, and John Baptist,
and the Prophet Jeremy were without all sin, they would go about at last to
make us believe, that Ignatius were so too. For us, in the highest of our
sanctification, still let us press with that, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, O
Lord forgive us our trespasses, and confess that we needed forgiveness, even
for the sins which we have not done; Dimissa fateor, and quae mea sponte feci,
and quae te duce, non feci, says S. Augustine, I confess I need thy mercy,
both for the sins which I have done, and for those, which if thy grace had not
restrained me, I should have done. And therefore if another think he has
escaped those sins that I have committed, August.
Non me derideat ab eo medico aegrum sanari, a quoei praestitum ne aegrotaret;
Let him not despise me, who am recovered, since it is the same physician who
has wrought upon us both, though by a diverse method, for he has preserved
him, and he has recovered me: for, for himself, we say still with the same
Father, Perdiderat bonum possibilitatis, As well he as I, had lost all
possibility of standing, or rising after our fall.

This was our first branch, Quid homo potest.
The universal impotency; And our second is, That this is In homine, In man,
no man (as man) can make this profession, That Jesus is the Lord: and
therefore, we consider first, wherein, and how far man is disabled. In every
Age, some men have attributed to the power of nature, more then a natural man
can do, and yet no man does so much as a natural man might do. For the
over-valuing of nature, and her power, there are impressions in the Fathers
themselves, which (whether mis-understood by the Readers, or by the Authors)
have led and prevailed much. When Justin Martyr says, Ratio pro fide Graecis
and Barbaris, That rectified reason did the same office in the Gentiles, as
faith did in the Christians; when Clement says, Philosophia per sese justi.
ficavit Graecos, That the Gentiles to whom the Law and Gospel was not
communicated, were justified by their Philosophy; when Chrysostom says, Satis
fuit Gentibus abstinuisse ab Idololatria, It was sufficient for the Gentiles,
if they did not worship false gods, though they understood not the true; when
S. Augustine says, Recte facis, nihil quaerere amplius, quam quod docet ratio,
He does well that seeks no farther, then his reason leads them, these
impressions in the Fathers have transported later men farther; so far, as that
Andradius in the Roman Church, saves all honest Philosophers, that lived
morally well without Christ: And Tostatus takes all impediments out of their
way, That original sin is absolutely remitted to them, In prima bona
operatione in charitate, In their first good moral work that they do. So that
they are in an easier way then we, who are but Christians; for in the opinion
of Tostatus himself, and that whole Church, we cannot be delivered from
original sin, but by baptism; nothing less then a Sacrament would deliver us
from original sin, and any good work shall deliver any of the Gentiles so
disposed.

In all ages, in all Churches, there have been men, who have been Ingrati
gratiae, as S. Augustine calls them, that have been unthanfull to the grace of
God, and attributed that to nature, Act. 17.26.
which belonged to grace. But we have an universal conclusion, God has made
of one blood all mankind, And no man can adopt himself into the family of
God; man is excluded, and all power in man, and all assistance from man;
neither your own reason, nor the reason of your Masters, whom you rely upon,
can raise you to this knowledge: for, Esaias 31.3.
Aegyptus homo, non Deus, The Egyptians are men, and not Gods, and their horses
are flesh, and not spirit; and when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, the
helper shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall, and they shall fall
together. The Atheist and all his Philosophy, Helper and he that is Helped,
Horse and Man, Nature and Art, Reason mounted and advanced upon Learning, shall
never be able to leap over, or break thorough this wall, No man, no natural
man can do any thing toward a supernatural work.

This was our second Branch, Quid homo facit.
That too much is ordinarily attributed by man to man, And our third is, That
too little is done by any man, and that is worse then the other. When
Nebuchadnezzar had made his Image of gold of sixty Cubits, it had been a
madness in him, not to have celebrated the Dedication thereof, with all the
pomp, and solemnity that he did: To have gone so far, and not to have made it
serve his farther uses, had been a strange impertinence. So is it a strange
contemplation, to see a man set up a golden Image, to attribute even Divinity
to our nature, and to imagine it to be able to do, whatsoever the grace of God
can do, and yet with this Angelical nature, with this celestial soul, to
contribute less to the glory of God, then an Ant, or a plant, or a stone. As
the counsel of the Philosopher Epictetus directs thee, if thou take any new
action in hand, consider what Socrates would do in that case; that is, dispose
thy self therein, according to the example, and precedent of some wise man: So
if thou will take this new action in hand, (that which is new, but should be
ordinary unto thee) if thou will take a view of thy sins that are past, do but
consider, if ever thou did any sin, which Socrates, or Seneca would not have
forborne. And whatsoever thou see another can do, by the power of that
reason, and that persuasion which thou art able to minister, who art not able
to infuse faith, nor inspire grace into him, but must work by thy reason, and
upon his reason, why should not thou be as powerful upon thy self, and as
strong in thine own behalf, and obey that counsel from thy self, which thou
think another man mad, if he do not obey, when thou give it? Why
should thou pretend Reason, why another should forbear any particular sin,
and not present that Reason to thy self, or not obey it? To love the
Scriptures of God better then any other book; to love the house of God better
then any other Court; to love the Communion of Saints better then any other
Conversation; to study to know the revealed will of God, rather then the
secrets of any Princes; to consider the direct purposes of God against his
enemies, rather then the sinister supplantations of pretenders to places in
Court; briefly to Read, to Hear, to Believe the Bible, is a work within the
ability of nature, within the power of a moral man.

He that attributes more to nature, he that allows her any ability of
disposing her self before hand, without prevention of grace, or concurrence
and cooperation after, without continual assistance of particular graces, he
sets up an Idol, and magnifies nature beyond that which appertains unto her.
But he that goes not so far as this, That the reason of man, and his natural
faculties, are the Instruments and Organs that God works in by his grace,
howsoever he may in discourse and in argument exalt nature, howsoever he may so
give too much to her, yet he does not so much with her, as he might do: He
has made her a Giant, and then, as though he were afraid of her, he runs away
from her: He will not do that which is in his power, and yet he thinks it is
in his power to repent when he lists, and when he lists to apply the merits of
Christ to himself, and to do all those duties which are employed in our next
Part, To say that Jesus is the Lord.

In this, our first duty is an outward act, Dicere, to profess Christ Jesus.
2. Part. Dicere. Romans 1.16. Luke 9.26.
Non erubesco, says S. Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
for it is the power of God unto salvation: And, Qui erubuerit, says Christ,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my word, of him shall the Son of Man
be ashamed, when he shall come in glory. This is a necessary duty, but is it
the duty of this place? for here it is not non vult, but non potest; not that
he is loath to profess Jesus, but that he is not able to do it. We see that
some could say that, and say it aloud, preach it, and yet without the Holy
Ghost; Some (says the Apostle) preach Christ through envy and strife, Philem.
15.
supposing to add more afflictions unto my bands. Which may well be, that some
Jews and Gentiles, to exasperate the State against Paul, fained themselves also
to be converted to his religion, because when they had made him odious by
drawing off others, they who pretended to have been drawn by him, could
always save themselves with recanting, and renouncing their new profession: So
they could say Dominum Iesum, That Jesus was the Lord, and never mean it. And
of those twelve whom Christ chose to preach, Judas was one, of whom Christ
says, John 6.70.
Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? So that this devil
Judas, and that devil that made him a devil, the devil himself, could say as
much as this, Jesus I know, Acts 19.15. Luke 4.41.
and Paul I know; They said it, they cried it, Thou art the Christ, the Son of
God, and that incessantly, Till Jesus rebuked them, and suffered them not to
say, That they knew him to be The Christ.

But besides that, even this confessing of Christ, is not Sine omni impulsu
Spiritus sancti, Altogether without any motion of the holy Ghost (for the holy
Ghost, even in these cases, had a purpose to draw testimonies for Christ, out
of the mouths of his adversaries) this is not the professing required here;
When Tiberius had a purpose to canonize Christ Jesus, and to admit him into the
number of the Roman Gods, and to make him beholden to him for that honor, he
therefore proposed it to the Senate, that so that honor, which Jesus should
have, might be derived from him, And when the Senate had an inclination of
themselves to have done Christ that honor, but yet forbore it, because the
intimation came not from themselves, but from the Emperor, who still wrought
and gained upon their privileges, neither of these, though they meant
collaterally and obliquely to do Christ an honor, neither of them did say
Iesum Dominum, that is, profess Jesus, so as is intended here, for they had
their own ends, and their own honors principally in Contemplation.

There is first an open profession of the tongue required; And therefore the
Holy Ghost descended in fiery tongues, Et lingua propria Spiritui Sancto, says
S. Gregory, The tongue is the fittest Instrument for the Holy Ghost to work
upon, and to work by; Qui magnam habet cognationem cum Verbo, says he, The
Son of God is the Word, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from him, And because that
faith that unites us to God, is expressed in the tongue, howsoever the heart be
the center in which the Holy Ghost rests, the tongue is the Sphere, in which
he moves: And therefore, says S. Cyril, as God set the Cherubim with a fiery
sword, to keep us out of Paradise, so he has set the Holy Ghost in fiery
tongues to let us in again. As long as John Baptist was unborne, Zachary was
dumb; when he was borne, Zachary spoke; Christ is not borne in us, we are not
regenerate in him, if we delight not to speak of his wondrous mercyes, and
infinite goodness to the sons of men; as soon as he is borne in us, his
Spirit speaks in us, and by us; in which, our first profession is Iesum esse,
That Jesus is, That there is a Jesus.

This is to profess with Esaias, Jesus. Esaias 4.2.
That he is Germen Iehovae, The Bud of the Lord, The Blossom of God himself;
for this Profession is a two-edged sword; for it wounds the Arians on one side,
That Jesus is Jehovah, (because that is the name that signifies the very
Essence of God) And then it wounds the Jews on the other side, because if Jesus
be Germen Iehovae, The Bud, the Blossom, the Offspring of God, then there is
a plurality of Persons, Father and Son in the Godhead. So that it is a
Compendiary and Summary Abridgement, and Catechism of all our Religion, to
profess that Jesus is, for that is a profession of his everlasting Essence,
that is, his Godhead. It has been denied that he was such as he was pretended
to be, that is, borne of a Virgin; for the first Heretics of all, Gerinthus,
and Ebion, who occasioned S. John's Gospel, affirmed him to be a mere man, made
by ordinary generation, between Joseph and Mary. It has been denied, that he
was such a man, as those Heretics allowed him to be, for Apelles his Heresy
was, That he made himself a Body out of the Elements, as he came down from
Heaven, through them. It has been denied, that he had any Body at all; Cerdon
and Marcion said, That he lived and dyed, but in Phantasmate, in appearance, and
only in a form and shape of a Body assumed; but, in truth, no Body, that did
live or dye, but did only appear, and vanish. It has been denied that that
Body which he had, though a true and a natural Body did suffer, for Basilides
said, That when he was led to Execution, and that on the way, the Cross was
laid upon Simon of Cyren, Christ cast a mist before their eyes, by which they
took Simon for him, and crucified Simon, Christ having withdrawn himself
invisibly from them, as at other times he had done. It has been denied,
(though he had a true Body, and suffered truly therein) that he has any Body
now in Heaven, or shall return with any, for he that said he made his Body
of the Elements as he came down from Heaven, says also that he resolved
that Body into those Elements again, at his return. It has been denied,
That he was, That he is, That he shall be; but this Profession, that Jesus is,
includes all, for, He of whom that is always true, Est, He is, He is Eternal,
and He that is Eternal, is God: This is therefore a Profession of the Godhead
of Christ Jesus.

Now, Dominus; A Lord.
in the next, as we profess him to be Dominus, A Lord, we profess him to be
God and man, we behold him as he is a mixed person, and so made fit to be the
Messiah, the Anointed high Priest, King of that Church, which he has purchased
with his blood, And the anointed King of that Kingdom which he has conquered
with his Cross. As he is Germen Iehovae, The offspring of Jehovah, so he must
necessarily be Jehovah; and that is the name, which is evermore translated The
Lord; So also as he is Jehovah, which is the fountain of all Essence and of
all Being, so he is Lord, by his interest, and his concurrence, in our
Creation; It is a devoute exercise of the soul, to consider, how absolute a
Lord he is, by this Title of Creation; If the King give a man a Creation by a
new Title, the King found before in that man, some virtuous and fit
disposition, some preparation, some object, some subject of his favor. The
King gives Creations to men, whom the Universities, or other Societies had
prepared; They Created persons whom other lower Schools had prepared; At
lowest, he that deals upon him first, finds a man, begotten and prepared by
Parents, upon whom he may work. But remember thy Creator, that called thee,
when thou wast not, as though thou had been, and brought thee out of
nothing; which is a condition (if we may call it a condition, to be nothing,
not to be) farther removed from Heaven, then hell it self: Who is the Lord of
life, and breathed this life into thee, and swears by that eternal life,
which he is, that he would have this life of thine immortal, As I live, says
the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner.

This Contemplation of Jesus, as a Lord, by Creating us, is a devout, and an
humble Contemplation; but to contemplate him as Lord by Redeeming us, and
breeding us in a Church, where that Redemption is applied to us, this is a
devout, and a glorious Contemplation. As he is Lord over that which his Father
gave him, (his Father gave him all power in Heaven and in earth, and Omne
Iudicium, His Father put all Judgment into his hands, all judiciary and all
military power was his; He was Lord Judge, and Lord of Hosts) As he is Lord
over his own purchase, Quod acquisivit sanguine, Acts 20.28.
That Church which he purchased with his own blood: So he is more then the
Heretics of our time have made him, That he was but sent as a principal
Prophet to explain the Law, and make that clear to us in a Gospel; Or as a
Priest, to sacrifice himself, but not for a Ransom, not for a Satisfaction,
but only for a lively example, thereby to incline us to suffer for Gods glory,
and for the edification of one another. If we call him Dominum, A Lord, we call
him Messiam, Vnctum, Regem, anointed with the oil of gladness by the Holy
Ghost, to be a cheerful conqueror of the world, and the grave, and sin, and
hell, and anointed in his own blood, to be a Lord in the administration of
that Church, which he has so purchased. This is to say that Jesus is a Lord;
To profess that he is a person so qualified, in his being composed of God and
Man, that he was able to give sufficient for the whole world, and did give it,
and so is Lord of it.

When we say Jesus est, That Jesus is, There we confess his eternity, and
therein, Dominus. The Lord.
his Godhead: when we say Jesus Dominus, that he is a Lord, therein we confess
a dominion which he has purchased; And when we say Iesum Dominum, so, as that
we profess him to be the Lord, Then we confess a vigilance, a
superintendency, a residence, and a permanency of Christ, in his Dominion, in
his Church, to the worlds end. If he be the Lord, in his Church, there is no
other that rules with him, there is no other that rules for him. The temporal
Magistrate is not so Lord, as that Christ and he are Colleagues, or
fellow-Consuls, that if he command against Christ, he should be as soon obeyed
as Christ; for a Magistrate is a Lord, and Christ is the Lord, a Magistrate is
a Lord to us, but Christ is the Lord to him, and to us, and to all, None rules
with him, none rules for him; Christ needs no Vicar, he is no non-resident; He
is nearer to all particular Churches at Gods right hand; then the Bishop of
Rome, at his left. Direct lines, direct beams does always warm better, and
produce their effects more powerfully, then oblique beams do; The influence
of Christ Jesus directly from Heaven upon the Church, has a truer operation,
then the oblique and collateral reflections from Rome: Christ is not so far
off, by being above the Clouds, as the Bishop of Rome is, by being beyond the
Hills. Dicimus Dominum Iesum, we say that Jesus is the Lord, and we refuse all
power upon earth, that will be Lord with him, as though he needed a Coadjutor,
or Lord for him, as though he were absent from us.

To conclude this second part, To say that Jesus is the Lord, is to confess
him to be God from everlasting, and to have been made man in the fullness of
time, and to govern still that Church, which he has purchased with his blood,
and that therefore he looks that we direct all our particular actions to his
glory. For this voice, wherein thou say Dominus Jesus, The Lord Jesus, must
be, as the voice of the Seraphim in Esaias, Esaias 6.2.
thrice repeated, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Holy, holy, holy; our hearts must
say it, and our tongue, and our hands too, or else we have not said it. For
when a man will make Jesus his companion, and be sometimes with him, and
sometimes with the world, and not direct all things principally toward him;
when he will make Jesus his servant, that is, proceed in all things, upon the
strength of his outward profession, upon the color, and pretense, and
advantage of Religion, and devotion, would this man be thought to have said
Iesum Dominum, Luke 6.46.
That Jesus is the Lord? Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things I
speak to you? says Christ; Christ places a tongue in the hands; Actions
speak; and Omni tuba clarior per opera Demonstratio, says S. Chrysostom,
There is not only a tongue, but a Trumpet, in every good work. When Christ
sees a disposition in his hearers, to do according unto their professing, John
13.14.
then only he gives allowance to that that they say, Dicitis me Dominum, and
been dicitis, You call me Lord, and you do well in doing so, do ye therefore,
as I have done to you. To call him Lord, is to contemplate his Kingdom of
power, to feel his Kingdom of grace, to wish his Kingdom of glory. It is not
a Domine usque quo, John 11.21.
Lord how long before the Consummation come, as though we were weary of our
warfare: It not a Domine si fuisses, Lord if thou had been here, our brother
had not died, as Martha said of Lazarus, as though, as soon as we suffer any
worldly calamity, we should think Christ to be absent from us, in his power,
or in his care of us; It is not a Domine vis mandemus, Luke 9.54.
Lord will thou that we command fire from Heaven to consume these Samaritans,
as though we would serve the Lord no longer, then he would revenge his own and
our quarrel; for, (that we may come to our last part) to that fiery question of
the Apostles, Christ answered, You know not of what spirit you are; It is not
the Spirit of God, it is not the Holy Ghost, which makes you call Jesus the
Lord only to serve your own ends, and purposes; and No man can say, that Jesus
is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

For this Part, 3 Part. Difficultas.
we proposed only two Considerations, first that this But, excluding all
means but one, that one must therefore necessarily be difficult, and secondly
that that But, admitting one means, that one must therefore necessarily be
possible; so that there is a difficulty, but yet a possibility in having this
working by the Holy Ghost. For the first, of those heretical words of Fanstus
the Manichaean, That in the Trinity, the Father dwelt In illa luce
inaccessibili, In that light which none can attain to, And the Son of God
dwelt in this created light, whose fountain and root is the Planet of the
Sun, And the Holy Ghost dwelt in the Air, and other parts illumined by the
Sun, we may make this good use, that for the knowledge of the Holy Ghost, we
have not so present, so evident light in reason, as for the knowledge of the
other blessed Persons of the glorious Trinity. For, for the Son, because he
assumed our nature, and lived and dyed with us, we conceive certain bodily
impressions, and notions of him; and then naturally, and necessarily, as soon
as we hear of a Son, we conceive a Father too. But the knowledge of the Holy
Ghost is not so evident, neither do we bend our thoughts upon the
consideration of the Holy Ghost, so much as we ought to do. The Arians
enwrapped him in double clouds of darkness, when they called him Creaturam
Creaturae; That Christ himself, from whom (say they) the Holy Ghost had his
Creation, was but a Creature, and not God, and so the Holy Ghost, the Creature
of a Creature. And Maximus ille Gigas, (as Saint Bernard calls Plato) That Giant
in all kind of Learning, Plato, never stopped at any knowledge, till he came
to consider the holy Ghost: Vnum inveni, quod cuncta operatur, I have (says
Plato) found One, who made all things; Et unum per quod cuncta efficiuntur, And
I have found another, by whom all things were made; Tertium autem non potui
invenire, A Third, besides those two, I could never find.

Though all the mysteries of the Trinity be things equally easy to faith, when
God infuses that, yet to our reason, (even as reason serves faith, and presents
things to that) things are not so equal, but that S. Basil himself saw, that
the eternal generation of the Son, was too hard for Reason; but yet it is in
the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, that he clearly professes his ignorance: Si
cuncta putarem nostra cogitatione posse comprehendi, vererer forte ignorantiam
profiteri, If I thought that all things might be known by man, I should be
as much afraid, and ashamed, as another man, to be ignorant; but, says he,
since we all see, that there are many things whereof we are ignorant, Cur non
de Spiritu sancto, absque rubore, ignorantiam faterer? Why should I be ashamed
to confess mine ignorance in many things concerning the Holy Ghost?

There is then a difficulty, no less then an impossibility, Possibilitas.
in searching after the Holy Ghost, but it is in those things which appertain
not to us; But in others, there is a possibility, a facility and easiness.
For, there are two processions of the holy Ghost, Aeterna, and Temporaria, his
proceeding from the Father, and the Son, and his proceeding into us. The first
we shall never understand, if we read all the books of the world, The other we
shall not choose but understand, if we study our own consciences. In the first,
the darkness, and difficulty is recompensed in this, That though it be hard to
find any thing, yet it is but little that we are to seek; It is only to find
that there is a holy Ghost, proceeding from Father, and Son; for in searching
farther, the danger is noted by S. Basil, to be thus great, Qui quomodo
interrogas, and ubi ut in loco, and quando ut in tempore, interrogabis; If thou
give thy curiosity the liberty to ask How the holy Ghost proceeded, thou will
ask where it was done, as though there were several rooms, and distinct
places, in that which is infinite, And thou will ask when it was done, as
though there were pieces of time, in that which is eternal: Et quaeres, non ut
fidem, sed ut infidelitatem invenias, (which is excellently added by that
Father) The end of thy enquiring will not be, that thou might find any
thing to establish thy belief, but to find something that might excuse thine
unbelief; All thy curious questions are not in hope that thou shall receive
satisfaction, but in hope that the weakness of the answer may justify thy
infidelity.

Thus it is, if we will be over curious in the first, the eternal proceeding
of the Holy Ghost. In the other, the proceeding of the holy Ghost into us, we
are to consider, that as in our natural persons, the body and soul do not make
a perfect man, except they be united, except our spirits (which are the active
part of the blood) do fit this body, and soul for one another working;; So,
though the body of our religion may seem to be determined in these two, our
Creation, which is commonly attributed to the Father, Tanquam fonti Deitatis,
As the fountain of the Godhead, (for Christ is God of God) And our Redemption,
which belongs to the Son, yet for this body there is a spirit, that is, the
holy Ghost, that takes this man, upon whom the Father has wrought by Creation,
and the Son included within his Redemption, and he works in him a Vocation, a
Justification, and a sanctification, and leads him from that Esse, which the
Father gave him in the Creation, And that Been esse which he has in being
admitted into the body of his Son, the visible Church, and Congregation, to an
Optime esse, to that perfection, which is an assurance of the inhabitation of
this Spirit in him, and an inchoation of eternal blessedness here, by a
heavenly and sanctified conversation, without which Spirit No man can say, that
Jesus is the Lord, because he is not otherwise in a perfect obedience to him,
if he embrace not the means ordained by him in his Church.

So that this Spirit disposes, and dispenses, distributes, and disperses, and
orders all the power of the Father, and all the wisdom of the Son, and all the
graces of God. It is a Center to all; So S. Bernard says upon those words of
the Apostle, We approve our selves as the Ministers of God; But by what? By
watching, by fasting, by suffering, by the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned. Vide,
tanquam omnia ordinantem, quomodo in medio virtutum, sicut cor in medio
corporis, constituit Spiritum Sanctum: As the heart is in the midst of the
body, so between these virtues of fasting and suffering before, and love
unfeigned after, the Apostle places the holy Ghost, who only gives life and
soul to all Moral, and all Theological virtues. And as S. Bernard observes
that in particular men, so does S. Augustine of the whole Church; Quod in
corpore nostro anima, id in corpore Christi, Ecclesia, Spiritus Sanctus; That
office which the soul performs to our body, the holy Ghost performs in the
body of Christ, which is the Church.

And therefore since the holy Ghost is thus necessary, and thus near, as at
the Creation the whole Trinity was intimated in that plural word, Elohim,
creavit Dii, but no person of the Trinity is distinctly named in the Creation,
but the holy Ghost, The Spirit of God moved upon the waters, As the holy Ghost
was first conveyed to our knowledge in the Creation, so in our Regeneration, by
which we are new creatures, though our Creation, and our Redemption be
religious subjects of our continual meditation, yet let us be sure to hold
this that is nearest us, to keep a near, a familiar, and daily acquaintance,
and conversation with the holy Ghost, and to be watchful to cherish his light,
and working in us. Homines docent quaerere, solus ipse, qui docet invenire,
habere, frui; Bernard.
Men can teach us ways how to find somethings; The Pilot how to find a Land,
The Astronomer how to find a Star; Men can teach us ways how to find God,
The natural man in the book of creatures, The Moral man in an exemplar life,
The Jew in the Law, The Christian in general in the Gospel, But Solus ipse,
qui docet invenire, habere, frui, Only the holy Ghost enables us to find God
so, as to make him ours, and to enjoy him. 1 Cor. 2.14.
First you must get more light then nature gives, for, The natural man
perceives not the things of the Spirit: When that light is so mended, that you
have some sparks of faith, Iud. 19.
you must also leave the works of the flesh, For, Fleshly men have not the
Spirit: When the Spirit offers it self in approaches, Resist it not, as Stephen
accuses them to have done, Ephesians. 4.32.
Act. 7. When it has prevailed, and sealed you to God, Grieve not the holy
Spirit, by whom ye are sealed unto Redemption. For this preventing the Spirit,
by trusting to nature, and morality, this infecting the Spirit, by living ill
in a good profession, this grieving of the Spirit, 1 These. 5.
by neglecting his operations, induces the last desperate work of Quenching the
Spirit, which is a smothering, a suffocating of that light, by a final
obduration.

Spiritus ubi vult spirat, John 3.8.
says our Savior Christ; which S. Augustine, (and indeed most of the Fathers)
interpret of the holy Ghost, and not of the wind, though it may also properly
enough admit that interpretation too. But The holy Ghost, says he, breathes
where it pleases him; Et vocem ejus audis, says Christ, You hear the voice of
the holy Ghost; for, (says S. Augustine upon those words of Christ) Sonat
psalmus, vox est Spiritus sancti, When you hear a Psalm sung, you hear the
voice of the holy Ghost; Sonat Euangelium, sonat sermo Divinus, You hear the
Gospel read, you hear a Sermon preached, still you hear the voice of the
holy Ghost; And yet, as Christ says in that place, Nescis unde venit, Thou
know not from whence that voice comes, Thou can find nothing in thy self,
why the holy Ghost should delight to entertain thee, and hold discourse with
thee, in so familiar, and so frequent, and so importunate a speaking to thee;
Nescis unde venit, Thou know not from whence all this goodness comes, but
merely from his goodness; So also, as Christ adds there, Nescis quo vadat, Thou
know not whither it goes, how long it will last and go with thee. If thou
carry him to dark and foul corners, if thou carry him back to those sins, of
which, since he began to speak to thee, at this time, thou have felt some
remorse, some detestation, he will not go with thee, he will give thee over.
But as long as he, The Spirit of God, by your cherishing of him, stays with
you, when Jesus shall say to you, (in your consciences) Quid vos dicitis? Whom
do you say that I am? You can say Jesus Dominus, We say, we profess, That
thou art Jesus, and that Jesus is the Lord: If he proceed, Si Dominus, ubi
timor? If I be Lord, where is my fear? You shall show your fear of him, even
in your confidence in him, In timore Domini, fiducia fortitudinis, In the fear
of the Lord, is an assured strength: You shall not only say Iesum Dominum,
profess Jesus to be the Lord, but Veni Domine Jesus, You shall invite, and
solicit Jesus to a speedy judgment, and be able, in his right, to stand
upright in that judgment. This you have, if you have this Spirit; and you may
have this Spirit, Acts 10.
if you resist it not, now; For, As when Peter spoke, the holy Ghost fell upon
all that heard, So in the Ministry of his weaker instruments, he conveyes, and
diffuses, and seals his gifts upon all, which come well disposed to the
receiving of him, in his Ordinance.

SERMON. XXXIII. Preached upon Whitsunday.
ACTS 10.44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all
them, which heard the word. Part of the second Lesson of that day.


THat which served for an argument amongst the Jews, to diminish, and
under-value Christ, Have any of the Rulers believed in him? John 7.48.
had no force amongst the Gentiles, for amongst them, the first persons that
are recorded to have applied themselves to the profession of the Christian
Religion, were Rulers, Persons of place, and quality: Sune propter hoc
Dignitates positae sunt, ut major pietas ostendatur, says S. Chrysostom, This
is the true reason why men are Ennobled, why men are raised, why men are
enriched, that they might glorify God the more, by that eminency; This is
truly to be a good Student, Scrutari Scripturas, To search the Scriptures, in
which is eternal life: This is truly to be called to the Bar, to be
Crucified with Christ Jesus: And to be called to the Bench, to have part in his
Resurrection, and reign in glory with him: and to be a Judge, to judge thy
self, that thou be not judged to condemnation, by Christ Jesus: Offices and
Titles, and Dignities, make thee, in the eye, and tongue of the world, a better
man; be truly a better man, between God and thee, for them, and they are well
placed. Those Pyramides and Obelisces, which were raised up on high, in the
Air, but supported nothing, were vain testimonies of the frivolousnesse, and
impertinency of those men that raised them; But when we see Pillars stand, we
presume that something is to be placed upon them. They, who by their rank and
place, are pillars of the State, and pillars of the Church, if Christ and his
glory be not raised higher by them, then by other men, put Gods building most
out of frame, and most discompose Gods purposes, of any others. And therefore
S. Chrysostom has noted usefully, That the first of the Gentiles, which was
converted to Christianity, was that Eunuch, Acts 8.27.
which was Treasurer to the Queen of Aethiopia; And the second was this
Centurion, in whose house S. Peter preached this fruitful Sermon, at which,
While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard
the word.

Our Parts will be two; first some Circumstances that preceded this act,
Divisio.
this miraculous descent and infusion of the Holy Ghost, And then the Act, the
Descent it self. In the first, we shall consider first, the time, it was when
Peter was speaking, when Gods Ordinance was then in executing, preaching; And
secondly, what made way to this descent of the Holy Ghost, that is, what Peter
was speaking, and preaching, These words, true and necessary Doctrine; And here
also we shall touch a little, the place, and the Auditory, Cornelius, and his
family. When from hence we shall descend to the second Part, The descent of the
Holy Ghost, we shall look first, (so as it may become us) upon the Person,
(the third Person in the holy, blessed, and glotions Trinity) And then upon his
action, as it is expressed here, Cecidit, He fell; As of Christ it is said,
Deliciae ejus cum filiis hominum, His delight is to be with the sons of men,
And, (to speak humanely, a perverse delight, for it was to be with the worst
men, with Publicans and sinners) so, (to speak humanely) the Holy Ghost had an
extraordinary, a perverse ambition, to go downwards, to enlarge himself, in
his working, by falling; He fell: And then, he fell so, as a shower of rain
falls, that does not lie in those round drops in which it falls, but diffuses,
and spreads and inlarges it self, He fell upon all; But then, it was because
all heard, They came not to see a new action, preaching, not a new Preacher,
Peter, nor to see one another at a Sermon, He fell upon all that heard; where
also, I think, it will not be impertinent, to make this note, That Peter is
said to have spoke these words, but they, on whom the holy Ghost fell, are said
to have heard The word; It is not Many words, long Sermons, nor good words,
witty and eloquent Sermons that induce the holy Ghost, for all these are words
of men; and howsoever the whole Sermon is the Ordinance of God, the whole
Sermon is not the word of God: But when all the good gifts of men are modestly
employed, and humbly received, as vehicuia Spiritus, as S. Augustine calls
them, The chariots of the holy Ghost, as means afforded by God, to convey the
word of life into us, in Those words we hear The word, and there the word and
the Spirit go together, as in our case in the Text, While Peter yet spoke
those words, the holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard The word. 1 Part.
Tempus.


When we come then to consider in the first place, the Time of this miracle, we
may easily see that verified in S. Peter's proceeding, which S. Ambrose says,
Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti gratia, The holy Ghost cannot go a slow
pace; It is the devil in the serpent that creeps, but the holy Ghost in the
Dove flies: And then, in the proceeding with the Centurion, we may see that
verified which Leo says, Vbi Deus Magister, quam cito discitur? Where God
teaches, how fast a godly man learnes? Christ did almost all his miracles in an
instant, without dilatory circumstances; Christ says to the man sick of the
palsy, Mark 2.11.
Toll grabatum, Take up thy bed and walk, and immediately he did so: To the
deaf man he says, Mark 7.34.
Ephphatha, Be thine ears opened, and instantly they were opened: He says to
the woman with the issue of blood, Mark 5.34.
Esto sana a plagatua, and she was not only well immediately upon that, but
she was well before, when she had but touched the hem of his garment. Upon him
who had lain in his infirmity thirty eight years, at the poole, Christ makes a
little stop; but it was no longer then to try his disposition with that
question, John 5.5. Mark 8.
Vis sanus fieri? Christ was sure what his answer would be; and as soon as he
gives that answer, immediately he recovered. Where Christ seems to have stayed
longest, which was upon the blind man, yet at his first touch, that man saw men
walk, though not distinctly, but at the second touch he saw perfectly. As
Christ proceeds in his miracles, Chrysostom.
so does the holy Ghost in his powerful instructions. It is true, Scientiae
sunt profectus, There is a growth in knowledge, and we overcome ignorances by
degrees, and by succession of more and more light: Christ himself grew in
knowledge, as well as in stature: But this is in the way of experimental
knowledge, by study, by conversation, by other acquisitions. But when the holy
Ghost takes a man into his school, he deals not with him, as a Painter, which
makes an eye, and an ear, and a lip, and passes his pencill an hundred times
over every muscle, and every hair, and so in many sittings makes up one man,
but he deals as a Printer, that in one strain delivers a whole story.

We see that in this example of S. Peter, S. Peter had conceived a doubt,
whether it were lawful for him to preach the Gospel to any of the Gentiles,
because they were not within the Covenant; This was the sanus fieri, This very
scruple was the voice and question of God in him: to come to a doubt, and to a
debatement in any religious duty, is the voice of God in our conscience: Would
you know the truth? Doubt, and then you will inquire: And facile solutionem
accipit anima, quae prius dubitavit, says S. Chrysostom. As no man resolves of
any thing wisely, firmly, safely, of which he never doubted, never debated, so
neither does God withdraw a resolution from any man, that doubts with an humble
purpose to settle his own faith, and not with a wrangling purpose to shake
another man's. Ver. 11.
God rectifies Peter's doubt immediately, and he rectifies it fully; he presents
him a Book, and a Commentary, the Text, and the Exposition: He lets down a
sheet from heaven with all kind of beasts and fowls, and tells him, that
Nothing is unclean, and he tells him by the same spirit, Ver. 19.
that there were three men below to ask for him, who were sent by God to apply
that visible Parable, and that God meant, in saying Nothing was unclean, that
the Gentiles generally, and in particular, this Centurion Cornelius, were not
incapable of the Gospel, nor unfit for his Ministry. And though Peter had
been very hungry; and would feign have eaten, as appears in the tenth verse,
yet after he received this instruction, we hear no more mention of his desire
to eat; but, as his Master had said, Cibus meus est, My meat is to do my
Fathers will that sent me, so his meat was to do him good that sent for him,
and so he made haste to go with those Messengers.

The time then was, Cum locutus
when Peter thus prepared by the Holy Ghost, was to prepare others for the Holy
Ghost, and therefore it was, Cum locutus, When he spoke, that is, preached to
them. For, Si adsit palatum fidei, cui sapiat mel Dei, says S. Augustine, To
him who has a spiritual taste, no honey is so sweet, as the word of God
preached according to his Ordinance. If a man taste a little of this honey at
his rods end, as Jonathan did, 1 Samuel 14.27.
though he think his eyes enlightened, as Jonathan did, he may be in Ionathans
case, I did but taste a little honey with my rod, Et ecce, morior, and behold,
I dye. If a man read the Scriptures a little, superficially, perfunctorily, his
eyes seem straight-waies enlightened, and he thinks he sees every thing that he
had pre-conceived, and fore-imagined in himself, as clear as the Sun, in the
Scriptures: He can find flesh in the Sacrament, without bread, because he
finds Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body, and he will take no more of that
honey, no more of those places of Scripture, where Christ says, Ego vitis, and
Ego porta, that he is a Vine, and that he is a Gate, as literally as he seems
to say, that that is his Body. So also he can find wormwood in this honey,
because he finds in this Scripture, Stipendium peccati mors est, that The
reward of sin is death, and he will take no more of that honey, not the
Quandocunque, That at what time soever a sinner repents, he shall have mercy.
As the Essential word of God, the Son of God, is Light of light, So the
written Word of God is light of light too, one place of Scripture takes light
of another: and if thou will read so, and hear so, as thine own affections
transport, and mis-lead thee; If when a corrupt confidence in thine own
strength possesses thee, thou read only those passages, Quare moriemini, domus
Israel? Why will ye dye, O house of Israel? and conclude out of that, that thou
have such a free will of thine own, as that thou can give life to thy self,
when thou will; If when a vicious dejection of spirit, and a hellish
melancholy, and declination toward desperation possesses thee, thou read only
those passages, Impossible est, That it is impossible, that he that falls,
after he has been enlightened, should be renewed again; And if thou hear
Sermons so, as that thou art glad, when those sins are declamed against, which
thou art free from, but would hear no more, would not have thine own sin
touched upon, though all reading, and all hearing be honey, yet if thou take so
little of this honey, Ionathans case will be thy case, Ecce, morieris, thou will dye of that honey; for the Scriptures are made to agree with one another,
but not to agree to thy particular taste and humor.

But yet, the counsel is good, on the other side too, Have thou found honey?
Prove. 25.16.
eat so much thereof as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith,
and vomit it. Content thy self with reading those parts of Scriptures, which
are clear, and edify, and perplex not thy self with Prophesies not yet
performed; and content thy self with hearing those Sermons, which rectify
thee In credendis, and Inagendis, in all those things, which thou art bound to
believe, and bound to practice, and run not after those Men, who pretend to
know those things, which God has not revealed to his Church. Too little, or
too much of this honey, of this reading, and of this hearing, may be
unwholesome: God has chosen ways of mediocrity; He Redeemed us not, by God
alone, nor by man alone, but by him, who was both. He instructs us not, by the
Holy Ghost alone, without the Ministry of man, nor by the Minister alone,
without the assistance of the Holy Ghost. An Angel appeared to Cornelius, but
that Angel bid him send for Peter: The Holy Ghost visits us, and disposes us,
but yet the Holy Ghost sends us to the Ministry of man: Non dedignatur docere
per hominem, qui dignatus est esse homo, says S. Augustine; He that came to
us, as Man, is content that we go to men, for our instruction. Preaching is the
ordinary means; that which S. Peter wrought upon them, was, Cum locutus, when
he had, and because he had preached unto them.

And it was also Dum locutus est, Whilst he yet spoke those words; Dum locutus.
Non permittit Spiritus absolvi Sermonem, says S. Chrysostom; The Holy Ghost
did not leave them to future meditations, to future conferences, he did not
stay till they told one another after the Sermon, That it was a learned Sermon,
a conscientious Sermon, a useful Sermon, but whilst the Preacher yet spoke,
the Holy Ghost spoke to their particular consciences. And as a Gardener takes
every bough of a young tree, or of a Vine, and leads them, and places them
against a wall, where they may have most advantage, and so produce, most, and
best fruit: So the Holy Ghost leads and places the words, and sentences of the
Preacher, one upon an Usurer, another upon an Adulterer, another upon an
ambitious person, another upon an active or passive Briber, when the Preacher
knows of no Usurer, no Adulterer, no ambitious person, no Briber active or
passive, in the Congregation. Nay, it is not only whilst he was yet speaking,
but, as S. Peter himself reports the same Story, in the next Chapter, Ver. 15.
As I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell upon them.

Perchance in the beginning of a Sermon, the reprehension of the Preacher falls
not upon me, it is not come to me; But, when as the duties of the Preacher are
expressed by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.2.
to be these three, To reprove, or convince by argument, to settle truths, to
overthrow errors; And to exhort, to rectify our manners; And to rebuke, to
denounce Gods Judgments upon the refractary; whatsoever he says the two first
ways, by Convincing, and by Exhorting, all that belongs to all, from the
beginning; And for that which he shall say, the third way, by way of Rebuking,
As I know at midnight, that the Sun will break out upon me to morrow, though I
know not how it works upon those places, where it shines then, So, though I
know not how the rebukes of the Preacher work upon their consciences, whose
sins he rebukes at the beginning; yet I must make account that he will meet with
my sin too; and if he do not meet with my present sin; that sin which is my
second wife, that sin which I have married now, (not after a divorce from my
former sin, so, as that I have put away that sin, but after the death of that
sin, which sickness or poverty has made me unable to continue in) yet if he
bend himself upon that sin, which has been my sin, or may be my sin, I must
be sensible that the Holy Ghost has offered himself to me, whilst he yet
speaks, and ever since he began to speak; And, Cum locutus, Because Preaching
is the ordinary means, and, Dum locutus, Because the Holy Ghost intends all
for my edification, I must embrace and entertain the Holy Ghost, who exhibits
himself to me, from the beginning, and not say, This concerns not me; for
whatsoever the Preacher can say of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus to any man, all
that belongs to me, for no man has received more of that, then I may do; And
whatsoever the Preacher can say of sin, all the way, all that belongs to me,
for no man has ever done any sin, which I should not have done, if God had
left me to my self, and to mine own perverseness toward sin, and to mine own
insatiablenesse in sin.

It was then, Hac verba.
when he preached, and whilst he preached, and as soon as he preached, but
when, and whilst, and as soon as he preached Thus, thus as is expressed here,
Whilst he spoke these words: In which, we shall only touch, but not much
insist upon, his manner first, and then his matter; And for his manner, we
consider only here, his preparation, Ver. 29.
and no other circumstance. Though S. Peter say to them, when he came, I ask
therefore, for what intent you have sent for me, yet God had intimated to him
before, That it was to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles; And therefore some
time of meditation he had; Though in such a person as S. Peter, so filled with
all gifts necessary for his function, and to such persons as Cornelius was, who
needed but Catechizing in the rudiments of the Gospel, much preparation needed
not. The case was often of the same sort, after, in the Primitive Church; The
persons were very able, and the people very ignorant; and therefore it is easy
to observe a far greater frequency of Preaching amongst the Ancient Fathers,
then ordinarily, men that love ease, will apprehend. We see evidently in S.
Augustines hundred forty fourth Sermon De Tempore, And in S. Ambroses forty
fourth Sermon De sancto Latrone, And in S. Bernards twelve Sermons upon one
Psalm, that all these blessed and Reverend Fathers, preached more then one
day, diverse days together, without intermission: And we may see in S. Basils
second Homily upon the six days work, that he preached in the afternoon;
And so, by occasion of his often preaching, it seems by his second Homily De
Baptismo, that he preached sometimes extemporally. But of all this, the reason
is as evident as the fact, The Preachers were able to say much, The people were
capable but of little: And where it was not so, the Clergy often assisted
themselves with one another labors; as S. Cyrils Sermons were studied without
book, and preached over again to their several Congregations, by almost all
the Bishops of the Eastern Church. Sometimes we may see Texts extended to very
many Sermons, and sometimes Texts taken of that extent and largeness, as only
a paraphrase upon the Text would make the Sermon; for we may see by S.
Augustines tenth Sermon De verbis Apostoli, that they took sometimes the
Epistle and Gospel of the day, and the Psalm before the Sermon for their text.

But in these our times, when the curiosity, (allow it a better name, for
truly, God be blessed for it, it deserves a better name) when the capacity of
the people requires matter of more labor, as there is not the same necessity,
so there is not the same possibility of that assiduous, and that sudden
preaching. No man will think that we have abler Preachers then the Primitive
Church had; no man will doubt, but that we have learneder, and more capable
auditories, and congregations then their were. The Apostles were not negligent,
when they mended their nets: A preacher is not negligent, if he prepare for
another Sermon, after he has made one; nor a hearer is not negligent, if he
meditate upon one Sermon, though he hear not another within three hours
after. S. Peter's Sermon was not extemporall; neither if it had (his person, and
the quality of the hearers, being compared with our times) had that been any
precedent, or pattern for our times, to do the like. But yet, Beloved, since
our times are such, as are overtaken with another necessity, that our
adversaries dare come, Cum locutus est, As soon as the Preacher has done, and
meet the people coming out of the Church, and deride the Preacher, and offer
an answer to any thing that has been said; since they are come to come to
Church with us, and Dum locutus est, Then when the Preacher is speaking, to say
to him, that sits next him, That is false, that is heretical; since they are
come to join with us at the Communion, so that it is hard to find out the
Judas, and if you do find him, he dares answer, Your Minister is no Priest,
and so your Bread and Wine no Sacrament, and therefore I care not how much of
it I take; since they are come to boast, that with all our assiduity of
preaching, we cannot keep men from them; since it is thus, as we were always
bound by Christ's example, To gather you as a hen gathers her chickens, (to call
you often to this assembling of your selves) so are we now much more bound to
hide and cover you, as a hen does her chickens, and because there is a Kite
hovering in every corner, (a seducer lurking in every company) to defend and
arm you, with more and more instructions against their insinuations. And if
they deride us, for often preaching, and call us fools for that, as David
said, He would be more vile, he would Dance more, So let us be more fools, in
this foolishness of preaching, and preach more. If they think us mad, since we
are mad for our souls, (as the Apostle speaks) let us be more mad; Let him
that has preached once, do it twice, and him that has preached twice, do it
thrice. But yet, not this, by coming to a negligent, and extemporall manner of
preaching, but we will be content to take so many hours from our rest, that
we, with you, may rest the safelyer in Abraham's bosom, and so many more hours
from our meat, that we, with you, may the more surely eat, and drink with the
Lamb, in the kingdom of heaven. Christ has undertaken, that his word shall
not pass away, but he has not undertaken that it shall not pass from us:
There is a Ne exeas munaum served upon the world, The Gospel cannot go, nor
be driven out of the world, till the end of the world; but there is not a Ne
exeas regnum, The Gospel may go out of this, or any Kingdom, if they flacken
in the doing of those things which God has ordained for the means of keeping
it, that is, a zealous, and yet a discreet; a sober, and yet a learned
assiduity in preaching.

Thus far then we have been justly carried, in consideration of this
circumstance in the manner of his preaching, his preparation; In descending to
the next, which is the matter of his Sermon, we see much of that in his Text.
S. Peter took his Text here, Res.
ver. 34. out of Deuteronomy, of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter
of persons. Where, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
because the words are not precisely the same in Deuteronomy, as they are in
this Text, we find just occasion to note, That neither Christ in his
preaching, nor the holy Ghost in penning the Scriptures of the new Testament,
were so curious as our times, in citing Chapters and Verses, or such
distinctions, no nor in citing the very, very words of the places. Heb. 4.4.
There is a sentence cited thus indefinitely, It is written in a certain place,
without more particular note: And, to pass over many, conducing to that
purpose, if we consider that one place in the Prophet Esaias, (Make the heart of
this people fat, Esaias 6.20.
make their eyes heavy, and shut them, lest they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed)
and consider the same place, as it is cited six several times in the new
Testament, we shall see, that they stood not upon such exact quotations, and
citing of the very words. But to that purpose, for which S. Peter had taken
that text, he follows his text. Now, Beloved, I do not go about to include S.
Peter's whole Sermon into one branch, of one part, of one of mine: Only I
refresh to your memories, that which I presume you have often read in this
Story, and this Chapter, that though S. Peter say, That God is no such accepter
of persons, Ver. 35.36.
but that in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him, yet it is upon this ground, Christ Jesus is Lord of all;
And, (as it is, ver. 42.) He has commanded us to preach; that is, he has
established a Church, and therein, visible means of salvation; And then, this
is our general text, the subject of all our Sermons, That through his name,
Ver. 43
whosoever believes in him shall have remission of sins. So that this is all
that we dare avow concerning salvation, that howsoever God may afford salvation
to some in all nations, yet he has manifested to us no way of conveying
salvation to them, but by the manifeltation of Christ Jesus in his Ordinance of
preaching.

And such a manifestation of Christ, had God here ordained for this Centurion
Cornelius. But why for him? I do not ask reasons of Gods mercy to particular
men, for if I would do so, when should I find a reason, why he has showed
mercy to me? But yet, Audite omnes, Chrysoft.
qui in Militia estis, and Regibus assistitis, All that serve in Wars, or
Courts, may find something to imitate in this Centurion: He was a devout man;
A Soldier, and yet devout; God forbid they were so incompatible, as that
courage, and devotion might not consist: A man that feared God; A Soldiers
profession is fearlesnesse; And only he that fears God, fears nothing else:
He and all his house; A Soldier, yet kept a house, and did not always wander;
He kept his house in good order, and with good means: He gave much alms;
Though Arms be an expensive profession for outward splendour, yet hereserved
for alms, much alms: And he prayed to God always; Though Arms require much
time for the duties thereof, yet he could pray at those times; In his Trenches,
at the Assault, or at the defense of a Breach, he could pray: All this the holy
Ghost testifies of him together, ver. 2. And this was his general disposition;
and then, those who came from him to Peter, add this, That he had a good
report amongst all the Nation of the Jews, ver. 22. And this to a stranger,
(for the Jews loved not strangers) and one that served the State, in such a
place, as that he could not choose but be heavy to the Jews, was hard to have.
And then, himself, when Peter comes to him, adds thus much more, That this
first mercy of God in having sent his Angel, and that farther mercy, that that
Angel named a man, and then that man came, was exhibited to him, then, when he
was fasting. Ver. 30
And then, this man, thus humbled and macerated by fasting, thus soupled and
entendered with the fear of God, thus burnt up and calcined with zeal and
devotion, thus united to God by continual prayer, thus tributary to God by
giving alms, thus exemplar in himself at home, to lead all his house, and thus
diffusive of himself to others abroad, to gain the love of good men, this man
prostrates himself to Peter at his coming, in such an over-reverentiall
manner, as Peter durst not accept, but took him up, Ver. 26.
and said, I my self am also a man; Sudden devotion comes quickly near
superstition.

This is a misery, which our time has been well acquainted with, and had much
experience of, and which grows upon us still, That when men have been mellowed
with the fear of God, and by heavy corrections, and calamities, brought to a
greater rendernesse of conscience then before, in that distemper of melancholy,
and inordinate sadness, they have been easiliest seduced and withdrawn to a
superstitious and Idolatrous religion. I speak this, because from the highest
to the lowest place, there are Sentinels planted in every corner, to watch all
advantages, and if a man lose his preferment at Court, or lose his child at
home, or lose any such thing as affects him much, and imprints a deep sadness
for the loss thereof, they work upon that sadness, to make him a Papist. When
men have lived long from God, they never think they come near enough to him,
except they go beyond him; because they have never offered to come to him
before, now when they would come, they imagine God to be so hard of access,
that there is no coming to him, but by the intervention, and intercession of
Saints; and they think that that Church, in which they have lived ill, cannot
be a good Church; whereas, if they would accustom themselves in a daily
performing of Christian duties, to an ordinary presence of God, Religion would
not be such a stranger, nor devotion such an Ague unto them. But when Peter had
rectified Cornelius, in this mistaking, in this over-valuing of any person, and
then saw Cornclius his disposition, who had brought materials to erect a Church
in his house, by calling his kinsmen, and his friends together to hear Peter,
Peter spoke those words, Which whilst he yet spoke, the holy Ghost fell upon
all them that heard the word. And so we are fallen into our second part.

In this, 2. Part.
the first Consideration falls upon the person that fell: And as the Trinity is
the most mysterious piece of our Religion, and hardest to be comprehended, So
in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost is the most mysterious person, and hardest to be
expressed. We are called the household of God, and the family of the faithful;
and therefore out of a contemplation, and ordinary acquaintance with the parts
of families, we are apter to conceive any such thing in God himself, as we see
in a family. We seem not to go so far out of our way of reason, to believe
a father, and a son, because father and son are pieces of families: nor in
believing Christ and his Church, because husband and wife are pieces of
families. We go not so far in believing Gods working upon us, either by
ministering spirits from above, or by his spiritual ministers here upon earth,
for master and servants are pieces of families. But does there arise any such
thing, out of any of these couples, Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master
and Servant, as should come from them, and they be no whit before neither? Is
there any thing in natural or civil families, that should assist our
understanding to apprehend this, That in heaven there should be a Holy Spirit,
so, as that the Father, and the Son, being all Spirit, and all Holy, and all
Holiness, there should be another Holy Spirit, which had all their Essential
holiness in him, and another holiness too, Sanctitatem Sanctificantem, a
holiness, that should make us holy?

It was a hard work for the Apostles, and their successors, at first, to draw
the Godhead, into one, into an unity: when the Gentiles had been long
accustomed to make every power and attribute of God, and to make every
remarkable creature of God a several God, and so to worship God in a
multiplicity of Gods, it was a great work to limit, and determine their
superstitious, and superfluous devotion in one God. But when all these lines
were brought into one center, not to let that center rest, but to draw lines
out of that again, and bring more persons into that one centricall Godhead,
this was hard forreason to digest: But yet to have extended that from that
unity, to a duality, was not so much, as to a triplicity. And thereupon, though
the Arians would never be brought to confess an equality between the Son and
the Father, they were much farther from confessing it in the Holy Ghost: They
made, says S. Augustine, Filium creaturam, Haeres. 49.
The Son, they accounted to be but a creature; but they made the Holy Ghost
Creaturam Creaturae, not only a Creature, and no God, but not a Creature of
Gods, but a Creature, a Messenger of the son, who was himself (with them) but
a Creature. But these mysteries are not to be chawed by reason, but to be
swallowed by faith; we professed three persons in one God, in the simplicity of
our infancy, at our baptism, and we have sealed that contract, in the other
Sacrament often since; and this is eternal life to die in that belief. There
are three that bear witness in heaven, The Father, the Word, 1 John 5.7.
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; And in that testimony we rest,
that there is a Holy Ghost, and in the testimony of this text, that this Holy
Ghost falls down upon all that hear the word of God.

Now, it is as wonderful that this Holy Ghost should fall down from heaven,
Cecidit. Esaias 14.12.
as that he should be in heaven. Quomodo cecidisti? How art thou fallen from
heaven, O Lucifer, thou son of the morning? was a question asked by the
Propher, of him, who was so fallen, as that he shall never return again. But
the Holy Ghost, (as mysterious in his actions, as in his Essential, or in his
Personal being) fell so from heaven, as that he remained in heaven, even then
when he was fallen. This Dove sent from heaven, Gen 8.7.
did more then that Dove, which was sent out of the Arc; That went and came,
but was not in both places at once; Noah could not have showed that Dove to his
sons and daughters, in the Arc, then, when the Dove was flowne out: But now,
when this Dove, the Holy Ghost, fell upon these men, at Peter's Sermon, Stephen,
who was then come up to heaven, saw the same Dove, the same Holy Ghost, whom
they, whom he had left upon the earth, felt upon the earth then: As if the Holy
Ghost fall upon any in this Congregation now, now the Saints of God see that
Holy Ghost in heaven, whom they that are here, feel falling upon them here. In
all his workings, the Holy Ghost descends, for there is nothing above him.
There is a third heaven; but no such third heaven, as is above the heaven of
heavens, above the seat and residence of the Holy Ghost: so that whatsoever he
does, is a descent, a diminution, a humiliation, and an act of mercy, because
it is a Communication of himself, to a person inferior to himself.

But there is more in this Text, then a descent. When the Holy Ghost came upon
Christ himself, after his Baptism, there it is said, He descended: Though
Christ as the Son of God, were equal to him, and so it was no descent for the
Holy Ghost to come to him, yet because Christ had a nature upon him, in which
he was not equal to the Holy Ghost, here was a double descent in the Holy
Ghost, That he who dwells with the Father and the Son, In luce inaccessibili,
In light inaccessible, and too bright to be seen, would descend in a visible
form, to be seen by men, And that he descended and wrought upon a mortal man,
though that man were Christ. Christ also had a double descending too; He
descended to be a man, and he descended to be no man; He descended to live
amongst us, and he descended to die amongst us; He descended to the earth, and
he descended to hell: Every operation of every person of the holy, and blessed,
and glorious Trinity, is a Descending; But here the Holy Ghost is said to have
fallen, which denotes a more earnest communicating of himself, a throwing, a
pouring out of himself, upon those, upon whom he falls: He falls as a fall of
waters, that covers that it falls upon; as a Hawk upon a prey, it desires and
it will possess that it falls upon; as an Army into a Country, it Conquers,
and it Governes where it falls. The Holy Ghost falls, but far otherwise, Mat.
21.44.
upon the ungodly. Whosoever shall fall upon this stone, shall be broken, but
upon whomsocver this stone shall fall, it will grind him to powder. Indeed, he
falls upon him so, as hail falls upon him; he falls upon him so, as he falls from
him, and leaves him in an obduration, and impenitiblenesse, and in an
irrecoverable ruin of him, that has formorly despised, and despighted the
Holy Ghost. But when the Holy Ghost falls not thus in the nature of a stone, but
puts on the nature of a Dove, and a Dove with an Olivebranch, and that in the
Ark, that is, testimonies of our peace, and reconciliation to God, in his
Church, he falls as that kind of lightning, which melts swords, and hurts not
scabbards; the Holy Ghost shall melt thy soul, and not hurt thy body; he shall
give thee spiritual blessings, and saving graces, under the temporal seals
of bodily health, and prosperity in this world: He shall let thee see, that
thou art the child of God, in the obedience of thy children to thee, And that
thou art the servant of God, in the faithfulness of thy servants to thee, And
that thou stand in the favor of God, bythe favor of thy superiors to thee;
he shall fall upon thy soul, and not wound thy body, give thee spiritual
prosperity, and yet not by worldly adversity, and evermore over-shadow and
refresh thy soul, and yet evermore keep thee in his Sunshine, and the light of
his countenance.

But there is more then this, in this falling of the Holy Ghost, in this Text.
For, it was not such a particular insinuation of the Holy Ghost, as that he
convaied himself into those particular men, for their particular good, and
salvation, and determined there; but such a powerful, and diffusive falling,
as made his presence, and his power in them, to work upon others also. So when
he came upon Christ, it was not to add any thing to Christ, but to inform
others, that that was Christ: So when Christ breathed his spirit into the
Apostles, it was not merely to infuse salvation into them, but it was
especially to seal to them that Patent, that Commission, Quorum remiseritis,
That others might receive remission of sins, by their power. So the Holy Ghost
fell upon these men here, for the benefit of others, that thereby a great doubt
might be removed, a great scruple divested, a great disputation extinguished,
whether it were lawful to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, Ver. 2.
or no; for, as we see in the next Chapter, Peter himself was reproved of the
Jews, for this that he had done: and therefore, God ratified, and gave
testimony to this service of his, by this miraculous falling of the Holy Ghost,
as S. Augustine makes the reason of this falling, very justly to have been; so
then, this falling of the Holy Ghost, was not properly, or not merely an
infusing of justifying grace, but an infusing of such gifts, as might edify
others: for, S. Peter speaking of this very action, in the next Chapter, Ver.
15.
fayes, The Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us, in the beginning; Which was,
when he fell upon them, as this day. This does not imply Graduum aequalitatem,
an equal measure of the same gifts, as the Apostles had, who were to pass
over the whole world, and work upon all men, But it implies Doni identitatem,
it was the same miraculous expressing of the presence, and working of the Holy
Ghost, for the confirmation of Peter, that the Gentiles might be preached unto,
and for the consolation of the Gentiles, that they might be enabled to preach
to one another: for so it is expressly said in this Chapter, Ver. 46.
That they heard these men speak with diverse tongues; they that heard the
Preacher, were made partakers of the same gifts that the Preacher had; A good
hearer becomes a good Preacher, that is, able to edify others.

It it true, that these men were not to be literally Preachers, as the Apostles
(upon whom the Holy Ghost fell, as upon them) were, and therefore the gift of
tongues may seem not to have been so necessary to them. But it is not only
the Preacher, that has use of the tongue, for the edification of Gods people,
but in all our discourses, and conferences with one another, we snould preach
his glory, his goodness, his power, that every man might speak one another
language, and preach to one another conscience; that when I accuse my self,
and confess mine infirmities to another man, that man may understand, that
there is, in that confession of mine, a Sermon, and a rebuke, and a
reprehension to him, if he be guilty of the same sin; Nay, if he be guilty of a
sin contrary to mine. For, as in that language in which God spoke, the Hebrew,
the same root will take in words of a contrary signification, (as the word of
Jobs wife signifies blessing and cursing too) so the covetous man that hears
me confess my prodigality, should argue to himself, If prodigality, which
howsoever it hurt a particular person, yet spreads money abroad, which is the
right and natural use of money, be so heavy a sin, how heavy is my
covetousness, which, besides that it keeps me all the way in as much
penuriousnesse, as the prodigal man brings himself to at last, is also a
public sin, because it emprisons that money which should be at liberty, and
employed in a free course abroad? And so also when I declare to another, the
spiritual and temporal blessings which God has bestowed upon me, he may be
raised to a thankful remembrance, that he has received all that from God
also. This is not the use of having learnt diverse tongues, to be able to talk
of the wars with Durch Captains, or of trade with a French Merchant, or of
State with a Spanish Agent, or of pleasure with an Italian Epicure; It is not
to entertain discourse with strangers, but to bring strangers to a better
knowledge of God, in that way, wherein we, by his Ordinance, do worship and
ferve him.

Now this place is ill detorted by the Roman Church, for the confirmation of
their Sacrament of Confirmation: That because the Holy Ghost fell upon men, at
another time then at Baptism, therefore there is a less perfect giving of the
Holy Ghost, in Baptism. It is too forward a triumph in him, who says of this
place, Pamclius Annot. in Cypr. Epist. 72.
Locus insignis ad assertionem Sacramenti manus impositionis: That is an
evident place for Confirmation of the Sacrament of Confirmation: It is true,
that S. Cyprian says there, That a man is not truly sanctified, Nisi utroque
Sacramento nascatur, Except he be regenerate by both Sacraments: And he tells us
what those two Sacraments are, Aqua and Spiritus, Water and the Spirit, That
except a man have both these seals, inward and outward, he is not safe: And S.
Cyprian requires (and usefully truly) an outward declaration of this inward
seal, of this giving of the Holy Ghost: For, he instances expressly in this,
which was done in this Text, That there was both Baptism, and a giving of the
Holy Ghost. Neither would S. Cyprian forbear the use of Confirmation, because
it was also in use amongst some Heretics, Quia Novatianus facere audet, non
putabimus nos esse faciendum? Cypr. Epist. 72.
Shall we give over a good custom, because the Novatians do the like? Quia
Novatianus extra Ecclesiam, vendicat sibi veritatis imaginem, relinquemus
Ecclesiae veritatem? Shall the Church forbear any of those customs, which
were induced to good purposes, because some Heretics, in a false Church, have
counterfaited them, or corrupted them? And therefore, says that Father, It was
so in the Apostles time, Et nunc quoque apud nos geritur, We continue it so in
our time, That they who are Baptized, Signaculo Dominico consummentur, That
they may have a ratification, a consummation in this seal of the Holy Ghost:
Which was not in the Primitive Church (as in the later Roman Church) a
confirmation of Baptism, so, as that that Sacrament should be but a
halfe-Sacrament, but it was a Confirmation of Christians, with an increase of
grace, when they came to such years, as they were naturally exposed to some
tentations.

Our Church acknowledges the trueuse of this Confirmation; for, in the first
Collect in the office of Confirmation, it confesses, that that child is already
regenerated by water and the holy Ghost; and prays only for farther strength:
And having like a good mother, taught us the right use of it, then our Church,
like a supreme Commander too, enjoins expressly, that none be admitted to the
Communion, till they have received their Confirmation. And though this
injunction be not in rigor and exactness pursued and executed, yet it is very
necessary that the purpose thereof should be maintained; That is, that none
should be received to the Communion, till they had given an account of their
faith and proficiencie. For, he is but an interpretative, but a presumptive
Christian, who, because he is so old, ventures upon the Sacrament. A beard does
not make a man fit for the Sacrament, nor a Husband, a woman: a man may be a
great officer in the State, and a woman may be a grandmother in the family, and
yet not be fit for that Sacrament, if they have never considered more in it,
but only to do as others do. The Church enjoynes a precedent Confirmation;
where that is not, we require yet a precedent Examination, before any be
admitted, at first, to the Sacrament.

This was then the effectual working of the Holy Ghost, Super omnes.
Non spiravit, He did not only breathe upon them, and try whether they would
receive the savor of life unto life, or no: Non sibilavit, He did not only
whisper unto them, and try whether they had a disposition to hear, and answer;
Non incubabat, He did not only hover over them, and sit upon them, to try what
he could hatch, and produce out of them; Non descendit, He did not only
descend toward them, and try whether they would reach out their hand to
receive him; But Cecidit, He fell, so, as that he possessed them, enwrapped
them, invested them with a penetrating, with a powerful force; And so, he fell
upon them All. As we have read of some Generals, in secular story, that in
great Services have knighted their whole Army, So the Holy Ghost Sanctifies,
and Canonizes whole Congregations.

They are too good husbands, and too thrifty of Gods grace, too sparing of the
Holy Ghost; that restrain Gods general propositions, Venite omnes, Let all
come, and Vult omnes salvos, God would have all men saved, so particularly, as
to say, that when God lays All, he means some of all sorts, some Men, some
Women, some Jews, some Gentiles, some rich, some poor, but he does not mean,
as he seems to say, simply All. Yes; God does mean, simply All, so as that no
man can say to another, God means not thee, no man can say to himself, God
means not me. Nefas est dicere, Deum aliquid, nisi bonum praedestinare; It is
modestly said by S. Augustine, and more were immodesty; There is no
predestination in God, but to good. And therefore it is Durus sermo, They are
hard words, to say, That God predestined some, not only Ad damnationem, but
Ad causas damnationis, Not only to damnation because they sinned, but to a
necessity of sinning, that they might the more justly be damned; And to say,
That God rejected some Odio libero, Out of a hate, that arose primarily in
himself, against those persons, before those persons were created, (so much as
in Gods intention) and not out of any hate of their sins, which he foresaw.

Beloved, we are to take in no other knowledge of Gods Decrees, but by the
execution thereof; How should we know any Decree in God, of the creation of
Man, according to his Image, but by the execution? Because I see that Man is
created so, as I conceive to be intended in this phrase, After his Image, I
believe that he Decreed to Create him so: because God does nothing
extemporally, but according to his own most holy, and eternal preconceptions,
and Ideas, and Decrees. So, we know his Decree of Election, and Reprobation, by
the execution; And how is that? Does God ever say, that any shall be saved or
damned, without relation, without condition, without doing, (in the Old
Testament) and, in the New Testament, without believing in Christ Jesus? If
faith in Christ Jesus be in the Execution of the Decree, faith in Christ Jesus
was in the Decree it self too. Christ wept for the imminent calamities,
temporal, and spiritual, which hung over Jerusalem; And Lacrymae Legati
doloris, says S. Cyprian, Tears are the Ambassadors of sorrow; And they are
Sanguis animi vulnerati, says S. Augustine, Tears are the blood of a wounded
soul; And would Christ bleed out of a wounded soul, and weep out of a sad
heart, for that, which himself, and only himself, by an absolute Decree,
Luke 7.32.
had made necessary and inevitable? The Scribes and Pharisees rejected the
Counsel of God, says S. Luke: In this new language we must say, They
fulfilled the Counsel of God, if positively, and primarily, and absolutely,
Gods determinate Counsel were, that they should do so. But this is not Gods
Counsel upon any, to be so far the Author of sin, as to impose such a
necessity of sinning, as arises not out of his own will. Perditio nostra ex
nobis, Our destruction is from our own sin, and the Devil that infuses it;
not from God, or any ill purpose in him that enforces us. The blood of Christ
was shed for all that will apply it, And the Holy Ghost is willing to fall,
with the sprinkling of that blood, upon all that do not resist him; And that
is, as follows in our text, Qui audiunt, The Holy Ghost fell upon all that
heard.

Faith in Christ is in the Execution of Gods Decree, Qui audiunt.
and Hearing is the means of this faith: And the proposition is not the less
general, if it except them, who will not be included in it, if the Holy Ghost
fall not on them, who will not come to hear. Let no man think that he has
heard enough, and needs no more; why did the Holy Ghost furnish his Church with
four Evangelists, if it were enough to read one? And yet every one of the
four, has enough for salvation, if Gods abundant care had not enriched the
Church with more: Those Nations which never heard of Christ, or of Evangelist,
shall rise up in judgment against us, and though they perish themselves, thus
far aggravate our condemnation, as to say, you had four Evangelists, and have
not believed, if we had had any one of them, we would have been saved. It is
the glory of Gods Word, not that it is come, but that it shall remain for ever:
It is the glory of a Christian, not that he has heard, but that he desires to
hear still. Are the Angels weary of looking upon that face of God, which they
looked upon yesterday? Or are Saints weary of singing that song, which they
sung to Gods glory yesterday? And is not that Alleluiah, that song which is
their morning and evening sacrifice, and which shall be their song, world
without end, called still A new song?

Be not you weary of hearing those things which you have heard from others
before: Do not say, if I had known this, I would not have come, for I have
heard all this before; since thou never thoughtest of it since that former
hearing, till thou heardst it again now, thou did not know that thou had
heard it before. Gideons Fleece, Iud. 6.35.
that had all the dew of heaven in it self alone, and all about it dry, one
day, next day was all dry in it self, though all about it had received the dew:
He that has heard, and believed, may lose his knowledge, and his faith too, if
he will hear no more. They say there is a way of castration, in cutting off
the ears: There are certain veins behind the ears, which, if they be cut,
disable a man from generation. The Ears are the Aqueducts of the water of
life; and if we cut off those, that is, intermit our ordinary course of
hearing, this is a castration of the soul, the soul becomes an Eunuch, and we
grow to a rust, to a moss, to a barrenness, without fruit, without
propagation. If then God have placed thee under such a Pastor, as presents thee
variety, bless God, who enlarges himself, to afford thee that spiritual
delight, in that variety; even for the satisfaction of that holy curiosity of
thine. If he have placed thee under one, who often repeates, and often
remembers thee of the same things, bless God even for that, that in that he
has let thee see, that the Christian Religion is Verbum abbreviatum, A
contracted doctrine, and that they are but a few things which are necessary to
salvation, and therefore be not loath to hear them often.

Our errand hither then, is not to see; but much less not to be able to see,
to sleep: Verbum.
It is not to talk, but much less to snort: It is to hear, and to hear all
the words of the Preacher, but, to hear in those words, the Word, that Word
which is the soul of all that is said, and is the true Physic of all their
souls that hear. The Word was made flesh; that is, assumed flesh; but yet the
Godhead was not that flesh. The Word of God is made a Sermon, that is, a Text
is dilated, diffused into a Sermon; but that whole Sermon is not the word of
God. But yet all the Sermon is the Ordinance of God. Delight thy self in the
Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire; Take a delight in Gods
Ordinance, in man's preaching, and thou will find Gods Word in that. To end all
in that Metaphor which we mentioned at beginning, As the word of God is as
honey, so says Solomon, Pleasant words are as the honey comb: Prove. 16.24.
And when the pleasant words of Gods servants have conveyed the saving word of
God himself into thy soul, then may thou say with Christ to the Spouse, I
have caten my honey comb with my honey, Cant. 5.1.
mine understanding is enlightened with the words of the Preacher, and my faith
is strengthened with the word of God; I glorify God much in the gifts of the
man, but I glorify God much more in the gifts of his grace; I am glad I have
heard him, but I am gladder I have heard God in him; I am happy that I have
heard those words, but thrice happy, that in those words, I have heard the
Word; Blessed be thou that came in the name of the Lord, but blessed be the
Lord, that is come to me in thee; Let me remember how the Preacher said it, but
let me remember rather what he said. And beloved, all the best of us all, all
that all together, all the days of our life shall be able to say unto you, is
but this, That if ye will hear the same Jesus, in the same Gospel, by the
same Ordinance, and not seek an imaginary Jesus, in an illusory sacrifice, in
another Church, If you will hear so, as you have contracted with God in your
Baptism, The holy Ghost shall fall upon you, whilst you hear, here in the
house of God, and the holy Ghost shall accompany you home to your own houses,
and make your domestique peace there, a type of your union with God in heaven;
and make your eating and drinking there, a type of the abundance, and fullness
of heaven; and make every days rising to you there, a type of your joyful
Resurrection to heaven; and every nights rest, a type of your eternal Sabbath;
and your very dreams, prayers, and meditations, and sacrifices to Almighty God.

SERMON. XXXIV. Preached upon Whitsunday.
ROMANS 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God.


I Take these words, to take occasion by them, to say something of the holy
Ghost: Our order proposed at first, requires it, and our Text affords it. Since
we speak by Him, let us love to speak of Him, and to speak for Him: but in
both, to speak with Him, that is, so, as he has spoken of himself to us in
the Scriptures. God will be visited, but he will not be importuned; He will be
looked upon, but he will not be pryed into. A man may flatter the best man; If
he do not believe himself, when he speaks well of another, and when he praises
him, though that which he says of him be true, yet he flatters; So an Atheist,
that temporises, and serves the company, and seems to assent, flatters. A man
may flatter the Saints in heaven, if he attribute to them that which is not
theirs; and so a Papist flatters. A man may flatter God himself; If upon
pretense of magnifying Gods mercy, he will say with Origin, That God at last
will have mercy upon the devil, he flatters. So, though God be our business,
we may be too busy with God; and though God be infinite, we may go beyond God,
when we conceive, or speak otherwise of God, then God has revealed unto us. By
his own light therefore we shall look upon him; and with that reverence, and
modesty, that That Spirit may bear witness to our spirit, that we are the
children of God.

That which we shall say of these words, Divisio.
will best be conceived, and retained best, if we handle them thus; That
whereas Christ has bidden us to judge our selves, that we be not judged, to
admit a trial here, lest we incur a condemnation hereafter, This text is a
good part of that trial, of that judicial proceeding. For, here are first,
two persons that are able to say much, The Spirit it self, and Our spirit; And
secondly, their office, their service, They bear witness; And thirdly, their
testimony, That we are the children of God; And these will be our three parts.
The first will have two branches, because there are two persons, The Spirit,
and Our spirit; And the second, two branches, They witness, and They witness
together, for so the word is; And the third also two branches, They testify of
us, their testimony concerns us, and they testify well of us, That we are the
children of God. The persons are withour exception, the Spirit of God cannot be
deceived, and the spirit of man will not deceive himself: Their proceeding is
Legal, and fair, they do not libell, they do not whisper, they do not
calumniate; They testify, and they agree in their testimony: And lastly, the
case is not argued so, as amongst practisers at the Law, that thereby, by the
light of that they may after give Counsel to another in the like, but the
testimony concerns our selves, it is our own case, The verdict upon the
testimony of the Spirit, and our spirit, is upon our selves, whatsoever it be;
And, blessed be the Father, in the Son, by the Holy Ghost, The verdict is, That
we are the children of God. The Spirit bears, etc.

First then, 1 Part.
a slacknesse, a supinenesse, in consideration of the diverse significations of
this word Spirit, has occasioned diverse errors, when the word has been
intended in one sense, and taken in another. All the significations will fall
into these four, for these four are very large; It is spoken of God, or of
Angels, or of men, or of inferior creatures. And first, of God, it is spoken
sometimes Essentially, sometimes Personally. God is a Spirit, John 4.24. Esaias
31.3.
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. So also, The
Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit; For,
if they were God, they were Spirit. So, God altogether, and considered in his
Essence, is a Spirit: but when the word Spir it is spoken, not essentially of
all, but personally of one, then that word designeth Spiritum sonctum, The holy
Ghost: Go and baptize, Mar. 28.19.
In the name of the Father, and Son, and Spiritus sancti, and the holy Ghost.
And as of God, so of Angels also it is spoken in two respects; of good Angels,
Sent farth to minister for them, Heb. 1.14. 1 King 22.22. Hosea 4.12. Esaias 19.3.
that shall be heirs of salvation, And evil Angels, The lying Spirit, that
would deceive the King by the Prophet; The Spirit of Whoredom, spiritual
whoredom, when the people ask counsel of their stocks, And Spiritus
vertiginis, The spirit of giddiness, of perversities, (as we translate it)
which the Lord does mingle amongst the people, in his judgment. Of man also,
is this word Spirit, spoken two ways; The Spirit is sometimes the soul, Psalm.
31.5.
Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, sometimes it signifies those animal
spirits, which conserve us in strength, and vigor, The poison of Gods arrows
drinks up my spirit; And also, Job. 6.4. Luke 1.47.
the superior faculties of the soul in a regenerate man, as there, My soul
does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, And then
lastly, of inferior creatures it is taken two ways too, of living creatures,
The God of the spirits of all flesh; Numb. 16.22. Ezekiel. 1.21.
and of creatures without life, (other then a metaphorical life) as of the
wind often, and of Ezckiels wheels, The Spirit of life was in the wheels.
Now in this first Branch of this first Part of our Text, it is not of Angels,
nor of men, nor of other creatures, but of God, and not of God Essentially, but
Personally, that is, of the Holy Ghost.

Origin says, Antecessores nostri, The Ancients before him had made this note,
That where we find the word Spirit without any addition, it is always
intended of the Holy Ghost. Before him, and after him, they stuck much to that
note; for S. Hierome makes it too, and produces many examples thereof; but yet
it will not hold in all. Didymus of Alexandria, though borne blind, in this
light saw light, and writ so of the Holy Ghost, as S. Hierome thought that work
worthy of his Translation; And he gives this note, That wheresoever the
Apostles intend the Holy Ghost, they add to the word Spirit, Sanctus, Holy
Spirit, or at least the Article The, The Spirit. And this note has good use
too, but yet it is not universally true. If we supply these notes with this,
That whenever any such thing is said of the Spirit, as cannot consist with
the Divine nature, there it is not meant of the Holy Ghost, but of his gifts,
or of his working; (as, when it is said, The Holy Ghost was not yet, (for his
person was always) And where it is said, John 7.39. 1 The fl. 5.19.
Quench not the Holy Ghost (for the Holy Ghost himself cannot be quenched) we
have enough for our present purpose. Here, it is Spirit without any addition,
and therefore fittest to be taken for the Holy Ghost; And it is Spirit, with
that emphaticall article, The, The Spirit, and in that respect also fittest to
be so taken. And though it be fittest to understand the Holy Ghost here, not of
his person, but his operation, yet it gives just occasion to look piously, and
to consider modestly, who, and what this person is, that does thus work upon
us. And to that purpose, we shall touch upon four things: First, His
Universality, He is All, He is God; Secondly, His Singularity, He is One, One
Person; Thirdly, His root from whence he proceeded, Father and Son; And
fourthly, His growth; his emanation, his manner of proceeding; for our order
proposed at first, leading us now to speak of this third person of the Trinity,
it will be almost necessary, to stop a little upon each of these.

First then, the Spirit mentioned here, the Holy Ghost is God, and if so, Deus.
equal to Father and Son, and all that is God. He is God, because the
Essential name of God is attributed to him; He is called Jehovah; Iebovah
says to Esaias, Go and tell this people, Esaias 6.9. Acts 28.29.
etc. And S. Paul making use of these words, in the Acts, he says, Well spoke
the Holy Ghost, by the Prophet Esaias. The Essential name of God is attributed
to him, and the Essential Attributes of God. He is Eternal; so is none but
God; where we hear of the making of every thing else, in the general
Creation, we hear that the Spirit of God moved, Genesis 1.2.
but never that the Spirit was made. He is every where; so is none but God;
Psalm. 139.7. 1 Cor. 2.10.
whither shall Igoe from thy Spirit? He knows all things; so does none but
God; The Spirit searches all things, yca the deep things of God. He has the
name of God, the Attributes of God, and he does the works of God. Is our
Creator, our Maker, God? Job 33.4.
The Spirit of God has mademe. Is he that can change the whole Creation, and
frame of nature, in doing miracles, God? The Spirit lead the Israelites
miraculously through the wilderness. Esaias 63.14. Esaias 48.16.
Will the calling and the sending of the Prophets, show him to be God? The Lord
God, and his Spirit has sent me. Is it argument enough for his Godhead, Esaias
61.1. Luke 4.18.
that he sent Christ himself? Christ himself applies to himself that, The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and has anointed me to preach. Acts 1.16. John
16.13.
He foretold future things, The Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spoke before,
says S. Peter. He establishes present things, The Spirit of truth guides into
all truth. And he does this, by ways proper only to God; for, our
illumination is his, He shall receive of me, Ver. 14. 1 Cor. 6.11. John 3.5.
John 16.8.
(says Christ) and show it you. Our Justification is his; Ye are justified, in
the name of the Lord Jesus, by the Spirit of God. Our regeneration is his;
There is a necessity of being borne again of Water, and the Spirit. The holy
sense of our natural wretchedness is his; For, It is he, that reproves the
world of Sin, of Righteousness, of Judgment. The sense oftrue comfort is his;
Acts 9.31.
The Churches were multiplied in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. All from the
Creation to the Resurrection, and the Resurrection it self, is his; Romans 8.11.
The Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead, shall quicken your mortal
bodies, by the same Spirit. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. John 4.14. Mat. 3.11. Zach.
12.10. Heb. 1.9. Romans 8.26.
He is Arrha, The earnest that God gives to them now, to whom he will give all
hereafter. He is Sigillum, that seal of our evidence, You are sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise. He is the water, which whosoever drinks, shall never
thirst, when Christ has given it; And he is that fire, with which Christ
baptizes, who baptizes with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. He is Spiritus
precum, The Spirit of grace, and supplication; And he is Oleum laetitiae, The
oil of gladness, that anoints us, when we have prayed. He is our Advocate, He
makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered; And when
our groanings under the calamities of this world, are uttered without remedy,
he is that Paracletus, John 16.7.
The Comforter, who when Christ himself seems to be gone from us, comes to
us; who is, (as Tertullian expresses it, elegantly enough, but not largely
enough) Dei Villicus, and Vicaria vis Christi, The Vicegerent of Christ, and
the Steward of God; but he is more, much more, infinitely more, for he is God
himself. All that which S. John intends, in the seven Spirits, which are
about the Throne, is in this One, in this only Spirit, August. 1 Cor. 12.4.
who is Vnicus and septiformis, solus and multiplex; One and yet seven, that
is infinite; for, Though there be diversity of gifts, yet there is but one
Spirit. He is God, because the essential name of God is his; Therefore let us
call upon his name: And because the Attributes of God are his; Therefore let us
attribute to him, All Might, Majesty, Dominion, Power, and Glory: And he is
God, because the Works of God are his; 1 Cor. 6.17.
Therefore let us cooperate, and work with this Spirit, and we shall be the
same Spirit with him.

He is God, Persona.
That was our first step, and our second is, that he is a distinct Person in
the Godhead. He is not Virtus a Deo in homine exaltata, Not the highest and
powerfullest working of God in man; Not Afflatus Divinus, The breathing of God
into the soul of man; These are low expressions; for they are all but Dona,
Charismata, The gifts of the Holy Ghost, not the Holy Ghost himself: But he is
a distinct person, as the taking of the shape of a Dove, and the shape of fiery
tongues do declare, which are acts of a distinct person. It is not the Power
of the King, that signs a pardon, but his Person. When the power of the
Government was in two Persons, in the two Consuls at Rome, yet the several
acts were done by their several Persons. Will thou ask me, What needs these
three Persons? Is there any thing in the three Persons, that is not in the one
God? Yes, The Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, falls not in the bare
consideration of that one God. Will thou say, What if they do not? What lack
we if we have one Almighty God? Though that God had no Son, nor they two, no
Holy Ghost? We lacked our redemption; we lacked all our direction; we lacked
the revealed will of God, the Scriptures; we have not God, if we have him not,
as he has delivered himself; and he has done that in the Scriptures; and we
embrace him, as we find him there; and we find him there, to be one God in
three Persons, and the Holy Ghost to be one of those three; and in them we
rest.

He is one; Ex filio.
but one that proceeds from two, from the Father, and from the Son. Some in the
Greek Church, in later times, denied the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the
Son; but this was especially a jealousy in terms; They thought that to make
him proceed from two, were to make duo principia, two roots, two beginnings
from whence the Holy Ghost should proceed, and that might not be admitted, for
the Father, and the Son are but one cause of the Holy Ghost, (if we may use
that word, Cause, in this my stery.) And therefore it is as suspiciously, and
as dangerously said by the Master of the Sentences, and by the later School,
That the Holy Ghost proceeds Minus Principaliter, Not so radically from the
Son, as from the Father; for, in this action, The Father and the Son are but
one root, and the Holy Ghost equally from both: In the generation of the Son,
the Father is in order before the Son, but in the procession of the holy Ghost,
he is not so. He is from both; for where he is first named, he is called
Spiritus Elohim, The Spirit of Gods, in the plural. In this Chapter, in the
ninth verse, Genesis 1.2.
he is the Spirit of the Son, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his; And so in the Apostle, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts. God sent him, and Christ sent him, Gal. 4.6. John 16.17. John
20.22.
If I depart, I will send the Comforter unto you. He sent him after he went,
and he gave him when he was here, He breathed upon his Apostles, and said,
Receive ye the holy Ghost. So he is of both.

But by what manner comes he from them? By proceeding. Processio.
That is a very general word; for, Creation is proceeding, and so is
Generation too: Creatures proceed from God, and so does God the Son proceed
from God the Father; what is this proceeding of the holy Ghost, that is not
Creation, nor Generation? Nazianz.
Exponant cur and quomodo Spiritus pulsat in arteriis, and tum in processionem
Spiritus sancti inquirant: When they are able clearly, and with full
satisfaction to tell themselves how and from whence that spirit proceeds, which
beats in their pulse, let them inquire how this Spirit proceeds from the Father
and the Son. And let them think till they be mad, and speak till they
behoarce, and read till they be blind, and write till they be lame, they must
end with S. Augustine, Distinguere inter Processioncm, and Generationem,
nescio, non valeo, non sufficio, I cannot distinguish, I cannot assign a
difference between this Generation, and this Proceeding. We use to say, they
differ principio, That the Son is from the Father alone, the holy Ghost from
both: but when this is said, that must be said too, That both Father and Son
are but one beginning. We use to say, They differ ordine, because the Son is
the second, and the holy Ghost the third person; but the second was not before
the third in time, nor is above him in dignity.

There is processio corporalis, such a bodily proceeding, as that that which
proceeds is utterly another thing then that from which it proceeds: frogs
proceed (perchance) of air, and mise of dust, and worms of carcasses; and they
resemble not that air, that dust, those carcasses that produced them. There is
also processio Metaphysica, when thoughts proceed out of the mind; but those
thoughts remain still in the mind within, and have no separate subsistence in
themselves: And then there is processio Hyperphysica, which is this which we
seek and find in our souls, but not in our tongues, a proceeding of the holy
Ghost so from Father and Son, as that he remains a subsistence alone, a
distinct person of himself. This is as far as the School can reach, Ortu, qui
relationis est, non est ase; Actu, qui personae est, per se subsistit: Consider
him in his proceeding, so he must necessarily have a relation to another,
Consider him actually in his person, so he subsists of himself. And De modo,
for the manner of his proceeding, we need, we can say but this, As the Son
proceeds per modu intellectus, (so as the mind of man conceives a thought) so
the holy Ghost proceeds per modum voluntatis; when the mind has produced a
thought, that mind, and that discourse and ratiocination produce a will; first
our understanding is settled, and that understanding leads our will. And nearer
then this (though God knows this be far off) we cannot go, to the proceeding
of the holy Ghost.

This then is The Spirit, The third person in the Trinity, but the first person
in our Text, Spiritus noster.
The other is our spirit, The Spirit bears witness with our spirit. I told
you before, that amongst the manifold acceptations of the word spirit, as it
has relation particularly to man, it is either the soul it self, or the vital
spirits, (the thin and active parts of the blood) or the superior faculties of
the soul, in a regenerate man; and that is our spirit in this place. So S. Paul
distinguishes soul and spirit, Heb. 4.12.
The word of God pierces to the dividing asunder soul and spirit; where The
soul is that which inanimates the body, and enables the organs of the senses
to see and hear; The spirit is that which enables the soul to see God, and to
hear his Gospel. The samephrase has the same use in another place, 1 These.
5.25. Calvin.
I pray God your spirit, and soul, and body may be preserved blameless: Where
it is not so absurdly said, (though a very great man call it an absurd
exposition) That the soul, Anima, is that, qua animales homines, (as the
Apostle calls them) that by which men are men, natural men, carnal men, And
the spirit is the spirit of Regeneration, by which man is a new creature, a
spiritual man, But that, that Expositor himself has said enough to our
present purpose, The soul is the seat of Affections, The spirit is rectified
Reason. It is true, this Reason is the Sovereign, these Affections are the
Officers, this Body is the Executioner: Reason authorizes, Affections command,
the Body executes: And when we conceive in our mind, desire in our heart,
perform in our body nothing that displeases God, then have we had benefit of
S. Paul's prayer, That in body, and soul, and spirit we may be blameless. In
sum, we need seek no farther for a word to express this spirit, but that
which is familiar to us, The Conscience: Rem. 9.1.
A rectified conscience is this spirit; My conscience bearing me witness,
says the Apostle: And so we have both the persons in this judicial
proceeding; The Spirit is the holy Ghost; Our spirit is our Conscience: And now
their office is to testify, to bear witness, which is our second general
part, The Spirit bears witness, etc.

To be a witness, 2 Part.
is not an unworthy office for the holy Ghost himself: Heretics in their
pestilent doctrines, Tyrans in their bloody persecutions, call God himself so
often, so far into question, as that he needs strong and pregnant testimony to
acquit him. First, against Heretics, we see the whole Scripture is but a
Testament; and Testamentum is Testatio meant is, it is but an attestation, a
proof what the will of God is: And therefore when Tertullian deprehended
himself to have slipped into another word, and to have called the Bible
Instrumentum, he retracts and corrects himself thus, Magis usui est dicere
Testamentum quam Instrumentum, It is more proper to call the Scripture a
Testament, then a Conveyance or Covenant: All the Bible is Testament,
Attestation, Declaration, Proof, Apoc. 11.2.
Evidence of the will of God to man. And those two witnesses spoken of in the
Revelation, are very conveniently, very probably interpreted to be the two
Testaments; And to the Scriptures Christ himself refers the Jews, John 5.39.
Search them, for they bear witness of me. The word of God written by the
holy Ghost is a witness, and so the holy Ghost is a witness against
Heretics. Against Tyrans and Persecuters, the office of a witness is an
honorable office too; for that which we call more passionately, and more
gloriously Martyrdom, is but Testimony; A Martyr is nothing but a Witness. He
that pledges Christ in his own wine, in his own cup, in blood; He that washes
away his sins in a second Baptism, and has found a lawful way of
Re-baptizing, even in blood; He that waters the Prophets ploughing, and the
Apostles sowing with blood; He that can be content to bleed as long as a Tyran
can foame, or an Executioner sweat; He that is pickled, nay embalmed in blood,
salted with fire, and preserved in his own ashes; He that (to contract all,
nay to enlarge beyond all) suffers in the Inquisition, when his body is upon
the rack, when the rags are in his throat, when the boots are upon his legs,
when the splinters are under his nails, if in those agonies he have the vigor
to say, I suffer this to show what my Savior suffered, must yet make this
difference, He suffered as a Savior, I suffer but as a witness. But yet to
him that suffers as a Martyr, as a witness, a crown is reserved; It is a
happy and a harmonious meeting in Stephens martyrdom; Proto-martyr, and
Stephanus; that the first Martyr for Christ should have a Crown in his name.
Such a blessed meeting there is in Ioash his Coronation, Posuit super eum
Diadema and Testimonium, 2 King. 11.12.
They put the Crown upon his head, and the Testimony; that is, The Law, which
testified, That as he had the Crown from God, so he had it with a witness,
with an obligation, that his Government, his life, and (if need were) his death
should testify his zeal to him that gave him that Crown.

Thus the holy Ghost himself is a witness against Heretics in the word; and
those men who are full of the holy Ghost, (as Stephen was) are witnesses
against persecution, in action, in passion. At this time, and by occasion of
these words, we consider principally the first, The testification of the holy
Ghost himself; and therein we consider thus much more, That a witness ever
testifies of some matter of fact, of something done before; The holy Ghost, the
Spirit here, (as we shall see anon) witnesses that we are the children of God.
Now if a Witness prove that I am a Tenant to such Land, or Lord of it, I do
not become Lord nor Tenant by this Witness, but his testimony proves that I
was so before. I have therefore a former right to be the child of God, that is,
The eternal Election of God in Christ Jesus. Christ Jesus could as well have
disobeyed his Father, and said, I will not go, or disappointed his Father, and
said, I will not go yet, as he could have dis-furnished his Father, and said,
He would not redeem me. The holy Ghost bears witness, that is, he pleads, he
produces that eternal Decree for my Election. And upon such Evidence shall I
give sentence against my self? Chrysostom.
Si testaretur Angelus, vel Archangelus, posset quisquam addubitare? I should
not doubt the testimony of an Angel, or Archangel, and yet Angels and
Archangels, all sorts of Angels were deceivers in the Serpent. And therefore
the Apostle presents it (though impossible in it self) as a thing that might
fall into our mis-apprehension: Gal. 1.8.
If we, (that is, the Apostles) or if an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel, Anathema sit, let him be accursed. But Quando Deus testatur, quis locus
relinquitur dubitationi? when God testifies to me, it is a rebellious sin to
doubt: And therefore how hyperbolically soever S. Paul argue there, If
Apostles, If Angels teach the contrary, teach false Doctrine, it never entered
into his argument (though an argument ab Impossibili) to say, If God should
teach, or testify false doctrine. Though then there be a former evidence for
my being the child of God, a Decree in heaven, yet it is not enough that there
is such a Record, but it must be produced, it must be pleaded, it must be
testified to be that, it must have the witness of the Spirit, and by that,
Innotescit, though it do not become my Election then, it makes my election
appear then, and though it be not Introductory, it is Declaratory. The Root is
in the Decree, the first fruits are in the testimony of the Spirit; but even
that spirit will not be testis singularis, he will not be heard alone, and
single, but it is Cum spiritu nostro, The Spirit testifies with our spirit, etc.

The holy Ghost will fulfill his own law, In ore duorum, In the mouth of two
witnesses. Cum spiriou nostro.
Sometimes our spirit bears witness of somethings appertaining to the next
world, without the testimony of the holy Ghost. Tertullian in that excellent
Book of his, De testimonio Animae. Of the testimony which the soul of man
gives of it self to it self, where he speaks of the soul of a natural, an
unregenerate man, gives us just occasion to stop a little upon that
consideration. If, says he, we for our Religion produce your own Authors
against you, (he speaks to natural men, secular Philosophers) and show you out
of them, what Passions, what Vices even they impute to those whom you have made
your Gods, then you say, they were but Poetae vani, Those Authors were but
vain, and frivolous Poets: But when those Authors speak any thing which sound
against our Religion, then they are Philosophers, and reverend and classique
Authors. And therefore, says he, I will draw no witness from them, Perversae
foelicitatis, quibus in falso potius creditur, quam in vero, Because they have
this perverse, this left handed happiness, to be believed when they lie,
better then when they say true. Novum testimonium adduco, says he; I wayve all
them, and I call upon a new witness: A witness, Omni literaturi notius, More
legible then any Character, then any text hand, for it is the intimation of
mine own soul, and conscience; and Omni Editione vulgatius, More public,
more conspicuous then any Edition, any impression of any Author, for Editions
may be called in, but who can call in the testimony of his own soul? He
proceeds, Te simplicem, and Idioticum compello, I require but a simple, an
unlearned soul, Qualem te habent, qui te solam habent, Such a soul, as that
man has, who has nothing but a soul, no learning; Imperitia tua mibiopus
est, quoniam aliquantulae peritiae tuae nemo credit; I shall have the more use
of thy testimony, the more ignorant thou art, for, in such cases, Art is
suspicious, and from them who are able to prove any thing, we believe nothing;
And therefore, says he, Nolo Academiis, bibliothecis instructam, I call not a
soul made in an University, or nursed in a Library, but let this soul come
now, as it came to me in my Mothers womb, an inartificiall, an unexperienced
soul; And then, (to contract Tertullians Contemplation) he proceeds to show
the notions of the Christian Religion, which are in such a soul naturally, and
which his spirit, that is, his rectified reason, rectified but by nature, is
able to infuse into him. And certainly, some of that, which is proved by the
testimony mentioned in this text, is proved by the testimony of our own
natural soul, in that Poet whom the Apostle cites, that said, Genus ejus, We
are the offspring of God. Acts 17.28.


So then our spirit bears witness sometimes when the Spirit does not; that
is, Nature testifies some things, without addition of particular grace: And
then the Spirit, the Holy Ghost oftentimes testifies, when ours does not: How
often stands he at the door, and knocks? How often spreads he his wings, to
gather us, as a Hen her chickens? How often presents he to us the power of God
in the mouth of the Preacher, and we bear witness to one another of the wit
and of the eloquence of the Preacher, and no more? How often he bears witness,
that such an action is odious in the sight of God, and our spirit bears
witness, that it is acceptable, profitable, honorable in the sight of man?
How often he bears witness, for Gods Judgments, and our spirit deposes for
mercy, by presumption, and how often he testifies for mercy, and our spirit
swears for Judgment, in desperation? But when the Spirit, and our spirit
agree in their testimony, That he has spoke comfortably to my soul, and my
soul has apprehended comfort by that speech, That, (to use Christ's
similitude) He has piped, and we have danced, He has showed me my Savior,
and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, He deposes for the Decree of my
Election, and I depose for the seals and marks of that Decree, These two
witnesses, The Spirit, and My spirit, induce a third witness, the world it
self, to testify that which is the testimony of this text, That I am the
child of God. And so we pass from the two former parts, The persons, The
Spirit, and our spirit, And their office, to witness, and to agree in their
witness, and we are fallen into our third part, The Testimony it self, That
we are the Children of God.

This part has also two branches; 3. Part.
First, That the Testimony concerns our selves, We are; And then, That that
which we are is this, We are the Children of God. And in the first branch,
there will be two twiggs, two sub-considerations; 1 We, A personal
appropriation of the grace of God to our selves, 2 We are, we are now, a
present possession of those Graces. First, consider we the Consolation in the
particle of appropriation, We. In the great Ant-hill of the whole world, I am
an Ant; I have my part in the Creation, I am a Creature; But there are ignoble
Creatures. God comes nearer; In the great field of clay, of red earth, that man
was made of, and mankind, I am a clod; I am a man, I have my part in the
Humanity; But Man was worse then annihilated again. When satan in that serpent
was come, as Hercules with his club into a potters shop, and had broke all the
vessels, destroyed all mankind, And the gracious promise of a Messiah to
redeem all mankind, was shed and spread upon all, I had my drop of that dew of
Heaven, my spark of that fire of heaven, in the universal promise, in which I
was involved; But this promise was appropriated after, in a particular
Covenant, to one people, to the Jews, to the seed of Abraham. But for all that
I have my portion there; for all that profess Christ Jesus are by a spiritual
engrafting, and transmigration, and transplantation, in and of that stock, and
that seed of Abraham; and I am one of those. But then, of those who do
profess Christ Jesus, some grovell still in the superstitions they were fallen
into, and some are raised, by Gods good grace, out of them; and I am one of
those; God has afforded me my station, in that Church, which is departed from
Babylon.

Now, all this while, my soul is in a cheerful progress; when I consider
what God did for Goshen in Egypt, for a little park in the midst of a forest;
what he did for Jury, in the midst of enemies, as a shire that should stand out
against a Kingdom round about it: How many Sancerraes he has delivered from
famins, how many Genevaes from plots, and machinations against her; all this
while my soul is in a progress: But I am at home, when I consider Bulls of
excommunications, and solicitations of Rebellions, and pistols, and poisons,
and the discoveries of those; There is our Nos, We, testimonies that we are in
the favor, and care of God; We, our Nation, we, our Church; There I am at
home; but I am in my Cabinet at home, when I consider, what God has done for
me, and my soul; There is the Ego, the particular, the individual, I. This
appropriation is the consolation, We are; But who are they? or how are we of
them? Testimonium est clamor ipse, says S. Chrysostom to our great advantage,
Even this, that we are able to cry Abba, Ver. 15.
Father, by the Spirit of Adoption, is this testimony, that we are his
Children; if we can truly do that, that testifies for us. The Spirit testifies
two ways; Directly, expressly, personally, Luke 5.20.
as in that, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee, And so to David by Nathan,
Transtulit, The Lord has taken away thy sin; And then he testifies, Per
indicia, by constant marks, and infallible evidences. We are not to look for
the first, for it is a kind of Revelation, nor are we to doubt of the second,
for the marks are infallible. And therefore, as S. Augustine said of the
Maniches, concerning the Scriptures, Insani sunt adversus Antidotum, quo sani
esse possunt, They are enraged against that, which only can cure them of their
rage, that was, the Scriptures; so there are men, which will still be in
ignorance of that which might cure them of their ignorance, because they will
not labor to find in themselves, the marks and seals of those who are
ordained to salvation, they will needs think, that no man can have any such
testimony.

They say, Sumus.
It is true, there is a blessed comfort, in this appropriation, if we could be
sure of it; They may; we are; we are already in possession of it. The marks of
our spiritual filiation, are less subject to error, then of temporal. Shall
the Mothers honesty be the Evidence? Alas, we have some such examples of their
falsehood, as will discredit any argument, built merely upon their truth. He is
like the Father; Is that the evidence? Imagination may imprint those
Characters: He has his land; A supposititious child may have that. Spiritual
marks are not so fallible as these: They have so much in them, as creates even
a knowledge, 1 John 3.2. John 5.19.
Now we are the Sons of God, and we know that we shall be like him; And we
know, that we are of God. Is all this but a conjecturall knowledge, but a
moral certitude? No tincture of faith in it? Can I acquire, and must I bring
Certitudinem fidei, an assurance out of faith, That a Council cannot err; And
then, such another faithful assurance, That the Council of Trent was a true
council; And then another, That the Council of Trent did truly and duly
proceed in all ways essential to the truth of a Council, in constituting
their Decree against this doctrine? And may I not bring this assurance of faith
to S. Paul, and S. John when they say the contrary? Is not S. Paul's sumus, and
S. John's scimus, as good a ground for our faith, as the servile and mercenary
voices of a herd of new pensionary Bishops, shovelled together at Trent for
that purpose, are for the contrary?

A particular Bishop in the Roman Church, cites an universal Bishop,
Catarinus.
a Pope himself in this point, and he says well, Legem credendi statuit lex
supplicandi, Whatsoever we may pray for, we may, we must believe Certitudine
fidei, With an assurance of faith; If I may pray, and say Pater noster, if I
may call God Father, I may believe with a faithful assurance, that I am the
child of God. Stet invicta Pauli sententia, Idem.
Let the Apostles doctrine, says that Bishop, remain unshaked; Et velut
sagitta, says he, This doctrine, as an arrow shot at them, will put out their
eyes that think to see beyond S. Paul. It is true, says that Bishop, there are
differences, Inter Catholicos, Amongst Catholics themselves in this point;
And then, why do they charge us, whom they defame, by the name of Heretics,
with beginning this doctrine, which was amongst themselves before we were at
all, if they did date us aright? Attestatur spiritus, and ei damus fidem, and
inde certi sumus, says that Bishop: The holy Ghost bears witness, and our
spirit with him, and thereby we are sure: but, says he, they will needs make a
doubt whether this be a knowledge out of faith; which doubt, says he, Secum
fert absurditatem, There is an absurdity, a contradiction in the very doubt: Ex
Spiritu sancto, and humana? Is it a knowledge from the holy Ghost, and is it
not a divine knowledge then? But, say they, (as that Bishop presses their
objections) The holy Ghost does not make them know, that it is the holy Ghost
that assures them; This is, says he, as absurd as the other; For, Nisi se
testantem insinuet, non testatur, Except he make them discern, that he is a
witness, he is no witness to them: He ends it thus, Sustinere coguntur quod
excidit; and that is indeed their case, in very many things controverted; Then
when it conduced to their advantage in argument, or to their profit in purse,
such and such things fell from them, and now that opposition is made against
such sayings of theirs, their profit lies at stake, and their reputation too,
to make good, and to maintain that which they have once, how undiscreetly
soever, said. Some of their severest later men, even of their Jesuits,
acknowledges that we may know ourselves to be the children of God, with as good
a knowledge, as that there is a Rome, or a Constantinople, And such an
assurance as delivers them from all fear that they shall fall away; Vegas,
Pererius.
and is not this more then that assurance which we take to our selves? We give
no such assurance as may occasion security, or slacknesse in the service of
God, and they give such an assurance as may remove all fear and suspicion of
falling from God.

It was truly good counsel in S. Gregory, when, writing to one of the
Empresses bedchamber, a religious Lady of his own name, who had written to him,
that she should never leave importuning him, till he sent her word, that he had
received a revelation from God that she was saved: for, says he, Rem
difficilem postulas, and inutilem, It is a hard matter you require, and an
impertinent, and useless matter: for I am not a man worthy to receive
revelations, and besides, such a revelation as you require, might make you too
secure: And Matter negligentiae solet esse securitas, (says he) Such a security
might make you negligent in those duties which should make sure your salvation.
S. Augustine felt the witness of The Spirit, but not of his spirit, when he
stood out so many solicitations of the holy Ghost, and deferred, and put off
the outward means, his Baptism. In that state, when he had a disposition to
Baptism, he says of himself, Inferbui exultando, sed inhorrui timendo; Still
I had a fervent joy in me, because I saw the way to thee, and intended to put
my self into that way, but yet, because I was not yet in it, I had a
trembling, a jealousy, a suspicion of my self. Insinuati sunt mihi in profundo
nutus tui, In that half darkness, in that twilight I discerned thine eye to
be upon me; Et gaudens in fide, laudavi nomen tuum, And this, says he, created
a kind of faith, a confidence in me, and this induced an inward joy, and that
produced a praising of thy goodness, Sed ea fides securum me non esse sinebat,
But all this did not imprint, and establish that security, that assurance which
I found as soon as I came to the outward seals, and marks, and testimonies of
thine inseparable presence with me, in thy Baptism, and other Ordinances. S.
Bernard puts the marks of as much assurance, as we teach, in these words of our
Savior, Surge, toll grabatum, and ambula, Arise, Take up thy bed, and walk.
Surge ad divina, Raise thy thoughts upon the next world; Toll corpus, ut non
te ferat, sed tu illud, Take up thy body, bring thy body into thy power, that
thou govern it, and not it thee; And then, Ambula, non retrospicias, Walk on,
proceed forward, and look not back with a delight upon thy former sins:
Remigius.
And a great deal an elder man then Bernard, expresses it well, Been
viventibus perhibet testimonium, quod jam sumus filii Dei, To him that lives
according to a right faith, the Spirit testifies that he is now the child of
God, Et quod talia faciendo, perseverabimus in ea filiatione, He carries this
testimony thus much farther, That if we endeavor to continue in that course,
we shall continue in that state, of being the children of God, and never be
cast off, never disinherited. Herein is our assurance, an election there is;
The Spirit bears witness to our spirit, that it is ours; We testify this in
a holy life; and the Church of God, and the whole world joins in this
testimony, That we are the children of God; which is our last branch, and
conclusion of all.

The holy Ghost could not express more danger to a man, then when he calls him
Filium saeculi, Luke 16.18. Ephesians. 5.6. Acts 13.10.
The child of this world; Nor a worse disposition, then when he calls him,
Filium diffidentiae, The child of diffidence, and distrust in God; Nor a worse
pursuer of that ill disposition, then when he calls him Filium diaboli, (as S.
Peter calls Elymas) The child of the devil; Nor a worse possessing of the
devil, then when he calls him Filium perditionis, John 17. Mat. 23.15.
The child of perdition; Nor a worse execution of all this, then when he calls
him Filium gehennae, The child of hell: The child of this world, The child
of desperation, The child of the devil, The child of perdition, The child
of hell, is a high expressing, a deep aggravating of his damnation; That his
damation is not only his purchase, as he has acquired it, but it is his
inheritance, he is the child of damnation. So is it also a high exaltation,
when the holy Ghost draws our Pedigree from any good thing, and calls us the
children of that: John 12.36. Mat. 9.15.
As, when he calls us Filios lucis, The children of light, that we have seen the
day star arise, when he calls us Filios sponsi, The children of the
bride-chamber, begot in lawful marriage upon the true Church, these are fair
approaches to the highest title of all, to be Filii Dei, The children of God;
And not children of God, Per filiationem vestigii, (so every creature is a
child of God) by having an Image, and impression of God, in the very Being
thereof, but children so, as that we are heirs, and heirs so, as that we are
Co-heires with Christ, as it follows in the next verse, and is employed in this
name, Children of God.

Heirs of heaven, which is not a Gavel-kinde, every son, every man alike; but
it is an universal primogeniture, every man full, so full, as that every man
has all, in such measure, as that there is nothing in heaven, which any man in
heaven wants. Heirs of the joys of heaven; Joy in a continual dilatation of
thy heart, to receive augmentation of that which is infinite, in the
accumulation of essential and accidental joy. Joy in a continual melting of
indissoluble bowels, in joyful, and yet compassionate beholding thy Savior;
Rejoicing at thy being there, and almost lamenting (in a kind of affection,
which we can call by no name) that thou could not come thither, but by those
wounds, which are still wounds, though wounds glorified. Heirs of the joy, and
heirs of the glory of heaven; where if thou look down, and see Kings fighting
for Crowns, thou can look off as easily, as from boys at stool-ball for
points here; And from Kings triumphing after victories, as easily, as a
Philosopher from a Pageant of children here. Where thou shall not be subject to
any other title of Dominion in others, but Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews,
nor ambitious of any other title in thy self, but that which thou possessest,
To be the child of God. Heirs of joy, heirs of glory, and heirs of the
eternity of heaven; Where, in the possession of this joy, and this glory, The
Angels which were there almost 6000. years before thee, and so prescribe, and
those souls which shall come at Christ's last coming, and so enter but then,
shall not survive thee, but they, and thou, and all, shall live as long as he
that gives you all that life, as God himself.

Heirs to heaven, and co-heires with Christ: There is much to be said of that
circumstance; but who shall say it? I that should say it, have said ill of it
already, in calling it a Circumstance. To be co-heires with Christ, is that
Essential salvation it self; and to that he entitled us, when after his
Resurrection he said of us, John 20.17.
Go tell my brethren that I am gone. When he was but borne of a woman, and
submitted to the law, when in his minority, he was but a Carpenter, and at full
age, but a Preacher, when they accused him in general, that he was a
Malefactor, or else they would not have delivered him, John 18.30.
but they knew not the name of his fault, when a fault of secular cognizance
was objected to him, that he moved sedition, that he denied tribute, And then a
fault of Ecclesiastical cognizance, that he spoke against the Law, and against
the Temple, when Barrabas a seditious murderer was preferred before him, and
saved, and yet two thieves left to accompany him, in his torment and death, in
these diminutions of Christ, there was no great honor, no great cause why any
man should have any great desire to be of his kindred; to be brother, or
co-heire to his Cross. But if to be his brethren, when he had begun his
triumph in his Resurrection, were a high dignity, what is it to be co-heires
with him in heaven, after his Ascension? But these are inexpressible,
unconceivable things; bring it back to that which is nearest us; to those
seals and marks which we have in this life; That by a holy, a sanctified
passage through this life, and out of this life, from our first seal in
Baptism, to our last seal upon our deathbed, The Spirit may bear witness
to our spirit, that we are the children of God. Amen.

SERMON. XXXV. Preached upon Whitsunday.
MAT. 12.31. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; But the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men.


AS when a Merchant has a fair and large, a deep and open Sea, into that
Harbor to which he is bound with his Merchandise, it were an impertinent
thing for him, to sound, and search for lands, and rocks, and clifts, which
threaten irreparable shipwreck; so we being bound to the heavenly City, the new
Jerusalem, by the spacious and bottomless Sea, the blood of Christ Jesus,
having that large Sea opened unto us, in the beginning of this Text, All manner
of sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, It may seem an impertinent
diversion, to turn into that little Creek, nay upon that desperate, and
irrecoverable rock, The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven
to men. But there must be Discoverers, as well as Merchants; for the security
of Merchants, who by storm and tempest, or other accidents, may be cast upon
those sands, and rocks, if they be not known, they must be known. So though
we fail on, with a merry gale and full sails, with the breath of the holy
Ghost in the first Part, All manner of sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men, yet we shall not leave out the discovery of that fearful and
ruinating rock too, But the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men.

I would divide the Text, and fewer Parts then two, we cannot make, and this
Text has scarce two Parts: The whole Text is a conveiance; it is true; but
there is a little Proviso at the end: The whole Text is a rule; it is true; but
there is an exception at the end; The whole text is a Royal Palace; it is
true; but there is a Sewar, a Vault behind it; Christ had said all, that of
himself he would have said, when he said the first part, All manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven to men, But the iniquity of the Pharisees extorted
thus much more, But the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven
unto men: The first part is the sentence, the proposition, and the sense is
perfect in that, All manner of sin, etc. The last part is but a Parenthesis,
which Christ had rather might have been left out, but the Pharisees, and their
perverseness inserted, But the blasphemy, etc. But since it deserves, and
requires our consideration, as well, that the mercy of God can have any stop,
any rub, determine any where, as that it can extend, and spread it self so
far, as it does in this text, let us make them two parts: And in the first
consider with comfort, the largeness, the expansion of Gods mercy, that there
is but one sin, that it reaches not to; And in the second let us consider with
fear, and trembling, that there is one sin, so swelling, so high, as that even
the mercy of God does not reach to it. And in the first we shall proceed thus,
in the magnifying Gods mercy, first, in the first term, Sin, we shall see that
sin is even a wound, a violence upon God; and then Omne peccatum, Every sin is
so; and nothing is so various, so diverse as sin; and even that sin, that
amounts to Blasphemy, a sin not only conceived in the thought, but expressed
in contumelious words; and those contumelious and blasphemous words uttered
against the Son, (for so it is expressed in the very next verse) All this shall
be forgiven: But yet it is in futuro, They shall be: No man's sins are forgiven
him, then when he sins them; but by repentance they shall be forgiven; forgiven
unto men; that is, first, unto any man, and then, unto none but men; for the
sin of the Angels shall never be forgiven: And these will be the Branches of
the first Part. And in the second Part, we shall look as far as this text
occasions it, upon that debated sin, the sin against the holy Ghost, and the
irremissiblenesse of that; of which Part, we shall derive and raise the
particular Branches anon, when we come to handle them.

First then, 1 Part. Peccatum.
for the first term, Sin, we use to ask in the School, whether any action of
man's can have rationem demeriti, whether it can be said to offend God, or to
deserve ill of God: for whatsoever does so, must have some proportion with God.
With things which are inanimate, things that have no will, and so no good nor
bad purpose, as dust, or the wind, or such, a man cannot properly be so
offended, as to say that they deserve ill of him. With those things which have
no use, no command of their will, as children, and fools, and mad men, it is
so too; And then, there is no creature so poor, so childish, so impotent in
respect of man, as the best man is in respect of God: How then can he sin, that
is, offend, that is, deserve ill of him? The question begun not in the School;
Job 35.6.
It was asked before of Job: If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or
if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? Thy wickedness
may hurt a man as thou art; but what is it to God? for, as Gregory says upon
that place, Humana impietas ci nocet, quem pervertendo inquinat, Our sins hurt
them, whom our example leads into tentation; but our sins cannot draw God to be
accessory to our sins, or to make him sin with us. Our sin cannot hurt him so;
nor hurt him directly any way; not his person: But his Subjects, whom he has
taken into his protection, it may; His Law, which he has given for direction,
it may; His Honor, of which he is jealous, which Honor consists much in our
honoring of him, it may. Wherein is a Kings Person violated, by coining a
false penny, or counterfaiting a seal? and yet this is Treason. God cannot be
robbed, he cannot be damnified; whatsoever is taken from him (and there is a
sacrilege in all unjust takings) wheresoever it be laid, he sees it, and it is
still in his possession, and in his house, and in his hands. God cannot be
robbed, nor God cannot be violated, he cannot be wounded, for he has no
limbs. But God is Vltimis fin is, The end to which we all go, and his Law is
the way to that end; And transilire lineam, to transgress that Law, to leave
that way, is a neglecting of him: and even negligences, and pretermissions, and
slightings, are as great offenses, as actual injuries. So God is communis
Pater, the Father of all creatures; and so the abuse of the creature reflects
upon God, as the injuries done to the children, do upon the Parents.

If then we can sin so against God, as we can against the King, and against the
Law, and against Propriety, and against Parents; we have ways enough of sinning
against God. Sin is not therefore so absolutely nothing, as that it is (in no
consideration) other then a privation, only Absentia recti, and nothing at all
in it self: but, not to enter farther into that inextricable point, we rest in
this, that sin is Actus inordinatus, It is not only an obliquity, a privation,
but it is an action deprived of that rectitude, which it should have; It does
not only want that rectitude, but it should have that rectitude, and therefore
has a sinful want. We shall not dare to call sin merely, absolutely nothing,
if we consider either the punishment due to sin, or the pardon of that
punishment, or the price of that pardon. The punishment is everlasting; why
should I believe it to be so? Os domini locutum, The mouth of the Lord has
said it. But why should it be so? Gregor.
Iustum est ut qui in suo aeter no peccavit contra Deum, in Dei aeterno
puniatur, It is but justice, that he that sins in his eternity, should be
punished in Gods eternity: Now to sin in our eternity, is to sin as long as we
live, and if we could live eternally, to desire to sin eternally. God can cut
off our eternity, he can shorten our life; If we could cut off his eternity,
and quench hell, our punishment were not eternal. We consider sin to be
Quoddam infinitum; as it is an aversion from God, who is infinite goodness, it
is an infinite thing: and as it is a turning upon the Creature, it is finite,
and determined; for all pleasure taken in the creature, is so: and accordingly
sin has a finite, and an infinite punishment: That which we call Poenam
sensus, The torment which we feel, is not infinite; (otherwise, then by
duration) for that torment is not equal in all the damned, and that which is
infinite must necessarily be equal; but that which we call Poenam damni, The
everlasting loss of the sight of the everliving God, that is infinite, and
alike, and equal in all the damned. Sin is something then, if we consider the
punishment; and so it is, if we consider our deliverance from this punishment:
That which God could not pardon in the way of justice without satisfaction,
that for which nothing could be a satisfaction, but the life of all men, or of
one man worth all, the Son of God, that that tore the Son out of the arms of
his Father, in the Quid dereliquisti, when he cried out, why have thou forsaken
me? That which imprinted in him, who was anointed with the Oil of gladness
above his fellows, a deadly heaviness, in his Tristis anima, when his soul
was heavy unto death, That which had power to open Heaven in his descent
hither, and to open hell, in his descent thither, to open the womb of the
Virgin in his Incarnation, and the womb of the Earth in his Resurrection, that
which could change the frame of Nature in Miracles, and the God of Nature in
becoming Man, that that deserved that punishment, that that needed that
ransom (say the School men what they will of privations) cannot be merely,
absolutely nothing, but the greatest thing that can be conceived, and yet that
shall be forgiven.

That, and all that; Sin, and all sin: And there is not so much of any thing in
the world, Omne.
as of sin. Every virtue has two extremes, two vices opposed to it; there is
two to one; But Abraham's task was an easy task to tell the stars of Heaven;
so it were to tell the sands, or hairs, or atoms, in respect of telling but
our own sins. And will God say to me, Confide Fili, My Son, be of good cheer,
thy sins are forgiven thee? Mat. 9.2.
Does he mean all my sins? He knows what original sin is, and I do not; and
will he forgive me sin in that root, and sin in the branches, original sin,
and actual sin too? He knows my secret sins, and I do not; will he forgive
my manifest sins, and those sins too? He knows my relapses into sins repented;
and will he forgive my faint repentances, and my rebellious relapses after
them? will his mercy dive into my heart, and forgive my sinful thoughts there,
and shed upon my lips, and forgive my blasphemous words there, and bathe the
members of this body, and forgive mine unclean actions there? will he contract
himself into himself, and meet me there, and forgive my sins against
himself, And scatter himself upon the world, and forgive my sins against my
neighbor, and emprison himself in me, and forgive my sins against my self?
Will he forgive those sins, wherein my practice has exceeded my Parents, and
those wherein my example has misled my children? Will he forgive that dim
sight which I have of sin now, when sins scarce appear to be sins unto me, and
will he forgive that over-quick sight, when I shall see my sins through Satan's
multiplying glass of desperation, when I shall think them greater then his
mercy, upon my death bed? In that he said all, he left out nothing, Heb. 2.8.
is the Apostles argument: and, he is not almighty, if he cannot; his mercy
endures not for ever, if he do not forgive all.

Sin, and all sin, even blasphemy: now blasphemy is not restrained to God
alone; Blasphemia.
other persons besides God, other things, besides persons, may be blasphemed. 1 Timothy 6.1. Jude 8, 10.
The word of God, the Doctrine, Religion may be blasphemed. Magistracy and
Dignities may be blasphemed. Nay, Omnia quae ignorant, says that Apostle, They
blaspheme all things which they know not. And for persons, the Apostle takes it
to his own person, 1 Cor. 4.13.
Being blasphemed, yet we entreat; and he communicates it to all men, Neminem
blasphemate, Tit. 3.2.
Blaspheme no man. Blasphemy, as it is a contumelious speech, derogating from
any man, that good that is in him, or attributing to any man, that ill that is
not in him, may be fastened upon any man. For the most part it is understood a
sin against God, and that directly; and here, by the manner of Christ
expressing himself, it is made the greatest sin; All sin, even blasphemy. And
yet, a drunkard that cannot name God, will spue out a blasphemy against God: A
child that cannot spell God, will stammer out a blasphemy against God: If we
smart, we blaspheme God, and we blaspheme him if we be tickled; If I lose at
play, I blaspheme, and if my fellow lose, he blasphemes, so that God is always
sure to be a loser. An Usurer can show me his bags, and an Extortioner his
houses, the fruits, the revenues of his sin; but where will the blasphemer
show me his blasphemy, or what he has got by it? The licentious man has had
his love in his arms, and the envious man has had his enemy in the dust, but
wherein has the blasphemer hurt God?

In the School we put it for the consummation of the torment of the damned,
Aquin. 221. q. 13. ar. 4.
that at the Resurrection, they shall have bodies, and so be able, even
verbally, to blaspheme God; herein we exceed the Devil already, that we can
speak blaspemously. There is a rebellious part of the body, that Adam covered
with fig leaves, that has damned many a wretched soul; but yet, I think,
not more then the tongue; And therefore the whole torment that Dives suffered
in hell, Luke 16.24.
is expressed in that part, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue.
The Jews that crucified God, will not sound the name of God, and we for whom he
was Crucified, belch him out in our surfets, and foame him out in our fury: An
Impertinent sin, without occasion before, and an unprofitable sin, without
recompense after, and an incorrigible sin too; for, almost what Father dares
chide his son for blasphemy, that may not tell him, Sir I learnt it of you? or
what Master his servant, that cannot lay the same recrimination upon him? How
much then do we need this extent of Gods mercy, that he will forgive sin, and
all sin, and even this sin of blasphemy, and (which is also another addition)
blasphemy against the Son.

This emphaticall addition arises out of the connection in the next verse, In
filium.
A word, (that is, a blasphemous word) against the Son, shall be forgiven. And
here we carry not the word Son so high, as that the Son should be the eternal
Son of God, Though words spoken against the eternal Son of God by many bitter
and blasphemous Heretics have been forgiven: God forbid that all the
Photinians who thought that Christ was not at all, till he was borne of the
Virgin Mary, That all the Nativitarians, that thought he was from all eternity
with God, but yet was not the Son of God, That all the Arians, that thought him
the Son of God, but yet not essentially, not by nature, but by grace and
adoption, God forbid that all these should be damned, and because they once
spoke against the Son, therefore they never repented, or were not received upon
repentance. We carry not the word, Son, so high, as to be the eternal Son of
God, for it is in the text, Filius hominis, The Son of Man; And, in that
acceptance, we do not mean it, of all blasphemies that have been spoken of
Christ, as the Son of man, that is, of Christ invested in the humane nature;
though blasphemies in that kind have been forgiven too: God forbid that all
the Arians, that thought Christ so much the Son of Man as that he took a
humane body, but not so much, as that he took a humane soul, but that the
Godhead it self (such a Godhead as they allowed him) was his soul; God forbid
that all the Anabaptists that confess he took a body, but not a body of the
substance of the Virgin; That all the Carpocratians, that thought only his
soul, and not his body ascended into Heaven, God forbid all these should be
damned, and never called to repentance, or not admitted upon it: There were
fearful blasphemies against the Son, as the Son of God, and as the Son of Man,
against his Divine, and against his Humane Nature, and those, in some of them,
by Gods grace forgiven too. But here we consider him only as the Son of Man,
merely as Man; but as such a Man, so good a Man, as to calumniate him, to
blaspheme him, was an inexcusable sin. To say of him, who had fasted forty
days and forty nights, Mat. 11.19. Mar. 12.14.
Ecce homo vorax, Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, To say of him, of
whom themselves had said elsewhere, Master, we know that thou art true, and
carest for no man, that he was a friend of Publicans and sinners, That this man
who was The Prince of Peace, Heb. 12.3.
should endure such contradiction, This was an inexcusable sin. If any man
therefore have had his good intentions mis-construed, his zeal to assist Gods
bleeding and fainting cause, called Innovation, his proceeding by ways good in
themselves, to ends good in themselves, called Indiscretion, let him be content
to forgive them, any Calumniator, against himself, who is but a worm and no
man, since God himself forgave them against Christ, who was so Filius hominis,
The Son of Man, as that he was the Son of God too.

There is then forgiveness for sin, for all sin, even for blasphemy, Infuturo.
for blasphemy against the Son, but it is Infuturo remittetur, It shall be
forgiven. It is not Remittebatur, It was forgiven; Let no man antidate his
pardon, and say, His sins were forgiven in an Eternal Decree, and that no man
that has his name in the book of life, has the addition, sinner; that if he
were there from the beginning, from the beginning he was no sinner. It is not,
in such a sense, Remittebatur, It was forgiven; nor it is not Remittitur, that
even then, when the sin is committed, it is forgiven, whether the sinner think
of it or no, That God sees not the sins of his Children, That God was no more
affected with David's adultery, or his murder, then an indulgent Father is to
see his child do some witty waggish thing, or some sportfull shrewd turn. It
is but Remittetur, Any sin shall be, that is, may be forgiven, if the means
required by God, and ordained by him, be entertained. If I take into my
contemplation, the Majesty of God, and the ugliness of sin, If I divest my
self of all that was sinfully got, and invest my self in the righteousness of
Christ Jesus, (for else I am ill suited, and if I clothe myself in Mammon, the
righteousness of Christ is no Cloak for that doublet) If I come to Gods Church
for my absolution, and the seal of that reconciliation, the blessed Sacrament,
Remittetur, by those means ordained by God any sin shall be forgiven me. But
if I rely upon the Remittebatur, That I had my Quietus est before hand, in the
eternal Decree, or in the Remittuntur, and so shut mine eyes, in an opinion
that God has shut his, and sees not the sins of his children, I change Gods
Grammar, and I induce a dangerous solecisme, for, it is not They were forgiven
before they were committed, nor They are forgiven in the committing, but, They
shall be, by using the means ordained by God, they may be; And so, They shall
be forgiven unto men, says the Text, and that is, first, unto every man.

The Kings of the earth are fair and glorious resemblances of the King of
heaven; Omni homini
they are beams of that Sun, Tapers of that Torch, they are like gods, they
are gods: The Lord kills and makes alive, He brings down to the grave, and
brings up: 1 Samuel 2.6.
This is the Lord of heaven; The Lords anointed, Kings of the earth do so too;
They have the dispensation of judgment, and of mercy, they execute, and they
pardon: But yet, with this difference amongst many other, that Kings of the
earth (for the most part, and the best, most) bind themselves with an oath,
not to pardon some offenses; The King of heaven swears, and swears by
himself, That there is no sinner but he can, and would pardon. At first,
Illuminat omnem hominem, He is the true light, John 1.9.
which lightneth every man that comes into the world; Let that light (because
many do interpret that place so) let that be but that natural light, which
only man, and every man has; yet that light makes him capable of the
super-naturall light of grace; for if he had not that reasonable soul, he
could not have grace; and even by this natural light, he is able to see the
invisible God, in the visible creature, and is inexcusable if he do not so. But
because this light is (though not put out) brought to a dimnesse, by man's first
fall, Therefore John Baptist came to bear witness of that light, that all
men, through him, might believe: Ver. 7.
God raises up a John Baptist in every man; every man finds a testimony in
himself, that he draws curtains between the light and him; that he runs into
corners from that light; that he does not make that use of those helps which
God has afforded him, as he might.

Thus God has mercy upon all before, by way of prevention; thus he enlightneth
every man that comes into the world: but, because for all this men do
stumble, even at noon, God has given Collyrium, an Eye Salve to all, Apoc.
3.18.
by which they may mend their eyesight; He has opened a poole of Bethesda to
all, where not only he that comes at first, but he that comes even at last, he
that comes washed with the water of Baptism in his infancy, and he that comes
washed with the tears of Repentance in his age, may receive health and
cleanness; For, the Font at first, and the deathbed at last, are Cisterns
from this poole, and all men, and at all times, may wash therein: And from this
power, and this love of God, is derived both that Catholic promise,
Quandocunque, At what time soever a sinner repents, And that Catholic and
extensive Commission, Quorum remiseritis, Whose sins soever you remit, shall be
remitted. All men were in Adam; because the whole nature, mankind, was in him;
and then, can any be without sin? All men were in Christ too, because the whole
nature, mankind, was in him; and then, can any man be excluded from a
possibility of mercy? There were whole Sects, whole bodies of Heretics, that
denied the communication of Gods grace to others; The Cathari denied that any
man had it but themselves: The Novatians denied that any man could have it
again, after he had once lost it, by any deadly sin committed after Baptism,
But there was never any Sect that denied it to themselves, no Sect of
despairing men. We have some somewhere sprinkled; One in the old Testament,
Cain, and one in the new, Judas, and one in the Ecclesiastique Story, Julian;
but no body, no Sect of despairing men. And therefore he that abandons himself
to this sin of desperation, sins with the least reason of any, for he prefers
his sin above Gods mercy, and he sins with the fewest examples of any, for God
has diffused this light, with an evidence to all, That all sins may be
forgiven unto men, that is, unto all men; and then, herein also is Gods mercy
to man magnified, that it is to man, that is, only to man.

Nothing can fall into this comparison, Non Angelis
but Angels; and Angels shall not be forgiven: We shall be like the Angels, we
shall participate of their glory which stand; But the Angels shall never be
like us; never return to mercy, after they are fallen. They were Primogeniti
Dei, Gods first born, and yet disinherited; and disinherited without any power,
at least, without purpose of revocation, without annuities, without pensions,
without any present supply, without any future hope. When the Angels were made,
and when they fell, we dispute; but when they shall return, falls not into
question. Howsoever Origin vary in himself, or howsoever he fell under that
jealousy, or misinterpretation, that he thought the devil should be saved at
last, I am sure his books that are extant, have pregnant and abundant testimony
of their everlasting, and irreparable condemnation. To judge by our evidence,
the evidence of Scriptures, for their sin, and the evidence of our conscience,
for ours, there is none of us that has not sinned more then any of them at
first; and yet Christ has not taken the nature of Angels, but of man, and
redeemed us, Jude 6.
having reserved them in everlasting chains, under darkness: How long? Unto
the judgment of the great day, says that Apostle; And is it but till then,
then to have an end? Alas no; It is not until that day, but unto that day; not
that that day shall end or ease their torments which they have, but inflict
accidental torments, which they have not yet; That is, an utter evacuation of
that power of seducing, which, till that day come, they shall have leave to
exercise upon the sons of men: To that are they reserved, and we to that glory,
which they have lost, and lost for ever; and upon us, is that prayer of the
Apostle fallen effectually, Ver. 2.
Mercy, and peace, and love is multiplied unto us; for, sin, and all sin,
blasphemy, and blasphemy against the Son, shall be, that is, is not, nor was
not, but may be forgiven to men, to all men, to none but men; And so we pass
to our second part.

In this second part, 2. Part. Divisio.
which seems to present a bank even to this Sea, this infinite Sea of the
blood of Christ Jesus; And an Horizon even to this heaven of heavens, to the
mercy of God, we shall proceed thus: First, we shall inquire, but modestly,
what that blasphemy, which is commonly called The sin against the holy Ghost,
is: And secondly, how, and wherein it is irremissible, that it shall never be
forgiven: And then thirdly, upon what places of Scripture it is grounded;
amongst which, if this text do not constitute and establish that sin, The sin
against the holy Ghost, yet we shall find, that that sin which is directly
intended in this text, is a branch of that sin, The sin against the holy Ghost:
And therefore we shall take just occasion from thence, to arm you with some
instructions against those ways which lead into that irrecoverable
destruction, into that irremissible sin: for though the sin it self be not so
evident, yet the limbs of the sin, and the ways to the sin, are plain enough.

S. Augustine says, Quid.
There is no question in the Scripture harder then this, what this sin is: And
S. Ambrose gives some reason of the difficulty in this, Sicut una divinitas,
una offensa: As there is but one Godhead, so there is no sin against God (and
all sin is so) but it is against the whole Trinity: and that is true; but as
there are certain attributes proper to every several person of the Trinity, so
there are certain sins, more directly against the several attributes and
properties of those persons, and in such a consideration, against the persons
themselves. Of which there are diverse sins against power, and they are
principally against the Father; for to the Father we attribute power; and
diverse sins against wisdom, and wisdom we attribute to the Son; and diverse
against goodness, and love, and these we attribute to the holy Ghost. Of those
against the holy Ghost, considered in that attribute of goodness, and of love,
the place to speak, will be in our conclusion. But for this particular sin, The
sin against the holy Ghost, as hard as S. Augustine makes it, and justly, yet
he says too, Exercere nos voluit difficultate quaestionis, non decipere
falsitate sententiae, God would exercise us with a hard question, but he would
not deceive us with a false opinion: Quid sit quaeri voluit, non negari; God
would have us modestly inquire what it is, not peremptorily deny that there is
any such sin.

It is (for the most part) agreed, that it is a total falling away from the
Gospel of Christ Jesus formerly acknowledged and professed, into a verbal
calumniating, and a real persecuting of that Gospel, with a deliberate purpose
to continue so to the end, and actually to do so, to persevere till then, and
then to pass away in that disposition. It falls only upon the professors of the
Gospel, and it is total, and it is practical, and it is deliberate, and it
is final. Here we have that sin, but, by Gods grace, that sinner no where.

It is therefore somewhat early, somewhat forwardly pronounced, though by a
reverend man, Certum reprobationis signum, in spiritum blasphemia, That it is
an infallible assurance, Calvin.
that that man is a Reprobate that blasphemes the holy Ghost. For, whatsoever
is an infallible sign, must be notorious to us; If we must know another thing
by that, as a sign, we must know that thing which is our sign, in it self:
And can we know what this blaspheming of the holy Ghost is? Did we ever hear
any man say, or see any man do any thing against the holy Ghost, of whom we
might say upon that word, or upon that action, This man can never repent, never
be received to mercy? And yet, says he, Tenendum est, quod qui exciderint,
nunquam resurgent; We are bound to hold, that they who fall so, shall never
rise again. I presume, he grounded himself in that severe judgment of his,
upon such places, as that to the Romans, Romans 1.18.
When they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over
to a reprobate mind: That that is the ordinary way of Gods justice, to
withdraw his Spirit from that man that blasphemes his Spirit; but S. Paul
blasphemed, and S. Peter blasphemed, and yet were not divorced from God.

S. Augustines rule is good; not to judge of this sin, and this sinner
especially, but a posteriori, from his end, from his departing out of this
world. Neither though I do see an ill life, sealed with an ill death, dare I
be too forward in this judgment. He was not a Christian in profession, but
worse then he are called Christians, that said, Qui pius est, sum
Philosophatur; The charitable man is the great Philosopher; Trismeg.
and it is charity not to suspect the state of a dead man. Consider in how
sudden a minute the holy Ghost has sometimes wrought upon thee; and hope that
he has done so upon another. It is a moderation to be embraced, that Peter
Martyr leads us to: The Primitive Church had the spirit of discerning spirits;
we have not; And therefore, though by way of definition, we may say, This is
that sin, yet by way of demonstration, let us say of no man, This is that
sinner: I may say of no man, This sin in thee is irremissible.

Now, in considering this word, Irremissible, That it cannot be forgiven, we
find it to be a word, rather usurped by the School, then expressed in the
Scriptures: Irremissibilitas.
for in all those three Evangelists, where this fearful denunciation is
interminated, still it is in a phrase, of somewhat more mildness, then so; It
is, It shall not be forgiven, It is not, it cannot be forgiven: It is an
irremission, it is not an irremissiblenesse. Absolutely there is not an
impossibility, and irremissiblenesse on Gods part: but yet some kind of
impossibility there is on his part, and on ours too. For, if he could forgive
this sin, he would; or else, his power were above his mercy; and his mercy is
above all his works. But God can do nothing that implies contradiction; and
God having declared, by what means only his mercy and forgiveness shall be
conveyed to man, God should contradict himself, if he should give forgiveness
to them, who will fully exclude those means of mercy. And therefore it were
not boldly, nor irreverently said, That God could not give grace to a beast,
nor mercy to the Devil, because either they are naturally destitute, or have
wilfully despoiled themselves of the capacity of grace, and mercy. When we
consider, that God the Father, whom, as the root of all, we consider
principally in the Creation, created man in a possibility, and ability, to
persist in that goodness, in which he created him, And consider that God the
Son came, and wrought a reconciliation for man to God, and so brought in a
treasure, in the nature thereof, a sufficient ransom for all the world, but
then a man knows not this, or believes not this, otherwise then Historically,
Morally, Civilly, and so evacuates, and shakes off God the Son, And then
consider that the holy Ghost comes, and presents means of applying all this,
and making the general satisfaction of Christ, reach and spread it self upon
my soul, in particular, in the preaching of the Word, in the seals of the
Sacraments, in the absolution of the Church, and I preclude the ways, and shut
up my self against the holy Ghost, and so evacuate him, and shake him off,
when I have resisted Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is there a fourth person in
the Godhead to work upon me? If I blaspheme, that is, deliberately pronounce
against the holy Ghost, my sin is irremissible therefore, because there is no
body left to forgive it, nor way left, wherein forgiveness should work upon
me; So far it is irremissible on Gods part, and on mine too.

And then, take it there, in that state of irremissiblenesse, and consider
seriously the fearfulness of it. Mat. 5.22.
I have been angry; and then, (as Christ tells me) I have been in danger of a
judgment; but in judgment, I may have counsel, I may be heard; I have said
Racha, expressed my anger and so been in danger of a Council; but a Council
does but consult, what punishment is fit to be inflicted; and so long there is
hope of mitigation, and commutation of penance; But I have said fatue, I have
called my brother fool, and so am in danger of hell fire. August. Chrysostom.
In the first, there is Ira, an inward commotion, an irregular distemper; In
the second, there is Ira and vox; In the first it is but Ira carnis, non animi,
It is but my passion, it is not I that am angry, but in the second I have
suffered my passion to vent and utter it self; but in the third, there is Ira,
vox and vituperatio, A distemper within, a declaration to evil example
without, and an injury and defamation to a third person, and this exalts the
offense to the height: But then when this third Person comes to be the third
Person in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, in all the other cases, there is danger,
danger of judgment, danger of a Council, danger of hell, but here is
irremissiblenesse, hell it self, and no avoiding of hell, no cooling in hell,
no deliverance from hell; Irremissible; Those hands that reached to the ends of
the world, in creating it, and span the world in preserving it, and stretched
over all in redeeming it, those hands have I manacled, that they cannot open
unto me: That tenderness that is affected to all, have I damped, retarded that
pronenesse, stupefied that alacrity, confounded that voice, diverted those
eyes, that are naturally disposed to all: And all this, Irremissibly, for ever;
not, though he would, but because he will not show mercy; not, though I would,
but because I cannot ask mercy: And therefore beware all approaches toward
that sin, from which there is no returning, no redemption.

We are come now, In quibus Script.
in our order, to our third and last Branch of this last Part, That this
Doctrine of a sin against the Holy Ghost, is not a dream of the Schoolmen,
though they have spoken many things frivolously of it, but grounded in evident
places of Scriptures: Amongst which, we look especially, how far this Text
conduces to that Doctrine. There are two places ordinarily cited, which seem
directly to concern this sin; and two others, which to me seem not to do so.
Those of the first kind, are both in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 6.4.
There the Apostle says, For those who were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, If they fall
away, it is impossible to renew them by repentance. Now, if final impenitence
had been added, there could have been no question, but that this must be The
sin against the Holy Ghost; And because the Apostle speaks of such a total
falling away, as precludes all way of repentance, it includes final
impenitence, and so makes up that sin. The other place from which it rises most
pregnantly, Heb. 10.29.
is, Of how sore a punishment shall they be thought worthy, who have trodden
under foot the Son of God, and have done despite unto the Spirit of grace? Ver.
26.
As he had said before, If we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation. But yet, though from
these places, there arises evidence, that such a sin there is, as naturally
shuts out repentance, and so is thereby irremissible, yet there arise no
marks, by which I can say, This man is such a sinner; not though he himself
would swear to me, that he were so now, and that he would continue so, till
death.

The other places that do not so directly concern this sin, and yet are
sometimes used in this affair, 1 John 5.16.
are, one in S. John, and this text another. That in S. John is, There is a sin
unto death, I do not say, that he shall pray for it. It is true, that the
Master of the Sentences, and from him, many of the School, and many of our
later Interpreters too, do understand this, of the sin against the Holy Ghost,
because we are (almost) forbidden to pray for it; but yet we are not absolutely
forbidden, in that we are not bidden. And if we were forbidden, when God says
to Jeremy, Pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry, Ier. 7.16.
nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear
thee, And again, Ier. 11.14.
Pray not for them, for I will not hear them, Not them, though they should
come to pray for themselves, God forbid that we should therefore say, that all
that people had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. And for this
particular place of S. John, that answer may suffice, which very good Divines
have given, Pray not for them, is indeed pray not with them, admit them to no
part in the public prayers of the Congregation, but if they sin a sin unto
death, a notorious, an inexcusable sin, let them be persons excommunicated to
thee.

For the words in this text, which seem to many appliable to that great sin,
it is not clear, it is not much probable, that they can be so applied. Take
the words invested in their circumstance, in the context and coherence, and it
will appear evident. Christ speaks this to the Pharisees, upon occasion of
that which they had said to him, and of him before, and he carries it, intends
it no farther. That appears by the first word of out text, Propterea,
Therefore I say unto you; Therefore, that is, Because you have used such words
unto me. And S. Mark makes it more clear, He said this to them, because they
said, Mark 3.30.
He had an unclean spirit; because they said he did his Miracles by the power
of the Devil. Now, this was certainly a sin against the Holy Ghost, so far,
as that it was distinguished from the sins against the Son of Man; But it was
not the sin against the Holy Ghost; for, Christ being a mixed person, God and
Man, did some things, in which his Divinity had nothing to do, but were only
actions of a mere natural man, and when they slandered him in these, they
blasphemed the Son of Man. Some things he did in the power of his God head, in
which his humanity contributed nothing; as all his Miracles; and when they
attributed these works to the Devil, they blasphemed the Holy Ghost. And
therefore S. Augustine says, That Christ in this place, did not so much accuse
the Pharisees, that they had already incurred the sin of the Holy Ghost, they
might at last fall into The sin, that impenitible, and therefore irremissible
sin. But that sin, this could not be, because the Pharisees had not embraced
the Gospel before, and so this could not be a falling from the Gospel, in them:
Neither does it appear to have continued to a final impenitence; so far from
it, as that S. Chrysostom. makes no doubt, but that some of these Pharisees did
repent upon Christ's admonition.

Now, beloved, since we see by this collation of places, that it is not safe to
say of any man, he is this sinner, nor very constantly agreed upon, what is
this sin, but yet we are sure, that such a sin there is, that captivates even
God himself, and takes from him the exercise of his mercy, and casts a
dumnesse, a speechlesnesse upon the Church it self, that she may not pray for
such a sinner; and since we see, that Christ, with so much earnestness,
rebukes the Pharisees for this sin in the text, because it was a limb of that
sin, and conduced to it, let us use all religious diligence, to keep our selves
in a safe distance from it. To which purpose, be pleased to cast a particular,
but short and transitory glaunce, upon some such sins, as therefore, because
they conduce to that, are sometimes called sins against the holy Ghost. Sins
against Power, (that is the Fathers Attribute) sins of infirmity are easily
forgiven; sins against Wisdom, (that is the Sons Attribute) sins of Ignorance
are easily forgiven; but sins against Goodness, (that is the Holy Ghosts
Attribute,) sins of an hard and ill nature are hardly forgiven: Not at all,
when it comes to be The sin; not easily, when they are Those sins, those that
conduce to it, and are branches of it.

For branches, the Schoolmen have named three couples, which they have called
sins against the Holy Ghost, because naturally they shut out those means by
which the Holy Ghost might work upon us. The first couple is, presumption and
desperation; for presumption takes away the fear of God, and desperation the
love of God. And then, they name Impenitence, and hardness of heart; for
Impenitence removes all sorrow for sins past, and hardness of heart all
tenderness toward future tentations. And lastly, they name The resisting of a
truth acknowledged before, and the envying of other men, who have made better
use of Gods grace then we have done; for this resisting of a Truth, is a
shutting up of our selves against it, and this envying of others, is a sorrow,
that that Truth should prevail upon them. And truly (to reflect a very little
upon these three couples again) To presume upon God, that God cannot damn me
eternally in the next world, for a few half-houres in this; what is a
fornication, or what is an Idolatay to God? what is a jest, or a ballad, or a
libel to a King? Or to despair, that God will not save me, how well soever I
live, after a sin? what is a tear, what is a sigh, what is a prayer to God?
what is a petition to a King? To be impenitent, senseless of sins past; I past
yesterday in riot, and yesternight in wantonness, and yet I hear of some
place, some office, some good fortune fallen to me to day; To be hardened
against future sins; shall I forbear some company, because that company leads
me into tentation? Why, that very tentation will lead me to preferment; To
forsake the truth formerly professed, because the times are changed, and wiser
men then I change with them; To envy and hate another, another State, another
Church, another man, because they stand out in defense of the truth, (for, if
they would change, I might have the better color, the better excuse of
changing too) al these are shrewd and slippery approaches toward the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and therefore the Schoolmen have called all these six,
(not without just reason, and good use) by that heavy name.

And some of the Fathers have extended it farther, then to these six. S.
Bernard, in particular, says, Nolle obedire, To resist lawful Authority; And
another, Simulata poenitentia, To delude God with relapses, and counterfeit
repentances; and another also, Omne schisma, All schismatic renting of the
peace of the Church, All these they call in that sense, Sins against the Holy
Ghost. Now, all sins against the Holy Ghost, are not irremissible. Stephen told
his persecutors, Acts 7.51.60.
They resisted the Holy Ghost, and yet he prayed for them. But because these
sins may, and ordinarily do come to that sin, stop betimes. David was far from
the murder of Vriah, when he did but look upon his Wife, as she was bathing. A
man is far from defying the holy Ghost, when he does but neglect him; and yet
David did come, and he will come to the bottom quickly. It may make some
impression in you, to tell, and to apply a short story. In a great Schism at
Rome, Ladislaus took that occasion to debauch and corrupt some of the
Nobility; It was discerned; and then, to those seven Governors, whom they had
before, whom they called Sapientes, Wise men, they added seven more, and called
them Bonos, Good men, honest men, and relied, and confided in them. Goodness
is the Attribute of the Holy Ghost; If you have Greatness, you may seem to
have some of the Father, for Power is his: If you have Wisdom, you may seem
to have some of the Son, for that is his: If you have Goodness, you have the
Holy Ghost, who shall lead you into all truth. And Goodness is, To be good and
easy in receiving his impressions, and good and constant in retaining them,
and good and diffusive in deriving them upon others: To embrace the Gospel, to
hold fast the Gospel, to propagate the Gospel, this is the goodness of the
Holy Ghost. And to resist the entrance of the Gospel, to abandon it after we
have professed it, to forsake them, whom we should assist and succor in the
maintenance of it, This is to depart from the goodness of the Holy Ghost: and
by these sins against him, to come too near the sin, the irremissible sin, in
which the calamities of this world shall enwrap us, and deliver us over to the
everlasting condemnation of the next. This is as much as these words do justly
occasion us to say of that sin; and into a more curious search thereof, it is
not holy sobriety to pierce.

SERMON. XXXVI. Preached upon Whitsunday.
JOHN 16.8, 9, 10, 11. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin,
and of righteousness, and of judgment.
Of sin, because ye belceve not on me.
Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.
Of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged.

OUr Panis quotidianus, Our daily bread, is that Judge sacrificium, That daily
sacrifice of meditating upon God; Our Panis hodiernus, This days bread, is to
meditate upon the holy Ghost. To day if ye will hear his voice, to day ye are
with him in Paradise; For, wheresoever the holy Ghost is, Luke 23.43.
he creates a Paradise. The day is not past yet; As our Savior said to Peter,
Hodie, in nocte hac, Mar. 14.10.
This day, even in this night thou shall deny me, so, Hodie in nocte hac, Even
now, though evening, the dayspring from on high visits you, Esaias 38.8.
God carries back the shadow of your Sun-dyall, as to Hezechias; And now God
brings you to the beginning of this day, if now you take knowledge, that he is
come, who, when he comes, Reproves the world of sin, etc.

The solemnity of the day requires, Divisio.
and the method of the words offers for our first consideration, the Person;
who is not named in our text, but designed by a most emphaticall denotation,
Ille, He, He who is all, and does all. But the word has relation to a name,
proper to the holy Ghost: for, in the verse immediately preceding, our Savior
tells his disciples, That he will send them the Comforter. So, forbearing all
other mysterious considerations of the holy Ghost, we receive him in that
notion, and function in which Christ sends him, The Comforter. And therefore,
in this capacity, as The Comforter, we must consider his action, Arguet, He
shall reprove; Reprove, and yet Comfort; nay, therefore comfort, because
reprove: And then the subject of his action, Mundum, The world, the whole
world; no part left unreproved, yet no part left without comfort: And after
that, what he reproves the world of; That multiplies; Of sin, of
righteousness, of judgment. Can there be comfort in reproof for sin? Or can
there lie a reproof upon righteousness, or upon judgment? Very justly;
Though the evidence seem at first, as strange as the crime; for, though that be
good evidence against the sin of the world, That they believe not in Christ,
(Of sin, because ye believe not on me) yet to be Reproved of righteousness,
because Christ goes to his Father, and they see him no more, And to be Reproved
of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged, this seems strange,
and yet this must be done, and done to our comfort; For, this must be done, Cum
venerit, Then when the holy Ghost, and he in that function, as the Comforter,
is come, is present, is working.

Beloved, Reproves upon others without charity, rather to defame them, then
amend them, Reproves upon thy self, without showing mercy to thine own soul,
diffidences, and jealousies, and suspicions of God, either that he hated thee
before thy sin, or hates thee irremediably, irreconciliably, irrecoverably,
irreparably for thy sin, These are Reproves, but they are Absente spiritu, In
the absence of the holy Ghost, before he comes, or when he is gone; When he
comes, and stays, He shall reprove, and reprove all the world, and all the
world of those errors, sin, and righteousness, and judgment, and those
errors upon those evidences, Of sin, because ye believe not on me, etc. But,
in all this proceeding he shall never divest the nature of a Comforter; In that
capacity he is sent, in that he comes, and works. I doubt I shall see an end of
my hour, and your patience, before I shall have passed those branches, which
appertain most properly to the celebration of this day, the Person, the
Comforter, his action, Reproof, the subject thereof, the world, and the Time,
Cum venerit, When he comes. The indictment, of what the accusation is, and the
evidence, how it is proved, may exercise your devotion at other times. Acts 2.2.
This day, the holy Ghost is said to have come suddenly, and therefore in that
pace we proceed, and make haste to the consideration of the Person, Ille, When
he, He the holy Ghost, the Comforter, is come.

Ille, Spiritus sanctus. Genesis 3.15.
Ille alone, He, is an emphaticall denotation; for to this purpose Ille and
Ipse is all one; And then, you know the Emphasis of that Ipse; Ipse conteret,
He or It shall bruise the Serpents head, denotes the Messiah, though there be
no Messiah named: This Ipse is so emphaticall a denotation, as that the Church
of Rome, and the Church of God strives for it; for they will needs read it
Ipsa, and so refer our salvation, in the bruising of the Serpents head, to the
Virgin Mary; we refer it according to the truth of the doctrine, and of the
letter, to Christ himself, and therefore read it Ipse, He. If there were no
more but that in David, Psalm. 100.3. Romans 8.16.
It is He that has made us, every man would conclude, that that He is God. And
if S. Paul had said Ipse alone, and not Ipse spiritus, That He, and not He the
Spirit bears witness with our spirit, every spirit would have understood this
to be the holy Spirit, the holy Ghost. If in our text there had been no more,
but such a denotation of a person that should speak to the hearts of all the
world, that that Ille, that He would proceed thus, we must necessarily have
seen an Almighty power in that denotation; But because that denotation might
have carried terror in it, being taken alone, therefore we are not left to
that, but have a relation to a former name, and specification of the holy
Ghost, The Comforter.

For the establishment of Christ's divinity, Esaias 9.6.
Christ is called The mighty God; for his relation to us, he has diverse names.
As we were all In massa damnata, Forfeited, lost, he is Redemptor, Esaias 59.20.
A Redeemer, for that that is past, The Redeemer shall come to Sion, says the
Prophet, Job 19.2.
and so Job saw His Redeemer, one that should redeem him from those miseries
that oppressed him. As Christ was pleased to provide for the future, so he is,
Salvator, Mat. 1.21.
A Savior, Therefore the Angel gave him that name Jesus, For he shall save his
people from their sins. So, because to this purpose Christ consists of two
natures, God and man, he is called our Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Because he
presents those merits which are his, as ours, and in our behalf, he is called
an Advocate, 1 John 2.1. Romans 2.6. Acts 10.42. 1 Cor. 12.3.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. And because every man is to expect according to his actions, he is
called the Judge, We testify that it is he, that is ordained of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead. Now, for Christ's first name, which is the root of
all, which is, The mighty God, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the holy Ghost; And there is our first comfort, in knowing that Christ is God;
for, he were an Intruder for that which is past, no Redeemer, he were a weak
Savior for the future, an insufficient Mediator, a silenced Advocate, and a
Judge that might be misinformed, if he were not God. And though he were God, he
might be all these to my discomfort, if there were not a holy Ghost to make all
these offices comfortable unto me. To be a Redeemer and not a Savior, is but
to pay my debts, and leave me nothing to live on. To be a Mediator, a person
capable by his composition of two natures, to intercede between God and man,
and not to be my Advocate, is but to be a good Counselor, but not of counsel
with me; To be a Judge of quick and dead, and to proceed out of outward
evidence, and not out of his bosom mercy, is but an acceleration of my
conviction; I were better lie in Prison still, then appear at that Assize;
better lie in the dust of the grave for ever, then come to that judgment. But,
as there is Men's in anima, There is a mind in the soul, and every man has a
soul, but every man has not a mind, that is, a Consideration, an Actuation,
an Application of the faculties of the soul to particulars; so there is
Spiritus in Spiritu, a Holy Ghost in all the holy offices of Christ, which
offices, being, in a great part, directed upon the whole world, are made
comfortable to me, by being, by this holy Spirit, turned upon me, and
appropriated to me; for so, even that name of Christ, which might most make me
afraid, (...).
The name of Judge, becomes a comfort to me. To this purpose does S. Baesil
call the holy Ghost, Verbum Dei, quia interpres filii: The Son of God is the
word of God, because he manifests the Father, and the Holy Ghost is the word of
God, because he applies the Son. Esaias 62.11.
Christ comes with that loud Proclamation, Ecce auditum fecit, Behold the Lord
has proclaimed it, to the end of the world, Ecce Salvator, and Ecce Merces,
Behold his Salvation, Behold thy Reward, (This is his publication in the
manifest Ordinances of the Church) And then the Holy Ghost whispers to thy
soul, as thou stand in the Congregation, in that voice that he promises,
Sibilabo populum meum, I will hiss, Zach. 10.8.
I will whisper to my people by soft and inward inspirations. Christ came to
tell us all, That to as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons
of God, John 1.12.
The Holy Ghost comes to tell thee, that thou art one of them. The Holy Ghost
is therefore Legatus, and Legatum Christi, He is Christ's Ambassador sent unto
us, and he is his Legacy bequeathed unto us by his Will; his Will made of force
by his death, and proved by his Ascension.

Now, when those days were come, that the Bridegroom was to be taken from
them, Christ Jesus to be removed from their personal sight, and conversation,
and therefore even the children of the marriage Chamber were to mourn, and
fast; Mat. 9.15. Cant.
when that Church that mourned, and lamented his absence, when she was but his
Spouse, must necessarily mourn now in a more vehement manner, when she was to
be, (in some sense) his Widow; when that Shepherd was not only to be smitten,
and so the flock dispersed, Mat. 26.21.
(this was done in his passion) but he was to be taken away, in his Ascension;
what a powerful Comforter had that need to be, that should be able to
recompense the absence of Christ Jesus himself, and to infuse comfort into his
Orphans, the children of his marriage Chamber, into his Widow, the desolate, and
disconsolate Church, into his flock, his amazed, his distressed, and, (as we
may, properly enough, say in this case) his beheaded Apostles and Disciples?
Quantus ergo Deus, qui dat Deum? Aug.
Less then God could not minister this comfort; How great a God is he, that
sends a God to comfort us? and how powerful a Comforter he, who is not only
sent by God, but is God? Therefore does the Apostle enlarge, and dilate, and
delight his soul upon this comfort, Blessed be God, 2 Cor. 1.3.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be able
to comfort them which are in any affliction, by that comfort, wherewith our
selves are comforted of God. The Apostle was loath to depart from the word,
Comfort; And therefore, as God, because he could swear by no greater, Heb.
6.13.
swear by himself, So, because there is no stronger adjuration, then the
comfort it self, to move you to accept this comfort, as the Apostle did, so we
entreat you by that, If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellow ship of the Spirit, if any bowels, Phil. 2.1.
and mercy, Lay hold upon this true comfort, the coming of the Holy Ghost,
and say to all the deceitful comforts of this world, not only Vane consolati
est is, Zach. 10.2. Job 16.2.
Your comforts are frivolous, but Onerosi consolatores, Your comforts are
burdensome; there is not only a disappointing of hopes, but an aggravating of
sin, in entertaining the comforts of this world. As Barnabas, that is, Filius
consolationis, The son of consolation, that he might be capable of this
comfort, divested himself of all worldly possessions, so, as such sons, Acts
4.36.
Suck and be satisfied, at the breasts of this consolation, that you may milk
out, Esaias 66.11. Ver. 13.
and be delighted with the abundance of his glory; And as one whom his mother
comfort, so will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
Heaven is Glory, and heaven is Joy; we cannot tell which most; we cannot
separate them; and this comfort is joy in the Holy Ghost. This makes all Jobs
states alike; as rich in the first Chapter of his Book, where all is suddenly
lost, as in the last, where all is abundantly restored. This Consolation from
the Holy Ghost makes my midnight noone, mine Executionera Physician, a stake
and pile of Fagots, a Bone-fire of triumph; this consolation makes a Satyr, and
Slander, and Libell against me, a Panegyrique, and an Elogy in my praise; It
makes a Toll an Ave, a Va an Euge, a Crucifige an Hosanna; It makes my
deathbed, a mariagebed, And my Passing Bell, an Epithalamion. In this notion
therefore we receive this Person, and in this notion we consider his
proceeding, Ille, He, He the Comforter, shall reprove.

This word, that is here translated To reprove, Arguere, Arguet.
has a double use and signification in the Scriptures. First to reprehend, to
rebuke, to correct, with Authority, with Severity; So David, Ne in furore
arguas me, O Lord rebuke me not in thine dnger: Psalm. 6.1.
And secondly, to convince, to prove, to make a thing evident, by undeniable
inferences, and necessary consequences; So, in the instructions of Gods
Ministers, the first is To reprove, 2 Ti^
and then To rebuke; So that reproving is an act of a milder sense, then
rebuking is. Augu^^
S. Augustine interprets these words twice in his Works; and in the first place
he follows the first signification of the word, That the Holy Ghost should
proceed, when he came, by power, by severity against the world. But though that
sense will stand well with the first act of this Reproof, (That he shall
Reprove, that is, reprehend the world of sin) yet it will not seem so properly
said, To reprehend the world of Righteousness, or of Judgment; for how is
Righteonsnesse, and Judgment the subject of reprehension? Therefore S.
Augustine himself in the other place, where he handles these words, embraces
the second sense, Hoc est arguere mundum, ostendere vera esse, quae non
credidit; This is to reprove the world, to convince the world of her errors,
and mistakings; And so (scarce any excepted) do all the Ancient Expositors
take it, according to that, All things are reproved of the light, Ephesians. 5.13.
and so made manifest; The light does not reprehend them, not rebuke them, not
chide, not upbraid them; but to declare them, to manifest them, to make the
world see clearly what they are, this is to reprove.

That reproving then, Elenchus.
which is warrantable by the Holy Ghost, is not a sharp increpation, a bitter
proceeding, proceeding only out of power, and authority, but by inlightning,
and informing, and convincing the understanding. The signification of this
word, which the Holy Ghost uses here for reproof, Elenchos, is best deduced,
and manifested to us, by the Philosopher who had so much use of the word, who
expresses it thus, Elenchus est Syllogismus contra contraria opinantem; A
reproof, is a proof, a proof by way of argument, against another man, who
holds a contrary opinion. All the pieces must be laid together: For, first it
must be against an opinion, and then an opinion contrary to truth, and then
such an opinion held, insisted upon, maintained, and after all this, the
reproof must lie in argument, not in force, not in violence.

First it must come so far, Opinio.
as to be an opinion; which is a middle station, between ignorance, and
knowledge; for knowledge excludes all doubting, all hesitation; opinion does
not so; but opinion excludes indifferency, and equanimity; I am rather inclined
to one side then another, Lactant. Bernard.
when I am of either opinion. Id opinatur quisque quod nescit: A man may have
an opinion that a thing is so, and yet not know it. S. Bernard proposes three
ways for our apprehending Divine things; first, understanding, which relies
upon reason; faith, which relies upon supreme Authority; and opinion, which
relies upon probability, and verisimilitude. Now there may arise in some man,
some mistakings, some mis-apprehensions of the sense of a place of Scripture,
there may arise some scruple in a case of conscience, there may arise some
inclinations to some person, of whose integrity and ability I have otherwise
had experience, there may arise some Paradoxicall imaginations in my self, and
yet these never attain to the setlednesse of an opinion, but they float in the
fancy, and are but waking dreams; and such imaginations, and fancies, and
dreams, receive too much honor in the things, and too much favor in the
persons, if they be reproved, or questioned, or condemned, or disputed against.
For, often times, even a condemnation nourishes the pride of the author of an
opinion; and besides, begets a dangerous compassion, in spectators and hearers;
and then, from pitying his pressures and sufferings, who is condemned, men come
out of that pity, to excuse his opinions; and from excusing them, to incline
toward them; And so that which was but straw at first, by being thus blown by
vehement disputation, sets fire upon timber, and draws men of more learning
and authority to side, and mingle themselves in these impertinencies. Every
fancy should not be so much as reproved, disputed against, or called in
question.

As it must not be only a fancy, Contra.
an imagination, but an opinion, (in which, though there be not a Certo, yet
there is a Potius, Though I be not sure, yet I do rather think it) so we
consider Contraria opinantem, That it must be an opinion contrary to something
that we are sure of; that is, to some received article, or to some evident
religious duty; contrary to religion, as religion is matter of faith, or as
religion is matter of obedience, to lawful Authority. Though fancies grow to
be opinions, that men come to think they have reasons for their opinions, and
to know they have other men on their side, in those opinions; yet, as long as
these are but opinions of a little too much, or a little too little, in matter
of Ceremony and Circumstance, as long as they are but deflectings, and
deviations upon collateral matters, no foundation shaked, no cornerstone
displaced, as long as they are but preteritions, not contradictions, but
omissions, not usurpations, they are not worthy of a reproof, of a conviction,
and there may be more danger then profit in bringing them into an over-vehement
agitation. Those men whose end is schism, and sedition, and distraction, are
brought so near their own ends, and the accomplishment of their own desires,
if they can draw other men together by the ears: As some have all they desire,
if they can make other men drunk, so have these if they can make sober men
wrangle.

They must be Opinions, not fancies, and they must have a contrariety, Tenenda.
an opposition to certain truths, and then they must be held, persisted in,
before it be fit to give a reproof, either by calling in question, or by
confutation. As some men are said to have told a lie so often, as that at last,
they believe it themselves, so a man admits sometimes an opinion to lodge so
long, as that Transit in intellectum, It fastens upon his understanding,
Bernard.
and that that he did but think before, now he seems to himself to know it, and
he believes it. And then, Fides si habet haesitationem, infirma est, Idem.
As that faith that admits a scruple is weak, and so, without scruple he comes
peremptorily to believe it. But so, Opinio si habet assertionem, temeraria est,
When that which is but an opinion comes to be published and avowed for a
certain, and a necessary truth, then it becomes dangerous; And that grows
apace; for scarcely does any man believe an opinion to be true, but he has a
certain appetite and itch to infuse it into others too.

Now when these pieces meet, when these atoms make up a body, a body of Error,
Syllogismus.
that it come to an Opinion, a halfe-assurance, and that in some thing contrary
to foundations, and that it be held stiffely, publicly persisted in, then
enters this reproof; but yet even then reproof is but Syllogismus, it is but
an argument, it is but convincing, it is not destroying; it is not an
Inquisition, a prison, a sword, an axe, a halter, a fire; It is a syllogism,
not a syllogism, whose major is this, Others, your Ancestors believed it, and
the minor this, We that are your Superiors believe it, Ergo you must, or else
be banished or burnt. With such syllogismes the Arians abounded, where they
prevailed in the Primitive Church, and this is the Logique of the Inquisition
of Rome. But our syllogism must be a syllogism within our Authors definition,
when out of some things which are agreed on all sides, other things that are
controverted, are made evident and manifest. Hell is presented to us by fire,
but fire without light: Heaven by light, and light without any ill effect of
fire in it. Where there is nothing but an Accuser, (perchance not that) and
fire, citation and excommunication, here is Satan, (who is an Accuser, but an
invisible one) and here is Hell it self, a devilish and a dark proceeding.
But when they, to whom this reproof belongs, take Christ's way, not to tread
out smoking flax, that a poor soul, misled by ignorant zeal, and so
easily combustible and apt to take fire, be not trodden down with too much
power, and passion, when they do not break a bruised reed, that is, not
terrify a distracted conscience, which perchance a long ill conversation with
schismatic company, and a spiritual melancholy, and over-tender sense of
sin has cast too low before, then does this reproof work aright, when it is
brought in with light before fire, with convenient instruction, and not hasty
condemnation.

We may well call this Viam Christi, and Viam Spiritus sancti, Christ's way, and
the Holy Ghosts way, for he had need be a very good Christian, and a very
sanctified man, that can walk in that way; Perfectorum est, nihil in peccatore
odisse praeter peccata: August.
He that hates nothing in an Heretic, or in a Schismatique, but the Schism,
or the Heresy, He that sets bounds to that sea, and has said to his
affections, and humane passions, Stay there, go no farther, has got far in the
steps of Christian perfection. The slipperinesse, the precipitation is so great
on the other side, that commonly we begin to hate the person first, and then
grow glad, when he grows guilty of any thing worthy our hate; and we make God
himself the Devils instrument, when we pretend zeal to his service, in these
reproves and corrections, and serve only our own impotent passion, and
inordinate ambition. For therein Plerumque cum tibi videris odisse inimicum,
fratrem odisti, August.
and nescis; Thou think or pretend^^t to hate an enemy, and hate thine
own brother, and know it not; Thou know not, considerest not, that he,
by good usage and instruction, might have been made thy Brother, a
fellow-member in the Visible Church, by outward conformity, and in the
Invisible too, by inward. Cyprian.
Etiam fictilia vasa confringere, Domino soli concessum, If thou be a vessel
of gold or silver, and that other of clay, thou of a clear, and rectified, he
of a dark and perverted understanding, yet even vessels of clay are only in
the power of that Potters hand that made them, or bought them, to break, and
no bodies else: Still, as long as it is possible, proceed we with the
moderation of that blessed Father, Sic peccata Haereticorum compesce, ut sint
quos poeniteat peccasse, August.
Take not away the subject of the error, (the perverseness of the man) so, as
that thou take away the subject of repentance, the man himself; If thou
require fruit, leave a tree; If thou would have him repent, take not away his
life, says he. We see the leasurely pace that Gods Justice walks in: Dan 4.24.
When Daniel had told Nebuchadnezzar his danger, yea the Decree of God upon
him, (as he calls it) yet he told him a way how to revoke it; by works of
mercy to the poor, and breaking off his sins; And after all this, he had a
years space to consider himself, Dan 26.
before the judgment was executed upon him.

But now beloved, Voluntas perversa.
all that we have said, or can be said to this purpose, conduces but to this,
That though this reproof, which the Holy Ghost leads us to, be rather in
convincing the understanding by argument, and other persuasions then by
extending our power to the destruction of the person, yet this has a
modification, how it must be, and a determination where it must end, for, there
are cases in which we may, we must go farther. For, for the understanding, we
know how to work upon that; we know what arguments have prevayled upon us,
with what arguments we have prevailed upon others, and those we can use: so
far, Vt nihil habeant contra, and si non assentiantur, That though they will
not be of our mind, yet they shall have nothing to say against it. So far we
can go upon that faculty, the understanding. But the will of man is so
irregular, so unlimited a thing, as that no man has a bridle upon another
will, no man can undertake nor promise for that; no Creature has that faculty
but man, yet no man understands that faculty. It has been the exercise of a
thousand wits, it has been the subject, yea the knot and perplexity of a
thousand disputations, to find out, what it is that determines, that concludes
the will of man so, as that it assents thereunto. For, if that were absolutely
true which some have said, (and yet perchance that is as far as any have gone)
that Vltimus actus intellectus est voluntas, That the last act of the
Understanding is the Will, then all our labor were still to work upon the
Understanding, and when that were rectified, the Will must follow. But it is
not so; As we feel in our selves that we do many sins, which our
understanding, and the soul of our understanding, our conscience, tells us we
should not do, so we see many others persist in errors, after manifest
convincing, after all reproof which can be directed upon the understanding.

When therefore those errors which are to be reproved, are in that faculty,
which is not subject to this reproof by argument, in a perverted will, because
this wilful stubbornness is always accompanied with pride, with singularity,
with faction, with schism, with sedition, we must remember the way which the
Holy Ghost has directed us in, Eccles. 10.16.
If the iron be blunt, we must either put to more strength, or whet the edge.
Now, when the fault is in the perverseness of the will, we can put to no more
strength, no argument serves to overcome that; And therefore the holy Ghost
has admitted another way, To whet the iron; Gal. 5.12.
And in that way does the Apostle say, Vtinam abscindantur, I would they were
even cut off which trouble you. There is an incorrigibility, in which, when the
reproof cannot lead the will, it must draw blood; which is, where pretenses of
Religion are made, and Treasons, and Rebellions, and Invasions, and Massacres
of people, and Assasinates of Princes practiced. And this is a reproof (which,
as we shall see of the rest in the following branches is) from the Holy Ghost,
in his function in this text, as he is a Comforter; This therefore is our
comfort, That our Church was never negligent in reproving the Adversary, but
has from time to time strenuously and confidently maintained her truths
against all oppositions, to the satisfying of any understanding, though not to
the reducing of some perverse wills. So Gregor: de Valentia professes of our
arguments, I confess these reasons would conclude my understanding, Nisi
didicissem captivare intellectum meum ad intellectum Ecclesiae, But that I have
learnt to captivate my understanding to the understanding of the Church, and,
say what they will, to believe as the Church of Rome believes; which is
Maldonats profession too, upon diverse of Calvin's arguments, This argument would
prevail upon me, but that he was an Heretic that found it. So that here is
our comfort, we have gone so far in this way of Reproof, Vt nihil habeant
contra, etsi nobiscum non sentiant. This is our comfort, that as some of the
greatest Divines in foreign parts, so also, in our Church at home, some of the
greatest Prelates, who have been traduced to favor Rome, have written the
most solidly and effectually against the heresies of Rome of any other. But it
must be a comfort upon them that are reproved. And this is their comfort, that
the State never drew drop of blood for Religion; But then, this is our comfort
still, that where their perverseness shall endanger either Church or State,
both the State and Church may, by the holy Ghosts direction, and will return to
those means which God allows them for their preservation, that is, To whet the
edge of the Iron, in execution of the laws. And so we pass from our second
consideration, The Action, Reproof, to the subject of Reproof, The world, He
shall reprove the world.

It is no wonder that this word Mundus should have a larger signification then
other words, for it contains all, embraces, comprehends all: But there is no
word in Scripture, Mundus.
that has not only not so large, but so diverse a signification, for it
signifies things contrary to one another. It signifies commonly, and primarily,
the whole frame of the world; and more particularly all mankind; and
oftentimes only wicked men; and sometimes only good men, As Dilexit mundum, God
loved the world, John 3.16. John 4.42. Romans 11.15.
And Hic est vere salvator mundi, This is the Christ, the Savior of the world;
And Reconciliatio mundi, The casting away of the Jews, is the reconciliation of
the world: The Jews were a part of the world, but not of this world. Now in
every sense, the world may well be said to be subject to the reproof of God,
as reproof is a rebuke: for He rebuked the wind, Luke 8.14. Psalm. 106.17. Genesis
3.17. Psalm. 105.14.
and it was quiet; And, He rebuked the red Sea, and it was dried up; He rebuked
the earth bitterly in that Maledicta terra, for Adams punishment, Cursed be the
ground for thy sake; And for the noblest part of earth, man, and the noblest
part of men, Kings, He rebuked even Kings for their sakes, and said, Touch not
mine anointed. But this is not the rebuke of our Text; for ours is a rebuke of
comfort, even to them that are rebuked; Whereas the angry rebuke of God carries
heavy effects with it. Increpat, and fugiunt, Esaias 17.13.
God shall rebuke them, and they shall fly far off; He shall chide them out of
his presence, and they shall never return to it. Increpasti superbos, and
maledicti isti: Thou have rebuked the proud, Psalm. 119.21.
and thy rebuke has wrought upon them as a Malediction, not physic, but
poison; As it is in another Psalm, Increpasti, and periit, Thou have rebuked
them, and they perished. Psalm. 9.6.
In these cases, there is a working of the holy Ghost; and that, as the holy
Ghost is a Comforter; for it is a comfort to them, for whose deliverances God
executes these judgments upon others, that they are executed; but we consider
a rebuke, a reproof that ministers comfort even to them upon whom it falls; and
so in that sense, we shall see that this Comforter reproves the world, in all
those significations of the world which we named before.

As the world is the whole frame of the world, God has put into it a reproof,
Mundus magnus.
a rebuke, lest it should seem eternal, which is, a sensible decay and age in
the whole frame of the world, and every piece thereof. The seasons of the year
irregular and distempered; the Sun fainter, and languishing; men less in
stature, and shorter-lived. No addition, but only every year, new sorts, new
species of worms, and flies, and sicknesses, which argue more and more
putrefaction of which they are engendered. And the Angels of heaven, which did
so familiarly converse with men in the beginning of the world, though they may
not be doubted to perform to us still their ministerial assistances, yet they
seem so far to have deserted this world, as that they do not appear to us, as
they did to those our Fathers. S. Cyprian observed this in his time, when
writing to Demetrianus, Cyprian.
who imputed all those calamities which afflicted the world then, to the
impiety of the Christians who would not join with them in the worship of their
gods, Cyprian went no farther for the cause of these calamities, but Ad
senescentem mundum, To the age and impotency of the whole world; And therefore,
says he, Imputent senes Christianis, quod minus valiant in senectutem; Old men
were best accuse Christians, that they are more sickly in their age, then they
were in their youth; Is the fault in our religion, or in their decay? Canos in
pueris videmus, nec aetas in senectute desinit, sed incipit a senectute; We see
gray hairs in children, and we do not die old, and yet we are borne old. Lest
the world (as the world signifies the whole frame of the world) should glorify
it self, or flatter, and abuse us with an opinion of eternity, we may admit
usefully (though we do not conclude peremptorily) this observation to be true,
that there is a reproof, a rebuke born in it, a sensible decay and mortality
of the whole world.

But is this a reproof agreeable to our Text? A reproof that carries comfort
with it? Consolatio. Romans 8.19.
Comfort to the world it self, that it is not eternal? Truly it is; As S.
Paul has most pathetically expressed it; The creature (that is, the world) is
in anearnest expectation, The creature waits, The whole creation groaneth,
and travelleth in pain. Therefore the creature (that is, the world) receives a
perfect comfort, in being delivered at last, and an inchoative comfort, in
knowing now, that it shall be delivered; From what? From subjection to vanity,
Ver. 20. and 21.
from the bondage of corruption; That whereas the world is now subject to
mutability and corruption, at the Resurrection it shall no longer be so, but in
that measure, and in that degree which it is capable of, Ver. 21.
It shall enter into the glorious liberty of the children of God, that is, be
as free from corruption, or change in that state, wherein it shall be
glorified, Esaias 30.26. 2 Pet. 3.13.
as the Saints shall be in the glory of their state; for, The light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold;
And there shall be new heavens, and new earth; Which is a state, that this
world could not attain to, if it were eternally to last, in that condition, in
which it is now, a condition subject to vanity, impotency, corruption, and
therefore there is a comfort in this reproof, even to this world, That it is
not eternal; This world is the happier for that.

As the world, Mundus, homines. Mat. 18.7.
in a second sense, signifies all the men of the world, (so it is, Woe unto the
world, because of offenses) There is a reproof born in every man; which
reproof is an uncontrollable sense, and an unresistible remorse, and chiding
of himself inwardly, when he is about to sin, and a horror of the Majesty of
God, whom, when he is alone, he is forced (and forced by himself) to fear,
and to believe, though he would fain make the world believe, that he did not
believe in God, but lived at peace, and subsisted of himself, without being
beholding to God. For, as in nature, heavy things will ascend, and light
descend rather then admit a vacuity, so in religion, the devil will get into
Gods room, rather then the heart of man shall be without the opinion of God;
There is no Atheist; They that oppose the true, do yet worship a false god; and
he that says there is no God, does for all that, set up some God to himself.
Every man has this reproof borne in him, that he does ill, that he offends a
God, that he breaks a law when he sins. Consolatio.
And this reproof is a reproof within our Text, for it has this comfort with
it, That howsoever some men labor to overcome the natural tenderness of the
conscience, and so triumph over their own ruin, and rejoice when they can
sleep, and wake again without any noise in their conscience, or sense of sin,
yet, in truth this candle cannot be blown out, this remorse cannot be
overcome; But were it not a greater comfort to me if I could overcome it? No.
For though this remorse (which is but a natural impression, and common to all
men) be not grace, yet this remorse, which is the natural reproof of the
soul, is that, that grace works upon. Grace does not ordinarily work upon the
stiffness of the soul, upon the silence, upon the frowardness, upon the
averseness of the soul, but when the soul is soupled and mellowed, and feels
this reproof, this remorse in it self, that reproof, that remorse becomes as
the matter, and grace enters as the form, that becomes the body, and grace
becomes the soul; and that is the comfort of this natural reproof of the
world, that is, of every man: First, that it will not be quenched in it self,
and then, that ordinarily it induces a nobler light then it self, which is
effectual and true Repentance.

As the world, in a third sense, Mundus, mali. Heb. 11.7. 2 Pet. 2.5.
signifies only the wicked world (so it is, Noah in preparing an Ark, condemned
the world; And so, God spared not the old world) That world, the world of the
wicked suffer many reproves, many rebukes in their hearts, which they will not
discover, because they envy God that glory. We read of diverse great actors in
the first persecutions of the Christians, who being fearfully tormented in
body and soul, at their deaths, took care only, that the Christians might not
know what they suffered, lest they should receive comfort, and their God glory
therein. Certainly Herod would have been more affected, if he had thought that
we should have known how his pride was punished with those sudden worms, Acts
12.23.
then with the punishment it self. This is a self-reproofe; even in this,
though he will not suffer it to break out to the edification of others, there
is some kind of chiding himself for some thing mis-done. But is there any
comfort in this reproof? Consolatio.
Truly, beloved, I can hardly speak comfortably of such a man, after he is
dead, that dies in such a dis-affection, loath that God should receive glory,
or his servants edification by these judgments. But even with such a man, if I
assisted at his deathbed, I would proceed with a hope to infuse comfort, even
from that dis-affection of his: As long as I saw him in any acknowledgement
(though a negligent, nay though a malignant, a despitefull acknowledgement) of
God, as long as I found him loath that God should receive glory, even from that
loathnesse, from that reproof, from that acknowledgement, That there is a God
to whom glory is due, I would hope to draw him to glorify that God before his
last gasp; My zeal should last as long as his wives officiousness, or his
childrens, or friends, or servants obsequiousness, or the solicitude of his
Physicians should; as long as there were breath, they would minister some help;
as long as there were any sense of God, I would hope to do some good. And so
much comfort may arise even out of this reproof of the world, as the world is
only the wicked world.

In the last sense, the world signifies the Saints, the Elect, the good men of
the world, Mundus, sancti. John 14.31. John 17.21.
believing and persevering men. Of those Christ says, The world shall know
that I love the Father; And, That the world may believe that thou have sent me.
And this world, that is, the godliest of this world, have many reproves, many
corrections upon them. That outwardly they are the prey of the wicked, and
inwardly have that Stimulum carnis, which is the devils Solicitor, and round
about them they see nothing but profanation of his word, mis-imployment of his
works, his creatures, mis-constructions of his actions, his judgments,
blasphemy of his name, negligence and under-valuation of his Sacraments,
violation of his Sabbaths, and holy convocations. O what a bitter reproof,
what a manifest evidence of the infirmity, nay of the malignity of man, is
this, (if it be put home, and thoroughly considered) That even the goodness of
man gets to no higher a degree, but to have been the occasion of the greatest
ill, the greatest cruelty that ever was done, the crucifying of the Lord of
life! The better a man is, the more he concurred toward being the cause of
Christ's death; which is a strange, but a true and a pious consideration.
Dilexit mundum, He loved the world, and he came to save the world; That is,
most especially, and effectually, those that should believe in him, in the
world, and live according to that belief, and die according to that life. If
there had been no such, Christ had not died, never been crucified. So that
impenitent men, mis-beleeving men have not put Christ to death, but it is we,
we whom he loves, we that love him, that have crucified him.

In what rank then, of opposition against Christ, shall we place our sins,
since even our faith and good works have been so far the cause why Christ
died, that, but for the salvation of such men, Believers, Workers, Perseverers,
Christ had not died? This then is the reproof of the world, that is, of the
Saints of God in the world, Psalm. 84.10.
that though I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, I must
dwell in the tents of wickedness, That though my zeal consume me, because
mine enemies have forgotten thy words, Psalm. 119.138.
I must stay amongst them that have forgotten thy words; But this, and all
other reproves, that arise in the godly, (that we may still keep up that
consideration, that he that reproves us, is The Comforter) have this comfort in
them, that these faults that I endure in others, God has either pardoned in
me, or kept from me: and that though this world be wicked, yet when I shall
come to the next world, I shall find Noah, that had been drunk; and Lot, Genesis
9.21. Genesis 19.33. Numb. 11.11.
that had been incestuous; and Moses, that murmured at Gods proceedings; and
Job, and Jeremy, and Jonas, impatient, even to imprecations against themselves;
Christ's own Disciples ambitious of worldly preferment; his Apostles forsaking
him, his great Apostle forswearing him; And Mary Magdalen that had been, I know
not what sinner; and David that had been all; I leave none so ill in this
world, but I may carry one that was, or find some that had been as ill as
they, in heaven; and that blood of Christ Jesus, which has brought them
thither, is offered to them that are here, who may be successors in their
repentance, as they are in their sins. And so have you all intended for the
Person, the Comforter, and the Action, Reproof, and the Subject, the World;
remains only (that for which there remains but a little time) the Time, Cum
venerit, When the Comforter comes he will proceed thus.

We use to note three Advents, three commings of Christ. Cum venerit
An Advent of Humiliation, when he came in the flesh; an Advent of glory, when
he shall come to judgment; and between these an Advent of grace, in his
gracious working in us, in this life; and this middlemost Advent of Christ, is
the Advent of the Holy Ghost, in this text; when Christ works in us, the Holy
Ghost comes to us. And so powerful is his coming, that whereas he that sent
him, Christ Jesus himself, Came unto his own, and his own received him not;
John 1.11.
The Holy Ghost never comes to his own but they receive him; for, only by
receiving him, they are his own; for, besides his title of Creation, by which
we are all his, with the Father, and the Son, as there is a particular title
accrewed to the Son by Redemption, so is there to the Holy Ghost, of certain
persons, upon whom he sheds the comfort of his application. The Holy Ghost
picks out and chooses whom he will; Spirat ubi vult; perchance me that speak;
perchance him that hears; perchance him that shut his eyes yester-night, and
opened them this morning in the guiltiness of sin, and repents it now:
perchance him that has been in the meditation of an usurious contract, of an
ambitious supplantation, of a licentious solicitation, since he came hither
into Gods house, and deprehends himself in that sinful purpose now. This is
his Advent, this is his Pentecost. As he came this day with a Manifestation,
so, if he come into thee this evening, he comes with a Declaration, a
Declaration in operation. Pater meus usque modo operatur, and ego operor, John
5.17.
My Father works even now, and I work, was Christ's answer, when he was accused
to have broken the Sabbath day; that the Father wrought that day as well as he.
So also Christ assigns other reasons of working upon the Sabbath; Luke 14.5.
Cujus Bos, Whose Ox is in danger, Mat. 12.3, 5.
and the owner will not relieve him? Nonne legistis, Have ye not read how David
ate the Shewbread? And Annon legistis, Did not the Priests break the Sabbath,
in their service in the Temple? But the Sabbath is the Holy Ghosts greatest
working day: The Holy Ghost works more upon the Sunday, then all the week. In
other days, he picks and chooses; but upon these days of holy Convocation, I
am surer that God speaks to me, Tertul.
then at home, in any private inspiration. For, as the Congregation besieges
God in public prayers, Agmine facto, so the Holy Ghost casts a net over the
whole Congregation, in this Ordinance of preaching, and catches all that break
not out.

If he be come into thee, he is come to reprove thee; to make thee reprove thy
self; But do that, Cum vencrit, when the Holy Ghost is come. If thou have
been slack in the outward acts of Religion, and find that thou art the
worse thought of amongst men, for that respect, and the more open to some
penal Laws, for those omissions, and for these reasons only beginnest to
correct, and reprove thy self, this is a reproof, Antequam Spiritus vener it,
before the Holy Ghost is come into thee, or has breathed upon thee, and
inanimated thine actions. If the powerfulness, and the piercing of the mercies
of thy Savior, have sometimes, in the preaching thereof, entendered and melted
thy heart, and yet upon the confidence of the readiness, and easiness of that
mercy, thou return to thy vomit, to the re-pursuite of those halfe-repented
sins, and think it time enough to go forward upon thy deathbed, this is a
reproof Postquam abierit Spiritus, After the Holy Ghost is departed from thee.
If the burden of thy sins oppress thee, if thou be ready to cast thy self
from the Pinnacle of the Temple, from the participation of the comforts afforded
thee in the Absolution, and Sacraments of the Church, If this appear to thee
in a kind of humility, and reverence to the Majesty of God, That thou dare
not come into his sight, not to his table, not to speak to him in prayer, whom
thou have so infinitely offended, this is a reproof, Cum Spiritus Sanctus
simulatur, when the Holy Ghost is counterfaited, when Satan is transformed into
an Angel of light, and makes thy dismayed conscience believe, that that
affection, which is truly a higher Treason against God, then all thy other
sins, (which is, a diffident suspecting of Gods mercy) is such a reverend
fear, and trembling as he looks for.

Reprove thy self; but do it by convincing, not by a downright stupefaction
of the conscience; but by a consideration of the nature of thy sin, and a
contemplation of the infinite proportion between God and thee, and so between
that sin and the mercy of God; for, thou can not be so absolutely, so
entirely, so essentially sinful, as God is absolutely, and entirely, and
essentially merciful. Do what thou can, there is still some goodness in
thee; that nature that God made, is good still: Do God what he will, he
cannot strip himself, not divest himself of mercy. If thou could do as
much as God can pardon, thou were a Manichaean God, a God of evil, as infinite
as the God of goodness is. Do it, Cum venerit Spiritus, when the Holy Ghost
pleads on thy side; not cum venerit homo, not when man's reason argues for thee,
and says, It were injustice in God, to punish one for another, the soul for
the body: Much less Cum venerit inimicus homo, when the Devil pleads, and
pleads against thee, that thy sins are greater then God can forgive. Reprove
any over-bold presumption, that God cannot forsake thee, with remembering who it
was that said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Even Christ himself
could apprehend a dereliction. Reprove any distrust in God, with remembering to
whom it was said, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso; Even the thief himself, who
never saw him, never met him, but at both their executions, was carried up with
him, the first day of his acquaintance. If either thy cheerfulness, or thy
sadness be conceived of the Holy Ghost, there is a good ground of thy Noli
timere, fear neither. So the Angel proceeded with Joseph, Fear not to take
Mary, for that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost. Fear not thou,
that a cheerfulness and alacrity in using Gods blessings, fear not that a
moderate delight in music, in conversation, in recreations, shall be imputed
to thee for a fault, for, it is conceived by the Holy Ghost, and is the
offspring of a peaceful conscience. Embrace therefore his working, Qui omnia
opera nostra operatus est nobis, Thou, O Lord, have wrought all our works in
us; Esaias 26.12.
And whose working none shall be able to frustrate in us; Operabitur, and quis
avertit? Esaias 43.13.
I will work, and who shall let it? And as the Son concurred with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost with the Son, in working in our behalf, so Operemur and
nos, let us also work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, by reproving
the errors in our understanding, and the perversenesses of our conversation,
that way, in which the Holy Ghost is our guide, by reproving, that is, chiding
and convincing the conscience, but still with comfort, that is, steadfast
application of the merits of Christ Jesus.

SERMON. XXXVII. Preached upon Whitsunday.
JOHN 16.8, 9, 10, 11. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin,
and of righteousness, and of judgment.
Of sin, because ye believe not on me.
Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.
Of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged.

IN a former Sermon upon these words, we have established this, That the Person
whom our Savior promises here, being by himself promised, in the verse before
the text, in the name and quality of The Comforter, All that this Person is to
do in this text, is to be done so, as the World, upon which it is to be done,
may receive comfort in it. Therefore this word, Reproof admitting a double
signification, one by way of authority, as it is a rebuke, an increpation, the
other as it is a convincing by argument, by way of instruction, and
information, because the first way cannot be applied to all the parts of this
text, and to all that the Holy Ghost is to do upon the world, (for, howsoever
he may rebuke the world of sin, he cannot be said to rebuke it of
righteousness, and of judgment) according to S. Augustines later
interpretation of these words, (for in one place of his works, he takes this
word, Reproof, in the harder sense, for rebuke, but in another, in the milder)
we have and must pursue the second signification of the word, That the Holy
Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, of judgment, by
convincing the world, by making the world confess and acknowledge all that
that the Holy Ghost intends in all these. And this manifestation, and this
conviction in these three, will be our parts. In the first of which, That the
Holy Ghost shall Reprove, that is, convince, the world of sin, we shall first
look how all the world is under sin; and then, whether the Holy Ghost, being
come, have convinced all the world, made all the world see that it is so; and
in these two inquisitions, we shall determine that first branch.

For the first, (for, of the other two we shall reach you the boughs anon, 1
Part. Mundus sub peccato.
when you come to gather the fruit, and lay open the particulars, then when we
come to handle them) That all the world is under sin, and knows it not, (for
this Reproof, Elenchus, is, (says the Philosopher) Syllogismus contra
contraria opinantem, An argument against him that is of a contrary opinion) we
condole first the misery of this Ignorance, for, August.
Quid miserius misero, non miser ante seipsum? What misery can be so great, as
to be ignorant, insensible of our own misery? Every act done in such an
ignorance as we might overcome, is a new sin; And it is not only a new
practice from the Devil, but it is a new punishment from God; August.
Iussisti Domine, and sic est, ut poena sit sibi omnis inordinatus animus,
Every sinner is an Executioner upon himself; and he is so by Gods appointment,
who punishes former sins with future. This then is the miserable state of the
world, It might know, and does not, that it is wholly under an inundation, a
deluge of sin. For, sin is a transgression of some Law, which, he that sins may
know himself to be bound by: For, if any man could be exempt from all Law, he
were impeccable, he could not sin; And if he could not possibly have any
knowledge of the Law, it were no Law to him.

Now under the transgression of what Law lies all the World? Lex Humana.
For the positive Laws of the States in which we live, a man may keep them,
according to the intention of them that made those Laws; which is all that is
required in any humane Law; (to keep it, if not according to the letter, yet
according to the intention of the Lawmakers) Nay it is not only possible,
Seneca.
but easy to do so; Angusta innocentia ad legem bonum esse, (says the moral
man's holy Ghost, Seneca) It is but a narrow and a shallow honesty, to be no
honester then the Law forces him to be. Thus then, in violating the Laws of the
State, all the World is not under sin.

If we pass from Laws merely humane, Ceremonialia.
(though, in truth, scarce any just Law is so, merely humane, for God, that
commands obedience to humane Laws, has a hand in the making of them) to those
ceremonial, and judicial Laws, which the Jews received immediately from God,
(in which respect they may be called divine Laws, though they were but local
and but temporary) which were in such a number, as that, though penal Laws in
some States be so many, and so heavy, as that they serve only for snares, and
springes upon the people, yet they are no where equal to the ceremonial and
judicial Laws, Psalm. ^.6.
which lay upon the Jews; yet even for these Laws S. Paul says of himself,
That touching that righteousness which is in the Law, he was blameless. Thus
therefore (in violating ceremonial or judicial Laws) all the World is not
under sin, both because all the World was not bound by that Law, and some in
the World did keep it.

But in two other respects it is; Lex Naturae.
first, That there is a Law of Nature that passes through all the World, a Law
in the heart; and of the breach of this, no man can be always ignorant. As
every man has a devil in himself, Chrysostom.
Spontaneum Daemonem, A Devil of his own making, some particular sin that
transports him, so every man has a kind of God in himself, such a
conscience, as sometimes reproves him. Carry we this consideration a little
higher, and we may see herein, some verification, at least, some useful
application of Origens extreme error. Origin.
He thought, that at last, after infinite revolutions, (as all other substances
should be) even the Devil himself should be (as it were) sucked and swallowed
into God, and there should remain nothing at last, (as there was nothing else
at first) but only God; (not by an annihilation of the Creature, that any
thing should come to nothing, but by this absorption, by a transmigration of
all Creatures into God, that God should be all, and all should be God) So in
our case, That which is the sinners devil, becomes his God; That very sin
which has possessed him, by the excess of that sin, or, by some loss, or
pain, or shame following that sin, occasions that reproof and remorse, that
withdraws him from that sin. So all the world is under sin, because they have a
Law in themselves, and a light in themselves.

And it is so in a second respect, Originale peecatum. Esaias 1.4. Wisd. 2.23.
That all being derived from Adam, Adams sin is derived upon all. Only that
one man, that was not naturally deduced from Adam, Christ Jesus, was guilty of
no sin; All others are subject to that malediction, Vae genti peccatrici, Woe to
this sinful World. God made man Inexterminabilem, says the Wiseman,
undisseisible, unexpellible; such, as he could not be thrust out of his
Immortality, whether he would or no: August.
for, that was man's first immortality, Posse non mori, That he needed not have
dyed. When man killed himself, and threw upon all his posterity the morte
morieris, that we must dye, and that Death is Stipendium peccati, The wages of
sin, and that Anima quae peccaverit, Ezech. 18.4.
ipsa morietur, that That soul, and only that soul that sins, shall dye,
Since we see the punishment fall upon all, we are sure the fault cleaves to all
too; all do dye, therefore all do sin. And though this Original sin that
over-flowes us all, may in some sense be called peccatum involuntarium, a sin
without any elicite act of the Will, (for so it must needs be in Children) and
so properly no sin, yet as all our other faculties were, August.
so omnium voluntates in Adam, all our wills were in Adam, and we sinned
wilfully, when he did so, and so Original sin is a voluntary sin: Our will is
poisoned in the fountain; and, as soon as our will is able to exercise any
election, we are willing to sin, as soon as we can, and sorry we can sin no
sooner, and sorry no longer: we are willing before the Devil is willing, and
willing after the Devil is weary, and seek occasions of tentation, when he
presents none. And so, as the breach of the Law of Nature, and as the deluge of
Original sin has surrounded the whole world, the whole world is under sin.

That all the world is so, requires not much proof: But then, does the Holy
Ghost, An arguat. Spiritus sanctus?
by his coming, reprove, that is, convince the whole world, that it is so? The
Holy Ghost is able to do it, and he has good cause to do it; But does he do
it? Is this Cum venerit, when he comes, come? Is he come to this purpose, to
make all the world know their sinful condition? God knows they know it not.
Howsoever they may have some knowledge of the breach of the Law of Nature, yet
they have no knowledge of any remedy after, and so lack all comfort; and
therefore this is no knowledge from the Holy Ghost, from the Comforter. And for
the knowledge of Original sin, which lies more heavy upon them then upon us,
(who have the ease of Baptism, which slackens, and weakens Original sin in
us) they are so far from knowing, that that sin is derived from Adam, as that
they do not know, that they themselves are derived from Adam; not that there
is such a sin, not that there was such an Adam. How then does the Holy Ghost,
who is come according to Christ's promise, according to his promise, Reprove,
that is, Convince the world of sin, since this (being to be done by the Holy
Ghost) implies a knowledge of Christ, and a way of comfort in the doing thereof?

This one word Arguet, He shall reprove, convince, admits three acceptations.
First, Antequam abierit.
in the future, as it is here presented, He shall; and so the Cum venerit, When
he comes, signifies Antequam abierit, Before he departs. He came at Pentecost,
and presently set on foot his Commission, by the Apostles, to reprove, convince
the world of sin, and has proceeded ever since, by their successors, in
reducing Nation after Nation; and, before the consummation of the world, before
he retire, to rest eternally in the bosom of the Father and the Son, from whom
he proceeded, he shall reprove the whole world of sin, that is, bring them to a
knowledge, That in the breach of the law of nature, and in the guiltiness of
original sin, they are all under a burden, which none of them all, of
themselves, can discharge. This work S. Paul seems to hasten sooner: Romans
10.18.
To convince the Jews of their infidelity, he argues thus, Have not they heard
the Gospel? They, that is, the Gentiles; and if They, much more You; And that
They had heard it, he proves by the application of those words, In omnem
terram, Psalm. 19.3.
Their voice is gone through all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world, That is, the voice of the Apostles, in the preaching of the Gospel.

Hence grew that distraction, and perplexity which we find in the Fathers,
Whether it could be truly said, that the Gospel had been preached over all the
world in those times. If we number the Fathers, most are of that opinion, That
before the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, this was fulfilled. Of those
that think the contrary, some proceed upon reasons ill grounded; particularly
Origin; Quid de Britannis and Germanis, Origin.
qui nec adhuc audierunt verbum Euangelii? What shall we say of Britanny, and
Germany, who have not heard of the Gospel yet? For, before Origens time,
(though Origin were 1400. years since) in what darkness soever he mistook us
to be, we had a blessed and a glorious discovery of the Gospel of Christ Jesus
in this Island. S. Hierome, Hierom.
who denies this universal preaching of the Gospel before the destruction of
the Temple, yet doubts not but that the fulfilling of that prophecy was then in
action, and in a great forwardness; I am completum, aut brevi ternimus
complendum; Already we see it performed, says he; Or, at least so earnestly
pursued, as that it must necessarily, very soon be performed: Nec puto aliquam
remanere gentem, quae Christi nomen ignor at; I do not think, (says that
Father, more then 1200. years since) that there is any nation that has not
heard of Christ; Et quanquam non habuerit praedicatorem, ex viciais, etc. If
they have not had express Preachers themselves, yet from their neighbors they
have had some Echoes of this voice, some reflections of this light.

The later Divines, and the School, that find not this early, and general
preaching over the world, to lie in proof, proceed to a more safe way, That
there was then Odor Euangelii, A sweet savor of the Gospel issued, though it
were not yet arrived to all parts: As if a plentiful and diffusive perfume
were set up in a house, we would say The house were perfumed, though that
perfume were not yet come to every corner of the house. But not to thrust the
world into so narrow a strait, as it is, when a Decree is said to have gone
out from Augustus, Luke 2.1. Acts 2.5.
to tax all the world, (for this was but the Roman world) Nor, That there
were men dwelling at Jerusalem, devout men, of every nation under heaven, (for,
this was but of nations discovered, and traded withal then) nor, when S. Paul
says, Romans 11.18. Mat. 24.14.
That the faith of the Romans was published to the world, (for that was as far
as he had gone) those words of our Savior, This Gospel of the kingdom shall
be preached in all the world, for a witness to all nations, and then shall the
end come, have evermore, by all, Ancient and Modern, Fathers and School,
Preachers and Writers, Expositors and Controverters, been literally understood,
that before the end of the world, the Gospel shall be actually, really,
evidently, efectually preached to all nations; and so, Cum venerit, When the
holy Ghost comes, that is, Antequam abierit, Before he go, he shall reprove,
convince the whole world of sin, and this, as he is a Comforter, by
accompanying their knowledge of sin, with the knowledge of the Gospel, for the
remission of sins.

It agrees with the nature of goodness to be so diffusive, communicable to
all. It agrees with the nature of God, Genesis 7.11.
who is goodness, That as all the fountains of the great Deep were broken up,
and the windows of heaven were opened, and so came the flood over all, so there
should be Diluvium Spiritus, A flowing out of the holy Ghost upon all, Joel.
2.28. Esaias 2.2. Joh. 3.8.
as he promises, Effundam, I will pour it out upon all, and Diluvium gentium,
That all nations should flow up unto him. For, this Spirit, Spirat ubi vult,
Breathes where it pleases him; and though a natural wind cannot blow East and
West, North and South together, this Spirit at once breathes upon the most
contrary dispositions, upon the presuming, and upon the despairing sinner; and,
in an instant can denizen and naturalize that soul that was an alien to the
Covenant, Empale and inlay that soul that was bred upon the Common, amongst
the Gentiles, transform that soul, which was a Goat, into a Sheep, unite that
soul which was a lost sheep to the fold again, shine upon that soul that sits
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and so melt and pour out that soul
that yet understands nothing of the Divine nature, nor of the Spirit of God,
that it shall become partaker of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 6.17.
and be the same Spirit with the Lord. When Christ took our flesh, he had not
all his Ancestors of the Covenant; he was pleased to come of Ruth, a Moabite, a
poor stranger; As he came, so will the holy Ghost go to strangers also. Shall
any man murmur, or draw into disputation, why this Spirit does not breath in
all nations at once? or why not sooner then it does in some? Does this Spirit
fall and rest upon every soul in this Congregation now? May not one man find
that he receives him now, and suffer him to go away again? May not another who
felt no motion of him now, recollect himself at home, and remember something
then, which has been said now, to the quickening of this Spirit in him there?
Since the holy Ghost visits us so, successively, not all at once, not all with
an equal establishment, we may safely embrace that acceptance of this word
Arguet, He shall, he will, Antequam abierit, Before the end come, Reprove,
convince the whole world of sin, by this his way, the way of comfort, the
preaching of the Gospel. And that is the first acceptance thereof.

The second acceptance of the word is in the present; Arguit.
not Arguet, He shall, but Arguit, He does, now he does reprove all the world.
As when the Devil confessed Christ in the Gospel, as when Judas, (who was the
Devils Devil, for, he had sold Christ to the Chiefe-Priests, Mat. 26.14.
before Satan entered into him after the Sop, John 13.27.) professed this Gospel,
this was not Sine omni impulsu Spiritus Sancti, Altogether without the motion
of the Holy Ghost, who had his ends, and his purposes therein, to draw
testimonies for Christ out of the mouths of his adversaries; so when a natural
man comes to be displeased with his own actions, and to discern sin in them,
though his natural faculties be the Instruments in these actions, yet the Holy
Ghost sets this Instrument in tune, and makes all that is music and harmony
in the faculties of this natural man. At Ephesus S. Paul found certain
Disciples which were baptized, and when he asked them, Whether they had
received the Holy Ghost, Acts 19.2.
they said, That they had not so much as heard that there was a Holy Ghost. So
certainly, infinite numbers of men, in those unconverted Nations have the Holy
Ghost working in them, though they have never so much as heard that there is a
Holy Ghost. When we see any man do any work well, that belongs to the hand, to
write, to carve, to play, to do any mechanique office well, do we determine
mine our consideration only upon the Instrument, the hand, do we only say,
he has a good, a fit, a well disposed hand for such a work, or do we not
rather raise our contemplation to the soul, and her faculties, which enable
that hand to do that work? So certainly when a moral man has any reproof,
any sense of sin in himself, the holy Ghost is the intelligence that moves in
that sphere, and becomes the soul of his soul, and works that in him
primarily, of which, natural faculties, or philosophical instructions, are
but ministerial instruments and suppletory assistances after. And not only in
the beginning of good actions, but in the prosecution of some evil, the holy
Ghost has an interest, though we discern him not: In the disposing of our
sins, the holy Ghost has a working thus, That when we intended some
mischievous sin to morrow, a less sin, some sin of pleasure meets us, and
takes hold of us, and diverts us from our first purpose, and so the holy Ghost
rescues us from one sin, by suffering us to fall into another. What action
soever has any degree of good, what action soever has any less evil in it
then otherwise it would have had, has received a working of the holy Ghost,
though that man upon whom he has wrought, knew not his working, nor his name.
As we think that we have the differences of seasons, of Winter and Summer, by
the natural motion of the Sun, but yet it is not truly by that natural
motion, but by a contrary motion of a higher sphere, which draws the Sun
against his natural course; (for, if the Sun were left to himself, we should
not have these seasons) so if the soul and conscience of a mere natural man
have any of these reproves, and remorses, though perchance fear, or shame, or
sickness, or penalties of law, yea though a weariness, and excess of the sin
it self, may seem to him to be the thing that reproves him, and that occasions
this remorse, because it is the most immediate, and therefore most discernible;
yet there is Digitus Dei, The hand of God, and spiritus Spiritus sancti, The
breath of the holy Ghost, in all this, who, as a liberal almes-giver sends to
persons, that never know who sends, works upon persons, who never know who
works. So the holy Ghost reproves all the world of sin; that is, all the
reproof, which even the natural man has, (and every man has some at
sometimes) is from the holy Ghost; and, as in the former sense, the Cum
venerit, When he eomes, was Antequam abierit, before he goes, so here the Cum
venerit, is Quia adest, because he is always present, and always working.

And then there is a third acceptance, where the Arguet is not in the future,
Operatus est.
That he shall do it, nor in the present, Arguit, That he does it now in every
natural man, but it is in the time past, Arguit. He has done it, done it
already. And here in this sense, it is not that the holy Ghost shall bring the
Gospel before the end, to all Nations, that is, Antequam abierit, Nor that the
holy Ghost does exalt the natural faculties of every man in all his good
actions, that is, Quia semper adest, but it is, that he has infused and
imprinted in all their hearts, whom he has called effectually to the
participation of the means of salvation in the true Church, a constant and
infallible assurance, that all the world, that is, all the rest of the world
which has not embraced those helps, lies unrecoverably (by any other means
then these which we have embraced) under sin, under the weight, the
condemnation of sin. So that the comfort of this reproof (as all the reproves
of the holy Ghost in this Text, are given by him in that quality, as he is The
Comforter) is not directly, and simply, and presently upon all the world
indeed, but upon those whom the holy Ghost has taken out of this world, to his
world in this world, that is, to the Christian Church, them he Reproves, that
is Convinces them, establishes, delivers them from all scruples, that they have
taken the right way, that they, and only they, are delivered, and all the
world beside are still under sin.

When the Holy Ghost has brought us into the Ark from whence we may see all
the world without, sprawling and gasping in the flood, (the flood of sinful
courses in the world, and of the anger of God) when we can see this violent
flood, (the anger of God) break in at windows, and there devour the
licentious man in his sinful embracements, and make his bed of wantonness his
deathbed; when we can see this flood (the anger of God) swell as fast as the
ambitious man swells, and pursue him through all his titles, and and at last
suddenly, and violently wash him away in his own blood, not always in a
vulgar, but sometimes in an ignominious death; when we shall see this flood
(the flood of the anger of God) overflow the valley of the voluptuous man's
gardens, and orchards, and follow him into his Arbours, and Mounts, and
Terasses, and carry him from thence into a bottomless Sea, which no Plummet
can sound, (no heavy sadness relieve him) no anchor take hold of, (no
repentance stay his tempested and weather-beaten conscience) when we find our
selves in this Ark, where we have first taken in the fresh water of Baptism,
and then the Bread, and Wine, and Flesh, of the Body and Blood of Christ Jesus,
Then are we reproved, forbidden all scruple, then are we convinced, That as the
twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve seats, and judge the twelve Tribes at the
last day; So does the Holy Ghost make us Judges of all the world now, and
inables us to pronounce that sentence, That all but they, who have sincerely
accepted the Christian Religion, are still sub peccato, under sin, and without
remedy. For we must not weigh God with leaden, or iron, or stone waights, how
much land, or metal, or riches he gives one man more then another, but how
much grace in the use of these, or how much patience in the want, or in the
loss of these, we have above others. When we come to say, Hi in curribus, Hi
in equis, Psalm. 20.7.
nos autem in nomine Domini Dei nostri invocabimus, Some trust in chariots, and
some in horses, Ver. 8.
but we will remember the name of the Lord our God; Ipsi obligati sunt, and
ceciderunt, nos autem surreximus, and erecti sumus, They are brought down and
fallen, but we are risen, and stand upright. Obligati sunt, and ceciderunt,
They are pinioned and fallen, fettered, and manacled, and so fallen; fallen and
there must lie: Nos autem erecti, We are risen, and enabled to stand, now we
are up. When we need not fear the mighty, nor envy the rich, Quia signatum
super nos lumen vultus tui Domine, Because the light of thy countenance O Lord,
Ver. 7.
is (not only shed, but) lifted up upon us, Quia dedisti laetitiam in cord
nostro, Because thou have put gladness in our heart, more then in the time
that their corn and their wine increased; when we can thus compare the
Christian Church with other States, and spiritual blessings with temporal,
then has the Holy Ghost thoroughly reproved us, that is, absolutely convinced
us, that there is no other foundation but Christ, no other name for salvation
but Jesus, and that all the world but the true professors of that name, are
still under sin, under the guiltiness of sin. And these be the three
acceptations of this word, Arguet, He shall carry the Gospel to all before the
end, Arguit, He does work upon the faculties of the natural man every
minute, and Arguit again, He has manifested to us, that that they who go
not the same way, perish. And so we pass to the second Reproof and
Conviction, He shall reprove the world, De Iustitia, Of Rightcousnesse.

This word, 2 Part. Dejustitia.
Iustificare, To justify, may be well considered three ways; First as it is
verbum vulgar, as it has an ordinary and common use; And then as it is verbum
forense, as it has a civil and a legal use; And lastly, as it is verbum
Ecclesiasticum, as it has a Church use, as it has been used amongst Divines.
The first way, To justify, is to aver, and maintain any thing to be true,
as we ordinarily say to that purpose, I will justify it; Psalm. 19.9.
and in that sense the Psalmist says, Iustificata judicia Domini in semetipso,
The judgments of the Lord justify themselves, prove themselves to be just:
And in this sense men are said to justify God, Luke 7.29.
The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God, but all the people,
and the Publicans justified God, that is, testified for him. In the second way,
as it is a judicial word, To justify is only a verdict of Not guilty, and a
Judgment entered upon that, That there is not evidence enough against him, and
therefore he is justified, that is, Prove. 17.14.
acquitted. In this sense is the word in the Proverbs, He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to
the Lord. Now neither of these two ways are we justified; we cannot be averred
to be just; God himself cannot say so of us; Exodus 23.7.
of us, as we are we: Non justificabo impium, I will not justify the wicked.
God will not say it, God cannot do it; A wicked man cannot be, he cannot, by
God, be said to be just; they are incompatible, contradictory things. Nor the
second way neither; consider us standing in judgment before God, no man can be
acquitted for want of evidence; Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for, in thy sight shall none that
lives be justified. For, if we had another soul to give the Devil, to bribe
him, to give no evidence against this, if we had another iron to sear up our
consciences against giving of evidence against our selves then, yet who can
take out of Gods hands those examinations, and those evidences, which he has
registered exactly, as often as we have thought, or said, or done any thing
offensive to him?

It is therefore only in the third sense of this word, as it is Verbum
Ecclesiasticum, A word which S. Paul, and the other Scriptures, and the Church,
and Ecclesiastical Writers have used to express our Righteousness, our
Justification by: And that is only by the way of pardon, and remission of
sins, sealed to us in the blood of Christ Jesus; that what kind of sinners
soever we were before, yet that is applied to us, Such and such you were
before, But ye are justified by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God. 1 Cor. 6 11.
Now the reproof of the World, the convincing of the World, the bringing of
the World to the knowledge, that as they are all sub peccato, under sin, by the
sin of another, so there is a righteousness of another, that must prevail for
all their Pardons, this reproof, this convincing, this instruction of the World
is thus wrought: That the whole World consisting of Jews and Gentiles, when the
Holy Ghost had done enough for the convincing of both these, enough for the
overthrowing of all arguments, which could either be brought by the Jew for the
righteousness of the Law, or by the Gentile for the righteousness of Works,
(all which is abundantly done by the Holy Ghost, in the Epistles of S. Paul,
and other Scriptures) when the Holy Ghost had possessed the Church of God, of
these all-sufficient Scriptures, Then the promise of Christ was performed, and
then, though all the world were not presently converted, yet it was presently
convinced by the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost had provided in those
Scriptures, of which he is the Author, that nothing could be said in the Worlds
behalf, for any other Righteousness, then by way of pardon in the blood of
Christ.

Thus much the Holy Ghost tells us; And if we will search after more then he is
pleased to tell us, that is to rack the Holy Ghost, to over-labour him, to
examine him upon such Intergatories, as belongs not to us, to minister unto
him. Curious men are not content to know, That our debt is paid by Christ, but
they will know farther, whether Christ have paid it with his own hands, or
given us money to pay it our selves; whether his Righteousness, before it do us
any good, be not first made ours by Imputation, or by Inhesion; They must know
whose money, and then what money, Gold or Silver, whether his active obedience
in fulfilling the Law, or his passive obedience in shedding his blood. But all
the Commission of the Holy Ghost here, is, To reprove the World of
righteousness, To convince all Sects in the World, that shall constitute any
other righteousness, then a free pardon by the incorruptible, and invaluable,
and inexhaustible blood of Christ Jesus. By that pardon, his Righteousness is
ours: How it is made so, or by what name we shall call our title, or estate, or
interest in his Righteousness, let us not enquire. The terms of satisfaction
in Christ, of acceptance in the Father, of imputation to us, or inhesion in
us, are all pious and religious phrases, and something they express; but yet
none of these, Satisfaction, Acceptance, Imputation, Inhesion, will reach home
to satisfy them, that will needs inquire, Quo modo, by what means Christ's
Righteousness is made ours. This is as far as we need go, Ad eundem modum
justi sumus coram Deo, quo cor am eo Christus fuit peccator, So as God made
Christ sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
we are made the righteousness of God in him: so; but how was that? He that
can find no comfort in this Doctrine, till he find How Christ was made sin,
and we righteousness, till he can express Quo modo, robs himself of a great
deal of peaceful refreshing, which his conscience might receive, in tasting
the thing it self in a holy and humble simplicity, without vexing his own, or
other men's consciences, or troubling the peace of the Church with impertinent
and inextricable curiosities.

Those questions are not so impertinent, but they are in a great part
unnecessary, which are moved about the cause of our righteousness, our
justification. Alas, let us be content that God is the cause, and seek no
other. We must never slacken that protestation, That good works are no cause of
our justification. But we must always keep up a right signification of that
word, Cause. For, Faith it self is no cause; no such cause, as that I can
merit Heaven, by faith. What do I merit of the King, by believing that he is
the undoubted Heir to all his Dominions, or by believing that he governes
well, if I live not in obedience to his Laws. If it were possible to believe
aright, and yet live ill, my faith should do me no good. The best faith is not
worth Heaven; The value of it grows Ex pacto, That God has made that Covenant,
that Contract, Creed and vives, only believe and thou shall be safe. Faith is
but one of those things, which in several senses are said to justify us. It
is truly said of God, Deus solus justificat, God only justifies us;
Efficienter, nothing can effect it, nothing can work toward it, but only the
mere goodness of God. And it is truly said of Christ, Christus solus
justificat, Christ only justifies us; Materialiter, nothing enters into the
substance and body of the ransom for our sins, but the obedience of Christ. It
is also truly said, Sola fides justificat, Only faith justifies us;
Instrumentaliter, nothing apprehends, nothing applies the merit of Christ to
thee, but thy faith. And lastly it is as truly said, Sola opera justificant,
Only our works justify us; Declaratorie, Only thy good life can assure thy
conscience, and the World, that thou art justified. As the efficient
justification, the gracious purpose of God had done us no good, without the
material satisfaction, the death of Christ had followed; And as that material
satisfaction, the death of Christ would do me no good, without the
isntrumental justification, the apprehension by faith; so neither would this
profit without the declaratory justification, by which all is pleaded and
established. God enters not into our material justification, that is only
Christ's; Christ enters not into our isntrumental justification, that is only
faiths; Faith enters not into our declaratory justification, (for faith is
secret) and declaration belongs to works. Neither of these can be said to
justify us alone, so, as that we may take the chain in pieces, and think to
be justified by any one link thereof; by God without Christ, by Christ without
faith, or by faith without works; And yet every one of these justifies us
alone, so, as that none of the rest enter into that way and that means, by
which any of these are said to justify us.

Consider we then our selves, as men fallen down into a dark and deep pit;
and justification as a chain, consisting of these four links, to be let down
to us, and let us take hold of that link that is next us, A good life, and
keep a fast and inseparable hold upon that; for though in that sense of which
we spoke, Fides justificat sola, Only faith do justify, yet it is not true in
any sense, Fides est sola, that there is any faith, where there is nothing but
faith. God comes downward to us; but we must go upward to God; not to get
above him in his unrevealed Decrees, but to go up toward him, in laying hold
upon that lowest link; that as the holy Ghost shall reprove, that is, convince
the world, that there is no other righteousness but that of Christ, so he may
enable you to pass a judgment upon your selves, and to testify to the world
that you have apprehended that righteousness; Which is that that is principally
intended in the third and last part, That the holy Ghost, 3. Part.
when he comes, shall reprove the World, as of sin, and of rightcousness, so of
judgment.

After those two convictions of the World, that is, Jew, and Gentile, first,
that they are all under sin, and so in a state of condemnation; And secondly,
that there is no righteousness, no justification to be had to the Jew by the
Law, nor to the Gentile in Nature, but that there is Righteousness, and
Justification enough for all the world, Jew, and Gentile in Christ; In the
third place, the Holy Ghost is to reprove, that is, still to convince the
world, to acquaint the world with this mystery, That there is a means settled
to convey this Righteousness of Christ upon the World, and then an account to
be taken of them, who do not lay hold upon this means; for, both these are
intended in this word Judgment, He shall reprove them, prove to them this
double signification of judgment; first, that there is a judgment of order,
of rectitude, of government, to which purpose he has established the Church;
And then a judgment of account, and of sentence, and beatification upon them,
who did; and malediction upon them who did not apply themselves to the first
judgment, that is, to those orderly ways and means of embracing Christ's
righteousness, Wi^d. 11.20.
which were offered them in the Church. God has ordered all things in measure,
1 Cor. 14.42.
and number, and weight; Let all things be done decently and in order for, God
is the God of order, and not of confusion. And this order, is this judgment;
The Court, the Tribunal, the Judgment seat, in which all men's consciences and
actions must be regulated and ordered, the Church. The perfectest order was
Innocence; that first integrity in which God made all. All was disordered by
sin: For, in sin, and the author of sin, Satan, there is no order, no
conformity; nothing but disorder, and confusion. Though the School do
generally acknowledge a distinction of orders in the ministering Spirits of
Heaven, now, Angels and Archangels, and others, yet they dispute, and doubt,
and (in a great part) deny that this distinction of orders was before the fall
of those Angels; for, they confess this distribution into orders, to have been
upon their submission, and recognition of Gods government, which recognition
was their very confirmation, and after that they could not fall. And though
those fallen Angels, the Devils, concur in an unan me consent to ruin us,
Hi^ron.
(for, Bellum Daemonum, summa pax hominum) we should agree better, if devils
did fall out, yet this is not such a peace, such an unity, as gives them any
peace, or relaxation, or intermission of anguish, but, as they are the Authors
of our confusion, so they are in a continual confusion themselves.

There is no order in the Author of sin; and therefore the God of order cannot,
directly nor indirectly, positively nor consecutively, be the Author of sin.
There is no order in sin it self. The nature, the definition of sin, is
disorder. Dectum, factum, August.
concupitum contra legem; God has ordered a law, and sin is an act; if we
cannot do that, it is a word; if we dare not do that, it is a desire against
that law. Forma peccati, deformitas; we can assign sin no other form, but
deformity. So that our affecting of any thing, as our end, which God has not
proposed for our end; or our affecting of true ends, by any other ways then he
has proposed, this is a disordering of Gods providence, as much as we can, and
so a sin. For the School resolves conveniently, probably, that that first sin
that ever was committed, (that peccatum praegnans, peccatum prolificum, That
womb and matrice of all sins that have been committed since) The sin of the
Angels, it was a disorder, an obliquity, a deformity, not in not going to the
right end, (for, Illud quaesiverunt, ad quod pervenissent, si stetissent, says
Aquinas out of S. August. They desired no more then they were made for, and
should have come to, if they had stood) but their sin was in affecting a right
end a wrong way, in desiring to come to their appointed perfection by
themselves, to subsist of themselves, and to be independent, without any
farther need of God, for that was their desire, To be like the most High, To
depend upon nothing, but be all-sufficient to themselves. So they disordered
Gods purpose; and when they had once broke that chain, when they had once put
that harmony out of tune, then came in disorder, discord, confusion, and that
is sin.

Gods work is perfect; How appears that? For all his ways are Judgment,
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
says Moses in his victorious song. This is Perfection, That he has
established an order, a judgment. Which is not only that order which S.
Augustine defines, Ordo est, August.
per quem omnia aguntur, quae Deus constituit, The order and the judgment by
which God governs the world, according to his purpose, (which judgment is
Providence) But (as the same Father says in the same book) it is Ordo, quem si
tenueris in vita, perdacet ad Deum, It is an order and a judgment which he
has manifested to thee, (for the order and judgment of his providence, he
does not always manifest) by obedience to which order and judgment, thou
may be saved. The same Father speaking of this order and judgment of
providence, says, Nihil ordini contrarium, Nothing can be contrary to that
order; He is in a holy rapture transported with that consideration, That even
disorders are within Gods order; There is in the order and judgment of his
providence an admission, a permission of disorders: This unsearchable
proceeding of God, carries him to that passionate exclamation, O sipossem
dicere quod vellem! O that I were able to express my self! Roge, ubi ubi estis
verba, suecurrite; Where, where are those words which I had wont to have at
command? why do ye not serve me, help me now? Now, when I would declare this,
Bona and mala sunt in ordine, That even disorders are done in order, that even
our sins some way or other fall within the providence of God. But that is not
the order, nor judgment which the holy Ghost is sent to manifest to the world.
The holy Ghost works best upon them, which search least into Gods secret
judgments and proceedings. But the order and judgment we speak of, is an
order, a judgement-seate established, by which, every man, howsoever oppressed
with the burden of sin, may, in the application of the promises of the Gospel
by the Ordinance of preaching, and in the seals thereof in the participation
of the Sacraments, be assured, that he has received his Absolution, his
Remission, his Pardon, and is restored to the innocence of his Baptism, nay to
the integrity which Adam had before the fall, nay to the righteousness of
Christ Jesus himself. In the creation God took red earth, and then breathed a
soul into it: When Christ came to a second creation, to make a Church, he took
earth, men, red earth, men made partakers of his blood; (for, Ecclesiam
quaesivit, and acquisivit, Bernard.
He desired a Church, and he purchased a Church; but by a blessed way of
Simony; Add medium acquisitionis, Sanguine acquisivit, Acts 20.28.
He purchased a Church with his own blood) And when he had made this body, in
calling his Apostles, then he breathed the soul into them, his Spirit, and
that made up all: Quod insufflavit Dominus Apostolis, and dixit, August.
Accipite Spiritum sanctum, Ecclesiae potestas collata est, Then when Christ
breathed that Spirit into them, he constituted the Church. And this power of
Remission of sins, is that order, and that judgment which Christ himself
calls by the name of the most orderly frame in this, or the next world, A
Kingdom, Dispono vobis regnum, Luke 22.29.
I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me.

Now, Faciunt favos and vespa, faciunt Ecclesias and Marcionitae, As Waspes
make combs, Tertul.
but empty ones, so do Heretics Churches, but frivolous ones, ineffectuall
ones. And, as we told you before, That errors and disorders are as well in
ways, as inends, so may we deprive our selves of the benefit of this
judgment, The Church, as well in circumstances, as in substances, as well in
opposing discipline, as doctrine. The holy Ghost reprovc^thee, convinces thee,
of judgment, that is, offers thee the knowledge that such a Church there is; A
Jordan to wash thine original leprosy in Baptism; A City upon a mountain,
to enlighten thee in the works of darkness; a continual application of all
that Christ Jesus said, and did, and suffered, to thee. Let no soul say, she
can have all this at Gods hands immediately, and never trouble the Church; That
she can pass her pardon between God and her, without all these formalities, by
a secret repentance. It is true, beloved, a true repentance is never frustrate:
But yet, if thou will think thy self a little Church, a Church to thy self,
because thou have heard it said, That thou art a little world, a world in thy
self, that figurative, that metaphorical representation shall not save thee.
Though thou be a world to thy self, yet if thou have no more corn, nor oil,
nor milk, then grows in thy self, or flows from thy self, thou will starve;
Though thou be a Church in thy fancy, if thou have no more seals of grace, no
more absolution of sin, Grego.
then thou can give thy self, thou will perish. Per solam Ecclesiam
sacrificium libenter accipit Deus: Thou may be a Sacrifice in thy chamber,
but God receives a Sacrifice more cheerfully at Church. Sola, quae pro
errantibus fiducialiter intercedit, Only the Church has the nature of a
surety; Howsoever God may take thine own word at home, yet he accepts the
Church in thy behalf, as better security. Join therefore ever with the
Communion of Saints; August.
Et cum membrum sis ejus corporis, quod loquitur omnibus linguis, creed te
omnibus linguis loqui, Whilst thou art a member of that Congregation, that
speaks to God with a thousand tongues, believe that thou speak to God with
all those tongues. And though thou know thine own prayers unworthy to come up
to God, because thou liftest up to him an eye, which is but now withdrawn from
a licentious glancing, and hands which are guilty yet of unrepented
uncleanness, a tongue that has but lately blasphemed God, a heart which even
now breaks the walls of this house of God, and steps home, or runs abroad upon
the memory, or upon the new plotting of pleasurable or profitable purposes,
though this make thee think thine own prayers uneffectuall, yet believe that
some honester man then thy self stands by thee, and that when he prays with
thee, he prays for thee; and that, if there be one righteous man in the
Congregation, thou art made the more acceptable to God by his prayers; and make
that benefit of this reproof, this conviction of the holy Ghost, That he
convinces thee De judicio, assures thee of an orderly Church established for
thy relief, and that the application of thy self to this judgment, The
Church, shall enable thee to stand upright in that other judgment, the last
judgment, which is also enwrapped in the signification of this word of our
Text, Judgment, and is the conclusion for this day.

As God begun all with judgment, Iudicium finale. Sap. 11.
(for he made all things in measure, number, and weight) as he proceeded with
judgment, in erecting a judicial seat for our direction, and correction, the
Church, so he shall end all with judgment, The final, and general judgment,
at the Resurrection; which he that believes not, believes nothing; not God;
for, Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God (that makes any step toward him) must believe, Deum
remuner atorem, God, and God in that notion, as he is a Rewarder; Therefore
there is judgment. But was this work left for the Holy Ghost? Did not the
natural man that knew no Holy Ghost, know this? Truly, all their fabulous
Divinity, all their Mythology, their Minos, and their Rhadamanthus, tasted of
such a notion, as a judgment. And yet the first planters of the Christian
Religion found it hardest to fix this root of all other articles, That Christ
should come again to judgment. Miserable and froward men! They would believe
it in their fables, and would not believe it in the Scriptures; They would
believe it in the nine Muses, and would not believe it in the twelve Apostles;
They would believe it by Apollo, and they would not believe it by the Holy
Ghost; They would be saved Poetically, and fantastically, and would not
reasonably, and spiritually; By Copies, and not by Originals; by counterfeit
things at first deduced by their Authors, out of our Scriptures, Tertul.
and yet not by the word of God himself. Which Tertullian apprehends and
reprehends in his time, when he says, Praescribimus adulteris nostris, We
prescribe above them, which counterfeit our doctrine, for we had it before
them, and they have but rags, and those torn from us. Fabulae immissae, quae
fidem infirmarent veritatis; They have brought part of our Scriptures into
their Fables, that all the rest might seem but Fables too. Gehennam
praedicantes and iudicium, ridemur, decachinnamur, They laugh at us when we
preach of hell, and judgment, Et tamen Elysii campi fidem praeoccupaverunt,
And yet they will needs be believed when they talk of their Elysian fields.
Fideliora nostra, quorum imagines fidem inveniunt, Is it not safer trusting to
our substance, then their shadows; To our doctrine of the judgment, in the
Scriptures, then their allusions in their Poets?

So far Tertullian considers this; But to say the truth, and all the truth,
Howsoever the Gentiles had some glimmering of a judgment, that is, an account
to be made of our actions after this life, yet of this judgment which we speak
of now, which is a general Judgment of all together, And that judgment to be
executed by Christ, and to be accompanied with a Resurrection of the body, of
this, the Gentiles had no intimation, this was left wholly for the holy Ghost
to manifest. And of this, all the world has received a full convincing from
him, because he has delivered to the world those Scriptures, which do so
abundantly, so irrefragably establish it. And therefore, Ecclus. 7.36. Bernard.
Memorare novissima and non peccabis; Remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss. Non dicitur memorare primordia, aut media; If thou remember the first
reproof, that all are under sin, that may give occasion of excusing, or
extenuating, How could I avoid that, that all men do? If thou remember the
second reproof, That there is a righteousness communicable to all that sin,
that may occasion so bold a confidence, Since I may have so easy a pardon,
what haste of giving over yet? But Memorare novissima, consider that there is a
judgment, and that that judgment is the last thing that God has to do with
man, consider this, and thou will not sin, not love sin, not do the same sins
to morrow thou did yester-day, as though this judgment were never the
nearer, but that as a thousand years are as one day with God, so thy
threescore years should be as one night with thee, one continual sleep in the
practice of thy beloved sin. Thou will not think so, if thou remember this
judgment.

Now, in respect of the time after this judgment, (which is Eternity) the time
between this and it cannot be a minute; and therefore think thy self at that
Tribunal, that judgment now: Where thou shall not only ^^are all thy sinful
works, and words, and thoughts repeated, which thou thy self had utterly
forgot, but thou shall hear thy good works, thine alms, thy coming to
Church, thy hearing of Sermons given in evidence against thee, because they had
hypocrisy mingled in them; yea thou shall find even thy repentance to
condemn thee, because thou made that but a door to a relapse. There thou
shall see, to thine inexpressible terror, some others cast down into hell, for
thy sins; for those sins which they would not have done, but upon thy
provocation. There thou shall see some that occasioned thy sins, and
accompanied thee in them, and sinned them in a greater measure then thou did,
taken up into heaven, because in the way, they remembered the end, and thou
shall sink under a less weight, because thou never lookedst toward him that
would have eased thee of it. Bernard.
Quis non cogitans haec in desperationis rotetur abyssum? Who can once think
of this and not be tumbled into desperation? But who can think of it twice,
maturely, and by the Holy Ghost, and not find comfort in it, when the same
light that shows me the judgment, shows me the Judge too? Knowing therefore
the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men; 1 Cor. 5.15.
but knowing the comforts too, we importune men to this consideration, That as
God preceeds with judgment in this world, to give the issue with the
tentation, and competent strength with the affliction, as the Wiseman expresses
it, Wisd. 12.21.
That God punishes his enemies with deliberation, and requesting, (as our
former Translation had it) and then with how great circumspection will he judge
his children? So he gives us a holy hope, That as he has accepted us in this
first judgment, the Church, and made us partakers of the Word and Sacraments
there, So he will bring us with comfort to that place, which no tongue but the
tongue of S. Paul, and that moved by the Holy Ghost, could describe, and which
he does describe so gloriously, and so pathetically, You are come unto Mount
Sion, Heb. 12.22.
and to the City of the living God, The heavenly Jerusalem, And to an
innumerable company of Angels, To the general Assembly and Church of the first
borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to Jesus
the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things then the blood of Abel. And into this blessed and inseparable
society, The Father of lights, and God of all comfort, give you an admission
now, and an irremoveable possession hereafter, for his only Sons only sake,
and by the working of his blessed Spirit, whom he sends to work in you, This
reproof of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. Amen.

SERMONS Preached upon Trinity-Sunday.
SERMON. XXXVIII. Preached upon Trinity-Sunday.
2 COR. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort.


THere was never Army composed of so many several Nations, the Tower of Babel
it self, in the confusion of tongues, gave not so many several sounds as are
uttered and mustered against God, and his Religion. The Atheist denies God;
for, though David call it a foolish thing to do so, (The fool has said it in
his heart) And though David speak it in the singular number, The fool, as
though there were not many so very fools, as to say, and to say in their
heart, There is no God, yet some such fools there are, that say it in their
very heart, and have made shift to think so indeed; But for such fools as say
it in their actions, that is, that live as though there were no God, Stultorum
plena sunt omnia; We have seen fools in the Court, and fools in the Cloister,
fools that take no calling, and fools in all callings that can be taken,
fools that hear, and fools that preach, fools at general Counsels, and
fools at Councell-tables, Stultorum plena sunt omnia, such fools as deny God,
so far, as to leave him out, are not in David's singular number, but
super-abound in every profession: So that David's manner of expressing it, is
not so much singular, as though there were but one, or few such fools, but
emphaticall, because that fool, that any way denies God, is the fool, the
veryest fool of all kinds of foolishness.

Now, as God himself, so his religion amongst us has many enemies; Enemies
that deny God, as Atheists; And enemies that multiply gods, that make many
gods, as Idolaters; And enemies that deny those diverse persons in the Godhead,
which they should confess, The Trinity, as Jews and Turks: So in his Religion,
and outward worship, we have enemies that deny God his House, that deny us any
Church, any Sacrament, any Priesthood, any Salvation, as Papists; And enemies
that deny Gods house any furniture, any stuff, any beauty, any ornament, any
order, as non-Conformitans; And enemies that are glad to see Gods house richly
furnished for a while, that they may come to the spoil thereof, as
sacrilegious usurpers of Gods part. But for Atheistical enemies, I call not
upon them here, to answer me; Let them answer their own terrors, and horrors
alone at midnight, and tell themselves whence that proceeds, if there be no
God. For Papisticall enemies, I call not upon them to answer me; Let them
answer our Laws as well as our Preaching, because theirs is a religion mixed as
well of Treason, as of Idolatry. For our refractary, and schismatic enemies,
I call not upon them to answer me neither; Let them answer the Church of God,
in what nation, in what age was there ever seen a Church, of that form, that
they have dreamt, and believe their own dream? And for our sacrilegious
enemies, let them answer out of the body of Story, and give one example of
prosperity upon sacrilege.

But leaving all these to that which has heretofore, or may hereafter be said
of them, I have bent my meditations, for those days, which this Term will
afford, upon that, which is the character and mark of all Christians in
general, The Trinity, the three Persons in one God; not by way of subtle
disputation, as to persons that doubted, but by way of godly declaration, as to
persons disposed to make use of it; not as though I feared your faith needed
it, nor as though I hoped I could make your reason comprehend it, but because I
presume, that the consideration of God the Father, and his Power, and the sins
directed against God, in that notion, as the Father; and the consideration of
God the Son, and his Wisdom, and the sins against God, in that apprehension,
the Son; and the consideration of God the Holy Ghost, and his Goodness, and
the sins against God, in that acceptance, may conduce, as much, at least, to
our edification, as any Doctrine, more controverted. And of the first glorious
person of this blessed Trinity, the Almighty Father, is this Text, Blessed be
God, etc.

In these words, Divisio.
the Apostle having tasted, having been fed with the sense of the power, and of
the mercies of God, in his gracious deliverance, delivers a short Catechism of
all our duties: So short, as that there is but one action, Benedicamus, Let us
bless; Nor but one object to direct that blessing upon, Benedicamus Deum, Let
us bless God. It is but one God, to exclude an Idolatrous multiplicity of
Gods, But it is one God notified and manifested to us, in a triplicity of
persons; of which, the first is literally expressed here, That he is a Father.
And him we consider In Paternitate aeterna, As he is the eternal Father, Even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, says our Text; And then In Paternitate
interna, as we have the Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry, Abba, Father; As
he is Pater miserationum, The Father of mercies; And as he expresses these
mercies, by the seal and demonstration of comfort, as he is the God of
comfort, and Totius consolationis, Of all comfort. Receive the sum of this,
and all that arises from it, in this short Paraphrase; The duty required of a
Christian, is Blessing, Praise, Thanksgiving; To whom? To God, to God only, to
the only God. There is but one; But this one God is such^ tree, as has diverse
boughs to shadow and refresh thee, diverse branches to shed fruit upon thee,
diverse arms to spread out, and reach, and embrace thee. And here he visits
thee as a Father: From all eternity a Father of Christ Jesus, and now thy
Father in him in that which thou need most, A Father of mercy, when thou
wast in misery; And a God of comfort, when thou foundest no comfort in this
world, And a God of all comfort, even of spiritual comfort, in the anguishes,
and distresses of thy conscience. Blessed be God, even the Father, etc.

First then, 1 Part. Benedictus.
the duty which God, by this Apostle, requires of man, is a duty arising out of
that, which God has wrought upon him: It is not a consideration, a
contemplation of God sitting in heaven, but of God working upon the earth; not
in the making of his eternal Decree there, but in the execution of those
Decrees here; not in saying, God knows who are his, and therefore they cannot
fail, but in saying in a rectified conscience, God, by his ordinary marks,
has let me know that I am his, and therefore I look to my ways, that I do
not fall. S. Paul out of a religious sense what God had done for him, comes to
this duty, to bless him.

There is not a better Grammar to learn, then to learn how to bless God, and
therefore it may be no levity, to use some Grammar terms herein. God blesses
man Dative, He gives good to him; man blesses God Optative, He wishes well to
him; and he blesses him Vocative, He speaks well of him. For, though toward
God, as well as toward man, 1 Samuel 25.27. 2 King 5.15.
real actions are called blessings, (so Abigail called the present which she
brought to David, A blessing, and so Naaman called that which he offered to
Elisha, A blessing) though real sacrifices to God, and his cause, sacrifices
of Alms, sacrifices of Arms, sacrifices of Money, sacrifices of Sermons,
advancing a good public cause, may come under the name of blessing, yet the
word here, (...), is properly a blessing in speech, in discourse, in
conference, in words, in praise, in thanks. The dead do not praise thee, says
David; The dead (men civilly dead, allegorically dead, dead and buried in an
useless silence, in a Cloister, or College, may praise God, but not in words
of edification, as it is required here, and they are but dead, and do not
praise God so; and God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, of those
that delight to praise and bless God, and to declare his goodness.

We represent the Angels to our selves, and to the world with wings, they are
able to fly; and yet when Jacob saw them aseending and descending, Genesis 28.12.
even those winged Angels had a Ladder, they went by degrees: There is an
immediate blessing of God, by the heart, but God requires the tongue too,
because that spreads and diffuses his glory upon others too. Calici
benedictionis benedicimus, says the Apostle, The cup which we bless, 1 Cor.
10.16.
is a cup of blessing; When we have blessed it, according to Christ's holy
institution, then it derives holy blessings upon us; and when we bless God
according to his Commandment, he blesses us according to his promise, and our
desire. Exodus 6.12. Ier. 1.6.
When God employed Moses, and when he employed Jeremy, Moses and Jeremy had no
excuse, but the unreadinesse of their tongues; he that has a tongue disposed
to Gods service, that will speak all he can, and dares speak all he should to
the glory of God, is fit for all. James 3.5.
As S. James says, The tongue is but a little member, but beasteth great
things; so truly, as little as it is, it does great things toward our
salvation. The Son of God, is (...), verbum, The word; God made us with his
word, and with our words we make God so far, as that we make up the mystical
body of Christ Jesus with our prayers, with our whole liturgy, and we make the
natural body of Christ Jesus appliable to our souls, by the words of
Consecration in the Sacrament, and our souls apprehensive, and capable of that
body, by the word Preached. Bless him therefore in speaking to him, in your
prayers: Bless him in speaking with him, in assenting, in answering that which
he says to you in his word: And bless him in speaking of him, in telling one
another the good things that he has done abundantly for you. I will bless the
Lord at all times, says David. Psalm. 34.2.
Is it at all times, says S. Augustine, Cum circumfluunt omnia, at all times,
when God blesses me with temporal prosperity? Cum minus nascuntur, cum nata
dilabuntur, says that Father, when thy gain ceases for the present, when that
that thou had formerly got, wastes and perishes, and threatens penury for the
future, still bless thou the Lord, Quia ille dat, ille tollit, sed seipsum a
benedicente se non tollit; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, but the
Lord never takes away himself from him that delights in blessing his name.
Bless, praise, speak; there is the duty, and we have done with that which was
our first Part: And bless thou God, which is our second Part, and a Part
derived into many Branches. Blessed be God, even, etc.

Here first we see the object of our praises, whom we must bless, Benedict us
sit Deus, 2 Part. Deum solum.
God. First, Solus Deus, God only, that is, God and not man, and then Deus
solus, the only God, that is God, and not many Gods. God only, and not man;
not that we may not bless, and wish well to one another, for there is a
blessing from God, belongs to that, Benedicam benedicentibus tibi, says God to
Abraham, Genesis 12.3.
I will bless them that bless thee: Neither is it that we may not bless,
that is, give due praise to one another; for as the vices and sins of great
persons are not smothered in the Scriptures, so their virtues, and good deeds
are published with praise. Noah's drunkenness, and Lots incest is not
disguised, Jobs righteousness and holy patience is not concealed neither; Rom
13.3.
Do that which is good, says the Apostle, and thou shall have praise for the
same. Neither is it that we may not bless, that is, pray for one another, of
what sort soever; for we are commanded to do that, for our superiors;
inferiors may bless superiors too; Nor that we should not bless, that is,
pray to one another, in petitioning and supplicating our superiors for those
things which are committed to their dispensation; Luke 18.5.
for the importunate suitor, the widow, is not blamed in the Gospel for her
importunity to the Judge; It is true, the Judge is blamed, for withholding
Justice, till importunity extorted it. But to bless, by praise, or prayer, the
man without relation to God, that is, the man, and not God in the man, to
determine the glory in the person, without contributing thereby to the glory of
God, this is a manner of blessing accursed here, because blessing is radically,
fundamentally, originally, here reserved to God, to God only, Benedictus sit
Deus, God be blessed.

For, properly, truly none is to be thus blessed by us, but he upon whom we may
depend and rely: and can we depend and rely upon man? upon what man? upon
Princes? As far as we can look for examples, round about us, in our next
neighbors, and in France, and in Spain, and farther, we have seen in our age
Kings discarded, and we have seen in some of them, the discarded cards taken
in again, and win the game. Upon what man will thou rely? upon great persons
in favor with Princes? Have we not seen often, that the bed-chambers of Kings
have back-doores into prisons, and that the end of that greatness has been,
but to have a greater Jury to condemn them? will thou rely upon the Prophet,
he can teach thee; or upon thy Brother, he does love thee; or upon thy Son, he
should love thee; or the Wife of thy bosom, she will say she loves thee; or
upon thy Friend, Deuteronomy. 13.
he is as thine own soul? yet Moses puts a case when thou must depart from
all these, not consent, no not conceal, not pardon, no not reprieve, Thou
shall surely kill him, says Moses, even this Prophet, this Brother, this Son,
this Wife may incline thee to the service of other Gods; Thou can not rely,
and therefore do not bless, not with praise, not with prayer and dependence
upon him, That Prophet, by what name or title soever he be called; that
Brother, how willingly soever he divide the inheritance with thee; that Son,
how dutiful soever in civil things; that Wife, how careful soever of her
own honor, and thy children; that Friend, how free soever of his favors, and
of his secrets, that enclines thee to other Gods, or to other service of the
true God, then is true. Greatness is not the object of this blessing, for
Greatness is often eclipsed by the way, and at last certainly extinguished in
death, and swallowed in the grave. Goodness, as it is moral, is not the
object of this blessing; but bless God only; God in the root, in himself,
or God exemplified, and manifested in godly men; bless God in them, in whom he
appears, and in them who appear for him, and so thou do bless solum Deum,
God only.

This thou must do, Deus solus.
Bless God only, not man, and then the only God, not other gods. For, this
was the wretched and penurious narrowness to which the Gentiles were reduced,
that being unable to confider God entirely, they broke God in pieces, and
crumbled, and scattered God into as many several gods, as there are Powers in
God, nay almost into as many several gods, as there are Creatures from God;
and more then that, as many gods as they could fancy or imagine in making
Chimera's of their own, for not only that which was not God, but that which
was not at all, was made a God. And then, as in narrow channels that cannot
contain the water, the water over-flowes, and yet that water that does so over
flow, flies out and spreads to such a shallowness, as will not bear a Boat to
any use; so when by this narrowness in the Gentiles, God had over-flowne this
bank, this limitation of God in an unity, all the rest was too shallow to bear
any such notion, any such consideration of God, as appertained to him: They
could not think him an Omnipotent God, when if one God would not, another
would, nor an Infinite God, when they had appeals from one God to another; and
without Omnipotence, and without Infiniteness they could not truly conceive a
God. They had cantoned a glorious Monarchy into petty States, that could not
subsist of themselves, nor assist another, and so imagined a God for every
state and every action, that a man must have applied himself to one God when
he shipped, and when he landed to another, and if he travailed farther, change
his God by the way, as often as he changed coins, or posthorses. Deuteronomy. 6.4.
But, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God. As though this were all that
were to be heard, all that were to be learned, they are called to hear, and
then there is no more said but that, The Lord thy God is one God.

There are men that will say and swear, they do not mean to make God the
Author of sin; but yet when they say, That God made man therefore, that he
might have something to damn, and that he made him sin therefore, that he
might have something to damn him for, truly they come too near making God the
Author of sin, for all their modest protestation of abstaining. So there are
men that will say and swear, they do not mean to make Saints Gods; but yet
when they will ask the same things at Saints hands, which they do at Gods, and
in the same phrase and manner of expression, when they will pray the Virgin
Mary to assist her Son, nay to command her Son, and make her a Chancellor to
mitigate his common Law, truly they come too near making more Gods then one.
And so do we too, when we give particular sins dominion over us; Quot vitia,
tot Deos recentes, says Hierom: As the Apostle says Covetousness is
Idolatry, so, says that Father, is voluptuousness, and licentiousness, and
every habitual sin. Non alienum says God, Thou shall have no other God but
me, But, Quis similis, says God too, Who is like me? He will have nothing
made like him, not made so like a God as they make their Saints, nor made so
like a God, as we make our sins. We think one King Sovereign enough, and one
friend counselor enough, and one Wife helper enough, and he is strangely
insatiable, that thinks not one God, God enough: especially, since when thou
have called this God what thou can, H^^^r.
he is more then thou have said of him. Cum definitur, ipse sua definitione
crescit; When thou have defined him to be the God of justice, and tremblest, he
is more then that, he is the God of mercy too, and gives thee comfort. When
thou have defined him to be all eye, He sees all thy sins, he is more then
that, he is all patience, and covers all thy sins. And though he be in his
nature incomprehensible, and inaccessible in his light, yet this is his
infinite largeness, that being thus infinitely One, he has manifested
himself to us in three Persons, to be the more easily discerned by us, and the
more closely and effectually applied to us.

Now these notions that we have of God, as a Father, as a Son, as a Holy Ghost,
Trinitas.
as a Spirit working in us, are so many handles by which we may take hold of
God, and so many breasts, by which we may suck such a knowledge of God, as that
by it we may grow up into him. And as we cannot take hold of a torch by the
light, but by the staff we may; so though we cannot take hold of God, as God,
who is incomprehensible, and inapprehensible, yet as a Father, as a Son, as a
Spirit, dwelling in us, we can. There is nothing in Nature that can fully
represent and bring home the notion of the Trinity to us. There is an elder
book in the World then the Scriptures; It is not well said, in the World, for
it is the World it self, the whole book of Creatures; And indeed the
Scriptures are but a paraphrase, but a comment, but an illustration of that
book of Creatures. And therefore, though the Scriptures only deliver us the
doctrine of the Trinity, clearly, yet there are some impressions, some
obumbrations of it, in Nature too. Take but one in our selves, in the soul.
The understanding of man (that is as the Father) begets discourse,
ratiocination, and that is as the Son; and out of these two proceed
conclusions, and that is as the Holy Ghost. Such as these there are many, many
sprinkled in the School, many scattered in the Fathers, but, God knows, poor
and faint expressions of the Trinity. But yet, Praemisit Deus naturam
magistram, Tertul.
submissurus and prophetiam, Though God meant to give us degrees in the
University, that is, increase of knowledge in his Scriptures after, yet he gave
us a pedagogy, he sent us to School in Nature before; Vt facilius credas
prophetiae discipulus naturae, That coming out of that School, thou might
profit the better in that University, having well considered Nature, thou
might be established in the Scriptures.

He is therefore inexcusable, that considers not God in the Creature, that
coming into a fair Garden, says only, Here is a good Gardener, and not,
Here is a good God; and when he sees any great change, says only, This is a
strange accident, and not, a strange Judgment. Hence is it, that in the books
of the Platonique Philosophers, and in others, much ancienter then they, (if
the books of Hermes Trismegistus and others, be as ancient as is pretended in
their behalf) we find as clear expressing of the Trinity, as in the Old
Testament, at least; And hence is it, that in the Talmud of the Jews, and in
the Alcoran of the Turks, though they both oppose the Trinity, yet when they
handle not that point, there fall often from them, as clear confessions of the
three Persons, as from any of the elder of those Philosophers, who were
altogether dis-interested in that Controversy.

But because God is seen Per creaturas, ut per speculum, per verbum ut per
lucem, Aleus.
In the creature, and in nature, but by reflection, In the Word, and in the
Scriptures, directly, we rest in the knowledge which we have of the plurality
of the persons, in the Scriptures; And because we are not now in a Congregation
that doubts it, nor in a place to multiply testimonies, we content our selves
(being already possessed with the belief thereof) with this illustration from
the old Testament, That the name of our one God, is expressed in the plural
number, in that place, which we mentioned before, where it is said, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
The Lord thy God is one God, that is, Elohim, unus Dii, one Gods. And though
as much as that seem to be said by God to Moses, Eris Aaroni in Elohim, Thou
shall be as Gods to Aaron; Exodus 4.16.
Yet that was because Moses was to represent God, all God, all the Persons in
God, and therefore it might as well be spoken plurally of Moses, so, as of God.
But because it is said, Gods appeared unto Jacob; And again, Dii Sancti ipse
est, He is the Holy Gods; Genesis 35.7. Ios. 24.19. Job 35.10. Genesis 1.26. Genesis 3
22.
And so also, Vbi Deus factores mei? Where is God my Makers? And God says of
himself, Faciamus hominem, and Factus est sicut unus ex nobis, God says, Let
us make man, and he says, Man is become as one of us, We embrace humbly, and
thankfully, and profitably, this, shall we call it Effigiationem ansarum, This
making out of handles? Or Protuberationem mammarum, This swelling out of
breasts? Or Germinationem gemmarum, This putting forth of buds, and blossoms,
and fruits, by which we may apprehend, and see, and taste God himself, so as
his wisdom has chosen to communicate himself to us, in the notion and
manifestation of diverse persons? Of which in this Text, we lay hold on him, by
the first handle, by the name of Father. Blessed be God, even the Father, etc.

Now we consider in God, Pater Essentialiter.
a twofold Paternity, a twofold Father-hood: One, as he is Father to others,
another as to us. And the first is twofold too: One essentially, by which he
is a Father by Creation, and so the name of Father belongs to all the three
Persons in the Trinity, Ephesians. 4.6.
for, There is one God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all,
and in you all, Which is spoken of God gathered into his Essence, and not
diffused into persons. Esaias 9.6.
In which sense, the Son of God, Christ Jesus, is called Father, Unto us a Son
is given, and his name shall be The Everlasting Father: And to this Father,
even to the Son of God, Mat. 9.2.
in this sense, are the faithful made sons, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins
are forgiven thee, Mark 5.34.
says Christ to the Paralytique, And Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole,
says he to the woman with the bloody issue; Thus Christ is a Father; And thus
Per filiationem vestigii, By that impression of God, which is in the very
being of every creature, Job 38.28.
God, that is, the whole Trinity, is the Father of every creature, as in Job,
Quis pluviae Pater? Has the rain a Father? or who has begotten the drops of
dew? And so in the Prophet, Mal. 2.10.
Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? But the second
Paternity is more mysterious in it self, and more precious to us, as he is a
Father, not by Creation, but by Generation, Even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Now, Personaliter.
Generationem istam quis enarrabit? who shall declare this generation? who
shall tell us how it was? who was there to fee it? Since the firstborn of all
creatures, the Angels, Esaias 53.8.
who are almost six thousand years old, (and much elder in the opinion of
many of the Fathers, who think the Angels to have been created long before the
general Creation) since, I say, these Angels are but in their swathing clouts,
but in their cradle, in respect of this eternal generation, who was present?
Quis enarrabit? who shall tell us how it was? who shall tell us when it was,
when it was so long before any time was, as that, when time shall be no more,
and that, after an end of time, we shall have lived infinite millions of
millions of generations in heaven, yet this generation of the Son of God, was
as long before that immortal life, as that Immortality, and Everlastingnesse
shall be after this life? It cannot be expressed, nor conceived how long our
life shall be after, nor how long this generation was before.

This is that Father, Nazian.
that has a Son, and yet is no elder then that Son, for he is a Patre, but not
Post Patrem, but so from the Father, as he is not after the Father: He has
from him Principium Originale, Biel.
but not Initiale, A root from whence he sprung, but no springtime, when he
sprung out of that root. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Wherefore blessed? Quia potuit? Because he could have a Son? Non
generavit potentia, sed natura; God did not beget this Son because he had
always a power to do so; for then, if this Son had ever been but in Potentia,
only in such a condition, as that he might have been, then this had not been
an eternal generation, for if there were a time, when only he might have been,
at that time he was not. He is not blessed then because cause he could, is he
blessed (that is, to be blessed by us) because he would beget this Son? Non
generavit voluntate, sed natura: God did not beget this Son, then when he
would, that is, had a will to do so, for, if his will determined it, now I
will do it, then till that, there had been no Son, and so this generation had
not been eternal neither. But when it was, or how it was, Turatiocinare, ego
mirer, says S. Augustine, Let others discourse it, let me admire it; Tu
disputa, ego credam, Let others dispute it, let me believe it. And when all is
done, you have done disputing, and I have done wondering, that that brings it
nearer then either, is this, That there is a Paternity, notby Creation, by
which Christ and the Holy Ghost are Fathers too, nor by generation, by which
God is, though inexpressibly, the Father even of our Lord Jesus Christ, but by
Adoption, as in Christ Jesus, he is Father of us all, notified in the next
appellation, Pater miserationum, The Father of mercies.

In this alone, Pater.
we discern the whole Trinity; here is the Father, and here is Mercy, which
mercy is in the Son; And the effect of this mercy, is the Spirit of Adoption,
by which also we cry, Rem. 8.15.
Abba, Father too. When Christ would pierce into his Father, and melt those
bowels of compassion, he enters with that word, Abba, Father, All things are
possible to thee; Mark 14.36.
take away this Cup from me. When Christ apprehended an absence, a dereliction
on Gods part, he calls not upon him by this name, not My Father, but My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.37.
But when he would incline him to mercy, mercy to others, mercy to enemies, he
comes in that name, wherein he could be denied nothing, Father; Father forgive
them, they know not what they do. He is the Lord of Hosts; Luke 23.24.
There he scatters us in thunder, transports us in tempests, enwraps us in
confusion, astonishes us with stupefaction, and consternation; The Lord of
Hosts, but yet the Father of mercies, There he receives us into his own bowels,
fills our emptiness, with the blood of his own Son, and incorporates us in
him; The Lord of Hosts, but the Father of mercy. Sometimes our natural Fathers
die, before they can gather any state to leave us, but he is the immortal
Father, and all things that are, as soon as they were, were his. Sometimes our
natural Fathers live to waste, and dissipate that state which was left them,
to be left us: but this is the Father, out of whose hands, and possession
nothing can be removed, and who gives inestimably, and yet remains
inexhaustible. Sometimes our natural Fathers live to need us, and to live upon
us: but this is that Father whom we need every minute, and requires nothing of
us, but that poor rent of Benedictus sit, Blessed, praised, glorified be this
Father.

This Father of mercies, of mercies in the plural; David calls God,
Miserationum. Psalm. 59.17. Numb. 14.19. Psalm. 51.1.
Misericordiam suam, His mercy; all at once: God is the God of my mercy: God is
all ours, and all mercy. Pardon this people, says Moses, Secundum magnitudinem
misericordiae, According to the greatness of thy mercy. Pardon me, says
David, Have mercy upon me, Secundum multitudinem misericordiarum, According to
the multitude of thy mercies: His mercy, in largeness, in number, extends over
all; It was his mercy that we were made, and it is his mercy that we are not
consumed. David calls his mercy, Multiplicatam, and Mirificatam, Psalm. 17.7.
Psalm. 31.22.
It is manifold, and it is mavelous, miraculous: Show thy mavelous loving
kindness; and therefore David in several places, carries it Super judicium,
above his judgments, Super Coelos, above the heavens, Super omnia opera, above
all his works. And for the multitude of his mercies, (for we are now upon the
consideration of the plurality thereof, Pater miserationum, Father of mercies)
put together that which David says, Psalm. 89.50.
Vbi misericordiae tuae antiquae? Where are thy ancient mercies? His mercy is
as Ancient, as the Ancient of days, who is God himself, And that which
another Prophet says, Omni mane, His mercies are new every morning, And put
between these two, between Gods former, and his future mercies, his present
mercy, in bringing thee this minute to the consideration of them, and thou have
found Multiplicatam, and Mirificatam, manifold, and wondrous mercy.

But carry thy thoughts upon these three Branches of his mercy, and it will be
enough. First, that upon Adams fall, and all ours in him, he himself would
think of such a way of mercy, as from Adam, to that man whom Christ shall find
alive at the last day, no man would ever have thought of, that is, that to show
mercy to his enemies, he would deliver his own, his only, his beloved Son, to
shame, to torments, to death: That he would plant Germen Iehovae in semine
mulieris, The blossom, the branch of God, in the seed of the woman: This
mercy, in that first promise of that Messiah, was such a mercy, as not only
none could have undertaken, but none could have imagined but God himself: And
in this promise, we were conceived In visceribus Patris, In the bowels of this
Father of mercies. In these bowels, in the womb of this promise we lay four
thousand years; The blood with which we were fed then, was the blood of the
Sacrifices, and the quickening which we had there, was an inanimation, by the
often refreshing of this promise of that Messiah in the Prophets. But in the
fullness of time, that infallible promise came to an actual performance,
Christ came in the flesh, and so, Venimus ad partum, In his birth we were
borne; and that was the second mercy; in the promise, in the performance, he is
Pater miserationum, Father of mercies. And then there is a third mercy, as
great, That he having sent his Son, and having reassumed him into heaven
again, he has sent his Holy Spirit to govern his Church, and so becomes a
Father to us, in that Adoption, in the application of Christ to us, by the Holy
Ghost; and this as that which is intended in the last word, Deus totius
Consolationis, The God of all Comfort.

I may know that there is a Messiah promised, and yet be without comfort,
Consolatio.
in a fruitless expectation; The Jews are so in their dispersion. When the
Jews will still post-date the commings of Christ, when some of them say, There
was no certain time of his coming designed by the Prophets; And others, There
was a time, but God for their sins prorogued it; And others again, God kept
his word, the Messiah did come when it was promised he should come, but for
their sins, he conceales himself from Manifestation; when the Jews will
postdate his first coming, and the Papists will antidate his second coming,
in a coming that cannot become him, That he comes, even to his Saints in
torment, before he comes in glory, That when he comes to them at their
dissolution, at their death, he comes not to take them to Heaven, but to cast
them into one part of hell, That the best comfort which a good man can have at
his death, is but Purgatory, Miserable comforters are they all. How fair a
beam of the joys of Heaven is true comfort in this life? If I know the
mercies of God exhibited to others, and feel them not in my self, I am not of
David's Church, Psalm. 59.1.
not of his Quire, I cannot sing of the mercies of God: I may see them, and I
may sigh to see the mercies of God determined in others, and not extended to
me; but I cannot sing of the mercies of God, if I find no mercy. But when I
come to that, Psalm. 94.19.
Consolationes tuae laetificaverunt, In the multitude of my thoughts within me,
thy comforts delight my soul, then the true Comforter is descended upon me,
and the Holy Ghost has over-shadowed me, Mat. 5.4.
and all that shall be borne of me, and proceed from me, shall be holy. Blessed
are they that mourn, says Christ: But the blessedness is not in the
mourning, but because they shall be comforted. Blessed am I in the sense of my
sins, and in the sorrow for them, but blessed therefore, because this sorrow
leads me to my reconciliation to God, and the consolation of his Spirit.
Whereas, if I sink in this sorrow, in this dejection of spirit, though it were
Wine in the beginning, it is lees, and tartar in the end; Inordinate sorrow
grows into sinful melancholy, and that melancholy, into an irrecoverable
desperation. The Wisemen of the East, by a less light, found a greater, by a
Star, they found the Son of glory, Christ Jesus: But by darkness, nothing: By
the beams of comfort in this life, we come to the body of the Sun, by the
Rivers, to the Ocean, by the cheerfulness of heart here, to the brightness,
to the fullness of joy hereafter. For, beloved, Salvation it self being so
often presented to us in the names of Glory, and of Joy, we cannot think that
the way to that glory is a sordid life affected here, an obscure, a beggarly, a
negligent abandoning of all ways of preferment, or riches, or estimation in
this World, for the glory of Heaven shines down in these beams hither;
Neither can men think, that the way to the joys of Heaven, is a joylesse
severenesse, a rigid austerity; for as God loves a cheerful giver, so he
loves a cheerful taker, that takes hold of his mercies and his comforts with
a cheerful heart, not only without grudging, that they are no more, but
without jealousy and suspicion that they are not so much, or not enough.

But they must be his comforts that we take in, Deus.
Gods comforts. For, to this purpose, the Apostle varies the phrase; It was The
Father of mercies; To represent to us gentleness, kindness, favor, it was
enough to bring it in the name of Father; But this Comfort, a power to erect
and settle a tottering, a dejected soul, an overthrown, a bruised, a broken,
a trodden, a ground, a battered, an evaporated, an annihilated spirit, this is
an act of such might, as requires the assurance, the presence of God. God
knows, all men receive not comforts, when other men think they do, nor are all
things comforts to them, which we present, and mean should be so. Your Father
may leave you his inheritance, and little knows he the little comfort you have
in this, because it is not left to you, but to those Creditors to whom you have
engaged it. Your Wife is officious to you in your sickness, and little knows
she, that even that officiousness of hers then, and that kindness, aggravates
that discomfort, which lies upon thy soul, for those injuries which thou had
formerly multiplied against her, in the bosom of strange women. Except the God
of comfort give it, in that seal, in peace of conscience, Nec intus, nec
subtus, nec circa te occurrit consolatio, says S. Bernard; Non subtus, not
from below thee, from the reverence and acclamation of thy inferiors; Non
circa, not from about thee, when all places, all preferments are within thy
reach, so that thou may lay thy hand, and set thy foot where thou will; Non
intus, not from within thee, though thou have an inward testimony of a moral
constancy, in all afflictions that can fall, yet not from below thee, not from
about thee, not from within thee, but from above must come thy comfort, or it
is mistaken. S. Chrysostom notes, and Areopagita had noted it before him, Ex
beneficiis acceptis nomina Deo affingimus, We give God names according to the
nature of the benefits which he has given us: So when God had given David
victory in the wars, by the exercise of his power, then Fortitudo mea, Psalm.
18.2. Psalm. 27.1.
and firmamentum, The Lord is my Rock, and my Castle: When God discovered the
plots and practices of his enemies to him, then Dominus illuminatio, The Lord
is my light, and my salvation. So whenever thou take in any comfort, be
sure that thou have it from him that can give it; for this God is Deus totius
consolationis, The God of all comfort.

Preciosa divina consolatio, nec omnino tribuitur admittentibus alienam:
Totius. Bernard^
The comforts of God are of a precious nature, and they lose their value, by
being mingled with baser comforts, as gold does with allay. Sometimes we make
up a sum of gold, with silver, but does any man bind up farthing tokens,
with a bag of gold? Spiritual comforts which have always Gods stamp upon
them, are his gold, and temporal comforts, when they have his stamp upon
them, are his silver, but comforts of our own coining, are counterfeit, are
copper. Because I am weary of solitariness, I will seek company, and my
company shall be, to make my body the body of a harlot: Because I am drousie, I
will be kept awake, with the obscenities and scurrilities of a Comedy, or the
drums and ejulations of a Tragedy: I will smother and suffocate sorrow, with
hill upon hill, course after course at a voluptuous feast, and drown sorrow in
excess of Wine, and call that sickness, health; and all this is no comfort,
for God is the God of all comfort, and this is not of God. We cannot say with
any color, as Esau said to Jacob, Have thou but one blessing, my Father? Genesis
17.38.
for he is the God of all blessings, and has given every one of us, many more
then one. But yet Christ has given us an abridgement, Vnum est necessarium,
Luke 10.42.
there is but one only thing necessary, And David, in Christ, took knowledge
of that before, when he said, Vnum petii, One thing have I desired of the Lord,
What is that one thing? All in one; Psalm. 27.4.
That I may dwell in the house of the Lord (not be a stranger from his
Covenant) all the days of my life, (not disseised, not excommunicate out of
that house) To behold the beauty of the Lord, (not the beauty of the place
only) but to inquire in his Temple, (by the advancement and advantage of
outward things, to find out him) And so I shall have true comforts, outward,
and inward, because in both, I shall find him, who is the God of all comfort.

Jacob thought he had lost Joseph his Son, And all his Sons, Genesis 37.35.
and all his Daughters rose up to comfort him, Et noluit consolationem, says
the Text, He would not be comforted, because he thought him dead. Rachel wept
for her children and would not be comforted, Mat. 2.18.
because they were not. But what aylest thou? Is there any thing of which thou
can say, It is not? perchance it is, but thou have it not: If thou have him,
that has it, thou have it. Have thou not wealth, but poverty rather, not
honor, but contempt rather, not health, but daily summons of Death rather yet?
Non omnia possidet, cui omnia cooperantur in bonum, Bernard.
If thy poverty, thy disgrace, thy sickness have brought thee the nearer to
God, thou have all those things, which thou think thou want, because thou
have the best use of them. 1 Cor. 3.23.
All things are yours, says the Apostle; why? by what title? For you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Carry back your comfort to the root, and bring
that comfort to the fruit, and confess, that God who is both, is the God of
all comfort. Follow God in the execution of this good purpose upon thee, to thy
Vocation, and hear him, who has left East, and West, and North, and South, in
their dimnesse, and dumnesse, and deafness, and has called thee to a
participation of himself in his Church. Go on with him to thy justification,
That when in the congregation one sits at thy right hand, and believes but
historically (It may be as true which is said of Christ, as of William the
Conqueror, and as of Julius Caesar) and another at thy left hand, and believes
Christ but civilly, (It was a Religion well invented, and keeps people well in
order) and thou between them beleevest it to salvation in an applying faith;
proceed a step farther, to feel this fire burning out, thy faith declared in
works, thy justification grown into sanctification, And then thou will be upon
the last staire of all, That great day of thy glorification will break out
even in this life, and either in the possessing of the good things of this
world, thou shall see the glory, and in possessing the comforts of this World,
see the joy of Heaven, or else, (which is another of his ways) in the want of
all these, thou shall have more comfort then others have, or perchance, then
thou should have in the possessing of them: for he is the God of all
comfort, and of all the ways of comfort; And therefore, Blessed be God, even
the Father, etc.

SERMON. XXXIX. Preached upon Trinity-Sunday.
1 PET. 1.17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according to every man's works, pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear.


YOu may remember, that I proposed to exercise your devotions and religious
meditations in these exercises, with words which might present to you, first
the several persons in the Trinity, and the benefits which we receive, in
receiving God in those distinct notions of Father, Son, and holy Ghost; And
then with other words which might present those sins, and the danger of those
sins which are most particularly opposed against those several persons. Of the
first, concerning the person of the Father, we spoke last, and of the other,
concerning sins against the Father, these words will occasion us to speak now.

It is well noted upon those words of David, Psalm. 51.1.
Have mercy upon me, O God, that the word is Elohim, which is Gods in the
plural, Have mercy upon me, O Gods: for David, though he conceived not diverse
Gods, yet he knew three diverse persons in that one God, and he knew that by
that sin which he lamented in that Psalm, that peccatum complicatum, that
manifold sin, that sin that enwrapped so many sins, he had offended all those
three persons. For whereas we consider principally in the Father, Potestatem,
Power, and in the Son Sapientiam, Wisdom, and in the holy Ghost Bonitatem,
Goodness, David had sinned against the Father, in his notion, In potestate, in
abusing his power, and kingly authority, to a mischievous and bloody end in the
murder of Vriah: And he had sinned against the Son, in his notion, In
sapientia, in depraving and detorting true wisdom into craft and treachery:
And he had sinned against the holy Ghost in his notion, In bonitate, when he
would not be content with the goodness and piety of Vriah, who refused to take
the eases of his own house, and the pleasure of his wifes bosom, as long as
God himself in his army lodged in Tents, and stood in the face of the Enemy.
Sins against the Father then, we consider especially to be such as are In
potestate, Either in a neglect of Gods Power over us, or in an abuse of that
power which we have from God over others; and of one branch of that power,
particularly of Judgment, is this Text principally intended, If ye call on the
Father, who without respect of persons judges, etc.

In the words we shall insist but upon two parts, Divisio.
First, A Counsel, which in the Apostles mouth is a commandment; And then a
Reason, an inducement, which in the Apostles mouth is a forcible, an
unresistible argument. The Counsel, that is, The commandment, is, If ye call
on the Father, fear him, stand in fear of him; And the reason, that is, the
Argument, is, The name of Father implies a great power over you, therefore
fear him; And amongst other powers, a power of judging you, of calling you to
an account, therefore fear him: In which Judgment, this Judge accepts no
persons, but judges his sons as his servants, and therefore fear him: And
then, he judges, not upon words, outward professions, but upon works, actions,
according to every man's works, and therefore fear him: And then as on his part
he shall certainly call you to judgment when you go hence, so on your part,
certainly it cannot be long before you go hence, for your time is but a
sojourning here, it is not a dwelling, And yet it is a sojourning here, it is
not a posting, a gliding through the world, but such a stay, as upon it our
everlasting dwelling depends; And therefore that we may make up this circle,
and end as we begun, with the fear of God, pass that time, that is, all that
time, in fear; In fear of neglecting and undervaluing, or of over-tempting that
great power which is in the Father, And in fear of abusing those limnes, and
branches, and beams of that power which he has communicated to thee, in
giving thee power and authority any way over others; for these, To neglect the
power of the Father, or To abuse that power which the Father has given thee
over others, are sins against the Father, who is power. If ye call on the
Father, etc.

First then, for the first part, the Counsel, Si invocatis, If ye call on the
Father, In timore, 1. Part.
Do it in fear, The Counsel has not a voluntary Condition, and arbitrary in
our selves annexed to it; If you call, then fear, does not import, If you do
not call, you need not fear; It does not import, That if you profess a
particular form of Religion, you are bound to obey that Church, but if you do
not, but have fancied a religion to your self without precedent, Or a way to
salvation without any particular religion, Or a way out of the world without
any salvation or damnation, but a going out like a candle, if you can think
thus you need not fear, This is not the meaning of this If in this place, If
you call on the Father, etc. But this If implies a wonder, an impossibility,
that any man should deny God to be the Father: If the author, the inventer of
any thing useful for this life be called the father of that invention, by the
holy Ghost himself, Genesis 4.20.
Iabal was the father of such as dwell in Tents, and Tubal his brother the
father of Music, And so Horace calls Ennius the father of one kind of Poem:
how absolutely is God our Father, who (may I say?) invented us, made us, found
us out in the depth, and darkness of nothing at all? He is Pater, and Pater
luminum, Father, and Father of lights, of all kinds of lights. Lux lucifica,
Iam. 1.17.
as S. Augustine expresses it, The light from which all the lights which we
have, whether of nature, or grace, or glory, have their emanation. Take these
Lights of which God is said to be the Father, to be the Angels, (so some of the
Fathers take it, and so S. Paul calls them Angels of light; And so Nazianzen
calls them Secundos splendores primi splendoris administros, 2 Cor. 11.14.
second lights that serve the first light) Or take these Lights of which God is
said to be the Father to be the Ministers of the Gospel, the Angels of the
Church, (so some Fathers take them too, and so Christ says to them, in the
Apostles, Mat. 5.14.
You are the light of the world) Or take these Lights to be those faithful
servants of God, who have received an illustration in themselves, and a
coruscation toward others, who by having lived in the presence of God, in the
household of his faithful, in the true Church, are become, as John Baptist was,
burning and shining lamps, (as S. Paul says of the faithful, Phil. 2.15.
You shine as lights in this world, And as Moses had contracted a glorious
shining in his face, by his conversation with God) Or take this light to be a
fainter light then that, (and yet that which S. James does most literally
intend in that place) The light of natural understanding, That which Pliny
calls serenitatem animi, when the mind of man, dis-encumbred of all Eclipses,
and all clouds of passion, or inordinate love of earthly things, is enlightened
so far, as to discern God in nature; Or take this light to be but the light of
a shadow, (for umbrae non sunt tenebrae, sed densior lux, shadows are not
darknesses, shadows are but a grosser kind of light) Take it to be that shadow,
that design, that delineation, that obumbration of God, which the creatures of
God exhibit to us, that which Pliny calls Coelilaetitiam, when the heavens,
and all that they embrace, in an opennesse and cheerfulness of countenance,
manifest God unto us; Take these Lights of which S. James speaks, in any
apprehension, any way, Angels of heaven who are ministering spirits, Angels of
the Church, who are spiritual Ministers, Take it for the light of faith from
hearing, the light of reason from discoursing, or the light flowing from the
creature to us, by contemplation, and observation of nature, Every way, by
every light we see, that he is Pater luminum, the Father of lights; all these
lights are from him, and by all these lights we see that he is A Father, and
Our Father.

So that as the Apostle uses this phrase in another place, Si opertum
Euangelium, 2 Cor. 4.3.
If the Gospel be hid, with wonder and admiration, Is it possible, can it be
that this Gospel should be hid? So it is here, Si invocatis, If ye call God
Father, that is, as it is certain you do, as it is impossible but you should,
because you cannot ascribe to any but him, your Being, your preservation in
that Being, your exaltation in that Being to a well-Being, in the possession of
all temporal, and spiritual conveniences, And then there is thus much more
force in this particle Si, If, which is (as you have seen) Si concessionis,
non dubitationis, an If that implies a confession and acknowledgement, not a
hesitation or a doubt, That it is also Si progressionis, Si conclusionis, an If
that carries you farther, and that concludes you at last, If you do it, that
is, Since you do it, Since you do call God Father, since you have passed that
act of Recognition, since not only by having been produced by nature, but by
having been regenerated by the Gospel, you confess God to be your Father,
and your Father in his Son, in Christ Jesus: Since you make that profession, Of
his own will begat he us, James 1.18.
with the word of Truth, If you call him Father, since you call him Father,
thus, go on farther, Timete, Fear him; If ye call him Father, fear him, etc.

Now, Timete.
for this fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom, and the end of
wisdom too, we are a little too wise, at least, too subtle, sometimes in
distinguishing too narrowly between a filial fear, and a servile fear, as
though this filial fear were nothing but a reverend love of God, as he is
good, and not a doubt and suspicion of incurring those evils, Prove. 8.13.
that are punishments, or that produce punishments. The fear of the Lord is to
hate evil, It is a holy detestation of that evil which is Malum culpae, The
evil of sin, and it is a holy trembling under a tender apprehension of that
other evil, which we call Malum poenae, The evil of punishment for sin. God
presents to us the joys of heaven often to draw us, Origin.
and as often the torments of hell to avert us. Origin says aright, As Abraham
had two sons, one of a Bondwoman, another of a Free, but yet both sons of
Abraham; so God is served by two fears, and the later fear, the fear of
future torment, is not the perfect fear, but yet even that fear is the
servant, and instrument of God too. Quis tam insensatus; Chrysostom.
Who can so absolutely divest all sense, Qui non fluctuante Civitate, imminente
naufragio, But that when the whole City is in a combustion and commotion, or
when the Ship that he is in, strikes desperately and irrecoverably upon a rock,
he is otherwise affected toward God then, then when every day, in a quietness
and calm of holy affections, he hears a Sermon? Gehennae timor (says the
same Father) regni nos affert coronam, Genesis 15.12. Exodus 3.6.
Even the fear of hell gets us heaven. Upon Abraham there fell A horror of
great darkness, And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.
And that way, toward that dejected look, does God bend his countenance; Upon
this man will I look, Esaias 66.12.
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word.
As there are both impressions in security, vicious and virtuous, good and bad,
so there are both in fear also. There is a wicked security in the wicked, by
which they make shift to put off all Providence in God, and to think God like
themselves, indifferent what becomes of this world; There is an ill security in
the godly, when for the time, in their prosperity, they grow ill husbands of
Gods graces, and negligent of his mercies; In my prosperity (says David
himself, Psalm. 30.6.
of himself) I said, I shall not be moved. And there is a security of the
faithful, a constant persuasion, grounded upon those marks, which God, in his
Word, has set upon that state, That neither height, nor depth, nor any
creature shall separate us from God: But yet this security is never discharged
of that fear, which he that said that, 1 Cor. 9.27. Phil. 2.12. 1 Cor. 10.12.
had in himself, I keep under my body, lest when I have preached to others, I
my self should be a castaway; And which he persuades other, how safe soever
they were, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, And Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

As then there is a vicious, an evil security; and that holy security which is
good, is not without fear: so there is no fear of God, though it have some
servility, (so far, as servility imports but a fear of punishment) but it is
good. August.
For, Timor est amor inchoativus, The love of God begins in fear, and then
Amor est timor consummatus, The fear of God ends in love; 1 s^l. 2.11.
which David intends when he says, Rejoice with trembling; Conceive no such
fear as excludes spiritual joy, conceive no such assurance, as excludes an
humble and reverentiall fear. There is fear of God too narrow, when we think
every natural cross, every worldly accident to be a judgment of God, and a
testimony of his indignation, which the Poet (not altogether in an ill sense)
calls a disease of the soul, Quo morbo mentem concusse? timore deorum; He
imagines a man may be sick of the fear of God, that is, not distinguish
between natural accidents, and immediate judgments of God; between ordinary
declarations of his power, and extraordinary declarations of his anger. There
is also a fear of God too large, too far extended, when for a false fear of
offending God, I dare not offend those men, who pretend to come in his name,
and so captivate my conscience to the traditions and inventions of men, as to
the word, and law of God. And there is a fear of God conceived, which never
quickens, but putrifies in the womb before inanimation; the fear and trembling
of the Devil, and men whom he possesses, desperate of the mercies of God. But
there is a fear acceptable to God, and yet has in it, a trembling, a horror,
a consternation, an astonishment, an apprehension of Gods dereliction for a
time. The Law was given in thundering, Exodus 20.20.
and lightning, and the people were afraid. How proceeds Moses with them? Fear
not, says he, for God is come to prove you, that his fear might be before
your faces. Here is a fear not, that is, fear not with despair, nor with
diffidence, but yet therefore, That you may fear the Law; for, in this place,
the very Law it self (which is given to direct them) is called fear; As in
another place, God himself is called fear, (as he is in other places called
love too) Jacob swore by the Fear of his Father Isaac; that is, Genesis 32.53.
by him whom his Father Isaac feared, as the Chalde Paraphrase rightly
expresses it.

Briefly, this is the difference between Fearfulness, and Fear, (for sow are
fain to call Timiditatem and Timorem) Timidity, Fearfulness, is a fear, where
no cause of fear is; and there is no cause of fear, where man and man only
threatens on one side, and God commands on the other: Fear not, thou worm of
Jacob, I will help thee, Es^y 41.14. Heb. 11.23.
says the Lord thy redeemer, the Holy one of Israel. Moses Parents had
overcome this fearfulness: They hid him, says the Text, Et non metucrunt
Edictum Regis, They feared not the Proclamation of the King, Because it was
directly, and evidently, and undisputably against the manifest will of God.
Queen Esther had overcome this fearfulness; she had fasted, and prayed, and
used all prescribed and all possible means, and then she entered the Kings
Chamber, against the Proclamation, with that necessary resolution, Si peream,
peream, If I perish, Esther 4.16.
I perish; Not upon a disobedient, not upon a desperate undertaking, but in a
rectified conscience, and well established opinion, that either that Law was
not intended to forbid her, who was his Wife, or that the King was not rightly
informed, in that bloody command, which he had given for the execution of all
her Countrymen. And for those who do not overcome this fearfulness, that is,
that fear where no cause of fear is, (and there is no cause of fear, where
Gods cause is by godly ways promoved, though we do not always discern the
ways, by which this is done) for those men that frame imaginary fears to
themselves, to the withdrawing or discouraging of other in the service of God,
we see where such men are ranked by the Holy Ghost, when S. John says, The
unbeleeving, the murderer, the whore-monger, the sorcerer, the idolater, Apoc.
21.8;
shall have their portion in the lake of brimstone, which is the second death:
We fee who leads them all into this irrecoverable precipitation, The fearful,
that is, he that believes not God in his promises, that distrusts God in his
own cause, as soon as he seems to open us to any danger; or distrusts Gods
instruments, as soon as they go another way, then he would have them go. To
end this, there is no love of God without fear, no Law of God, no God himself
without fear; And here, as in very many other places of Scripture, the fear
of God is our whole Religion, the whole service of God; for here, Fear him,
includes Worship him, reverence him, obey him. Which Counsel or Commandment,
though it need no reason, no argument, yet the Apostle does pursue with an
argument, and that constitutes our second Part.

Now the Apostles arguments grow out of a double root; 2 Part.
One argument is drawn from God, another from man. From God, thus implied, If
God be a Father, fear him, for naturally we acknowledge the power of a Father
to be great over his children, and consequently the reverent fear of the
children great toward him. The Father had Potestatem vitae and necis, A power
over the life of his child, he might have killed his child; but that the child
should kill his Father, it never entered into the provision of any Law, and it
was long before it fell into the suspicion of any Lawmakers. Romulus in his
Laws, called every manslaughter Parricidium, because it was Paris occisio, He
had killed a man, a Peer, a creature equal to himself; but for Parricide in
the later sense, when Parricide is Patricide, the killing of a Father, it came
not into the jealousy of Romulus Law, nor into the heart or hand of any man
there, in six hundred years after: Cum lege coeperunt, Seneca.
and facinus poena monstravit, says their Moral man: That sin began not, till
the Law forbad it, and only the punishment ordained for it, showed that there
might be such a thing. He that curses Father or Mother, shall surely dye,
says Moses; Exodus 21.17. Deuteronomy. 21.18.
And he that is but stubborn toward them, shall dye too. The dutiful love of
children to Parents is so rooted in nature, that Demosthenes says, it is
against the impressions and against the Law of nature, for any child ever to
love that man, that has done execution upon his Father, though by way of
Justice: And this natural Obligation is not conditioned with the limitations
of a good or a bad Father, Natura te non bono patri, sed patri conciliavit,
Epictetus.
says that little great Philosopher, Nature has not bound thee to thy father,
as he is a good Father, but merely as he is thy Father.

Now for the power of Fathers over their children, by the Law of Nations, that
is, the general practice of Civil States, the Father had power upon the life
of his child; It fell away by discontinuance, in a great part, and after was
abrogated by particular Laws, but yet, by a connivence admitted in some cases
too. For, as in Nature man is Microcosmus, a little World, so in nature, a
family is a little State, a little Commonwealth, and what power the Magistrate
has in that, Aristor.
the Father has in this. Ipsum regnu^ suaptenatura imperium est paternum, The
power of a King, if it be kept within the bounds of the nature of that Office,
Tertul.
is only to be a Father to his people: And, Gratius est nomen pietatis, quam
potestatis, Authority is presented in a more acceptable name, when I am called
a Father, then when I am called a Master; and therefore, says Seneca, our
Ancestors mollified it thus, Vt invidiam Dominis, contumcliam servis
detraherent, That there might accrue no envy to the Master for so great a
title, nor contempt upon the servant for so low a title, they called the Master
Patremfamilias, The Father of a household, and they called the servants,
familiares, parts and pieces of the family. So that in the name of Father they
understand all power; and the first Law that passed amongst the Romans against
Parricides, L. Pompeia.
was Contra interfectores Patrum and Dominorum; They were made equal, Fathers
and Sovereigns: And in the Law of God it self, Honor thy Father, we see all
the honor, and fear, and reverence that belongs to the Magistrate, is
conveyed in that name, in that person, the Father is all; as in the State of
that people, before they came to be settled, both the Civil part of the
Government, and the Spiritual part, was all in the Father, that Father was
King and Priest over all that family.

Present God to thy self then as a Father, and thou will fear him; and take
knowledge, that the Son might not sue the Father; Enter no actio^ against God
why he made thee not richer, nor wiser, nor fairer; no nor why he elects, or
refuses, without respect of good or bad works; But take knowledge too, that
when by the Law, the Father might punish the Son with death, he might not kill
his Son before he was passed three years in age, before he was come to some
demonstration of an ill, and rebellious nature, and disposition: Whatsoever God
may do of his absolute Power, believe that he will not execute that power upon
thee to thy condemnation, till thine actual sins have made thee incapable of
his love: What he may do, dispute not, but be sure he will do thee no harm if
thou fear him, as a Father.

Now to bring that nearer to you, Sacerdotalis.
which principally we intended, which is, the consideration and precaution of
those sins, which violate this Power of God, notified in this name of Father,
we consider a threefold emanation or exercise of Power in this Father, by
occasion of a threefold repeating of this part of the Text, in the Scripture.
The words are weighty, always at the bottom; for we have these words in the
last of the Prophets, in Malachie, and in the last of the Evangelists, in John,
And here in this Apostle, we have them of the last Judgment. Mal. 1.6.
In Malachi he says, A Son honors his Father, if then I be a Father, where
is my honor? This God speaks there to the Priest, to the Levite; Exodus 32.29.
for, the Tribe of Levi, had before, (as Moses bade them) consecrated their
hands to God, and punished by a zealous execution, the Idolatry of the golden
Calfe; and for this service, God fastened the Priesthood upon them. But when
they came in Malachies time, to connive at Idolatry it self, God, who was
himself the root of the Priesthood, and had trusted them with it, and they
had abused that trust, and the Priesthood, Then when the Prophet was become a
fool, Hose. 9.7.
and the spiritual Man, mad, or (as S. Hierom reads it) Arreptitius, that is,
possessed by others, God first of all turns upon the Priest himself, rebukes
the Priest, interminates his judgment upon the Priest, for God is our high
Priest. And therefore fear this Father in that notion, in that apprehension,
as a Priest, as thy high Priest, that refuses or receives thy sacrifices, as he
finds them conditioned; and if he look narrowly, is able to find some spot in
thy purest Lamb, some sin in thy holiest action, some deviation in thy prayer,
some ostentation in thine alms, some vain glory in thy Preaching, some
hypocrisy in thy hearing, some concealing in thy confessions, some reservation
in thy restitutions, some relapses in thy reconciliations: since thou call
him Father, fear him as thy high Priest: So the words have their force in
Malachie, and they appertain Ad potestatem Sacerdotalem, To the power of the
Priest, despise not that.

And then, Civilis. John 8.42.
in the second place, which is in S. John, Christ says, If God were your
Father, you would love me: And this Christ speaks to the Pharisees, and to
them, not as Sectaries in Religion, but as to persons in Authority, and command
in the State, as to Rulers, to Governors, to Magistrates: So Christ says to
Pilate, John 19.11. Romans 13.11.
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above: And so S. Paul, There is no power but of God, The powers that be, be
ordained of God. Christ then charges the Pharisees, that they having the
secular Power in their hands, they went about to kill him, when he was doing
the will of his Father, who is the root, as of Priesthood, so of all Civil
power, and Magistracy also. Fear this Father then, as the Civil Sword, the
Sword of Justice is in his hand. He can open thee to the malicious prosecutions
of adversaries, and submit thee to the penalties of those Laws, which, in
truth, thou have never transgressed: Thy Fathers, thy Grandfathers have sinned
against him, and thou have been but reprieved for two sessions, for two
generations, and now may come to execution. Thou have sinned thy self, and
have repented, and have had thy pardon sealed in the Sacrament; but thy pardon
was clogged with an Ita quod se been gerat, Thou wast bound to the peace by
that pardon, and have broken that peace since, in a relapse, and so fallest
under execution for thine old sins: God cuts off men by unsearchable ways and
means; and therefore fear this Father as a Sovereign, as a Magistrate, for
that use this word in S. John may have.

In Malachie we consider him in his supreme spiritual power, Iudiciaria.
and in S. John in his supreme temporal power; And in this Text, this Father
is presented in a power, which includes both, in a judiciary power, as a Judge,
as our Judge, our Judge at the last day, beyond all Appeal; And (as this
Apostle S. Peter, is said by Clement, who is said to have been his successor
at Rome, to have said) Quis peccare poterit, etc. Who could commit any sin at
any time, if at all times he had his eye fixed upon this last Judgment? We
have seen purses cut at the Sessions, and at Executions, but the Cutpurse did
not see the Judge look upon him: we see men sin over those sins to day, for
which Judgment was inflicted but yesterday, but surely they do not see then
that the Judge sees them. Romans 2.5.
Thou treasurest up wrath, says the Apostle, against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the judgment of God: There is no Revelation of the day of
Judgment, no sense of any such day, till the very day it self overtake him,
and swallow him. Represent God to thy self as such a Judge, as S. Chrysostom
says, That whosoever considers him so, as that Judge, and that day, as a day
of irrevocable judgment, Gehennae poenam tolerare malit, quam adverso Deo
stare, He will even think it an ease to be thrown down into hell out of the
presence of God, rather then to stand long in the presence, and stand under the
indignation of that incensed Judge: The Ite maledicti will be less then the
Surgite qui dormitis. And there is the miserable perplexity, Latere
impossibils, Apparere intolerabile, Bernard.
To be hid from this Judge is impossible, and to appear before him,
intolerable: for he comes invested with those two flames of confusion, (which
are our two next branches in the Text) first, He respects no persons, Then, He
judges according to works: Without respect of persons, etc.

Nine or ten several times it is repeated in the Scriptures, and, I think,
Acceptor personarum.
no one entire proposition so often, That God is no accepter of persons. It is
spoken by Moses, that they who are conversant in the Law might see it, and
spoken in the Chronicles, that they might see it who are conversant in
State-affaires, and spoken in Job, that men in afflictions might not
mis-imagine a partiality in God: It is spoken to the Gentiles, by the Apostle
of the Gentiles, S. Paul, severally; To the Romans, to the Galatians, to the
Ephesians, to the Colossians: And spoken by the chief Apostle, S. Peter, both
in a private Sermon in Cornelius his house, and now in this Catholic Epistle
written to all the world, that all the world, and all the inhabitants thereof
might know, That God is no accepter of persons: And lest all this should not be
all, it is spoken twice in the Apocryphal books; and though we know not
assuredly by whom, yet we know to whom, To all that exercise any judiciary
power under God, it belongs to know, That God is no accepter of persons. In
diverse of those places, this also is added, Nor receiver of Rewards; whether
that be added as an equal thing, That it is as great a sin to accept persons,
as to accept rewards, Or as a concomitancy, they go together, He that will
accept persons, will accept rewards, Or as an Identity, It is the same thing to
accept persons, and to accept rewards, because the preferment which I look for
from a person in place, is as much a reward, as money from a person rich in
treasure; whether of these it be, I dispute not: Clearly there is a Bribery in
my love to another, and in my fear of another there is a Bribery too: There is
a bribery in a poor man's tears, if that decline me from justice, as well as
in the rich man's Plate, and Hangings, and Coach, and Horses.

Let no man therefore think to present his complexion to God for an excuse, and
say, My choler with which my constitution abounded, and which I could not
remedy, inclined me to wrath, and so to blood; My Melancholy inclined me to
sadness, and so to Desperation, as though thy sins were medicinal sins, sins
to vent humors. Let no man say, I am continent enough all the year, but the
spring works upon me, and inflames my concupiscencies, as though thy sins were
seasonable and anniversary sins. Make not thy Calling the occasion of thy sin,
as though thy sin were a Mystery, and an Occupation; Nor thy place, thy
station, thy office the occasion of thy sin, as though thy sin were an
Heir-loome, or furniture, or fixed to the freehold of that place: for this one
proposition, God is no accepter of persons, is so often repeated, that all
circumstances of Dispositions, and Callings, Ambros.
and time, and place might be involved in it. Nulla descretio personarum, sed
morum; God discernes not, that is, distinguishes not Persons, but Actions, for,
He judges according to every man's works, which is our next Branch.

Now this judging according to works, Opera.
excludes not the heart, nor the heart of the heart, the soul of the soul,
Faith. God requires the heart, My son give me thy heart; He will have it, but
he will have it by gift; and those Deeds of Gift must be testified; and the
testimony of the heart is in the hand, the testimony of faith is in works. If
one give me a timber tree for my house, I know not whether the root be mine or
no, whether I may stub it by that gift: but if he give me a fruit tree for mine
Orchard, he intends me the root too; for else I cannot transplant it, nor
receive fruit by it: God judges according to the work, that is, Root and
fruit, faith and work; That is the work; And then he judges according unto
Thy work; The works of Other men, the Actions and the Passions of the blessed
Martyrs, and Saints in the Primitive Church, works of Supererogation are not
thy works. It were a strange pretense to health, that when thy Physician had
prescribed thee a bitter potion, and came for an account how it had wrought
upon thee, thou should say, My brother has taken twice as much as you
prescribed for me, but I took none, Or if he ordained six ounces of blood to
be taken from thee, to say, My Grandfather bled twelve. God shall judge
according to The work, that is, The nature of the work, and according to Thy
work, The propriety of the work: Thee, who art a Protestant, he shall judge
by thine own work, and not by S. Stephens, or S. Peter's; and thee, who art a
Papist, he shall judge by thine own work, and not by S. Campians, or S.
Garnets, as meritorious as thou think them. And therefore if God be thy
Father, and in that title have sovereign power over thee, A power spiritual,
as High Priest of thy soul, that discernes thy sacrifices; A power Civil, and
draws the sword of Justice against thee, when he will; A power judiciary, and
judges without accepting persons, and without error in apprehending thy works,
If he be a Father thus, fear him, for these are the reasons of fear, on his
part, and then fear him, for this reason on thy part, That this time which
thou art to stay here, first, is But a sojourning, it is no more, but yet it is
a sojourning, it is no less, Pass the time of your sojourning here, etc.

When there is a long time to the Assizes, Incolatus.
there may be some hope of taking off, or of smothering Evidence, or working
upon the Judge, or preparing for a pardon: Or if it were a great booty, a great
possession which we had gotten, even that might buy out our peace. But this
world is no such thing, neither for the extent that we have in it, It is but
little that the greatest has, nor for the time that we have in it; In both
respects it is but a sojourning, Genesis 47.6. Heb. 13.14.
it is but a pilgrimage, says Jacob, And But the days of my pilgrimage; Every
one of them quickly at an end, and all of them quickly reckoned. Here we have
no continuing City; first, no City, no such large being, and then no continuing
at all, it is but a sojourning. The word in the Text is (...), we have but a
parish, we are but parishioners in this world, and they that labor to purchase
whole shires, usurp more then their portion; and yet what is a great Shire in a
little Map? Here we are but Viatores, Passengers, wayfaring men; This life is
but the highway, and thou can not build thy hopes here; Nay, to be buried in
the high way is no good mark; and therefore bury not thy self, thy labors,
thy affections upon this world. What the Prophet says to thy Savior, (O the
hope of Israel, (...). 14.7.
the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should thou be a stranger in
the land, and as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry for a night?) say
thou to thy soul, Sincethou art a stranger in the land, a wayfaring man,
turned aside to tarry for a night, since the night is past, Arise and depart,
for here is not thy rest; Mic. 2.10.
prepare for another place, and fear him whom thou call Father, and who is
shortly to be thy Judge; for here thou art no more then a sojourner; but yet
remember withal that thou art so much, Thou art a sojourner.

This life is not a Parenthesis, a Parenthesis that belongs not to the sense,
Incolatus.
a Parenthesis that might be left out, as well as put in. More depends upon
this life then so: upon every minute of this life, depend millions of years in
the next, and I shall be glorified eternally, or eternally lost, for my good or
ill use of Gods grace offered to me this hour. Therefore where the Apostle
says of this life, Peregrinamur a Domino, 2 Cor. 5.6.
We are absent from the Lord, yet he says, We are at home in the body: This
world is so much our home, as that he that is not at home now, he that has not
his conversation in heaven here, shall never get home. And therefore even in
this Text, our former Translation calls it Dwelling; That which we read now,
pass the time of your sojourning, we did read then, pass the time of your
dwelling; for this, where we are now, is the suburb of the great City, the
porch of the triumphant Church, and the Grange, or Country house of the same
Landlord, belonging to his heavenly Palace, in the heavenly Jerusalem. Be it
but a sojourning, yet thou must pay God something for thy sojourning, pay God
his rent of praise and prayer; And be it but a sojourning, yet thou art bound
to it for a time; Though thou sigh with David, Heu mihi, quia prolongatus
incolatus, Psalm. 120.5.
woe is me that I sojourne so long here, Though the miseries of thy life make
thy life seem long, yet thou must stay out that time, which he, who took thee
in, appointed, and by no practice, no not so much as by a deliberate wish, or
unconditioned prayer, seek to be delivered of it: Because thy time here is
such a sojourning as is quickly atan end, and yet such a sojourning as is never
at an end, (for our endless state depends upon this) fear him, who shall so
certainly, and so soon be a just Judge of it; fear him, in abstaining from
those sins which are directed upon his power; which are, principally, (as we
intimated at the beginning, and with which we shall make an end) first, The
negligence of his power upon thee, And then, the abuse of his power
communicated to thee over others.

First then, the sin directed against the Father, Negligentia.
whom we consider to be the root and center of all power, is, when as some
men have thought the soul of man to be nothing but a resultance of the
temperament and constitution of the body of man, and no infusion from God, so
they think that power, by which the world is governed, is but a resultance of
the consent, and the tacit voice of the people, who are content, for their
ease to be so governed, and no particular Ordinance of God: It is an
undervaluing, a false conception, a mis-apprehension of those beams of power,
which God from himself sheds upon those, whom himself calls Gods in this World.
We sin then against the Father, when we undervalue God in his Priest. God has
made no step in that perverse way of the Roman Church, to prefer, so as they
do, the Priest before the King; yet, speaking in two several places, of the
dignity of his people, first, as Jews, then as Christians, he says in one
place, They shall be a Kingdom, and a Kingdom of Priests; and he says in the
other, Esaias 19.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.
They shall be Sacerdotium, and Regale Sacerdotium, Priests, and royal
Priests: In one place, the King, in the other, the Priest mentioned first, and
in both places, both involved in one another: The blessings from both are so
great, as that the Holy Ghost expresses them by one another mutually. Number. 1.
Oleaster.
When God commands his people to be numbered in every Tribe, one moves this
question, Why in all other Tribes he numbered but from twenty years upward, and
in the Tribe of Levi from a month upward? Agnosce sacerdos, says he, quanti
te Deus tuus fecerit, Take knowledge, thou who art the Priest of the high God,
what a value God has set upon thee, that whereas he takes other servants for
other affairs, when they are men, fit to do him service, he took thee to the
Priesthood in thy cradle, in thine infancy. How much more then, when the
Priest is not Sacerdos infans, A Priest that cannot or does not speak; but
continues watchful in meditating, and assiduous in uttering, powerfully, and
yet modestly, the things that concern your salvation, ought you to abstain
from violating the power of God the Father, in dis-esteeming his power thus
planted in the Priest?

So also do we sin against the Father, the root of power, Civilis.
in conceiving amiss of the power of the Civil Magistrate: Whether where God
is pleased to represent his unity, in one Person, in a King; or to express it
in a plurality of persons, in diverse Governors, When God says, Per me Reges
regnant, By me Kings reign; There the Per, is not a Permission, but a
Commission, It is not, That they reign by my Sufferance, but they reign by
mine Ordinance. A King is not a King, because he is a good King, nor leaves
being a King, Romans 13.5.
as soon as he leaves being good. All is well summed by the Apostle, You must
needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

But then the greatest danger of sinning against the Father, Iudiciaria.
in this notion of power, is, if you conceive not aright of his Judiciary
power, of that judgment, which he executes, not by Priests, nor by Kings upon
earth, but by his own Son Christ Jesus in heaven. For, not to be astonished at
the Contemplation of that judgment, where there shall be Information,
Examination, Publication, Hearing, Judgment, and Execution in a minute; where
they that never believed, till they heard me, may be taken in, and I that
Preached and wrought their salvation, may be left out; where those wounds which
my Savior received upon earth, for me, shall be shut up against me, and those
wounds which my blasphemies have made in his glorified body, shall bleed out
indignation, upon sight of me, the murderer, not to think upon, not to tremble
at this judgment, is the highest sin against the Father, and his power, in the
undervaluing of it.

But there is a sin against this power too, Abusus.
in abusing that portion of that power, which God has deposited in thee. Art
thou a Priest, and expectest the reverence due to that holy calling? Ambr Ep.
6. ad Iren.
Be holy in in that calling. Quomodo potest observari a populo, qui nihil habet
secretum a populo? How can the people reverence him, whom they see to be but
just one of them? Quid in te miretur, si sua in te recognoscit? If they find
no more in thee, then in one another, what should they admire in thee? Si quae
in se erubescit, in te, quem reverendum arbitratur, offendit? If they discern
those infirmities in thee, which they are ashamed of in themselves, where is
there any object, any subject, any exercise of their reverence? psalm. 52.1.
Art thou great in Civil Power? Quid gloriaris in malo, quiae potens es? Why
boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? Have thou a great body
therefore, because thou should stand heavy upon thine own feet, and make
them ache? Or a great power therefore, because thou should oppress them that
are under thee? use thy power justly, Jes. 1.^.
and call it the voice of allegiance when the people say to thee, as to Joshua,
All that thou command us, we will doc, and whither soever thou sendest us,
we will go: Abuse that power to oppression, and thou can not call that the
voice of sedition, in which, Peter and the other Apostles joined together, Acts
5.29.
We ought to obey God rather then man. Have thou any judicial place in this
world? here there belongs more fear then in the rest: Some things God has
done in Christ as a Priest in this world, some things as a King, But when
Christ should have been a Judge in civil causes, he declined that, he would
not divide the Inheritance, and in criminal causes he did so too, he would not
condemn the Adulteress. So that for thy example in judgment, thou art
referred to that which is not come yet, to that, to which thou must come, The
last, the everlasting judgment. Weigh thine affections there, and then, and
think there stands before thee now, a prisoner so affected, as thou shall be
then. Weigh the mercy of thy Judge then, and think there is such mercy required
in thy judgment now. Be but able to say, God be such to me at the last day, as
I am to his people this day, and for that days justice in thy public
calling, God may be pleased to cover many sins of infirmity. And so you have
all that we intended in this exercise to present unto you, The first person of
the Trinity, God the Father, in his Attribute of power, Almighty, and those
sins, which, as far as this Text leads us, are directed upon him in that
notion of Father. The next day the Son will rise.

SERMON. XL. Preached upon Trinity-Sunday.
1 COR. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema,
Maranatha.


CHrist is not defined, not designed by any name, by any word so often, as by
that very word, The Word, Sermo, Speech. In man there are three kinds of
speech; Sermo innatus, That inward speech, which the thought of man reflecting
upon it self produces within, He thinks something; And then Sermo illatus, A
speech of inference, that speech which is occasioned in him by outward things,
from which he draws conclusions, and determins; And lastly, Sermo prolatus,
That speech by which he manifests himself to other men. We consider also three
kinds of speech in God; and Christ is all three. There is Sermo innatus; His
eternal, his natural word, which God produced out of himself, which is the
generatiof the second Person in the Trinity; And then there is Sermo illatus,
His word occasioned by the fall of Adam, which is his Decree of sending Christ,
as a Redeemer; And there is also Sermo prolatus, His speech of manifestation
and application of Christ, which are his Scriptures. The first word is Christ,
the second, the Decree, is for Christ, the third, the Scripture, is of Christ.
Let the word be Christ, so he is God; Let the word be for Christ, for his
coming hither, so he is man; Let the word be of Christ, so the Scriptures make
this God and man ours. Now If in all these, if in any of these apprehensions,
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha.

By most of those, who, from the perverseness of Heretics, Divisio.
have taken occasion to prove the Deity of Christ, this text has been cited;
and therefore I take it now, when in my course proposed, I am to speak of the
second Person in the Trinity; but, (as I said of the first Person, the Father)
not as in the School, but in the Church, not in a Chair, but in a Pulpit, not
to a Congregation that required proof, in a thing doubted, but edification,
upon a foundation received; not as though any of us would dispute, whether
Jesus Christ were the Lord, but that all of us would join in that
Excommunication, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be, etc.
Let this then be the frame that this exercise shall stand upon. We have three
parts; The person upon whom our Religious worship is to be directed, The Lord
Jesus Christ: And secondly, we have the expression and the limitation of that
worship, as far as it is expressed here, Love the Lord Jesus Christ: And
lastly, we have the imprecation upon them that do not, If any man do not, let
him be Anathema, Maranatha. In the first we have Verbum natural, verbum
innatum, As he is the essential word, The Lord, a name proper only to God; And
then Verbum conceptum, verbum illatum, Gods Decree upon consideration of man's
misery, that Christ should be a Redeemer, for to that intent he is Christus,
Anointed to that purpose; And lastly, Verbum prolatum, verbum manifestatum,
That this Christ becomes Jesus, That this Decree is executed, that this person
thus anointed for this office, is become an actual Savior; So the Lord is
made Christ, and Christ is made Jesus. In the second Part we shall find
another argument for his Deity, for there is such a love required toward the
Lord Jesus Christ, as appertains to God only; And lastly, we shall have the
indeterminable, and indispensable excommunication of them, who though they
pretend to love the Lord, (God in an universal notion) yet do not love the
Lord Jesus Christ, God, in this apprehension of a Savior; and, If any man love
not, etc.

First then, in the first branch of the first part, in that name of our
Savior, The Lord, 1 Part. Dominus.
we apprehend the eternal Word of God, the Son of God, the second Person in
the Trinity: for, He is Persona producta, Begotten by another, and therefore
cannot be the first; And he is Persona spirans, a Person out of whom, with the
Father, another Person, that is, the Holy Ghost proceeds, and therefore cannot
be the last Person, and there are but three, Nazian.
and so he necessarily the second. Shall we hope to comprehend this by reason?
Quid magni haberet Dei generatio, si angusti is intellectus tui
comprehenderetur? How small a thing were this mystery of Heaven, if it could be
shut in, in so narrow a piece of the earth, Idem.
as thy heart? Qui tuam ipsius generatione^ vel in totum nescis, vel dicere sit
pudor, Thou that know nothing of thine own begetting, or art ashamed to
speak that little that thou do know of it, wilt not thou be ashamed to
offer to express the eternal generation of the Son of God? It is true, De
modo, How it was done, our reason cannot, but De facto, that it was done, our
reason may be satisfied. We believe nothing with a moral faith, till something
have wrought upon our reason, and vanquished that, and made it assent and
subscribe. Our divine faith requires evidence too, and has it abundantly; for,
the works of God are not so good evidence to my reason, as the Word of God is
to my faith; The Sun shining is not so good a proof that it is day, as the
Word of God, the Scripture is, that that which is commanded there, is a duty.
The root of our belief that Christ is God, is in the Scriptures, but we
consider it spread into three branches, 1 The evident Word it self, that
Christ is God; 2 The real declaration thereof in his manifold Miracles; 3 The
conclusions that arise to our understanding; thus illumined by the Scriptures,
thus established by his miracles.

In every mouth, Ex Scripturis.
in every pen of the Scriptures, that delivers any truth, the Holy Ghost
speaks, and therefore whatsoever is said by any there, is the testimony of the
Holy Ghost, for the Deity of Christ. And from the Father we have this
testimony, that he is his Son, Mat. 3. ult. Heb. 1.8.
This is my beloved Son, And this testimony that his Son is God, Unto his Son
he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. The Holy Ghost testifies,
and his Father, and himself; Apoc. 1.8.
and his testimony is true, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning, and the
ending, says the Lord, which is, which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty. He testifies with his Father; Apoc. 22.16.
and then, their Angels and his Apostles testify with him, I Jesus have sent
mine Angels, to testify unto you these things in the Church, That I am the
Root, and the Offspring of David, not the offspring only, but the root
too, and therefore was before David. God and his Angels in Heaven testify it,
And visible Angels upon earth, his Apostles, Acts 20.28.
God has purchased his Church, with his own blood, says S. Paul; He who shed
his blood for his Church, was God; and no false God, no mortal God, as the
gods of the Nations were, 1 John 5.20. Tit. 2.13.
but, This is the true God, and cternall life; and then, no small God, no
particular God, as the Gods of the Nations were too, but, We look for the
glorious appearing of our great God, our Savior Christ Jesus: God, that is,
God in all the Persons, Angels, that is, Angels in all their acceptations,
Angels of Heaven, Angels of the Church, Angels excommunicate from both, the
fallen Angels, Devils themselves, testify his Godhead, Mar. 3.11.
Unclean Spirits fell down before him, and cried, Thou art the Son of God.

This is the testimony of his Word; Miracula.
the testimony of his Works, are his Miracles. That his Apostles did Miracles
in his name, Acts 3.16.
was a testimony of his Deity. His name, through faith in his Name, has made
this man strong, says S. Peter, at the raising of the Creeple. But that he did
Miracles in his own Name, by his own Power, is a nearer testimony; Belssed be
the Lord God of Israel, Psalm. 72.18.
says David, Qui facit Mirabilia solus, Which does his Miracles alone, without
deriving power from any other, or without using an other instrument for his
Power. Epipha.
For, Mutare naturam, nisi qui Dominus naturae est, non potest: Whosoever is
able to change the course of nature, is the Lord of nature; And he that is so,
made it; and he that made it, Tertul.
that created it, is God. Nay, Plus est, it is more to change the course of
Nature, then to make it; for, in the Creation, there was no reluctation of the
Creature, for there was no Creature, but to divert Nature out of her settled
course, is a conquest upon a resisting adversary, and powerful in a
prescription. The Recedat Mare, Let the Sea go back, and the Sistat Sol, Let
the Sun stand still, met with some kind of opposition in Nature, but in the
Fiat Mare, and Fiat Sol, Let there be a Sea, and a Sun, God met with no
opposition, no Nature, August.
he met with nothing. And therefore, Interrogemus Miracula, quid nobis de
Christo loquantur, Let us ask his Miracles, and they will make us understand
Christ; Habent enim si intelligantur, linguam suam, If we understand them,
that is, If we would understand them, they speak loud enough, and plain
enough. In his Miraculous birth of a Virgin, In his Miraculous disputation with
Doctors at twelve years of age, in his fasting, in his invisibility, in his
walking upon the Sea, in his re-assuming his body in the Resurrection, Christ
spoke, in himself, in the language of Miracles. So also had they a loud and a
plain voice, in other men; In his Miraculous curing the sick, raising the
dead, dispossessing the Devil, Christ spoke, in other men, in the language of
Miracles. And he did so also, as in himself, and in other men, so in other
things; In the miraculous change of Water into Wine, in the drying up of the
Fig Tree, In feeding five thousand with five loaves, in shutting up the Sun in
darkness, and opening the graves of the Dead to light, in bringing plenty of
Fish to the Net, and in putting money into the mouth of a Fish at the Angle,
Christ spoke in all these Creatures, in the language of Miracles. So the
Scriptures testify of his Deity, and so do his Miracles, and so do those
Conclusions which arise from thence, though we consider but that one, which is
expressed in this part of the Text, that he is the Lord, If any love not the
Lord, etc.

We reason thus, God gives not his glory to others, Dominus.
and his glory is in his Essential Name, and in his Attributes; and to
whomsoever he gives them, because they cannot be given from God, he who has
them, is God. Of these, none is so peculiar to him, as the name of Iehova; the
name, which for reverence, the Jews forbore to sound, and in the room thereof
ever sounded, Adonai, and Adonai, is Dominus, the name of this Text, The Lord;
Christ by being the Lord thus, is Jehovah, and if Jehovah, God. It is
Tertullians observation, Et ss Pater sit, and dicatur Dominus, and Filius sit,
and dicatur Deus, That though the Father be the Lord, and be called the Lord,
and though the Son be God, and be called God, yet, says he, the manner of the
Holy Ghost in the New Testament, is, to call the Father God, and the Son the
Lord. He is Lord with the Father, as he was Con-creator, his Colleague in the
Creation; But for that Dominion and Lordship which he has by his Purchase, by
his Passion, Calcavit solus, Ple trod the Wine Press alone, not only no man,
but no Person of the Trinity, redeemed us, by suffering for us, but he. For the
ordinary appellation of Lord in the New Testament, which is (...), it is but a
name of Civility, not only no name implying Divine worship, but not implying
any distinction of rank or degree amongst men. Mary Magdalen speaks of Christ,
and speaks to the Gardener, (as she thought) and both in one and the same
word; it is (...), Dominus, Lord, to both: when she says, They have taken away
my Lord, meaning Christ, John 20.15.
and when she says to the Gardener, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, it is
the same word too. But all that reaches not to the style of this Text, The
Lord, for here The Lord, is God; 1 Cor. 12.3.
And no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. All that
was written in the Scriptures, all that was established by Miracles, all that
is deduced by reason, conduces to this, determines in this, That every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord; in which essential name, the
name of his nature, he is first proposed, as the object of our love.

Now this Lord, Lord for ever, is become that which he was not for ever,
Christus.
(otherwise then in a secondary consideration) that is, Christ, which implies a
person prepared, and sitted, and anointed to a peculiar Office in this World.
And can the Lord, the ever-living Lord, the Son of God, the only Son of God,
God himself have any preferment? preferment by an Office in this World? Was it
a preferment to Dionysius, who was before in that height over men, to become a
schoolmasters over boys? Were it a preferment to the Kings Son, to be made
governor over a Bee-hive, or over-seer over an Ant-hill? And men, nay Mankind
is no more, not that, not a Bee-hive, not an Ant-hill, compared to this Person,
who being the Lord, would become Christ. As he was the Lord, we considered him
as God, and that there is a God, natural reason can comprehend; As he is
Christ, we consider him God and Man, and such a Person, natural reason (not
rooted in the Scriptures, not illustrated by the Scriptures) cannot comprehend;
Man will much easilier believe the Lord, that is, God, then Christ, that is,
God and Man in one Person.

Christ then is the style, the title of his Office; Non Nomen, sed Appellatio,
Tertul.
Christ is not his Name, but his Addition. Vnctus significatur, says he, and
unctus non magis nomen, quam vestitus, calceatus; Christ signifies but
anointed, and anointed is no more a Name, then apparelled, or shod, is a name:
So, as he was apparelled in our flesh, and his apparel dyed red in his own
blood, so as he was shod to tread the Wine Press for us, So he was Christ.
That it is Nomen Sacramenti, as S. Aug. calls it, A mystery, is easily agreed
to: for all the mysteries of all the Religions in the World, are but Milk in
respect of this Bone, but Catechismes in respect of this Schoole-point, but
Alphabets in respect of this hard Style, God and Man in one person. That it is
Nomen Sacramenti, as Augustine says, is easy; but that it is Nuncupatio
potestatis, as Lactantius calls it, is somewhat strange, that it is an office of
power, a title of honor: for the Creator to become a Creature, and the Lord of
life the object of death, nay the seat of death, in whom death did sojourn
three days, can Lactantius call this a declaration of power? is this
Nuncupatio potestatis, a title of honor? Beloved, he does, and he may; for it
was so: for, it was an Anointing; Exodus 29.7.
Christas is unctus; and unction was the Consecration of Priests, Thou shall
take the anointing Oil, and power it upon his head. The Mitre (as you may see
there) was upon his head then; but then there was a Crown upon the Mitre;
There is a power above the Priest, the regal power; not above the function of
the Priest, but above the person of the Priest; 1 Samuel 10.1. and 24.
But Unction was the Consecration of Kings too; Samuel saluted Saul with a
kiss, and all the people shouted, and said, God save the King; but, Is it not,
says Samuel, because the Lord has anointed thee, to be captain over his
inheritance? Kings were above Priests; and in extraordinary cases, God raised
Prophets above Kings; for there is no ordinary power above them: But Unction
was the Consecration of these Prophets too; Elisha was anointed to be Prophet
in Elias room; and such a Prophet as should have use of the Sword: 1 Reg.
19.16, 17.
Him that scapes the Sword of Hazael, (Hazael was King of Syria) shall the
Sword of Iehu slay, and him that scapes the Sword of Iehu (Iehu was King of
Israel) shall the Sword of Elisha slay. In all these, in Priests who were above
the people, in Kings, who (in matter of Government) were above the Priests, in
Prophets, who (in those limited cases expressed by God, and for that time,
wherein God gave them that extraordinary employment) were above Kings, The
Unction imprinted their Consecration, they were all Christ's, and in them all,
thereby, was that Nuncupatio potestatis, which Lactantius mentions; Unction,
Anointing was an addition and title of honor: Psalm. 109. Psalm. 2.6. Deuteronomy. 18.
Much more in our Christ, who alone was all three; A Priest after the Order of
Melchizedek; A King set upon the holy hill of Sion; And a Prophet, The Lord thy
God will raise up a Prophet, unto him shall ye harken: And besides all this
threefold Unction, Humanitas uncta Divinitate; He had all the unctions that all
the other had, and this, which none other had; In him the Humanity was
Consecrated, anointed with the Divinity it self.

So then, Nazian: Cyrill. Psalm. 95.7.
unio unctio, The hypostaticall union of the Godhead to the humane nature, is
his Conception, made him Christ: for, oleo laetitia perfusus in unione, Then,
in that union of the two natures, did God anoint him with the oil of gladness
above his fellows. There was an addition, something gained, something to be
glad of; and, to him, as he was God, The Lord, so nothing could be added; If he
were glad above his fellows, it was in that respect wherein he had fellows, and
as God, as The Lord, he had none; so that still, as he was made Man, he became
this Christ. In which his being made Man, if we should not consider the last
and principal purpose, which was to redeem man, if we leave out his part, yet
it were object enough for our wonder, and subject enough for our praise and
thankesgiving, to consider the dignity, that the nature of man received in that
union, wherein this Lord was thus made this Christ, for, the Godhead did not
swallow up the manhood; but man, that nature remained still; The greater
kingdom did not swallow the less, but the less had that great addition, which
it had not before, and retained the dignities and privileges which it had
before too. Damasc.
Christus est nomen personae, non naturae, The name of Christ denotes one
person, but not one nature: neither is Christ so composed of those two natures,
as a man is composed of Elements; for man is thereby made a third thing, and is
not now any of those Elements; you cannot call man's body fire or air, or earth
or water, though all four be in his composition: But Christ is so made of God
and Man, as that he is Man still, for all the glory of the Deity, and God
still, for all the infirmity of the manhood: Idem.
Divinum miraculis lucet, humanum contumeliis afficitur: In this one Christ,
both appear; The Godhead bursts out, as the Sun out of a cloud, and shines
forth gloriously in miracles, even the raising of the dead, and the humane
nature is submitted to contempt and to torment, even to the admitting of death
in his own bosom; sed tamen ipsius sunt tum miraculae, Idem.
tum supplicia, but still, both he that rayses the dead, and he that dies
himself, is one Christ, his is the glory of the Miracles, and the contempt and
torment is his too. This is that mysterious person, who is singularis, and yet
not individuus; singularis, There never was, never shall be any such, but we
cannot call him Individual, Idem.
as every other particular man is, because Christitatis non est Genus, there is
no genus nor species of Christ's; it is not a name, which, so (as the name
belongs to our Christ, that is, by being anointed with the divine nature) can
be communicated to any other, as the name of Man, may to every Individual Man.
Christ is not that Spectrum, that Damascene speaks of, nor that Electrum that
Tertullian speaks of; not Spectrum, so as that the two natures should but
imaginarily be united, and only to amaze and astonish us, that we could not
tell what to call it, what to make of it, a spectre, an apparition, a
phantasma, for he was a Real person. Neither was he Tertullians Electrum, a
third metal made of two other metals, but a person so made of God and Man, as
that, in that person, God and Man, are in their natures still distinguished. He
is Germen Davidis, Iere. 23.5. Isa. 4.2.
in one Prophet, The branch, the Offspring of David; And he is Germen Iehovae,
The Branch, the Offspring of God, of the Lord, in another: When this Germen
Davidis, the Son of Man would do miracles, then he was Germen Iehovae, he
reflected to that stock into which the Humanity was engrafted, to his Godhead;
And when this Germen Iehovae, the Son of God, would endure humane miseries, he
reflected to that stock, to that humanity, in which he had invested, and
incorporated himself. This person, 1 Cor. 15.3. Tertul.
this Christ dyed for our sins, says S. Paul; but says he, He dyed according to
the Scriptures; Non sine onere pronunciat Christum mortuum; The Apostle thought
it a hard, a heavy, an incredible thing to say that this person, this Christ,
this Man and God, was dead, And therefore, Vt duritiam molliret, and scandalum
auditoris everteret, That he might mollify the hardness of that saying, and
defend the hearer from being scandalized with that saying, Adjecit, secundum
scripturas, He adds this, Christ is dead, according to the Scriptures: If the
Scriptures had not told us that Christ should die, and told us again, that
Christ did die, it were hard to conceive, how this person, in whom the Godhead
dwelt bodily, should be submitted to death. But therein principally is he
Christus, as he was capable of dying. As he was Verbum natural, and innatum,
The natural and essential word of God, He has his first name in the text, He
is the Lord: As he is verbum illatum, and Conceptum, A person upon whom there
is a Decree and a Commission, that he shall be a person capable to redeem Man
by death, he has this second name in the text, He is Christ; As he is The
Lord, he cannot die; As he is Christ (under the Decree) he cannot choose but
die; But as he is Jesus, He is dead already, and that is his other, his third,
his last name in this Text, If any man love not etc.

We have inverted a little, the order of these names, or titles in the Text;
Jesus.
because the Name of Christ, is in the order of nature, before the name of
Jesus, as the Commission is before the Execution of the Commission. And, in
other places of Scripture, to let us see, how both the capacity of doing it,
and the actual doing of it, belongs only to this person, the Holy Ghost seems
to convey a spiritual delight to us, in turning and transposing the Names
every way; sometimes Jesus alone, and Christ alone, sometimes Jesus Christ, and
sometimes Christ Jesus, that every way we might be sure of him. Now we consider
him, as Jesus, a real, an actual Savior. And this was his Name; The Angel
said to his Mother, Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people; And we say to you, Call upon this name Jesus, for he has saved his
people; for, Romans 8.1.
Now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: As he was
verbum conceptum, and illatum, The word which the Trinity uttered amongst
themselves, so he was decreed to come in that place, The Lord of the vineyard
(that is, Almighty God seeing the misery of Man, Luke 20.13.
to be otherwise irremediable) The Lord of the vineyard said, what shall I do?
I will send my beloved Son; it may be, they will reverence him when they see
him. But did they reverence him, when they saw him? This sending made him
Christ, a person, whom, though the Son of God, they might see: They did see
him; but then, says that Gospel, they drew him out and killed him. And this he
knew before he came, and yet came, and herein was Jesus, a real, an actual, a
zealous Savior, even of them that slew him: And in this (with piety and
reverence) we may be bold to say, that even the Son of God, was filius
prodigus, that powered out his blood even for his Enemies; but rather in that
acclamation of the prodigal child's Father, This my son was dead, and is
alive again, he was lost, and is found. For, but for this desire of our
salvation, why should he who was the Lord, be ambitious of that Name, the name
of Jesus, which was not Tam expectabile apud Iudaeos nomen, Tertull.
no such name as was in any especial estimation amongst the Jews: for, we see
in Ioscphus, diverse men of that name, of no great honor, of no good
conversation. But because the name implies salvation, Joshua, who had another
name before, Idem.
Cum in hujus sacramenti imagine parabatur, when he was prepared as a Type of
this Jesus, to be a Savior, a Deliverer of the people, Etiam nominis Dominici
inaugur atus est figurae, and Jesus cognominatus, then he was canonized with
that name of salvation, and called Iosuae, which is Jesus.

The Lord then, the Son of God, had a Sitio in heaven, as well as upon the
Cross; He thirsted our salvation there; and in the midst of the fellowship of
the Father from whom he came, and of the Holy Ghost, who came from him and the
Father, and all the Angels, who came (by a lower way) from them all, he desired
the conversation of Man, for Man's sake; He that was God The Lord, became
Christ, a man, and he that was Christ, became Jesus, no man, a dead man, to
save man: To save man, all ways, in all his parts, And to save all men, in all
parts of the world: To save his soul from hell, where we should have felt
pains, and yet been dead, then when we felt them; and seen horrid spectacles,
and yet been in darkness and blindness, then when we saw them; And suffered
unsufferable torments, and yet have told over innumerable ages in suffering
them: To save this soul from that hell, and to fill that capacity which it
has, and give it a capacity which it has not, to comprehend the joys and
glory of Heaven, this Christ became Jesus. To save this body from the
condemnation of everlasting corruption, where the worms that we breed are our
betters, because they have a life, where the dust of dead Kings is blown into
the street, and the dust of the street blown into the River, and the muddy
River tumbled into the Sea, and the Sea remaunded into all the veins and
channels of the earth; to save this body from everlasting dissolution,
dispersion, dissipation, and to make it in a glorious Resurrection, not only a
Temple of the holy Ghost, but a Companion of the holy Ghost in the kingdom of
heaven, This Christ became this Jesus. To save this man, body and soul
together, from the punishments due to his former sins, and to save him from
falling into future sins by the assistance of his Word preached, and his
Sacrrments administered in the Church, which he purchased by his blood, is this
person, The Lord, the Christ, become this Jesus, this Savior. To save so, All
ways, In soul, in body, in both; And also to save all men. For, to exclude
others from that Kingdom, is a tyranny, an usurpation; and to exclude thy
self, is a sinful, and a rebellious melancholy. But as melancholy in the body
is the hardest humor to be purged, so is the melancholy in the soul, the
distrust of thy salvation too. Flashes of presumption a calamity will quench,
but clouds of desperation calamities thicken upon us; But even in this
inordinate dejection thou exaltest thy self above God, and make thy worst
better then his best, thy sins larger then his mercy. Christ has a Greek name,
and an Hebrew name; Christ is Greek, Jesus is Hebrew; He had commission to
save all nations, and he has saved all; Thou give him another Hebrew name,
and another Greek, Apoc. 9.11.
when thou make his name Abaddon, and Apollyon, a Destroyer; when thou will
not apprehend him as a Savior, and love him so; which is our second Part, in
our order proposed at first, If any man love not, etc.

In the former part, 2 Part.
we found it to be one argument for the Deity of Christ, That he was Jehovah,
The Lord; we have another here, That this great branch, nay this very root of
all divine worship due to God, is required to be exhibited to this person, That
is, Love, Cicero.
If any man love not, etc. If any man could see Virtue with his eye, he would
be in love with her: Christ Jesus has been seen so: Quod vidimus, says the
Apostle, That which we have seen with our eyes, we preach to you, and
therefore If any man love not, etc. If he love him not with that love which
implies a Confession, that the Lord Jesus is God, Levit. 10.12.
That is, if he love him not with all his heart, and all his power: What does
the Lord thy God require of thee? To love him with all thy heart, and all thy
soul. God forbids us not a love of the Creature, proportionable to the good
that that creature can do us: To love fire as it warms me, and meat as it
feeds me, and a wife as she helps me; But because God does all this, in all
these several instruments, God alone is centrically, radically, directly to be
loved, and the creature with a love reflected, and derived from him; And Christ
to be loved with the love due to God himself: Mat. 10.37.
He that loves father or mother, son or daughter more then me, is not worthy
of me, says Christ himself. If then we love him so, as we love God, entirely,
we confess him to be the Lord; And if we love him so, as he has loved us, we
confess him to be Christ Jesus: And we consider his love to us (for the
present) in these two demonstrations of it, first Dilexit in finem, As he
loved, so he loved to the end; And then Posuit animam, Greater love there is
not, then to die for one, and he did that.

Our Savior Christ forsook not Peter, when Peter forsook him: In finem.
because he loved him, he loved him to the end. Love thou Christ to the end; To
His end, and to Thy end. Finem Domini vidistis, says S. James, You have seen
the end of the Lord; That is, 1 (...) 5.11.
says August. to what end the Lord came; His way was contempt and misery, and
his end was shame and death: Love him there. Thy love is not required only in
the Hosanna's of Christ, when Christ is magnified, and his Gospel advanced, and
men preferred for loving it: No, nor only in the Transfiguration of Christ,
when Christ appears to thee in some particular beams, and manifestation of
his glory; but love him in his Crucifigatur, then when it is a scornful thing
to love him, And love him in the Nunquid and tu? when thou must pass that
examination, Were not thou one of them? John 18.25, 26.
And in the Nonne ego te vidi? if witnesses come in against thee for the love
of Christ, love him when it is a suspicious thing, a dangerous thing to love
him; And love him not only in spiritual transfigurations, when he visits thy
soul with glorious consolations, but even in his inward eclipses, when he
withholds his comforts, and withdrawes his cheerfulness, even when he makes as
though he loved not thee, love him. Love him, all the way, to his end, and to
thy end too, to the laying down of thy life for him.

Love him then in the laying down of the pleasures of this life for him,
Mortificatio.
and love him in the laying down of the life it self, if his love need that
testimony. Of the first case, of crucifying himself to the world, Epist. 39.
S. Augustine had occasion to say much to a young Gentleman, young, and noble,
and rich, and (which is not, in such persons, an ordinary tentation, but where
it is, it is a shrewd one) as he was young, and noble, and rich, so he was
learned in other learnings, and upon that strength withdrew, and kept off from
Christ. It was Licentius, to whom S. Augustine writes his 39. Epistle. He had
sent to S. Augustine a handsome Elegy of his making, in which Poem he had
said as much of the vanity and deceivablenesse of this world, as S. Augustine
could have looked for, or, perchance, have said in a Homily; And he ends his
Elegy thus, Hoc opus, ut jubeas, All this concerning this world I know already,
Do you but tell me, do you command me, what I shall do. Iubebit Augustinus
conservo suo? says that sensible and blessed Father: Shall I, shall Augustine
command his fellow servants? Et non plang at potius frustra juberc Dominum? Must
not Augustine rather lament that the Lord has commanded thee, and is not
obeyed? Would thou hear me? Can thou pretend that? Exaudi teipsum,
Durissime, Immanissime, Surdissime; Thou that art inoxorable against the
persuasions of thine own soul, Hard against the tenderness of thine own
heart, Deaf against the charms of thine own Verses, can thou pretend a
willingness to be led by me? Quam animam, quod ingenium non licet immolare Deo
nostro? How well disposed a soul, how high pitched a wit is taken out of my
hands, that I may not sacrifice that soul, that I may not direct that wit upon
our God, because, with all these good parts, thou turnest upon the pleasures of
this world? Mentiuntur, moriuntur, in mortem trahunt: Do not speak out of
wit, nor out of a love to elegant expressions, nor do not speak in jest of
the dangerous vanities of this world; Mentiuntur, they are false, they perform
not their promises; Moriuntur, they are transitory, they stay not with thee;
and In mortem trahunt, they dye, and they dye of the infection, and they
transfuse the venom into thee, and thou dyest with them: Non dicit verum, nisi
veritas, and Christus veritas, Nothing will deal truly with thee but the
Truth it self, and only Christ Jesus is this Truth. He follows it thus much
farther, Si calicem aureum invenisses in terrae, If thou foundest a chalice of
gold in the earth, so good a heart as thine would say, Surely this belongs to
the Church, and surely thou would give it to the Church: Accepisti a Deo
ingenium spiritualiter aureum, God has given thee a wit, an understanding, not
of the gold of Ophir, but of the gold of the heavenly Jerusalem, Et in illo,
Satanae propinas teipsum? In that chalice once consecrated to God, will thou
drink a health to the devil, and drink a health to him in thine own blood, in
making thy wit, thy learning, thy good parts advance his kingdom? He ends all
thus, Miserearis jam mei, si tibi viluisti, If thou undervalue thy self, if
thou think not thy self worth hearing, if thou follow not thine own
counsels, yet miserearis mei, Have mercy upon me, me, whose charge it is to
bring others to heaven, me, who shall not be received there, if I bring no
body with me; be content to go with me, that way, which by the inspiration
of the holy Ghost I do show, and that way, which by the conduct of the holy
Ghost I would fain go. All bends to this, First, love Christ so far as to lay
down the pleasures of this life for him, and so far, as to lay down the life it
self for him.

Christ did so for thee: Martyrium.
and his blessed Servants the Martyrs, in the Primitive Church, did so for him,
and thee; for his glory, for thy example. Can there be any ill, any loss, in
giving thy life for him? Is it not a part of the reward it self, the honor to
suffer for him? Muk 10.30.
When Christ says, Whosoever loses any thing for my sake, and the Gospels, he
shall have a hundred fold in houses, and lands, with persecutions, we need not
limit that clause of the Promise, (with persecutions) to be, That in the midst
of persecutions, God will give us temporal blessings, but that in the midst of
temporal blessings, God will give us persecutions; that it shall be a part of
his mercy, to be delivered from the danger of being puffed up by those
temporal abundances, by having a mixture of adversity and persecutions; and
then, Tertul.
what ill, what loss, is there in laying down this life for him? Quid hoc
mali est, quod martyrialis mali, non habet timorem, pudorem, tergiversationem,
poenitentiam, deplorationem? What kind of evil is this, which when it came to
the highest, Ad malum martyriale, to martyrdom, to death, did neither imprint
in our holy predecessors in the Primitive Church, Timorem, any fear that it
would come; not Tergiversationem, any recanting lest it should come; nor
Pudorem, any shame when it was come; nor Poenitentiam, any repentance that they
would suffer it to come; nor Deplorationem, any lamentation by their heirs,
and Executors, because they lost all, when it was come? Quid mali? What kind
of evil can I call this, in laying down my life, for this Lord of life, Cujus
reus gaudet, Idem.
when those Martyrs called that guiltiness a joy, Cujus accusatio votum, and
the accusation a satisfaction, Cujus poena foelicitas, and the suffering
perfect happiness? Love thy neighbor as thy self, is the farthest of that
Commandment; but love God above thy self; for, indeed, in doing so thou do
but love thy self still: Remember that thy soul is thy self; and as if that
be lost, nothing is gained, so if that be gained, nothing is lost, whatsoever
become of this life.

Love him then, Dominus.
as he is presented to thee here; Love the Lord, love Christ, love Jesus. If
when thou look upon him as the Lord, thou find frowns and wrinkles in his
face, apprehensions of him, as of a Judge, and occasions of fear, do not run
away from him, in that apprehension; look upon him in that angle, in that line
awhile, and that fear shall bring thee to love; and as he is Lord, thou shall
see him in the beauty and loveliness of his creatures, in the order and
succession of causes, and effects, and in that harmony and music of the peace
between him, and thy foul: As he is the Lord, thou will fear him, but no man
fears God truly, but that that fear ends in love.

Love him as he is the Lord, Christus.
that would have nothing perish, that he has made; And love him as he is
Christ, that has made himself man too, that thou might not perish: Love
him as the Lord that could show mercy; and love him as Christ, who is that way
of mercy, which the Lord has chosen. Return again, and again to that
mysterious person, Christ; And let me tell you, that though the Fathers never
forbore to call the blessed Virgin Mary, Deiparam, the Mother of God, yet in
Damascens time, they would not admit that name, Christiparam, that she was the
Mother of Christ: Not that there is any reason to deny her that name now; but
because then, that great Heretic, Nestorius, to avoid that name, in which the
rest agreed, Deiparam, (for he thought not Christ to be God) invented a new
name, Christiparam: Though it be true in it self, that that blessed Virgin is
Christipara, yet because it was the invention of an Heretic, and a
fundamental Heretic, who though he thought Christ to be anointed by the Holy
Ghost above his fellows, yet did not believe him to be God, Damascen, and his
Age, refused that addition to the blessed Virgin; So reverently were they
affected, so jealously were they enamoured of that name, Christ, the name which
employed his Unction, his Commission, the Decree, by which he was made a Person,
able to redeem thy soul: And in that contemplation, say with Andrew, to his
brother Peter, Invenimus Messiam; I have found the Messiah; I could find no
means of salvation in my self, nay, no such means to direct God upon, by my
prayer, or by a wish, as he has taken; but God himself has found a way, a
Messiah; His Son shall be made man; And Inveni Messiam, I have found him, and
found, that he, who by his Inearnation, was made able to save me, (so he was
Christ) by his actual passion, has saved me, and so I love him as Jesus.

Christ loved Stephen all the way, Jesus.
for all the way Stephen was disposed to Christ's glory, but in the agony of
death (death suffered for him) Christ expressed his love most, in opening the
windows, Acts 7.56.
the curtains of heaven it self, to see Stephen dye, and to show himself to
Stephen. I love my Savior as he is The Lord, He that studies my salvation; And
as Christ, made a person able to work my salvation; but when I see him in the
third notion, Jesus, accomplishing my salvation, by an actual death, I see
those hands stretched out, that stretched out the heavens, and those feet
racked, to which they that racked them are foot-stooles; I hear him, from whom
his nearest friends fled, pray for his enemies, and him, whom his Father
forsook, not forsake his brethren; I see him that clothes this body with his
creatures, or else it would wither, and clothes this soul with his
Righteousness, or else it would perish, hang naked upon the Cross; And him
that has, him that is, the Fountain of the water of life, cry out, He
thirsts, when that voice overtakes me, in my cross ways in the world, Is it
nothing to you, all you that pass by? Lament. 1.12.
Behold, and see, if there by any sorrow, like unto my sorrow, which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger;
When I conceit, when I contemplate my Savior thus, I love the Lord, and there
is a reverent adoration in that love, I love Christ, and there is a mysterious
admiration in that love, but I love Jesus, and there is a tender compassion in
that love, and I am content to suffer with him, and to suffer for him, rather
then see any diminution of his glory, by my prevarication. And he that loves
not thus, that loves not the Lord God, and God manifested in Christ, Anathema,
Maranatha, which is our next, and our last Part.

Whether this Anathema be denounced by the Apostle, by way of Imprecation, 3
Part. Imprecatio.
that he wished it so, or pronounced by way of excommunication, That others
should esteem them so, and avoid them, as such persons, is sometimes debated
amongst us in our books. If the Apostle say it by way of Imprecation, if it
sound so, you are to remember first, That many things are spoken by the
Prophets in the Scriptures, which sound as imprecations, as execrations, which
are indeed but prophesies; They seem to be spoken in the spirit of anger, when
they are in truth, but in the spirit of prophecy. So, in very many places of
the Psalms, David seems to wish heavy calamities upon his and Gods enemies,
when it is but a declaration of those judgments of God, which he
prophetically foresees to be imminent upon them: They seem Imprecations, and
are but Prophesies; and such, we, who have not this Spirit of Prophecy, nor
foresight of Gods ways, may not venture upon. If they be truly Imprecations,
you are to remember also, that the Prophets and Apostles had in them a power
extraordinary, and in execution of that power, might do that, which every
private man may not do: So the Prophets rebuked, so they punished Kings. So 2
King. 2.24.
Elizeus called in the Bears to devour the boys; And so 2 Kings 1.
Elias called down fire to devour the Captains; So S. Peter killed Acts 5.
Ananias, and Sapphira with his word; And Acts 13.8.
so S. Paul stroke Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness. But upon Imprecations
of this kind, we as private men, or as public persons, but limited by our
Commission, may not adventure neither. But take the Prophets or the Apostles in
their highest Authority, yet in an over-vehement zeal, they may have done some
things some times not warrantable in themselves, many times many things, not to
be imitated by us. In Moses his passionate vehemence, Dele me, Exodus 32.32.
If thou will not forgive them, blot me out of thy book, And in the Apostles
inconfiderate zeal to his brethren, Optabam Anathema esse, I could wish that
my self were accursed from Christ; Romans 9.3.
In James and John's impatience of their Masters being neglected by the
Samaritans, when they drew from Christ that rebuke, You know not of what spirit
you are; In these, Luke 9.55.
and such as these, there may be something, wherein even these men cannot be
excused, but very much wherein we may not follow them, nor do as they did, nor
say as they said. Since there is a possibility, a facility, a proclivity of
erring herein, and so many conditions and circumstances required, to make an
Imprecation just and lawful, the best way is to forbear them, or to be very
sparing in them.

But we rather take this in the Text, Excommunicatio.
to be an Excommunication denounced by the Apostle, then an Imprecation: So
Christ himself, If he will not hear the Chruch, let him be to thee as a
Heathen, or a Publican; That is, Have no conversation with him. So says the
Apostle, speaking of an Angel, Anathema, If any man, if we our selves, Gal. 1.9.
if an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. Now the
Excommunication is in the Anathema, and the aggravating thereof in the other
words, Maranatha. The word Anathema had two significations; They are expressed
thus, Quod Deo dicatum, Just. Mart.
Quod a Deo per vitium alienatum; That which for some excellency in it, was
separated from the use of man, to the service of God, or that which for some
great fault in it, was separated from God and man too. Ab illo abstinebant
tanquam Deo dicatum, Ab hoc recedebant, Chrysostom.
tanquam a Deo abalienatum: From the first kind, men abstained, because they
were consecrated to God, and from the other, because they were aliened from
God; and in that last sense, irreligious men, such as love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, are Anathema, aliened from God. Amongst the Druides, with the Heathen,
they excommunicated Malefactors, and no man might relieve him in any necessity,
no man might answer him in any action: And so amongst the Jews, the Esseni, who
were in special estimation for sanctity, excommunicated irreligious persons,
and the persons so excommunicated starved in the streets and fields. By the
light of nature, by the light of grace, we should separate our selves from
irreligious, and from idolatrous persons; and that with that earnestness,
which the Apostle expresses in the last words, Maran Atha.

In the practice of the Primitive Church, Maran Atha.
by those Canons, which we call The Apostles Canons, and those which we call
The penitential Canons, we see there were different penances inflicted upon
different faults, and there were, very early, relaxations of penances,
Indulgences; and there were reservations of cases; in some any Priest, in some
a Bishop only might dispense. It is so in our Church still; Impugners of the
Supremacy are excommunicated, and not restored but by the Archbishop: Impugners
of the Common prayer Book excommunicated too, but may be restored by the
Bishop of the place: Impugners of our Religion declared in the Articles,
reserved to the Archbishop: Impugners of Ceremonies restored when they repent,
and no Bishop named: Authors of Schism reserved to the Archbishop; maintainers
of Schismatiques, referred but to repentance; And so maintainers of
Conventicles, to the Archbishop; maintainers of Constitutions made in
Conventicles, to their repentance. There was ever, there is yet a reserving of
certain cases, and a relaxation or aggravating of Ecclesiastical censures,
for their weight, and for their time: and, because Not to love the Lord Jesus
Christ was the greatest, the Apostle inflicts this heaviest Excommunication,
Maran Atha.

The word seems to be a Proverbiall word amongst the Jews after their return,
and vulgarly spoken by them, and so the Apostle takes it, out of common use of
speech: Maran, is Dominus, The Lord, and Athan is Venit, He comes: Not so
truly, in the very exactness of Hebrew rules, and terminations, but so amongst
them then, when their language was much depraved: Dan. 4.16. Deuteronomy. 33.2.
but, in ancienter times, we have the word Mara for Dominus, and the word Atha
for Venit; And so Anathema, Maran Atha will be, Let him that loves not the
Lord Jesus Christ, be as an accursed person to you, even till the Lord come. S.
Hierom seems to understand this, Dominus venit, That the Lord is come; come
already, come in the flesh; Superfluum, says he, odiis pertinacibus contendere
adversus eum, qui jam venit; It is superabundant perverseness, to resist Christ
now; Now that he has appeared already, and established to himself a Kingdom
in this world. And so S. Chrysostom seems to take it too; Christ is come
already, says he, Et jam nulla potest excusatio non diligentibus eum; If any
excuse could be pretended before, yet since Christ is come, none can be: Si
opertum, says the Apostle, If our Gospel be hid now, it is hid from them who
are lost; that is, they are lost from whom it is hid. But that is not all, that
is intended by the Apostle, in this place. It is not only a censorious speech,
It is a shame for them, and an inexcusable thing in them, if they do not love
the Lord Jesus Christ, but it is a judiciary speech, thus much more, since they
do not love the Lord, The Lord judge them when he comes; I, says the Apostle,
take away none of his mercy, when he comes, but I will have nothing to do with
them, till he comes; to me, he shall be Anathema, Maran Atha, separated from
me, till then; then, the Lord who shows mercy in minutes, do his will upon him.
Our former Translation had it thus, Let him be had in execration, and
excommunicated till death; In death, Lord have mercy upon him; till death, I
will not live with him.

To end all, If a man love not the Lord, if he love not God, which is, which
was, and which is to come, what will please him? whom will he love? If he love
the Lord, and love not Christ, and so love a God in general, but lay no hold
upon a particular way of his salvation, Sine Christo, sine Deo, says the
Apostle to the Ephesians, when ye were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.
ye were without God; A non-Christian, is an Atheist in that sense of the
Apostle. If any man find a Christ, a Savior of the World, but find not a
Jesus, an actual Savior, 1 John 2.22.
that this Jesus has saved him, Who is a liar, says another Apostle, but he
that denies that Jesus is the Christ? 1 John 5.1.
And (as he says after) Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne
of God. From the presumptuous Atheist, that believes no God, from the reserved
Atheist, that believes no God manifested in Christ, from the melancholique
Atheist that believes no Jesus applied to him, from him of no Religion, from
him of no Christian Religion, from him that erres fundamentally in the
Christian Religion, the Apostle enjoynes a separation, not till clouds of
persecution come, and then join, not till beams of preferment come, and then
join, not till Laws may have been slumbred some years, and then join, not
till the parties grow somewhat near an equality, and then join, but Maran
Atha, donec Dominus venit, till the Lord come to his declaration in judgment,
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Amen.

SERMON. XLI. Preached upon Trinity-Sunday.
PSALM. 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry.


WHether we shall call it a repeating again in us, of that which God had done
before to Israel, or call it a performing of that in us, which God promised by
way of Prophecy to Israel, that is certainly afforded to us by God, which is
spoken by the Prophet of Israel, Hos. 11.4.
God does draw us with the cords of a man, and with bands of love: with the
cords of a man, the man Christ Jesus, the Son of God, and with the bands of
love, the band and seal of love, a holy kiss, Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry. No man comes to God, except the Father draw him; The Father draws no
man, but by the Son; and the Son receives none, but by love, and this cement
and glue, of a zealous and a reverentiall love, a holy kiss; Kiss the Son,
etc.

The parts upon which, for the enlightening of your understandings, Divisio.
and assistance of your memories, we shall insist, are two: first our duty,
then our danger; The first is an expression of love, Kiss the Son; the second
is an impression of fear, lest he be angry. In the first we shall proceed
thus: we shall consider first The object of this love, the Person, the second
Person in the Trinity, The Son; The rather, because that consideration will
clear the Translation; for, in no one place of Scripture, do Translations
differ more, then in this Text; and the Roman Translation and ours differ so
much, as that they have but Apprehendite disciplinam, Embrace knowledge, where
we have, (as you heard) Kiss the Son. From the Person, The Son, we shall pass
to the act, Osculamini, Kiss the Son; In which we shall see, That since this
is an act, which licentious men have depraved, (carnal men do it, and
treacherous men do it; Judas (and not only Judas) have betrayed by a kiss)
and yet God commands this, and expresses love in this, Every thing that has,
or may be abused, must not therefore be abandoned; the turning of a thing out
of the way, is not a taking of that thing away, but good things deflected to
ill uses, by some, may be by others reduced to their first goodness. And then
in a third branch of this first part, we shall consider, and magnify the
goodness of God, that has brought us into this distance, that we may Kiss
the Son, that the expressing of this love lies in our hands, and that, whereas
the love of the Church, in the Old Testament, even in the Canticle, went no
farther but to the Osculetur me, O that he would kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth! now, Cant. 1.1.
in the Christian Church, and in the visitation of a Christian soul, he has
invited us, enabled us to kiss him, for he is presentially amongst us: And
this will lead us to conclude that first part, with an earnest persuasion, and
exhortation to kiss the Son, with all those affections, which we shall there
find to be expressed in the Scriptures, in that testimony of true love, a holy
kiss. But then, lest that persuasion by love should not be effectual, and
powerful enough to us, we shall descend from that duty, to the danger, from
love, to fear, Lest he be angry; And therein see first, that God, who is love,
can be angry; And then, that this God who is angry here, is the Son of God, He
that has done so much for us, and therefore in Justice may be angry; He that
is our Judge, and therefore in reason, we are to fear his anger: And then, in
a third branch, we shall see, how easily this anger departs, a kiss removes
it, Do it, lest he be angry; And then lastly, we shall inquire, what does anger
him; and there consider, That as we attribute power to the Father, and so, sins
against power (the undervaluing of Gods power in the Magistrate over us, or the
abusing of Gods power, in our selves, over others) were sins against the
Father; so wisdom being the attribute of the Son, ignorance, which is so
far under wisdom, and curiosity, which carries us beyond wisdom, will be
sins against the Son.

Our first branch in our first part, 1 Part. Persona, Filius.
directs us upon him, who is first and last, and yesterday and to day, and the
same for ever; The Son of God, Osculamini filium, Kiss the Son. Where the
Translations differ as much, as in any one passage. The Chalde paraphrase
(which is, for the most part, good evidence) and the translation of the
Septuagint, (which adds much weight) and the current of the Fathers (which is
of importance too) do all read this place, Apprehendite disciplinam, Embrace
knowledge, and not Osculamini filium, Kiss the son. Of the later men in the
Roman Church, diverse read it as we do, Osculamini, and some farther,
Amplectimini, Embrace the son. Amongst the Jews, Rab. Solomon reads it,
Armanini disciplina, Arm your selves with knowledge; And another modern man,
reads it, Osculamini pactum, Kiss the Covenant; And, Adorate frumentum, Adore
the Corn, and thereby carries it from the pacification of Christ in heaven, to
the adoration of the bread in the Sacrament. Clearly, and without exception,
even from Bellarmine himself, according to the Original Hebrew, it ought to
be read, as we read it, Kiss the Son. Now very many, very learned, and very
zealous men of our times, have been very vehement against that Translation of
the Roman Church, though it be strengthened, by the Chalde, by the Septuagint,
and by the Fathers, in this place. The reason of the vehemence in this place,
is not because that sense, which that translation presents, may not be
admitted; no, nor that it does not reach home, to that which is intended in
ours, Kiss the Son: for, since the doctrine of the Son of God, had been
established in the verses before, to say now, Apprehendite disciplinam, lay
hold upon that Doctrine; That doctrine which was delivered before, is, in
effect the same thing, as, Kiss the Son. So Luther, when he takes, and
follows that translation of that Church, says, Nostra translatio, ad verbum,
nihil est, ad sensum propriissima; That translation, if we consider the very
words only, is far from the Original, but if we regard the sense, it is most
proper. And so also Calvin admits; Take it which way you will, Idem manet
sensus, Pelican.
the sense is all one. And therefore another Author in the Reformation says, In
re dubia, malim vetustissimo interpreti crederc, since upon the whole matter it
is doubtful, or indifferent, I would not depart, says he, from that
Translation, which is most ancient.

The case then being thus, that that sense may be admitted, and admitted so as
that it establish the same doctrine that ours does, why are our late men so
very vehement against it? Truly, upon very just reason: for, when those former
reverent men were so moderate as to admit that translation in this place; The
Church of Rome, had not then put such a sanctity, such a reverence, such a
singularity, and pre-eminence, and supremacy, such a Noli me tangere, upon that
Translation; It had the estimation then of a very reverend Translation, and
compared with any other Translations, then the best. But when in the Council
of Trent they came to make it as Authentical, to prefer it before the
Originals themselves, to decide all matters of Controversy by it alone, and to
make the doing so, matter of faith, and heresy, in any thing to depart from
that Translation, then came these later men justly to charge it with those
errors, wherein, by their own confessions, it has departed from the Original;
Not that these men meant to discredit that Translation so, as that it should
not still retain the estimation of a good and useful Translation, but to avoid
that danger, that it should be made matter of faith, to be bound to one
Translation; or that any Translation should be preferred before the Original.
And so truly it is, in many other things, besides the translation. They say S.
Peter was at Rome; and all moderate men went along with them; S. Peter was at
Rome. But when upon S. Peter's personal being at Rome, they came to build their
universal supremacy over all the Church, and so to erect matter of faith upon
matter of fact, then later men came to deny, that it could be proved out of
Scripture, that Peter was at Rome; So the Ancients spoke of many Sacraments, so
they did of Purgatory, so they did of many things controverted now; when as
they, then, never suspected that so impious a fense would have been put upon
their words, nor those opinions and doctrines so mischievously advanced, as
they have been since. If they would have let their translation have remained
such a translation, we would not have declined it; since they will have all
trials made by it, we rather accept the Original; and that is in this place,
Osculamini filium, Kiss the Son.

The person then (which was our first Consideration) is the Son; Osculamini.
The testimony of our love to this person, is this Kiss, Osculamini: where we
see, that God calls upon us, and enjoins unto us, such an outward act, as has
been diversely depraved, and vitiated before amongst men. God gives no
countenance to that distempered humor, to that distorted rule; It has been ill
used, and therefore it may not be used. Sacred and secular Stories abound with
examples of the treacherous Kiss; Let the Scriptures be our limits. Ioabs
complement with Amasa; Art thou in health, my brother? ended in this; 2 Samuel
20.9.
He took him with the right hand, as to kiss him, and killed him. Enlarge your
thoughts a little upon Judas case; Judas was of those, who had tasted of the
word of God, Heb. 6.5.
and the powers of the world to come; He had lived in the Conversation, in the
Paedagogy, in the Discipline of Christ; yet he sold Christ; and sold him at a
low price, as every man that is so unprovident, as to offer a thing to sale,
shall do; and he stayed not till they came to him, with, What will you take for
your Master? but he went to them, with, What will you give me for Christ? yet
Christ admits him, admits him to supper, and after all this, calls him friend;
for, after all this, Christ had done two, perchance three offices of a friend
to Judas; He washed his feet; and, perchance, he gave him the Sacrament with
the rest; and by assigning the sop for a particular mark, he let him see, that
he knew he was a traitor, which might have been enough to have reclaimed him,
It did not; but he proceeded in his treason, and in the most mischievous and
treacherous performing of it, tobetray him with a kiss; He gave them a sign,
whomsoever I shall kiss, the same is he: Mat. 26.48.
Dat signum osculi, cum veneno Diaboli, says Hierome, He kisses with a biting
kiss, and conveys treason in a testimony of love. It is an Apophthegme of
Luthers, Mali tyranni, haeretiei pejores, falsi fratres pessimi: A persecutor
is ill; but he that persuades me to any thing, which might submit me to the
persecutors rage, is worse; but he that has persuaded me, and then betrays me,
is worst of all. Mic. 7.6. Act. 20.30.
When all that happens, when a man's enemies are the men of his own house, when
amongst our selves men arise, and draw away the Disciples, remember that Judas
defamed this kiss before, he kissed his Master, and so betrayed him. Homo sum,
and inter homines vivo, says S. Augustine, I am but a man my self, and I look
but for men to live amongst; Nec mihi arrogare audeo, meliorem domum meam, quam
Arca Noah, I cannot hope to have my house clearer than Noah's Arc, and there,
in eight, there was one ill; nor then Jacobs house, and there the Son went up
to the Fathers bed; nor then David's, and there the brother forced the sister;
nor then Christ's, and there Judas betrayed his Master, and with a kiss: which
alone does so aggravate the fact, as that for the atrocity and heinousness
thereof, three of the Evangelists remember that circumstance, That he betrayed
him with a kiss; and as though it might seem impossible, incredible to man,
that it could be so, S. John pretermits that circumstance, That it was done
with a kiss.

In Ioabs treachery, in Judas treason, is the kiss defamed, and in the carnal
and licentious abuse of it, it is every day depraved. They mistake the matter
much, that think all adultery is below the girdle: A man darrs out an adultery
with his eye, in a wanton look; and he wraps up adultery with his fingers, in a
wanton letter; and he breaths in an adultery with his lips, in a wanton kiss.
But though this act of love, be so defamed both ways, by treachery, by
licentiousnes, yet God chooses this Metaphore, he bids us kiss the Son. It
is a true, and an useful Rule, That ill men have been Types of Christ, Hieron.
Ep. 131. G. Sanctius. 2 Samuel 11. n. 29.
and ill actions figures of good: Much more, may things not ill in themselves,
though deflected and detorted to ill, be restored to good again; and therefore
does God, in more then this one place, expect our love in a kiss; for, if we
be truly in love with him, it will be a holy and an acceptable Metaphore unto
us, else it will have a carnal and a fastidious taste. Frustra ad legendum
amoris carmen, qui non amat, accedit: Bernar.
He that comes to read Solomon's Love song, and loves not him upon whom that
Song is directed, will rather endanger, then profit himself by that reading:
Non capit ignitum eloquium frigidum pectus: Idem.
A heart frozen and congealed with the love of this world, is not capable, not
sensible of the fires of the holy Ghost; Idem.
Graece loquentes non intelligit, qui Graece non novit, and lingua amoris ei,
qui non amat, barbara; As Greek it self is barbarous to him that understands
not Greek, so is the language of love, and the kiss which the holy Ghost
speaks of here, to him that always groveleth, and holds his face upon the
earth.

Treachery often, but licentiousness more, has depraved this seal of love;
and yet, Vt nos ad amplexus sacri amoris accendat, Gregor.
usque ad turpis amoris nostri verba se inclinat; God stoops even to the words
of our foul and unchaste love, that thereby he might raise us to the heavenly
love of himself, Idem.
and his Son. Cavendum, ne machina quae ponitur ut levet, ipsa aggrevet: Take
thou heed, that that ladder, or that engine which God has given to raise thee,
do not load thee, oppress thee, cast thee down: Take heed lest those phrases
of love and kisses which should raise thee to him, do not bury thee in the
memory and contemplation of sinful love, Idem.
and of licentious kisses. Palea tegit frumentum; palea jumentorum, frumentum
hominum: There is corn under the chafe; and though the chafe and straw be
for cattle, there is corn for men too: There is a heavenly love, under these
ordinary phrases; the ordinary phrase belongs to ordinary men; the heavenly
love and the spiritual kiss, to them who affect an union to God, and him whom
he sent, his Son Christ Jesus. S. Paul abhors not good and applyable sentences,
because some secular Poets had said them before; nor has the Christian Church
abhorred the Temples of the Gentiles, because they were profaned before with
idolatrous sacrifices. I do not conceive how that Jesuit Serarius should
conceive any such great joy, In Jos. 6. q. 40.
as he says he did, when he came to a Church Porch, and saw an old statue of
Jupiter, and another of Hercules, holding two basins of holy water; when
Jupiter and Hercules were made to do Christians such services, the Jesuit is
over-joyed. His Jupiter and his Hercules might well enough have been spared in
the Christian Church, but why some such things as have been abused in the
Roman Church, may not be preserved in, or reduced to their right use here, I
conceive not; as well as (in a proportion) this outward testimony of inward
love, though defamed by treachery, though depraved by licentiousness, is
exacted at our hands by God himself, toward his Son, Kiss the Son, lest he
be angry.

For all Ioabs and Judas treason, Propinquitas.
and carnal lovers licentiousness, kiss thou the Son, and be glad that the
Son has brought thee, in the Christian Church, within that distance, as that
thou may kiss him. The nearest that the Synagogue, or that the Spouse of
Christ not yet married came to, Cant. 11.1.
was, Osculetur me, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. It was but a
kissing of his hand, when he reached them out their spiritual food by others;
It was a marriage, but a marriage by a proxy; The personal marriage, the
consummation of the marriage was in the coming of Christ, in establishing a
real presence of himself in the Church. Praecepta Dei oscula sunt, says
Gregory; In every thing that God says to us, he kisses us; Sed per Prophetas
and Ministros, alieno ore nos osculatur, He kissed us by another man's mouth,
when he spoke by the mouth of the Prophets; but now that he speaks by his own
Son, Exodus 6.12.
it is by himself. Even his servant Moses himself was of uncircumcised lips,
and with the uncircumcised there was no marriage. Even his servant Esaias was of
unclean lips, Esaias 6.5. Jer. 1.6.
and with the unclean there was no marriage: Even his servant Jeremy was oris
infantilis, he was a child and could not speak, and with children, in
infancy, there is no marriage: But in Christ, God has abundantly performed
that supply promised to Moses, there, Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet;
Christ himself shall come and speak to thee, and return and speak for thee:
In Christ, the Seraphim has brought that live coal from the Altar, and
touched Esayes lips, and so spoken lively, and clearly to our souls; In
Christ, God has done that which he said to Jeremy, Fear not, I am with thee;
for in this Immanuel, God and man, Christ Jesus, God is with us.

In Eschines mouth, when he repeated them, they say, even Demosthenes Orations
were flat, and tastlesse things; Compare the Prophets with the Son, and even
the promises of God, 2 King. 4.34.
in them, are faint and dilute things. Elishaes staff in the hand of Gehazi
his servant, would not recover the Shunamites dead child; but when Elisha
himself came, and put his mouth upon the child's mouth, that did: In the mouth
of Christ's former servants there was a preparation, but effect, and
consummation in his own mouth. In the Old Testament. at first, God kissed man,
and so breathed the breath of life, and made him a man; In the New Testament
Christ kissed man, he breathed the breath of everlasting life, the holy Ghost,
into his Apostles, and so made the man a blessed man. Love is as strong as
death; Cant. 8.6.
As in death there is a transmigration of the soul, so in this spiritual
love, and this expressing of it, by this kiss, there is a transfusion of the
soul too: And as we find in Gellius a Poem of Platoes, where he says, he knew
one so extremely passionate, Vt parum affuit quin moreretur in osculo, much
more is it true in this heavenly union, expressed in this kiss, as S. Ambrose
delivers it, Per osculum adhaeret anima Deo, et transfunditur spiritus
osculantis, In this kiss, where Righteousness and peace have kissed each
other, In this person, where the Divine and the humane nature have kissed each
other, Psalm. 85.10.
In this Christian Church, where Grace and Sacraments, visible and invisible
means of salvation, have kissed each other, Love is as strong as death; my
soul is united to my Savior, now in my life, as in death, and I am already
made one spirit with him: and whatsoever death can do, this kiss, this union
can do, that is, give me a present, an immediate possession of the kingdom of
heaven: And as the most mountainous parts of this kingdom are as well within
the kingdom as a garden, so in the midst of the calamities and incommodities
of this life, I am still in the kingdom of heaven. In the Old Testament, it
was but a contract, but per verba de futuro, Sponsabo, I will marry thee; Hos.
2.19. Mat. 9.15.
but now that Christ is come, the Bridegroom is with us for ever, and the
children of the Bridechamber cannot mourn.

Now, by this, we are slid into our fourth and last branch of our first part,
Exhortatic.
The persuasion to come to this holy kiss, though defamed by treachery, though
depraved by licentiousness, since God invites us to it, by so many good uses
thereof in his Word. It is an imputation laid upon Nero, That Neque adveniens,
neque profisciscens, That whether coming or going he never kissed any: And
Christ himself imputes it to Simon, as a neglect of him, That when he came
into his house, he did not kiss him. Luke 7.45. August.
This then was in use, first among kinsfolks; In illa simplicitate antiquorum,
propinqui propinquos osculabantur: In those innocent and harmless times,
persons near in blood did kiss one another: And in that right, and not only
as a stranger, Jacob kissed Rachel, Genesis 29.12.
and told her how near of kin he was to her. There is no person so near of kin
to thee, as Christ Jesus: Christ Jesus thy Father as he created thee, and thy
brother as he took thy nature: Thy Father as he provided an inheritance for
thee, and thy brother as he divided this inheritance with thee, and as he dyed
to give thee possession of that inheritance: He that is Nutritious, thy
Foster-father who has nursed thee in his house, in the Christian Church, and
thy Twin-brother, so like thee, as that his Father, and thine in him, shall not
know you from one another, but mingle your conditions so, as that he shall find
thy sins in him, and his righteousness in thee; Osculamini Filium, Kiss this
Son as thy kinsman.

This kiss was also in use, as Symbolum subjectionis, A recognition of
sovereignty or power; Pharaoh says to Joseph, Thou shall be over my house,
Genesis 41.40.
and according to thy word shall all my people be ruled; there the Original
is, All my people shall kiss thy face. This is the Lord Paramount, the
Sovereign Lord of all; The Lord Jesus; Jesus, Phil. 2.10. Mat. 28.18.
at whose name every knee must bow, in heaven, in earth, and in hell; Jesus,
into whose hands all power in heaven and in earth is given; Jesus, who has
opened a way to our Appeal; from all powers upon earth, Fear not them which
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; Jesus, Mat. 10.28.
who is the Lion and the Lamb too, powerful upon others, accessible unto
thee; Osculamini Filium, Kiss this Son, as he is thy Sovereign.

It was in use likewise In discessu, friends parting kissed; Genesis 31.15. Act.
20.37.
Laban rose up early in the morning, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and
departed: And at Paul's departing, they fell on his neck, and wept, and kissed
him. When thou departest to thy worldly businesses, to thy six days labor,
kiss him, take leave of him, and remember that all that while thou art gone
upon his errand, and though thou work for thy family, and for thy posterity,
yet thou workest in his vineyard, and do his work.

They kissed too In reditu; Esau ran to meet his brother, and fell on his neck
and kissed him. Genesis 33.4.
When thou returnest to his house, after thy six days labor, to celebrate his
Sabbath, kiss him there, and be able to give him some good account, from
Sabbath to Sabbath, from week to week, of thy stewardship, and thou will never
be bankrupt.

They kissed in reconciliation; David kissed Absalon. 2 Samuel 14.33.
If thou have not discharged thy stewardship well, Restore to man who is
damnified therein, Confess to God who has suffered in that sin, Reconcile thy
self to him, and kiss him in the Sacrament, in the seal of Reconciliation.

They kissed in a religious reverence even of false gods; I have, says God, 2
King. 19 18.
seven thousand knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and mouths that have not
kissed him. Let every one of us kiss the true God, in keeping his knees from
bowing to a false, his lips from assenting, his hands from subscribing to an
Idolatrous worship. And, as they kissed In Symbolum concordiae, Romans 16.16.
(which was another use thereof; Salute one another with a holy kiss) upon
which custom, Justin Martyr says, Osculum ante Eucharistiam, before the
Communion, the Congregation kissed, to testify their unity in faith in him, to
whom they were then Sacramentally to be united, as well as Spiritually, And
Tertullian calls it Osculum signaculum Orationis, Because they ended their
public Prayers with that seal of unity and concord, Let every Congregation
kiss him so; at every meeting to seal to him a new band, a new vow that they
will never break, in departing from any part of his true worship. Luke 7.38.
And to that purpose kiss his feet, as Mary Magdalen did: Speciosi pedes
Euangelizantium; Let his feet, his Ministers, in whom he comes, be acceptable
unto you; and love that, upon which himself stands, The Ordinance which he
has established for your salvation.

Kiss the Son, that is, embrace him, depend upon him all these ways; As thy
kinsman, As thy Sovereign, At thy going, At thy coming; At thy
Reconciliation, in the truth of religion in thy self, in a peaceable unity
with the Church, in a reverent estimation of those men, and those means, whom
he sends. Kiss him, and be not ashamed of kissing him; Cant. 8.1.
It is that, which the Spouse desired, I would kiss thee, and not be despised.
If thou be despised for loving Christ in his Gospel, remember that when David
was thought base, for dancing before the Arc, his way was to be more base. If
thou be thought frivolous for thrusting in at Service, in the fore-noone, be
more frivolous, and come again in the afternoon: Gregor.
Tanto major requies, quanto ab amore Jesus nulla requies: The more thou
troublest thy self, or art troubled by others for Christ, the more peace thou
have in Christ.

We descend now to our second Part, 2 Part.
from the duty to the danger, from the expressing of love to the impression of
fear, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry: And first that anger and love, are not
incompatible, that anger consists with love: God is immutable, and, God is
love, and yet God can be angry. God stops a little upon scorn, in the fourth
verse of this Psalm, When the Kings of the earth take counsel against his
anointed, he laughs them to scorn, he has them in dirision. But it ends not
in a jest; He shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure; And that is not all; He shall break them with a rod of iron, and
dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

Lactantius reprehends justly two errors, and proposes a godly middle way in
the Doctrine of the anger of God. Some say, says he, that only favor, and
gentleness can be attributed to God, Quia illaesibilis, He himself cannot be
hurt, and then why should he be angry? And this is, says he, Favorabilis and
popularis oration, It is a popular and an acceptable proposition, God cannot be
angry, do what you will, you cannot anger him, for he is all gentleness.
Others, says Lactantius, take both anger, and gentleness from God, and say he
is affected neither way: And this is, says he well, Constantior error, An
error that will better hold together, better consist in it self, and be better
stood to; for they are inseparable things; whosoever does love the good, does
hate the bad: and therefore if there be no anger, there is no love in God; but
that cannot be said. And therefore, says he, we must not argue thus, Because
there is no anger in God, therefore there is no love; for that indeed would
follow, if the first were true; But because there is love in God, therefore
there is anger: And so he concludes thus, This is Cardo Religionis, This is the
hinge upon which all Religion, all the Worship of God turns and moves, Si
nihil praestat colenti non debetur cultus, nec metus si non irascitur non
cobenti; If God gave me nothing for my love, I should not love him, nor fear
him if he were not angry at my displeasing him. It is argument enough against
the Epicures, (against whom principally he argues) Si non curat, non habet
potestatem: If God take no care of humane actions, he has no power; for it is
impossible to think, that he has power, and uses it not; An idle God is as
impossible an imagination, as an impotent God, or an ignorant God. Anger, as it
is a passion that troubles, and disorders, and discomposes a man, so it is not
in God, but anger as it is a sensible discerning of foes from friends, and of
things that conduce, or disconduce to his glory, so it is in God. In a word,
Hilarie has expressed it well, Poena patientis, ir a decernentis, Man's
suffering is God anger; when God inflicts such punishments, as a King justly
incensed would do, then God is thus angry.

Now here, our case is heavier; It is not this Great, and Almighty, Filius.
and Majesticall God, that may be angry; that is like enough; But even the Son,
whom we must kiss, may be angry: It is not a person whom we consider merely as
God, but as man; Nay, not as man neither, but a worm, and no man, and he may
be angry, and angry to our ruin. But is it he? Is it the Son, that is intended
here? Ask the Roman Translation, and it is not he: There it is, Ne irascatur
Dominus, Lest the Lord be angry; But the Record, the Original will be against
them: Though it were so, The Lord, it might be He, the Son, but it is not the
Lord, but must necessarily be the Son; The Son may, the Son will be angry
with us. If he could be angry, why did he not show it to the Devil that
tempted him, to the Jews that crucified him? God bless us from such an anger,
as works upon the Devil, in a desperate unsensiblenesse of any mercy, from any
trade in that Sea, which environs the whole world, and makes all that, one
Island, where only the Devil can be no Merchant, The bottomless Sea of his
blood; And God bless us from such an anger, as works upon the Jews, in an
obduration, and the punishment of it, a dispersion: Are ye sure David was not
angry with Shimei, because he reprieved him for a time? Are ye sure the Son is
not angry now, because ye perish not yet? Do you not say, A fruit is perished,
if it be bruised in one place? Is not your Religion perished, if Locusts and
Eare-wigges have eaten into it, though they have not eaten it up? Is not your
Religion perished, if irreligion and profaneness be entered into your manners,
into your lives, though Religion have some motion in our ordinary meetings, and
public exercises here?

The Son is Caput, and Corpus, as S. Augustine says often, Christ, and the
Church of Christ, are Christ; And, Quis enumeret omnia, quibus corpus Christi
irascitur? says the same Father; Who can reckon how many ways, this Christ,
this body of Christ, the Church, is constrained to express anger? How many
Excommunications, how many Censures, how many Suspensions, how many
Irregularities, how many Penances, and Commutations of Penances, is the body of
Christ, the Church, forced to inflict upon sinners? And how heavy would these
be to us, if we did not weigh them with the waights of flesh in the Shambles,
or of Iron in the Shop; if we did not consider them only in their temporal
damage, how little an excommunication took from us of our goods, or worldly
substance, and not how much it shut up the ordinary and outward means of our
salvation. When the anger of the Body, the Church, is thus heavy, what is the
anger of the Head, of Christ himself, who is Judge in his own cause? When an
unjust judgment was executed upon him, how was the frame of nature shaked in
Eclipses, in Earthquakes, in renting of the Temple, and cleaving the Monuments
of the dead: When his pleasure is to execute a just judgment upon a Nation,
upon a Church, upon a Man, in the infatuation of Princes, in the recidivation
of the Clergy, in the consternation of particular consciences, Quis stabit? who
shall be able to stand in that Judgment? Kiss the Son lest he be angry; But
when he is angry, he will not kiss you, nor be kissed by you, but throw you
into unquenchable fire, if you be cold, and if you be lukewarm, spit you out
of his mouth, remove you from the benefit and comfort of his Word.

This is the anger of God, that reaches to all the world; and the anger of the
Son, Osculum amovet.
that comes home to us; and all this is removed with this holy and spiritual
kiss: Osculamini Filium, Kiss the Son lest he be angry, implies this, If ye
kiss him, he will not be angry. What this kiss is, we have seen all the
way; It is to hang at his lips, for the Rule of our life, To depend upon his
Word for our Religion, and to succor our selves, by the promises of his
Gospel, in all our calamities, and not to provoke him to farther judgments, by
a perverse and froward use of those judgments which he has laid upon us: As
it is, in this point toward man, it is toward God too; Nihil mansuetudine
violentius, There is not so violent a thing as gentleness, so forcible, so
powerful upon man, Chrysostom.
or upon God. This is such a saying, as one would think he that said it, should
be ready to retract, by the multiplicity of examples to the contrary every day.
Such Rules as this, He that puts up one wrong invites and calls for another,
will shake Chrysostomes Rule shrewdly, Nihil mansuetudine violentius, That no
battery is so strong against an enemy, as gentleness. Say, if you will,
Nihilmelius, There is no better thing then gentleness, and we can make up that
with a Comment, that is, nothing better for some purposes; Say, if you will,
Nihil frugalius, There is not a thriftier thing then gentleness, It saves
charges, to suffer, It is a more expensive thing to revenge then to suffer,
whether we consider expense of soul, or body, or fortune; And, (by the way)
that, which we use to add in this account, opinion, reputation, that which we
call Honor, is none of the Elements of which man is made; It may be the air,
that the Bird flies in, It may be the water, that the Fish swimmes in, but it
is none of the Elements that man is made of, for those are only soul, and
body, and fortune. Say also, if you will, Nihil accommodatius, Nothing
conformes us more to our great pattern Christ Jesus, then mildness, then
gentleness, for that is our lesson from him, Discite a me, quiamitis, Learn
of me, for I am meek.

All this Chrysostom might say; but will he say, Nihil violentius, There is
not so violent, so forcible a thing as mildness? That there is no such Bullet,
as a Pillow, no such Action, as Passion, no such revenge, as suffering an
injury? Yet, even this is true; Nothing defeats an anger so much as patience;
nothing reproaches a chiding so much as silence. Reprehendis iratum? accusas
indignationem? says that Father: Art thou sorry to see a man angry? Cur magis
irasci vis? Why do thou add thy anger to his? Why do thou fuel his anger
with thine? Quodigni aqua, hoc irae mansuetudo, As water works upon fire, so
would thy patience upon his anger. S. Ambrose has expressed it well too, Haec
sunt armajusti, ut cedendo vincat; This is the war of the righteous man, to
conquer by yielding. Esaias 36.21.
It was Ezechiahs way; when Rabshakeh reviled, They held their peace, (where,
the very phrase affords us this note, That silence is called holding of our
peace, we continue our peace best by silence) They held their peace, says that
text, and answered him not a word, for the King had commanded them not to
answer. Why? S. Hierom tells us why; Ne ad majores blasphemias provocaret; Lest
the multiplying of cholerique words amongst men, should have occasioned more
blasphemies against God. And as it is thus with man, with God it is thus too;
Nothing spends his judgments, and his corrections so soon, as our patience,
nothing kindles them, exasperates them so much, as our frowardness, and
murmuring. Kiss the Son, and he will not be angry; If he be, kiss the rod,
and he will be angry no longer; love him lest he be, fear him when he is
angry: The preservative is easy, and so is the restorative too: The Balsamum
of this kiss is all; To suck spiritual milk out of the left breast, as well
as out of the right, To find mercy in his judgments, reparation in his
ruins, feasts in his Lents, joy in his anger. But yet we have reserved it for
our last Consideration, what will make him angry: what sins are especially
directed upon the second Person, the Son of God, and then we have done all.

Though those three Attributes of God, Sapientia.
Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, he all three in all the three Persons of
the Trinity, (for they are all (as we say in the School) Coomnipotentes, they
have all a joynt-Almightinesse, a joynt-Wisdome, and a joynt-Goodnesse) yet,
because the Father is Principium, The root of all, Independent, not proceeding
from any other, as both the other Persons do, and Power, and Sovereignty best
resembles that Independency, therefore we attribute Power to the Father: And
because the Son proceeds Per modum intellectus, (which is the phrase that
passes through the Fathers, and the School) That as our understanding proceeds
from our reasonable soul, so the second Person, the Son, proceeds from the
Father, therefore we attribute Wisdom to the Son: And then, because the Holy
Ghost is said to proceed Per modum voluntatis, That as our soul (as the root)
and our understanding, proceeding from that soul, produce our will, and the
object of our will, is evermore Bonum, that which is good in our apprehension,
therefore we attribute to the Holy Ghost, Goodness. And therefore David forms
his prayer, Psalm 51.
in that manner, plurally, Miserere mei Elohim, Be merciful unto me all,
because in his sin upon Vriah, (which he laments in that Psalm) he had
transgressed against all the three Persons, in all their Attributes, against
the Power, and the Wisdom, and the Goodness of God.

That then which we consider principally in the Son, is Wisdom. And truly
those very many things, which are spoken of Wisdom, in the Proverbs of
Solomon, do, for the most part, hold in Christ: Christ is, for the most part,
the Wisdom of that book. And for that book which is called altogether, The
book of Wisdom, Isidore says, that a Rabbi of the Jews told him, That that
book was heretofore in the Canonical Scripture, and so received by the Jews;
till after Christ's Crucifying, when they observed, what evident testimonies
there were in that book for Christ, they removed it from the Canon. This I
know, is not true; but I remember it therefore, because all assists us, to
consider Wisdom in Christ, as that does also, That the greatest Temple of the
Christians in Constantinople, was dedicated in that name, Sophia, to Wisdom;
by implication to Christ. And in some apparitions, where the Son of God is said
to have appeared, he calls himself by that name, Sapientiam Dei. He is Wisdom,
therefore, because he reveals the Will of the Father to us; and therefore is
no man wise, but he that knows the Father in him. Isidore makes this
difference Inter sapientem and prudentem, that the first, The wise man, attends
the next world, the last, The prudent man, but this world: But wisdom, even
heavenly wisdom, does not exclude that prudence, though the principal, or
rather the ordinary object thereof, be this world. And therefore sins against
the second Person, are sins against Wisdom, in either extreme, either in
affected and gross ignorance, or in overrefined and sublimed curiosity.

As we place this Ignorance in Practical things of this world, so it is
Stupidity; and as we place it in Doctrinall things, of the next world, so
Ignorance is Implicit Belief: And Curiosity, as we place it upon Practical
things, is Craft, and upon Doctrinal things, Subtilty; And this Stupidity and
this Implicit faith, and then this Craft, and this Subtilty, are sins directed
against the Son, who is true and only Wisdom.

First then, A stupid and negligent passage through this world, as though thou
were no part of it, without embarking thy self in any calling; To cross Gods
purpose so much, Stupiditas.
as that, whereas he produced every thing out of nothing, to be something, thou will go so far back, toward nothing again, as to be good for nothing, that
when as our Laws call a Calling, an Addition, thou will have no Addition, And
when (as S. Augustine says) Musca Soli praeferenda, quia vivit, A Fly is a
nobler Creature then the Sun, in this respect, because a Fly has life in it
self, and the Sun has none, so any Artificer is a better part of a State,
then any retired or contemplative man that embraces no Calling, These chippings
of the world, these fragmentary and incoherent men, trespass against the Son,
against the second Person, as he is Wisdom. And so do they in doctrinall
things, that swallow any particular religion, upon an implicit faith. When
Christ declared a very forward knowledge, in the Temple, at twelve years, with
the Doctors, yet he was there, Audiens and interrogans, He heard what they
would say, and he moved questions, to hear what they could say; for, Ejusdem
scientiae est, scire quid interroges, quidve respondeas, Luke 2.46. Origin.
It is a testimony of as much knowledge to ask a pertinent question, as to
give a pertinent answer. But never to have been able to give answer, never to
have asked question in matter of Religion, this is such an Implicitenesse, and
indifferency, as transgresses against the Son of God, who is Wisdom.

It is so too, in the other extreme, Curiosity; And this in Practical things,
is Craft, Curiositas.
in Doctrinall, Subtilty. Craft, is properly and narrowly, To go toward good
ends, by ill ways: And though this be not so ill, as when neither ends, nor
ways be good, yet this is ill too. The Civilians use to say of the Canonists,
and Casuists, That they consider nothing but Crassam aequitatem, fat Equity,
downright Truths, things obvious and apprehensible by every natural man: and
to do but so, to be but honest men, and no more, they think a diminution. To
stay within the limits of a profession, within the limits of precedents, within
the limits of time, is to over-active men contemptible; nothing is wisdom,
till it be exalted to Craft, and got above other men. And so it is, with some,
with many, in Doctrinall things too. To rest in Positive Divinity, and Articles
confessed by all Churches, To be content with Salvation at last, and raise no
estimation, no emulation, no opinion of singularity by the way, only to edify
an Auditory, and not to amaze them, only to bring them to an assent, and to a
practice, and not to an admiration, This is but homespun Divinity, but
Country-learning, but Catechisticall doctrine. Let me know (say these
high-flying men) what God meant to do with man, before ever God meant to make
man: I care not for that Law that Moses has written; That every man can read;
That he might have received from God, in one day; Let me know the Cabal, that
which passed between God and him, in all the rest of the forty days. I care
not for Gods revealed Will, his Acts of Parliament, his public Proclamations,
Let me know his Cabinet Counsels, his bosom, his pocket dispatches. Is there
not another kind of Predestination, then that which is revealed in Scriptures,
which seems to be only of those that believe in Christ? May not a man be
saved, though he do not, and may not a man be damned, though he do perform
those Conditions, which seem to make sure his salvation in the Scriptures?
Beloved, our Country man Holkot, upon the book of Wisdom, says well of this
Wisdom, which we must seek in the Book of God: After he has magnified it in
his harmonious manner, (which was the style of that time) after he had said,
Cujus authore nihil sublimius, That the Author of the Scripture was the highest
Author, for that was God, Cujus tenore nihil solidius, That the assurance of
the Scripture was the safest foundation, for it was a Rock, Cujus valor nihil
locupletius, That the riches of the Scripture was the best treasure, for it
defrayed us in the next World, After he had pursued his way of Elegancy, and
called it Munimentum Majestatis, That Majesty and Sovereignty it self was
established by the Scriptures, and Fundamentum firmitatis, That all true
constancy was built upon that, and Complementum potestatis, That the exercise
of all power, was to be directed by that, he reserves the force of all to the
last, and contracts all to that, Emolumentum proprietatis, The profit which I
have, in appropriating the power and the wisdom of the Scriptures to my self:
All wisdom is nothing to me, if it be not mine: and I have title to nothing,
that is not conveyed to me, by God, in his Scriptures; and in the wisdom
manifested to me there, I rest. I look upon Gods Decrees, in the execution of
those Decrees, and I try whether I be within that Decree of Election, or no, by
examining my self, whether the marks of the Elect be upon me, or no, and so I
appropriate the wisdom of the Scripture to my self. A stupid negligence in
the practical things of this World, To do nothing; and an implicit credulity
in doctrinall things, To believe all; and so also, a crafty preventing, and
circumventing in the Practical part; and a subtle, and perplexing intricacy,
in the Doctrinall part; The first on this side, The other beyond, do both
transgress from that Wisdom of God, which is the Son, and, in such a
respect, are sins, especially against the second Person in the Trinity.

SERMON. XLII. Preached at Lincolns Inn upon Trinity-Sunday. 1620.
GENESIS 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?


THese words are the entrance into that prayer and expostulation, which Abraham
made to and with God, in the behalf of Sodom, and the other Cities. He that
is, before Abraham was, Christ Jesus himself, in that prayer, which he has
proposed to us, has laid such a foundation, as this is, such a religious
insinuation into him, to whom we make that prayer; Before we ask any thing, we
say. Our Father, which art in heaven: If he be our Father, A Father when his
son asks bread will not give him a stone; Luke 11.12.
God has a fatherly disposition toward us; And if he be our Father in Heaven,
If evil fathers know how to give good things unto their children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the Spirit to them that ask him? Shall
your Father, which is in heaven, deny you any good thing? says Christ there;
It is impossible: Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? says Abraham
here; It is as impossible.

The history which occasioned and induced these words, I know you know. The
Holy Ghost by Moses has expressed plainly, and your meditations have
paraphrased to yourselves this history, That God appeared to Abraham, in the
plain of Mamre, in the persons of three men; three men so glorious, as that
Abraham gave them a great respect: That Abraham spoke to those three, as to one
person: That he exhibited all offices of humanity and hospitality unto them:
That after they had executed the first part of their Commission, which was to
ratify, and to reduce to a more certainty of time, the promise of Isaac, and
consequently of the Messiah, though Abraham and Sara were past hope in one
another; that they imparted to Abraham, upon their departure, the indignation
that God had conceived against the sins of Sodom, and consequently the
imminent destruction of that City; That this awakened Abraham's compassion, and
put him into a zeal, and vehemence; for, all the while, he is said, to have
been with him that spoke to him, and yet, now it is said, Abraham drew near, he
came up close to God, and he says, Ver. 23.24.
Peradventure, (I am not sure of it) but peradventure, there may be some
righteous in the City, and if there should be so, it should be absolutely
unjust to destroy them; but, since it may be so, it is too soon to come to a
present execution; Absit a te, says Abraham, Be that far from thee; And he
repeats it twice; And upon the reason in our text, Shall not the judge of all
the Earth do right?

First then, The person who is the Judge of all the Earth, submits us to a
necessity of seeking, Divisis.
who it is that Abraham speaks to; and so, who they were that appeared to him:
whether they were three men, or three Angels, or two Angels, and the third, to
whom Abraham especially addressed himself, were Christ: Or whether in these
three persons, whatsoever they were, there were any intimation, any insinuation
given, or any apprehension taken by Abraham, of the three blessed Persons of
the glorious Trinity. And then, in the second part, in the expostulation it
self, we shall see, first, The descent, and easiness of God, that he
vouchfafes to admit an expostulation, an admonition from his servant, He is
content that Abraham remember him, of his office: And the Expostulation lies in
this, That he is a Judge, And shall not a Judge do right? But more in this,
That he is Judge of all the Earth, and, if he do wrong, there is no Appeal from
him, And shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? And from thence we
shall fall upon this consideration, What was that Right, which Abraham presses
upon God here: And we shall find it twofold: for, first, he thinks it unjust,
that God should wrap up just and unjust, righteous and unrighteous, all in one
condemnation, in one destruction, Absit, be this far from God: And then, he
has a farther aim then that, That God for the righteous sake, should spare
the unrighteous, and so forbear the whole City. And though this Judge of the
whole Earth, might have done right, though he had destroyed the most righteous
persons amongst them, much more, though he had not spared the unrighteous, for
the righteous sake, yet we shall see at last, the abundant measure of Gods
overflowing mercy to have declared it self so far, as if there had been any
righteous, he had spared the whole City. Our parts then are but two: but two
such, as are high parts, and yet growing rich, and yet emproving, so far, as
that the first is above Man, and the extent of his Reason, The mystery of the
Trinity; And the other is above God so, as that it is above all his works, The
infinitenes of his Mercy.

To come to the several branches of these two maine parts, first, in the
first, we ask, 1. Part. An viri.
An viri, whether these three that appeared to Abraham, were men or no. Now,
between Abraham's apprehension, who saw this done, and ours, who know it was
done, because we read it here in Moses relation, there is a great difference.
Moses who informs us now, what was done then, says expressly, Apparuit
Dominus, The Lord appeared, and therefore we know they were more then ordinary
men; But when Moses tells us how Abraham apprehended it, Ecce tres viri, He lift
up his eyes, and he saw three men, he took them to be but men, and therefore
exhibited to them all offices of humanity and courtesy: Where we note also,
that even by the Saints of God, civil behavior, and fair language is
conveniently exercised: A man does not therefore mean ill, because he speaks
well: A man must not therefore be suspected to perform nothing, because he
promises much: Such phrases of humility, and diminution, and undervaluing of
himself, as David utters to Saul; such phrases of magnifying, and glorifying
the Prince, as Daniel uses to the King, perchance no secular story, perchance
no modern Court will afford; Neither shall you find in those places, more of
that which we call Complement, 1 Samuel 25.
then in Abigails access to David, in the behalf of her foolish husband, when
she comes to intercede for him, and to deprecate his fault. Harshnesse, and
morosity in behavior, rusticity, and coorsenesse of language, are no arguments
in themselves, of a plain, and a direct meaning, and of a simple heart.
Abraham was an hundred years old, and that might, in the general, indispose
him; And it was soon after his Circumcision, which also might be a particular
disabling; He was sitting still, and so not only enjoying his bodily ease, but
his Meditation, (for his eyes were cast down) But as soon as he lift up his
eyes; and had occasion presented him to do a courtesy, for all his age, and
infirmity, and possession of rest, he runs to them, and he bows himself to
them, and salutes them, with words not only of courtesy, but of reverence:
Explorat itinera, says S. Ambrose, he searches and inquires into their
journey, that he might direct them, or accompany, or accommodate them; A dest
non quaerentibus, He prevents them, and offers before they ask; Rapit
praetergressuros, when they pretended to go farther, he forced them, by the
irresistible violence of courtesy, to stay with him, and he calls them, (or one
amongst them) Dominum, Lord, and professes himself their servant. But Abraham
did not determine his courtesy in words, and no more: We must not think, that
because only man of all creatures can speak, that therefore the only duty of
man is to speak; fair Apparel makes some show in a wardrobe, but not half
so good as when it is upon a body: fair language does ever well, but never so
well as when it apparels a real courtesy: Abraham entreated them fair, and
entertained them well: he spoke kindly, and kindly performed all offices of
ease, and refocillation to these wayfaring strangers.

Now here is our copy, but who writes after this copy? Abraham is pater
multitudinis, A father of large posterity, but he is dead without issue, or his
race is failed; for, who has this hospital care of relieving distressed
persons now? Thou see a needy person, and thou turnest away thine eye; but it
is the Prince of Darkness that casts this mist upon thee; Thou stoppest thy
nose at his sores, but they are thine own incompassionate bowels that stink
within thee; Thou tellest him, he troubles thee, and think thou have chidden
him into a silence; but he whispers still to God, and he shall trouble thee
worse at last, when he shall tell thee, in the mouth of Christ Jesus, I was
hungry and ye fed me not: Still thou say to the poor, I have not for you,
when God knows, a great part of that which thou have, thou have for them, if
thou would execute Gods commission, and dispense it accordingly, as God has
made thee his steward for the poor. Give really, and give gently; Do kindly,
and speak kindly too, for that is Bread, and Honey.

Abraham then took these for men, An Angeli.
and offered courtesies proper for men: for though he called him, to whom he
spoke, Dominum, Lord, yet it is not that name of the Lord, which implies his
Divinity, it is not Jehovah, but Adonai; it is the same name, and the same
word, John 20.
which his wife Sara, after, gives him. And Mary Magdalen when she was at
Christ's Sepulcher, speaks of Christ, and speaks to the Gardener (as she
thought) in one and the same word: Tulerunt Dominum, she says of Christ, They
have taken away my Lord, And to the Gardener she says, Domine, si sustulisti:
for (...), which is the word in both places, was but a name of civil courtesy,
and is well enough translated by our men, in that later place, Sir, Sir if you
have taken him away, etc. Abraham then, at their first appearing, had no
evidence that they were other then men; but we have; for that place of the
Apostle, Heb. 13.2.
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained
Angels unawares, has evermore, by all Expositors, had reference to this action
of Abraham's; which proves both these first branches, That he knew it not, and
That they were Angels. The Apostles principal purpose there is, to recommend
to us Hospitality, but limited to such hospitality as might in likelihood, or
in possibility, be an occasion of entertaining Angels, that is, of Angelical
men, good and holy men. Hospitality is a virtue, more recommended by the
Writers in the Primitive Church, then any other virtue: but upon this reason,
That the poor flock of Christ Jesus, being by persecution then scattered upon
the face of the earth, men were necessarily to be excited, with much vehemence,
to succor and relieve them, and to receive them into their houses, as they
travailed.

Tertullian says well, That the whole Church of God is one household: He says,
every particular Church is Ecclesia Apostolica, quia soboles Apostolicarum, An
Apostolical Church, if it be an offspring of the Apostolical Churches: He
does not say, quia soboles Apostolicae, because that Church is the offspring
of the Apostolical Church, as though there were but one such, which must be
the mother of all: for, says he, Omnes primae, and omnes Apostolicae, Every
Church is a supreme Church, and every Church is an Apostolical Church, dum
omnes unam probant unitatem, as long as they agree in the unity of that
doctrine which the Apostles taught, and adhere to the supreme head of the whole
Church, Christ Jesus. Which S. Cyprian expresses more clearly, Episcopatus unus
est, The whole Church is but one Bishopric, Cujus, a singulis, in solidum pars
tenetur, Every Bishop is Bishop of the whole Church, and no one more then
another. The Church then was, and should be, as one household; And in this
household, says Tertullian there, there was first Communicatio pacis, a
peaceable disposition, a charitable interpretation of one another actions: And
then there was Appellatio fraternitatis, says he; That if they did differ in
some things, yet they esteemed themselves sons of one Father, of God, and by
one Mother, the Catholic Church, and did not break the band of Brotherhood,
nor separate from one another for every difference in opinion; And lastly,
says he, There was Contesseratio Hospitalitatis, A warrant for their reception
and entertainment in one another houses, wheresoever they travailed. Now,
because for the benefit and advantage of this ease, and accommodation in
travailing, men conterfeited themselves to be Christians that were not, the
Council of Nice made such provision as was possible; (though that also were
deluded after) which was, That there should be literae formatae, (as they
called them) certain testimonial letters, subscribed with four characters,
denoting Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and those letters should be contesseratio
hospitalitatis, a warrant for their entertainment wheresoever they came. Still
there was a care of hospitality, but such, as Angels, that is, Angelical, good
and religious men, and truly Christians, might be received.

Beloved, Baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is this
Contesseration; all that are truly baptized are of this household, and should be
relieved and received: But certainly, there is a race that have not this
Contesseration, not these testimonial letters, not this outward Baptism:
Amongst those herds of vagabonds, and incorrigible rogues, that fill porches,
and barnes in the Country, a very great part of them was never baptized:
people of a promiscuous generation, and of a mischievous education; ill brought
into the world, and never brought into the Church. No man receives an Angel
unawares, for receiving or harboring any of these; neither have these any
interest in the household of God, for they have not their first Contesseration:
And as there are sins which we are not bid to pray for, so there are beggars
which we are not bid to give to. God appeared by Angels in the Old Testament,
and he appears by Angels in the New, in his Messengers, in his Ministers, in
his Servants: And that Hospitality, and those feasts which cannot receive such
Angels, those Ministers and Messengers of God, where by reason of excess and
drunkenness, by reason of scurril and licentious discourse, by reason of
wanton and unchaste provocations, by reason of execrable and blasphemous oaths
these Angels of God cannot be present, but they must either offend the company
by reprehension, or prevaricate and betray the cause of God by their silence,
this is not Abraham's hospitality, whose commendation was, that he received
Angels.

Those Angels came, and stood before Abraham, but till he lift up his eyes, and
ran forth to them, they came not to him: The Angels of the Gospel come within
their distance, but if you will not receive them, they can break open no
doors, nor save you against your will: The Angel does, as he that sends him,
Stand at the door, and knock, Revel. 3.20.
if the door be opened, he comes in, and sups with him; What gets he by that?
This; He sups with me too, says Christ there; He brings his dish with him; he
feeds his Host, more then his Host him. This is true Hospitality, and
entertainment of Angels, both when thou feedest Christ, in his poor members
abroad, or when thou feedest thine own soul at home, with the company and
conversation of true and religious Christians at thy table, for these are
Angels.

Abraham then, took these three for men, and no more, when as they were Angels:
An Christus.
But were they all Angels, and no more? was not that one, to whom more
particularly Abraham addressed himself, and called him Lord, The Son of God,
Christ Jesus? This very many, very learned amongst the Ancients, did not only
ask by way of Problem, and disputation, but affirm Doctrinally, by way of
resolution. Irenaeus thought it, and expressed it so elegantly, as it is almost
pity, if it be not true; Inseminatus est ubique in Scriptur is, Filius Dei,
says he: The Son of God is sowed in every furrow, in every place of the
Scripture, you may see him grow up; and he gives an example out of this place,
Cum Abraham loquens, cum Abraham comesurus, Christ talked with Abraham, and he
dined with him. And they will say, that whereas it is said in that place to the
Hebrews, That Abraham received Angels, the word Angel must not be too
precisely taken: For sometimes, Angel in the Scriptures, signifies less then
Angel, (as John, and Malachy are called Angels) and sometimes Angel signifies
more then Angel, as Christ himself is called The Angel of the great Council,
according to the Septuagint: So therefore, Esaias 9.
they will say, That though Christ were there, Christ himself might be called
so, An Angel; Or it may be justly said by S. Paul, That Abraham did receive
Angels, because there were two, that were, without question, Angels. This led
Hilary to a direct, and a present resolution, that Abraham saw Christ, and to
exclaim gratulatorily in his behalf, Quanta fidei vis, ut in indiscreta
assistentium specie, Christum internosceret! What a perspicacy had Abraham's
faith, who, where they were all alike, could discern one to be above them all!

Make this then the question, whether Christ ever appeared to men upon earth,
before his Incarnation; and the Scriptures not determining this question at
all, if the Fathers shall be called to judge it, it will still be a perplexed
case, for they will be equal in number, and in weight. S. Augustine (who is
one of them that deny it) says first, for the general, the greatest work of
all, the promulgation of the Law, was done by Angels alone, without concurrence
of the Son; and for this particular, says he, concerning Abraham, they who
think that Christ appeared to Abraham, ground themselves but upon this reason,
That Abraham speaks to all, in the singular number, as to one person; And
then, says that Father, they may also observe, that when this one Person, whom
they conclude to be Christ, was departed from the other two, and that the other
two went up to Sodom, Gen 19.18.
there Lot speaks to those two, in the singular number, as to one person, as
Abraham did before. From this argumentation of S. Augustines, this may well be
raised, That when the Scriptures may be interpreted, and Gods actions well
understood, by an ordinary way, it is never necessary, seldom safe to induce
an extraordinary. It was then an ordinary, and familiar way for God, to proceed
with those his servants by Angels; but by his Son, so extraordinary, as that it
is not clear, that ever it was done; and therefore it needs not be said, nor
admitted in this place.

In this place, this falls properly to be noted, that even in these three
glorious Angels of God, there was an eminent difference; One of them seemed to
Abraham, to be the principal man in the Commission, and to that one, he
addressed himself. Amongst the other Angels, which are the Ministers in Gods
Church, one may have better abilities, better faculties then another, and it is
no error, no weakness in a man to desire to confer with one rather then
with another, or to hear one rather then another. But Abraham did not so apply
himself to one of the three, that he neglected the other two: No man must be
so cherished, so followed, as that any other be thereby either defrauded of
their due maintenance, or dis-heartened for want of due encouragement. We have
not the greatest use of the greatest Stars; but we have more benefit of the
Moon, which is less then they, because she is nearer to us. It is not the
depth, nor the wit, nor the eloquence of the Preacher that pierces us, but his
nearenesse; that he speaks to my conscience, as though he had been behind the
hangings when I sinned, and as though he had read the book of the day of
Judgment already. Something Abraham saw in this Angels above the rest, which
drew him, which Moses does not express; Something a man finds in one Preacher
above another, which he cannot express, and he may very lawfully make his
spiritual benefit of that, so that that be no occasion of neglecting due
respects to others.

This being then thus fixed, An Trinitas.
that Abraham received them as men, that they were in truth no other then
Angels, there remains, for the shutting up of this Part, this Consideration,
whether after Abraham came to the knowledge that they were Angels, he
apprehended not an intimation of the three Persons of the Trinity, by these
three Angels. Whether Gods appearing to Abraham (which Moses speaks of in the
first verse) were manifested to him, Ver. 13. Ver. 17.
when Sarah laughed in her self, and yet they knew that she laughed; Or
whether it were manifested, when they imparted their purpose, concerning
Sodom; (for, in both these places, they are called neither men nor Angels, but
by that name, The Lord, and that Lord which is Jehovah) whether, I say, when
Abraham discerned them to be such Angels, as God appeared in them, and spoke
and wrought by them, whether then, as he discerned the Divinity, he discerned
the Trinity in them too, is the question. I know the explicit Doctrine of the
Trinity was not easy to be apprehended then; as it is not easy to be
expressed now. It is a bold thing in servants, to inquire curiously into their
Masters Pedigree, whether he be well descended, or well allied: It is a bold
thing too, to inquire too curiously into the eternal generation of Christ
Jesus, or the eternal procession of the Holy Ghost. When Gregory Nazianzen was
pressed by one, to assign a difference between those words, Begotten, and
Proceeding, Dic tu mihi, says he, quid sit Generatie, and ego dicam tibi, quid
sit Processio, ut ambo insaniamus: Do thou tell me, what this Begetting is,
and then I will tell thee, what this Proceeding is; and all the world will
find us both mad, for going about to express inexpressible things.

And as every manner of phrase in expressing, or every comparison, does not
manifest the Trinity; so every place of Scripture, which the Fathers, and later
men have applied to that purpose, does not prove the Trinity. And therefore,
those men in the Church, who have cried down that way of proceeding, to go
about to prove the Trinty, out of the first words of Genesis, Creavit Dii, That
because God in the plural is there joined to a Verb in the singular, therefore
there is a Trinity in Unity; or to prove the Trinity out of this place, that
because God, who is but one, appeared to Abraham in three Persons, therefore
there are three Persons in the Godhead; those men, I say, who have cried down
such manner of arguments, have reason on their side, when these arguments are
employed against the Jews, for, for the most part, the Jews have pertinent, and
sufficient answers to those arguments. But yet, between them, who make this
place, a distinct, and a literal, and a concluding argument, to prove the
Trinity, and them who cry out against it, that it has no relation to the
Trinity, our Church has gone a middle, and a moderate way, when by appointing
this Scripture for this day, when we celebrate the Trinity, it declares that to
us, who have been baptized, and catechized in the name and faith of the
Trinity, it is a refreshing, it is a cherishing, it is an awakening of that
former knowledge which we had of the Trinity, to hear that our only God thus
manifested himself to Abraham in three Persons.

Luther says well upon this text, If there were no other proof of the Trinity
but this, I should not believe the Trinity; but yet says he, This is Singular
testimonium de articule Trinitatis, Though it be not a concluding argument, yet
it is a great testimony of the Trinity. Fateor, says he, historico sensu nihil
concludi praeter hospitalitatem, I confess, in the literal sense, there is
nothing but a recommendation of hospitality, and therefore, to the Jews, I
would urge no more out of this place: Sed non sic agendum cum auditoribus, ac
cum adversariis, We must not proceed alike with friends and with enemies. There
are places of Scriptures for direct proofs, and there are places to exercise
our meditation, and devotion in things, for which we need not, nor ask not any
new proof. And for exercise, says Luther, Rudi ligne ad formam gladii utimur,
We content our selves with a foil, or with a stick, and we require not a
sharp sword. To cut off the enemies of the Trinity, we have two-edged swords,
that is, undeniable arguments: but to exercise our own devotions, we are
content with similitudinary, and comparative reasons. He pursues it farther, to
good use: The story does not teach us, That Sarah is the Christian Church, and
Hagar the Synagogue; But S. Paul proves that, from that story; he proves it
from thence, Gal. 4.24.
though he call it but an Allegory. It is true that S. Augustine says,
Figuranihil probat, A figure, an Allegory proves nothing; yet, says he, addit
lucem, and ornat, It makes that which is true in it self, more evident and
more acceptable.

And therefore it is a lovely and a religious thing, to find out Vestigia
Trinitatis, Impressions of the Trinity, in as many things as we can; and it is
a reverent obedience to embrace the wisdom of our Church, in renewing the
Trinity to our Contemplation, by the reading of this Scripture, this day, for,
even out of this Scripture, Philo Iudaeus, (although he knew not the true
Trinity aright) found a threefold manifestation of God to man, in this
appearing of God to Abraham: for, as he is called in this Story, Iehova, he
considers him, Fontem Essentiae, To be the fountain of all Being; As he is
called Deus, God, he considers him, in the administration of his Creatures, in
his providence; As he is called Dominus, Lord, and King, he considers him in
the judgment, glorifying, and rejecting according to their merits: So, though
he found not a Trinity of Persons, he found a Trinity of Actions in the Text,
Creation, Providence, and Judgment. If he, who knew no Trinity, could find
one, shall not we, who know the true one, meditate the more effectually upon
that, by occasion of this story? Let us therefore, with S. Bernard, consider
Trinitatem Creatricem, and Trinitatem Creatam, A Creating, and a Created
Trinity; A Trinity, which the Trinity in Heaven, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
has created in our souls, Reason, Memory, and Will; and that we have
super-created, added another Trinity, Suggestion, and Consent, and Delight in
sin; And that God, after all this infuses another Trinity, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, by which we return to our first; for so far, that Father of
Meditation, S. Bernard, carries this consideration of the Trinity. Since
therefore the confession of a Trinity is that which distinguishes us from Jews,
and Turks, and al other professions, let us discern that beam of the Trinity,
which the Church has showed us, in this text, and with the words of the
Church, conclude this part, O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three
Persons, and one God, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

We are descended now to our second part, 2 Part. Expostulatio. Job 31.13.
what past between God and Abraham, after he had thus manifested himself unto
him; Where we noted first, That God admits, even expostulation, from his
servants; almost rebukes and chidings from his servants. We need not wonder at
Jobs humility, that he did not despise his man, nor his maid, when they
contended with him, for God does not despise that in us. God would have gone
from Jacob when he wrestled, Genesis 32.26.
and Jacob would not let him go, and that prevailed with God. If we have an
apprehension when we begin to pray, that God does not hear us, not regard
us, God is content that in the fervor of that prayer, we say with David,
Evigila Domine, and Surge Domine, Awake O Lord, and Arise O Lord; God is
content to be told, that he was in bed, and asleep, when he should hear us.
If we have not a present deliverance from our enemies, God is content that we
proceed with David, Eripe manum de sinu, Pluck out thy hand out of thy bosom;
God is content to be told, that he is slack and dilatory when he should deliver
us. If we have not the same estimation in the world, that the children of this
world have, God is content that we say with Amos, Pauperem pro calceamentis,
Amos 2.6.
that we are sold for a pair of shoes; And with S. Paul, that we are the
offscouring of the world: God is content to be told, that he is unthrifty, and
prodigal of his servants lives, and honors, and fortunes. Now, Offer this to
one of your Princes, says the Prophet, and see whether he will take it. Bring a
petition to any earthly Prince, and say to him, Evigila, and Surge, would your
Majesty would awake, and read this petition, and so insimulate him of a former
drowsinesse in his government; say unto him, Eripe manum, pull thy hand out of
thy bosom, and execute Justice, and so insimulate him of a former manacling
and slumbring of the Laws; say unto him, we are become as old shoes, and as
off-scourings, and so insimulate him of a diminution, and dis-estimation fallen
upon the Nation by him, what Prince would not (and justly) conceive an
indignation against such a petitioner? which of us that heard him, would not
pronounce him to be mad, to ease him of a heavier imputation? And yet our
long-suffering, and our patient God, (must we say, our humble and obedient
God?) endures all this: He endures more; for, when Abraham came to this
expostulation, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? God had said
never a word, of any purpose to destroy Sodom, but he said only, He would go
see, whether they had done altogether, according to that cry, which was come up
against them; and Abraham comes presently to this vehemence: And might not the
Supreme Ordinary, God himself, go this visitation? might not the supreme
Judge, God himself, go this Circuit? But as long as Abraham kept himself upon
this foundation, It is impossible, that the Judge of all the earth should not
do right, God mis-interpreted nothing at Abraham's hand, but received even his
Expostulations, and heard him out, to the sixth petition.

Almost such an Expostulation as this, Moses uses toward God; He asks God a
reason of his anger, Iudex. Exodus 32.11.
Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people? He tells him a reason,
why he should not do so, For thou have brought them forth with a great power,
and with a mighty hand: And he tells him the inconveniences that might follow,
The Egyptians will say, He brought them out for mischief, to slay them in the
mountain: He imputes even perjury to God himself, and breach of Covenant, to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which were Feffees in trust, between God and his
people, and he says, Thou sware'st to them, by thine own self, that thou
would not deal thus with them; And therefore he concludes all with that
vehemence, Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent this evil purpose against
them. But we find a prayer, or expostulation, of much more exorbitant
vehemence, in the stories of the Roman Church, toward the blessed Virgin,
(toward whom, they use to be more mannerly and respective then toward her
Son, or his Father) when at a siege of Constantinople, they came to her statue,
with this protestation, Look you to the drowning of our Enemies ships, or we
will drown you: Si vis ut imaginem tuam non mergamus in mari, merge illos. The
farthest that Abraham goes in this place, is, That God is a Judge, and
therefore must do right: Job 32.10.
for, Far be wickedness from God, and iniquity from the Almighty; surely God
will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment. An Usurer,
an Extortioner, an Oppressor, a Libeller, a Thief, and Adulterer, yea a
Traitor, makes shift to find some excuse, some flattery to his Conscience;
they say to themselves; the Law is open, and if any be grieved, they may take
their remedy, and I must endure it, and there is an end. But, since nothing
holds of this oppressor, and manifold malefactor, but the sentence of the
Judge, shall not the Judge do right? how must this necessarily shake the frame
of all? An Arbitrator or a Chancellor, that judges by submission of parties, or
according to the Dictates of his own understanding, may have some excuse, He
did as his Conscience led him: But shall not a Judge, that has a certain Law
to judge by, do right? Especially if he be such a Judge, as is Judge of the
whole earth? which is the next step in Abraham's expostulation.

Now, as long as there lies a Certiorari from a higher Court, Omnem terram.
or an Appeal to a higher Court, the case is not so desperate, if the Judge
do not right, for there is a future remedy to be hoped: If the whole State be
incensed against me, yet I can find an escape to another Country; If all the
World persecute me, yet, if I be an honest man, I have a supreme Court in my
self, and I am at peace, in being acquitted in mine own Conscience. But God
is the Judge of all the earth; of this which I tread, and this earth which I
carry about me; and when he judges me, my Conscience turns on his side, and
confesses his judgment to be right. And therefore S. Paul's argument, seconds,
and ratifies Abraham's expostulation; Is God unrighteous? God forbid; for then,
says the Apostle, Romans 3.6.
how shall God judge the World? The Pope may err, but then a Council may
rectify him: The King may err; but then, God, in whose hands the Kings heart
is, can rectify him. But if God, that judges all the earth, judge thee, there
is no error to be assigned in his judgment, no appeal from God not thoroughly
informed, to God better informed, for he always knows all evidence, before
it be given. And therefore the larger the jurisdiction, and the higher the
Court is, the more careful ought the Judge to be of wrong judgment; for
Abraham's expostulation reaches in a measure to them, Shall not the Judge of all
(or of a great part of the earth) do right?

Now what is the wrong, which Abraham dissuaded, and deprecated here? first,
Iusti cum impiis.
Ne justi cum impiis, That God would not destroy the Just with the unjust, not
make both their cases alike. This is an injustice, which never any bloody men
upon earth, but those, who exceeded all, in their infamous purposes, the
Authors, and Actors in the Powder treason, did ever deliberately and advisedly,
upon debate whether it should be so, or no, resolve, that all of both Religions
should perish promiscuously in the blowing up of that house. Here the Devil
would be Gods Ape; and as God had presented to S. Peter, a sheet of all sorts
of Creatures, clean and unclean, and bad him take his choice, kill and eat;
So the Devil would make S. Peter, in his imaginary Successor, or his
instruments, present God a sacrifice of clean and unclean, Catholics and
Heretics, (in their denomination) and bid him take his choice: which action,
whosoever forgets so, as that he forgets what was intended in it, forgets his
Religion, and whosoever forgets it so, as that he forgets what they would do
again, if they had power, forgets his reason. But this is not the way of Gods
justice; God is a God of harmony, and consent, and in a musical instrument, if
some strings be out of tune, we do not presently break all the strings, but
reduce and tune those, which are out of tune.

As gold whilst it is in the mine, in the bowels of the earth, is good for
nothing, and when it is out, and beaten to the thinness of leaf-gold, it is
wasted, and blown away, and quickly comes to nothing; But when it is tempered
with such allay, as it may receive a stamp and impression, then it is current
and useful: So whilst Gods Justice lies in the bowels of his own decree and
purpose, and is not executed at all, we take no knowledge that there is any
such thing; And when Gods Justice is dilated to such an expansion, as it
overflowes all alike, whole Armies with the sword, whole Cities with the
plague, whole Countries with famine, oftentimes we lose the consideration of
Gods Justice, and fall upon some natural causes, because the calamity is fallen
so indifferently upon just and unjust, as that, we think, it could not be the
act of God: but when Gods Justice is so allayd with his wisdom, as that we
see he keeps a Goshen in Egypt, and saves his servants in the destruction of
his enemies, then we come to a rich and profitable use of his Justice. And
therefore Abraham presses this, with that vehement word, Chalilah, Absit:
Abraham serves a Prohibition upon God, as S. Peter would have done upon Christ,
when he was going up to Jerusalem to suffer, Absit, says he, Thou shall not do
this. But the word signifies more properly prophanationem, pollutionem: Abraham
intends, that God should know, that it would be a profaning of his holy
honor, and an occasion of having his Name blasphemed amongst the Nations, if
God should proceed so, as to wrap up just and unjust, righteous and
unrighteous, all in one condemnation, and one execution; Absit, Be this far
from thee.

But Abraham's zeal extended farther then this; Vt parcat Impiis.
his desire and his hope was, That for the righteous sake, the unrighteous
might be spared, and reserved to a time of repentance. This therefore ministers
a provocation to every man, to be as good as he can, not only for his own
sake, but for others too. This made S. Ambrose say, Quantus murus patriae, vir
bonus? An honest and religious man, is a wall to a whole City, a sea to a whole
Island. When our Savior Christ observed, that they would press him with that
Proverb, Medice, cura teipsum, Physician, heal thy self, we see there, that
himself was not his person, Luke 4.23.
but his Country was himself; for that is it that they intend by that Proverb,
Heal thy self, take care of them that are near thee, do that which thou do
here in Capernaum, at home; Preach these Sermons there; do these miracles
there: cure thy Country, and that is curing thy self. Live so, that thy
example may be a precedent to others; live so, that for thy sake, God may spare
others; and then, and not till then, thou have done thy duty. God spares
sometimes, ob commixtionem sanguinis, for kindreds sake, and for alliance; and
therefore it behooves us to take care of our allyances, and planting our
children in religious families. How many judgments do we escape, because we
are of the seed of Abraham, and made partakers of the Covenant, which the
Gentiles, who are not so, are overwhelmed under? God spares sometimes, Ob
cohabitationem, for good neighborhood; he will not bring the fire near a good
man's house: As here, Act. 27.
in our Text, he would have done in Sodom, and as he did save many, only
because they were in the same Ship with S. Paul. And therefore, as in the other
Religion, the Jews have streets of their own, and the Stews have streets of
their own; so let us choose to make our dwellings, and our conversation of our
own, and not affect the neighborhood, nor the commerce of them who are of
evil communication. Be good then, that thou may communicate thy goodness
to others; and consort with the good, that thou may participate of their
goodness. Omnis sapiens stulti est redemptio, is excellently said by Philo, A
wise mad is the savior and redeemer of a fool: And, (as the same man says)
though a Physician when he is called, discern that the patient cannot be
recovered, yet he will prescribe something, Ne ob ejus negligentiam periisse
videatur, lest the world should think he dyed by his negligence; How incurable,
how incorrigible soever the world be, be thou a religious honest man, lest some
child in thy house, or some servant of thine be damned, which might have been
saved, if thou had given good example. Gods ordinary way is to save man by
man; and Abraham thought it not out of Gods way, to save man for man, to save
the unjust for the just, the unrighteous for the righteous sake.

But if God do not take this way, Si nolit Deus. Eccles. 9.2.
if he do wrap up the just and the unjust in the same Judgment, is God
therefore unjust? God forbid. All things come alike to all, says Solomon; One
event to the righteous, and to the wicked, to the clean, and to the unclean,
to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is
the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath. There is one
event of all, says he; but, says he, This is an evil, that it is so: But
what kind of evil? An evil of vexation; because the weak are sometimes
scandalized that it is so, and the glory of God seems for a time to be
obscured, when it is so, because the good are not discerned from the evil. But
yet God, who knows best how to repair his own honor, suffers it, nay
appoints it to be so, that just and unjust are wrapped up in the same
Judgment. The Corn is as much beaten in the threshing, as the straw is; The
just are as much punished here as the unjust. Because God of his infinite
goodness, has elected me from the beginning, therefore must he provide that I
have another manner of birth, or another manner of death, then the Reprobate
have? Must he provide, that I be borne into the world, without original sin,
of a Virgin, as his Son was, or that I go out of the world, by being taken
away, as Enoch was, or as Elias? And though we have that one example of such a
coming into the world, and a few examples of such a going out of the world,
yet we have no example (not in the Son of God himself) of passing through this
world, without taking part of the miseries and calamities of the world, common
to just and unjust, to the righteous and unrighteous. If Abraham therefore
should have intended only temporal destruction, his argument might have been
defective: for Ezekiel, and Daniel, and other just men, were carried into
Captivity, as well as the unjust, and yet God not unrighteous: God does it, and
avowes it, and professes that he will do it, and do it justly; Occidam in te
justum and injustum, I will cut off the righteous and unrighteous together.
There is no man so righteous, Ezekiel. 21.3.
upon whom God might not justly inflict as heavy judgments, in this world, as
upon the most unrighteous; Though he have wrapped him up in the righteousness
of Christ Jesus himself, for the next world, yet he may justly wrap him up in
any common calamity falling upon the unrighteous here. But the difference is
only in spiritual destruction. Abraham might justly apprehend a fear, that a
sudden and unprepared death might endanger them for their future state; And
therefore he does not pray, that they might be severed from that judgment,
because, if they dyed with the unrighteous, they dyed as the unrighteous, if
they passed the same way as they, out of this world, they therefore passed into
the same state as they, in the next world, Abraham could not conclude so, but
because the best men do always need all means of making them better, Abraham
prays, that God would not cut them off, by a sudden destruction, from a
considering, and contemplating the ways of his proceeding, and so a preparing
themselves to a willing and to a thankful embracing of any way, which they
should so discern to be his way. The wicked are suddenly destroyed; and do not
see what hand is upon them, till that hand bury them in hell; The godly may die
as suddenly, but yet he sees and knows it to be the hand of God, and takes hold
of that hand, and by it is carried up to heaven.

Now, if God be still just, though he punish the just with the unjust, in this
life, Sinon parcat.
much more may he be so, though he do not spare the unjust for the righteous
sake, which is the principal drift of Abraham's expostulation, or deprecation.
God can preserve still, so as he did in Egypt. God has the same Receipts, and
the same Antidotes which he had, to repel the flames of burning furnaces, to
bind or stupifie the jaws of hungry Lions, to blunt the edge of Swords, and
overflowing. Armies, as he had heretofore. John 8.59.18.6.
Christ was invisible to his enemies, when he would escape away; And he was
impregnable to his enemies, when in his manifestation of himself, (I am he)
they fell down before him; And he was invulnerable, and immortal to his
enemies, as long as he would be so, for if he had not opened himself to their
violence, no man could have taken away his soul; And where God sees such
deliverances conduce more to his honor then our suffering does, he will
deliver us so in the times of persecution. So that God has another way, and he
had another answer for Abraham's petition; he might have said, There is no ill
construction, no hard conclusion to be made, if I should take away the just
with the unjust, neither is there any necessity, that I should spare the wicked
for the righteous: I can destroy Sodom, and yet save the righteous; I can
destroy the righteous, and yet make death an advantage to them; which way
soever I take, I can do nothing unjustly.

But yet, though God do not bind himself to spare the wicked for the
righteons yet he descends to do so at Abraham's request. The jaw bone of an
Ass, in the hand of Samson, Tainen id facit.
was a devouring sword. The words of man, in the mouth of a faithful man, of
Abraham, are a Canon against God himself, and batter down all his severe and
heavy purposes for Judgments. Yet, this comes not, God knows, out of the
weight or force of our words, but out of the easiness of God. God puts
himself into the way of a shot, he meets a weak prayer, and is graciously
pleased to be wounded by that: God sets up a light, that we direct the shot
upon him, he enlightens us with a knowledge, how, and when, and what to pray
for; yea, God charges, and discharges the Canon himself upon himself; He fills
us with good and religious thoughts, and appoints and leaves the Holy Ghost, to
discharge them upon him, in prayer, for it is the Holy Ghost himself that
prays in us. Mauz zim, whch is, The God of forces, is not the name of our God,
Dan. 11.38.
but of an Idol; Our God is the God of peace, and of sweetness; spiritual
peace, spiritual honey to our souls; His name is Deus optimus maximus; He is
both; He is All Greatness, but he is All Goodness first: He comes to show his
Greatness at last, but yet his Goodness begins his Name, and can never be
worn out in his Nature. He made the whole world in six days, but he was
seven in destroying one City, Jericho. God threatens Adam, If thou eat that
fruit, in that day, Morte morieris, Thou shall dye the death; Here is a double
Death interminated in one Day: Now, one of these Deaths is spiritual Death,
and Adam never dyed that Death; And for the other Death, the bodily Death,
which might have been executed that day, Adam was reprieved above nine hundred
years. To lead all to our present purpose, Gods descending to Abraham's
petition, to spare the wicked for a few just, is first and principally to
advance his mercy, That sometimes in abundant mercy, he does so; but it is also
to declare, that there is none just and righteous. Jerem. 5.1.
Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, (says God in the Prophet)
and seek in the broad places, If ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes Judgment, that seeks Truth, and I will pardon it. Where God does
not intimate, that he were unjust, if he did not spare those that were unjust,
but he declares the general flood and inundation of unrighteousness upon
Earth, That upon Earth there is not a righteous man to be found. If God had
gone no farther in his promise to man, then that, if there were one righteous
man, he would save all, this, in effect, had been nothing, for there was never
any man righteous, in that sense and acceptance; He promised and sent one who
was absolutely righteous, and for his sake has saved us.

To collect all, Conclusio.
and bind up all in one bundle, and bring it home to your own bosoms,
remember, That though he appeared in men, it was God that appeared to Abraham;
Though men preach, though men remit sins, though men absolve, God himself
speaks, and God works, and God seals in those men. Remember that nothing
appeared to Abraham's apprehension but men, yet Angels were in his presence;
Though we bind you not to a necessity of believing that every man has a
particular Angel to assist him, (enjoy your Christian liberty in that, and
think in that point so as you shall find your devotion most exalted, by
thinking that it is, or is not so) yet know, that you do all that you do, in
the presence of Gods Angels; And though it be in it self, and should be so to
us, a stronger bridle, to consider that we do all in the presence of God; (who
sees clearer then they, for he sees secret thoughts, and can strike
immediately, which they cannot do, without commission from him) yet since the
presence of a Magistrate, or a Preacher, or a father, or a husband, keeps men
often from ill actions, let this prevail something with thee, to that purpose,
That the Angels of God are always present, though thou discern them not.
Remember, that though Christ himself were not amongst the three Angels, yet
Abraham apprehended a greater dignity, and gave a greater respect to one then
to the rest; but yet without neglecting the rest too: Apply thy self to such
Ministers of God, and such Physicians of thy soul, as thine own conscience
tells thee do most good upon thee; but yet let no particular affection to one,
defraud another in his duties, nor empaire another in his estimation. And
remember too, That though Gods appearing thus in three persons, be no
irrefragable argument to prove the Trinity against the Jews, yet it is a
convenient illustration of the Trinity to thee that art a Christian: And
therefore be not too curious in searching reasons, and demonstrations of the
Trinity, but yet accustom thy self to meditations upon the Trinity, in all
occasions, and find impressions of the Trinity, in the three faculties of
thine own soul, Thy Reason, thy Will, and thy Memory; and seek a reparation
of that thy Trinity, by a new Trinity, by faith in Christ Jesus, by hope of
him, and by a charitable delivering him to others, in a holy and exemplar life.

Descend thou into thy self, as Abraham ascended to God, and admit thine own
expostulations, as God did his. Let thine own conscience tell thee not only
thy open and evident rebellions against God, but even the immoralities, and
incivilities that thou do toward men, in scandalizing them, by thy sins; And
the absurdities that thou committest against thy self, in sinning against
thine own reason; And the uncleanness, and consequently the treachery that
thou committest against thine own body; and thou shall see, that thou had
been not only in better peace, but in better state, and better health, and in
better reputation, a better friend, and better company, if thou had finned
less; because some of thy sins have been such as have violated the band of
friendship; and some such as have made thy company and conversation dangerous,
either for tentation, or at least for defamation. Tell thy self that thou art
the Judge, as Abraham told God that he was, and that if thou will judge thy
self, thou shall escape a severer judgment. He told God that he was Judge of
all the earth; Judge all that earth that thou art, Judge both thy kingdoms,
thy soul and thy body; Judge all the Provinces of both kingdoms, all the
senses of thy body, and all the faculties of thy soul, and thou shall leave
nothing for the last Judgment. Mingle not the just and the unjust together;
God did not so; Do not think good and bad all one; Do not think alike of thy
sins, and of thy good deeds, as though when Gods grace had quickened them, still
thy good works were nothing, thy prayers nothing, thine alms nothing in the
sight and acceptance of God: But yet spare not the wicked for the just,
continue not in thy beloved sin, because thou make God amends some other way.
And when all is done, as in God toward Abraham, his mercy was above all, so
after all, Miserere animae tuae, Be inercifull to thine own soul; And when
the effectual Spirit of God has spoken peace and comfort, and sealed a
reconciliation to God, to thy soul, rest in that blessed peace, and enter into
no such new judgment with thy self again, as should overcome thine own
Mercy, with new distractions, or new suspicions that thy Repentance was not
accepted, or God not fully reconciled unto thee. God, because he judges all the
earth, cannot do wrong; If thou judge thy earth and earthly affections so, as
that thou examine clearly, and judge truly, thou do not do right, if thou
extend not Mercy to thy self, if thou receive not, and apply not cheerfully
and confidently to thy soul, that pardon and remission of all thy sins, which
the holy Ghost, in that blessed state, has given thee commission to pronounce
to thine own soul, and to seal with his seal.

SERMON. XLIII. Preached at S. Dunstans upon Trinity-Sunday. 1624.
MAT. 3.17. And lo, A voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased.


IT has been the custom of the Christian Church to appropriate certain
Scriptures to certain Days, for the celebrating of certain Mysteries of God,
or the commemorating of certain benefits from God: They who consider the age
of the Christian Church, too high or too low, too soon or too late, either in
the cradle, as it is exhibited in the Acts of the Apostles, or bedridden in the
corruptions of Rome, either before it was come to any growth, when Persecutions
nipped it, or when it was so over-growne, as that prosperity and outward
splendour swelled it, They that consider the Church so, will never find a good
measure to direct our religious worship of God by, for the outward Liturgies,
and Ceremonies of the Church. But as soon as the Christian Church had a
constant establishment under Christian Emperors, and before the Church had her
tympany of worldly prosperity under usurping Bishops, in this outward service
of God, there were particular Scriptures appropriated to particular days.
Particular men have not liked this that it should be so: And yet that Church
which they use to take for their pattern, (I mean Geneva) as soon as it came
to have any convenient establishment by the labors of that Reverend man, who
did so much in the rectifying thereof, admitted this custom of celebrating
certain times, by the reading of certain Scriptures. So that in the pure
times of the Church, without any question, and in the corrupter times of the
Church, without any infection, and in the Reformed times of the Church, without
any suspicion of backsliding, this custom has been retained, which our
Church has retained; and according to which custom, these words have been
appropriated to this day, for the celebrating thereof, And lo, A voice came,
etc.

In which words we have pregnant and just occasion to consider, first, Divisio.
the necessity of the Doctrine of the Trinity; Secondly, the way and means by
which we are to receive our knowledge and understannding of this mystery; And
thirdly, the measure of this knowledge, How much we are to know, or to inquire,
in that unsearchable mystery: The Quid, what it is; the Quomodo, How we are to
learn it; and the Quantum, How far we are to search into it, will be our
three Parts. We consider the first of these, the necessity of that knowledge to
a Christian, by occasion of the first Particle, in the Text, And; A Particle of
Connection, and Dependence; and we see by this Connection, and Dependence, that
this revealing, this manifestation of the Trinity, in the text, was made
presently after the Baptism of Christ; and that intimates, and inferres, That
the first, and principal duty of him, who has ingrafted himself into the body
of the Christian Church, by Baptism, is to inform himself of the Trinity, in
whose name he is Baptized. Secondly, in the means, by which this knowledge of
the Trinity is to be derived to us, in those words, (Lo, a voice came from
heaven, saying) we note the first word, to be a word of Correction, and of
Direction; Ecce, Behold, leave your blindness, look up, shake off your
stupidity, look one way or other; A Christian must not go on implicitly,
inconsiderately, indifferently, he must look up, he must intend a calling: And
then, Ecce again, Behold, that is, Behold the true way; A Christian must not
think he has done enough, if he have been studious, and diligent in finding
the mysteries of Religion, if he have not sought them the right way: First,
there is an Ecce corrigentis, we are chidden, if we be lazy; And then, there is
an Ecce dirigentis, we are guided if we be doubtful. And from this, we fall
into the way it self; which is, first, A voice, There must be something heard;
for, take the largest Sphere, and compass of all other kinds of proofs, for
the mysteries of Religion, which can be proposed, Take it first, at the first,
and weakest kind of proof, at the book of creatures, (which is but a faint
knowledge of God, in respect of that knowledge, with which we must know him)
And then, continue this first way of knowledge, to the last, and powerfullest
proof of all, which is the power of miracles, not this weak beginning, not
this powerful end, not this Alpha of Creatures, not this Omega of miracles,
can imprint in us that knowledge, which is our saving knowledge, nor any other
means then a voice; for this knowing is believing, And, how should they
believe, except they hear? says the Apostle. It must be Vox, A voice, And Vox
de coelis, A voice from heaven: For, we have have had voces de terra, voices of
men, who have indeed but diminished the dignity of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
by going about to prove it by humane reason, or to illustrate it by weak and
low comparisons; And we have had voces de Inferis, voices from the Devil
himself, in the mouths of many Heretics, blasphemously impugning this
Doctrine; We have had voces de profundis, voices fetched from the depth of the
malice of the Devil, Heretics; And voces de medio, voices taken from the
ordinary strength of Moral men, Philosophers; But this is vox de Excelsis,
only that voice that comes from Heaven, belongs to us in this mystery: And
then lastly, it is vox dicens, a voice saying, speaking, which is proper to
man, for nothing speaks but man; It is Gods voice, but presented to us in the
ministry of man; And this is our way; To behold, that is, to depart from our
own blindness, and to behold a way, that is showed us; but showed us in the
word, and in the word of God, and in that word of God, preached by man. And
after all this, we shall consider the measure of this knowledge, in those last
words, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; For, in that word,
Meus, My, there is the Person of the Father; In the Filius, there is the Person
of the Son; and in the Hic est, This is, there is the Person of the Holy Ghost,
for that is the action of the Holy Ghost, in that word, He is pointed at, who
was newly baptized, and upon whom the Holy Ghost, in the Dove, was descended,
and had tarried. But we shall take those words in their order, when we come to
them.

First then, 1 Part.
we noted the necessity of knowing the Trinity, to be pregnantly intimated in
the first word, Et, And: This connects it to the former part of the history,
which is Christ's Baptism, and presently upon that Baptism, this manifestation
of the holy Trinity. Consider a man, as a Christian, his first Element is
Baptism, and his next is Catechism; and in his Catechism, the first is, to
believe a Father, Son, and holy Ghost. There are in this man, this Christian,
Tres nativitates, says S. Gregory, three births; one, Per generationem, so we
are borne of our natural mother; one Per regenerationem, so we are borne of
our spiritual Mother, the Church, by Baptism; and a third, Per
Resurrectionem, and so we are borne of the general Mother of us all, when the
earth shall be delivered, not of twins, but of millions, when she shall empty
her self of all her children, in the Resurrection. And these three Nativities
our Savior Christ Jesus had; Of which three, Hodie alter salvator is natalis,
says S. Augustine, This day is the day of Christ's second birth, that is, of
his Baptism. Not that Christ needed any Regeneration; but that it was his
abundant goodness, to sanctify in his person, and in his exemplar action,
that Element, which should be an instrument of our Regeneration in Baptism,
the water, for ever. Even in Christ himself, Honoratior secunda, says that
Father, The second birth, which he had at his Baptism, was the more honorable
birth; for, Ab illa se, Pater qui putabatur, Joseph excusat, At his first
birth, Joseph, his reputed Father, did not avow him for his Son; In hac se,
Pater qui non putabatur, insinuat, At this his second birth, God, who was not
known to be his Father before, declares that now: Ibi labor at suspicionibus
Matter, quia professioni deerat Pater, There the Mothers honor was in question,
because Joseph could not profess himself the Father of the child; Hic
honoratur genetrix, quia filium Divinitas protestatur, Here her honor is
repaired, and magnified, because the Godhead it self, proclaims it self to
be the Father.

If then, Christ himself chose to admit an addition of dignity at his
Baptism, who had an eternal generation in heaven, and an innocent conception
without sin, upon earth, let not us undervalue that dignity, which is afforded
us by Baptism, though our children be borne within the Covenant, by being
borne of Christian Parents; for the Covenant gives them Ius ad rem, a right to
Baptism; children of Christian Parents may claim Baptism, which aliens to
Christ cannot do; but yet they may not leave out Baptism: A man may be within
a general pardon, and yet have no benefit by it, if he sue it not out, if he
plead it not; a child may have right to Baptism, and yet be without the
benefit of it, if it be neglected.

Christ began at Baptism; Natural things he did before; He fled into Egypt,
to preserve his life from Herod's Persecution, before: And a miraculous thing he
did before; He overcame in disputation, the Doctors in the Temple, at twelve
years old; but yet, neither of these neither, before his Circumcision, which
was equivalent to Baptism, to this purpose; but before he accepted, or
instituted Baptism, he did some natural, and some miraculous things. But his
ordinary work which he came for, his preaching the Gospel, and thereby raising
the frame for our salvation, in his Church, he began not, but after his
Baptism: And then, after that, it is expressly and immediately recorded, That
when he came out of the waters, he prayed; and then, the next thing in the
history is, that he fasted, and upon that, his tentation in the wilderness. I
mean no more in this, but this, That no man has any interest in God, to
direct a prayer unto him, how devoutly soever, no man has any assurance of any
effect of his endeavors in a good life, how morally holy soever, but in
relation to his Baptism, in that seal of the Covenant, by which he is a
Christian: Christ took this Sacrament, his Baptism, before he did any other
thing; and he took this, three years before the institution of the other
Sacrament of his body and blood: So that the Anabaptists obtrude a false
necessity upon us, that we may not take the first Sacrament, Baptism, till we
be capable of the other Sacrament too; for, first in nature, Prius nascimur,
quam pascimur, we are borne before we are fed; and so, in Religion, we are
first borne into the Church, (which is done by Baptism) before we are ready
for that other food, which is not indeed milk for babes, but solid meat for
stronger digestions.

They that have told us, that the Baptism, that Christ took of John, was not
the same Baptism, which we Christians take in the Church, speak impertinently;
John 1.6.
for John was sent by God to baptize; and there is but one Baptism in him. It
is true, that S. Augustine calls John's Baptism, Praecursorium ministerium, as
he was a forerunner of Christ, his Baptism was a fore-running Baptism; It is
true, that Justin Martyr calls John's Baptism, Euangelicae gratiae praeludium,
A Prologue to the grace of the Gospel; It is true, that more of the Fathers
have more phrases of expressing a difference between the Baptism of John, and
the Baptism of Christ: But all this is not De essentia, but De modo, Not of
the substance of the Sacrament, which is the washing of our souls in the blood
of Christ, but the difference was in the relation; John baptized In Christum
morituturum, Into Christ, who was to dye, and we are baptized In Christum
mortuum, Into Christ who is already dead for us. Damascen expresses it fully,
Christus baptizatur suo Baptismo: Christ was baptized with his own Baptism; It
was John's Baptism, and yet it was Christ's too. And so we are baptized with his
Baptism, and there neither is, nor was any other; And that Baptism is to us,
Ianua Ecclesiae, as S. Augustine calls it, The Door of the Church, at that we
enter, And Investitura Christianismi, The investing of Christianity, as S.
Bernard calls it, There we put on Christ Jesus; And, (as he, whom we may be
bold to match with these two floods of spiritual eloquence, for his Eloquence,
that is Luther expresses it) Puerpera regni Coelorum, The Church in Baptism,
is as a Woman delivered of child, and her child is the Kingdom of Heaven, and
that kingdom she delivers into his arms who is truly Baptized. This Sacrament
makes us Christians; this denominates us, both Civilly, and Spiritually; there
we receive our particular names, which distinguish us from one another, and
there we receive that name, which shall distinguish us from the Nations, in the
next World; at Baptism we receive the name of Christians, Act. 11.26.
and there we receive our Christian names.

When the Disciples of Christ, in general, came to be called Christians, we
find. It was a name given upon great deliberation, Barnabas had Preached
there; who was a good Man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith, himself.
But he went to fetch Paul too, a Man of great gifts, and power in Preaching;
and both they continued a year Preaching in Antioch, and there, first of all,
the Disciples were called Christians: Before they were called Fideles, and
Fratres, and Discipuli; The Faithful, and the Brethren, and the Disciples, and
(as S. Chrysostom says) De via, Men that were in the way; for, all the World
besides, were beside him, who was The Way, the Truth, and the Life. But, (by
the way) we may wonder, what gave S. Chrysostom occasion of that opinion or
that conjecture, since in the Ecclesiastique Story (I think) there is no
mention of that name, attributed to the Christians: And in the Acts of the
Apostles, it is named but once; when Saul desired Letters to Damascus, Acts 9.2.
to punish them, whom he found to be of That way. Where we may note also, the
zeal of S. Paul, (though then, in a wrong cause) against them, who were of
That way, that is, That way inclined; And our stupidity, who startle not at
those men, who are not only inclined another way, a cross way, but labor
pestilently to incline others, and hope confidently to see all incline that way
again. Here then at Antioch, they began to be called Christians; not only out
of Custom, but, as it may seem, out of decree. For, if there belong any
credit to that Council, which the Apostles are said to have held at Antioch, I
^^nus in Act 11.20.
(of which Council there was a Copy, whether true or false, in Origens
Library, within two hundred years after Christ) one Canon in that Council is,
Vt credentes in Iesum, quos tunc vocabant Galilaeos, vocarentur Christiani,
That the followers of Christ, who, till then, were called Galileans, should
then be called Christians. There, in general, we were all called Christians;
but, in particular, I am called a Christian, because I have put on Christ, in
Baptism.

Now, in considering the infinite treasure which we receive in Baptism,
insinuated before the text, That the Heavens opened, that is, The mysteries of
Religion are made accessible to us, we may attain to them; And then, The Holy
Ghost descends, (And he is a Comforter, whilst we are in Ignorance, and he is
a Schoolmaster to teach us all truths) And he comes as a Dove, that is, Brings
peace of conscience with him, and he rests upon us as a Dove, that is, Requires
simplicity, and an humble disposition in us, That not only as Elias opened and
shut Heaven, Vt pluviam aut emitteret, aut teneret, That he might pour out or
withhold the rain; but (as that Father, S. Chrysostom pursues it) Ita
apertum, ut ipse conscendas, and alios, si velles, tecum levares, Heaven is so
opened to us in baptism, as that we our selves may enter into it, and by our
good life, lead others into it too; As we consider, I say, what we have
received in Baptism, so, if we be not only Dealbati Christiani, (as S.
Augustine speaks) White-lim'd Christians, Christians on the outside, we must
consider what we are to do upon all this. We are baptized, In plena and adulta
Trinitate, says S. Cyprian, not in a Father without a Son, nor in either, or
both, without a Holy Ghost, but in the fullness of the Trinity: And this
mystery of the Trinity, is Regula fidei, says S. Hierom, It is the Rule of our
faith, this only regulates our faith, That we believe aright of the Trinity;
It is Dogma nostrae Religionis, says S. Basil, As though there were but this
one Article; It is, says he, the foundation, the sum, it is all the
Christian Religion, to believe aright of the Trinity. By this we are
distinguished from the Jews, who accept no plurality of Persons; And by this we
are distinguished from the Gentiles, who make as many several persons, as
there are several powers, and attributes belonging to God. Our Religion, our
holy Philosophy, our learning, as it is rooted in Christ, so it is not limited,
not determined in Christ alone; we are not baptized in his name alone, but our
study must be the whole Trinity; for, he that believes not in the Holy Ghost,
as well as in Christ, is no Christian: And, as that is true which S. Augustine
says, Nec laboriosius aliquid quaeritur, nec periculosius alicubi erratur, As
there is not so steepy a place to clamber up, nor so slippery a place to fall
upon, as the doctrine of the Trinity; so is that also true which he adds, Nec
fructuosius invenitur, There is not so fulfilling, so accomplishing, so
abundant an Article as that of the Trinity, for it is all Christianity. And
therefore let us keep our selves to that way, of the manifestation of the
Trinity, which is revealed in this text; and that way is our second part.

We must necessarily pass faster through the branches of this part, 2 Part.
then the Dignity of the subject, or the fecundity of the words will well
admit; but the clearenesse of the order must recompense the speed and dispatch.
First then, in this way here is an Ecce, An awaking, an Alarm, a calling us
up, Ecce, Behold. First, an Ecce correctionis, Ecce Correctionis.
A voice of chiding, of rebuking. If thou lie still in thy first bed, as thou
art merely a Creature, and think with thy self, that since the Lilly
labors not, nor spins, and yet is gloriously clothed, since the Fowls of the
Heavens sow not, nor reap, and yet are plentifully fed, thou may do so, and
thou shall be so; Ecce animam, Behold thou have an immortal soul, which must
have spiritual food, the Bread of life, and a more durable garment, the
garment of righteousness, and cannot be emprisoned and captivated to the
comparison of a Lilly that spins not, or of a Bird that sowes not. If thou
think thy soul sufficiently fed, and sufficiently clothed at first, in thy
baptism, That that Manna, and those clothes shall last thee all thy
pilgrimage, all thy life, That since thou art once Baptized, thou art well
enough, Ecce fermentum, take heed of that leaven of the Pharisees, Take heed of
them that put their confidence in the very act and character of the Sacrament,
and trust to that: for there is a Confirmation belongs to every man's Baptism;
not any such Confirmation as should intimate an impotency, or insufficiency in
the Sacrament, but out of an obligation, that that Sacrament lays upon thee,
That thou art bound to live according to that stipulation and contract, made in
thy behalf, at thy receiving of that Sacrament, there belongs a Confirmation
to that Sacrament, a holy life, to make sure that salvation, sealed to thee at
first. So also, if thou think thy self safe, because thou have left that
leaven, that is, Traditions of men, and live in a Reformed, and Orthodox
Church, yet, Ecce Paradisum, Behold Paradise it self, even in Paradise, the
bed of all ease, yet there was labor required; so is there required diligence,
and a laborious holiness, in the right Church, and in the true Religion. If
thou think thou know all, because thou understandest all the Articles of
faith already, and all the duties of a Christian life already, yet Ecce scalam,
Behold the life of a Christian is a Jacobs Ladder, and till we come up to God,
still there are more steps to be made, more way to be gone. Briefly, to the
most learned, to him that knows most, To the most sanctified, to him that
lives best, here is an Ecce correctionis, there is a farther degree of
knowledge, a farther degree of goodness, proposed to him, then he is yet
attained unto.

So it is an Ecce correctionis, an Ecce instar stimuli, God by calling us up to
Behold, rebukes us because we did not so, and provokes us to do so now: It is
also an Ecce directionis, an Ecce instar lucernae, God by calling us up to
Behold, gives us a light whereby we may do so, and may discern our way:
whomsoever God calls, to him he affords so much light, as that, if he proceed
not by that light, he himself has winked at that light, or blow out that
light, or suffered that light to wast, and go out, by his long negligence. God
does not call man with an Ecce, To behold him, and then hide himself from him;
he does not bid him look, and then strike him blind. We are all borne blind
at first; In Baptism God gives us that Collyrium, that eye salve, by which we
may see, and actually by the power of that medicine, we do all see, Mat. 7.^.
more then the Gentiles do. But yet, Ecce trabs in oculis, says Christ; Behold
there is a beam in our eye, that is, Natural infirmities. But for all this
beam, when Christ bids us behold, we are able to see, by Christ's light, our
own imperfections; though we have that beam, yet we are able to see that we
have it. And when this light which Christ gives us, (which is his first grace)
brings us to that, then Christ proceeds so that which follows there, Projice
trabem, Cast out the beam that is in thine eye, and so we become able by that
succeeding grace, to overcome our former impediments: If Christ bid us behold,
he gives us light; if he bid us cast out the beam, he gives us strength. There
is an Ecce neutus, cast upon Zachary, Behold thou shall be dumb, Luke 1.20.
God punished Zacharies incredulity with dumbness; But there is never an Ecce
caecus, Behold thou shall be blind, That God should call man to see, and then
blow out the candle, or not show him a candle, if he were in utter darkness;
for this is an Ecce directionis, an Ecce lucernae, God calls, and he directs,
and lightens our paths; never reproach God so impiously as to suspect, that
when he calls, he does not mean that we should come.

Well then, Vox.
with what does he enlighten thee? Why, Ecce vox, Behold a voice, saying. Now,
for this voice in the Text, by whom it was heard, as also by whom the Dove that
descended was seen, is sometimes disputed, and with some perplexity amongst the
Fathers. Some think it was to Christ alone, because two of the Evangelists,
Mark and Luke, record the words in that phrase, Tu es filius, not as we read
it in our Text, This is, but, Thou art my beloved Son: But so, there had been
no use, neither of the Dove, nor of the voice; for Christ himself lacked no
testimony, that he was that Son. Some think it was to Christ, and John
Baptist, and not to the company; Because, say they, The mystery of the Trinity
was not to be presented to them, till a farther and maturer preparation; And
therefore they observe, that the next manifestation of Christ, and so of the
Trinity, Mat. 17.
by a like voice, was almost three years after this, in his Transfiguration,
after he had manifested this doctrine by a long preaching amongst them; And
yet, even then, it was but to his Apostles, and but to a few of them neither,
and those few forbidden to publish too; and how long? Till his resurrection;
when by that resurrection he had confirmed them, then it was time to acquaint
them with the Doctrine of the Trinity. But for the Doctrine of the Trinity, as
mysterious as it is, it is insinuated and conveyed unto us, even in the first
verse of the Bible, in that extraordinary phrase, Creavit Dii, Gods, Gods in
the plural, created heaven and earth; There is an unity in the action, it is
but Creavit, in the singular, and yet there is a plurality in the persons, it
is not Deus, God, but Dij, Gods: The Doctrine of the Trinity, is the first
foundation of our Religion, and no time is too early for our faith, The
simplest may believe it; and all time is too early for our reason, The wisest
cannot understand it. And therefore, as Chrysostom is well followed in his
opinion, so he is well worthy to be followed, That both the Dove was seen, and
the voice was heard by all the company: for, neither was necessary to Christ
himself; And the voice was not necessary to John Baptist, because the sign
which was to govern him, was the Dove; He that sent me, said, upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit come down, and tarry still, it is he that baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost. But to the company, both voice and Dove were necessary: for, if
the voice had come alone, they might have thought, that that testimony had been
given of John, of whom they had, as yet, a far more reverend opinion, then of
Christ; And therefore, God first points out the person, and by the Dove
declares him to all, which was He, and then, by that voice declares farther to
them all, what He was. This benefit they had by being in that company, they
saw, and they heard things conducing to their salvation; for, though God work
more effectually upon those particular persons in the Congregation, who, by a
good use of his former graces, are better disposed then others, yet to the most
graceless man that is, if he be in the Congregation, God vouchsafes to speak,
and would be heard.

They that differ in the persons, Via Creaturae.
who heard it, agree in the Reason; All they heard it, in all their opinions,
to whom it was necessary to hear it; And it is necessary to all us, to have
this means of understanding and believing, to hear. Therefore God gives to
all that shall be saved, vocem, his voice. We consider two other ways of
imprinting the knowledge of God in man; first in a dark and weak way, the way
of Nature, and the book of Creatures; and secondly, in that powerful way, the
way of Miracles. But these, and all between these, are uneffectuall without the
Word. When David says of the Creatures, Psalm. 19.3. Romans 10.17.
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard, (the voice of
the Creature is heard over all) S. Paul commenting upon those words, says, They
have heard, All the world has heard; but what? The voice of the Creature; now
that is true, so much all the world had heard then, and does hear still: But
the hearing that S. Paul intends there, is such a hearing as begets faith, and
that the voice of Creature reaches not to. The voice of the Creature alone, is
but a faint voice, a low voice; nor any voice, till the voice of the Word
inanimate it; for then when the Word of God has taught us any mystery of our
Religion, then the book of Creatures illustrates, and establishes, and
cherishes that which we have received by faith, in hearing the Word: As a stick
bears up, and succors a vine, or any plant, more precious then it self, but
yet gave it not life at first, nor gives any nourishment to the root now: so
the assistance of reason, and the voice of the Creature, in the preaching of
Nature, works upon our faith, but the root, and the life is in the faith it
self; The light of nature gives a glimmering before, and it gives a reflection
after faith, but the meridianall noone is in faith.

Now, if we consider the other way, the way of power, Via miraculorum.
Miracles, no man may ground his belief upon that, which seems a Miracle to
him. Moses wrought Miracles, and Pharaohs instruments wrought the like: we
know, theirs were no true Miracles, and we know Moses were; but how do we know
this? By another voice, by the Word of God, who cannot lie: for, for those upon
whom those Miracles were to work on both sides, Moses, and they too, seemed to
the beholders, diversely disposed to do Miracles. One Rule in discerning, and
judging a Miracle, is, to consider whether it be done in confirmation of a
necessary Truth: otherwise it is rather to be suspected for an Illusion, then
accepted for a Miracle. The Rule is intimated in Deuteronomy, where, Deuteronomy. 13.
though a Prophets prophecy do come to pass, yet, if his end be, to draw to
other gods, he must be slain. What Miracles soever are pretended, in
confirmation of the inventions of Men, are to be neglected. God has not
carried us so low for our knowledge, as to Creatures, to Nature, nor so high,
as to Miracles, but by a middle way, By a voice.

But it is Vox de Coelis, A voice from heaven. S. Basil applying (indeed with
some wresting and derorting) those words in the 29 Psalm, verse. 3. De Coelis.
(The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of glory makes it to
thunder) to this Baptism of Christ, he says, Vox super aquas Ioannes, The
words of John at Christ's Baptism, were this voice that David intends; And then
that manifestation which God gave of the Trinity, (whatsoever it were)
altogether, that was the Thunder of his Majesty: so this Thunder then, was vox
de Coelis, A voice from heaven; And in this voice the person of the Father was
manifested, as he was in the same voice at his Transfiguration. Since this
voice then is from Heaven, and is the Fathers voice, we must look for all our
knowledge of the Trinity from thence. For, (to speak of one of those persons,
Mat. 11.27.
of Christ) no man knows the Son, but the Father; Who then, but he, can
make us know him? If any knew it, yet it is an unexpressible mystery, no man
could reveal it; Mat. 16.17.
Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven; If any could reveal it to us, yet none could draw us to believe it; No
man can come to me, except the Father draw him: John 6.44.
So that all our voice of Direction must be from thence, De Coelis, from Heaven.

We have had Voces de Inferis, voices from Hell, in the blasphemies of
Heretics; De Inferis.
That the Trinity was but Cera extensa, but as a Roll of Wax spread, or a
Dough Cake rolled out, and so divided unto persons: That the Trinity was but a
nest of Boxes, a lesser in a greater, and not equal to one another; And then,
that the Trinity was not only three persons, but three Gods too; So far from
the truth, and so far from one another have Heretics gone, in the matter of
the Trinity; and Cerinthus so far, in that one person, in Christ, as to say,
That Jesus, and Christ, were two distinct persons; and that into Jesus, who,
says he, was the son of Joseph, Christ, who was the Spirit of God, descended
here at his Baptism, and was not in him before, and withdrew himself from him
again, at the time of his Passion, and was not in him then; so that he was not
borne Christ, nor suffered not being Christ; but was only Christ in his
preaching, and in his Miracles; and in all the rest, he was but Jesus, says
Cerinthus.

We have had Voces de Inferis, de profundis, from the depth of hell, De Medio.
in the malice of Heretics, And we have had Voces de medio, voices from
amongst us, Inventions of men, to express, and to make us understand the
Trinity, in pictures, and in Comparisons: All which (to contract this point)
are apt to fall into that abuse, which we will only note in one; At first,
they used ordinarily to express the Trinity in four letters, which had no ill
purpose in it at first, but was a religious ease for their memories, in
Catechismes: The letters were (...), and (...), and (...), and (...); The (...)
was (...), and the (...) was (...), and the two last belonged to the last
person, for (...) was (...), and (...) was (...), and so there was Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, as if we should express it in F, and S, and H, and G.
But this came quickly thus far into abuse, as that they thought, there could
belong but three letters, in that picture, to the three persons; and therefore
allowing so many to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they took the last letter
P, for Petrus, and so made Peter head of the Church, and equal to the Trinity.
So that for our knowledge, in this mysterious doctrine of the Trinity, let us
evermore rest, in voce de coelis, in that voice which came from heaven.

But yet it is Vox dicens, Dicens.
A voice saying, speaking, A voice that man is capable of, and may be benefited
by. It is not such a voice as that was, (which came from heaven too) when
Christ prayed to God to glorify his name, John 12.28.
That the people should say, some, that it was a Thunder, some that it was an
Angel that spoke. They are the sons of Thunder, and they are the Ministerial
Angels of the Church, from whom we must hear this voice of heaven: Nothing can
speak, but man: No voice is understood by man, but the voice of man; It is not
Vox dicens, That voice says nothing to me, that speaks not; And therefore
howsoever the voice in the Text were miraculously formed by God, to give this
glory, and dignity to this first manifestation of the Trinity in the person of
Christ, yet because he has left it for a permanent Doctrine necessary to
Salvation, he has left ordinary means for the conveying of it; that is, The
same voice from heaven, the same word of God, but speaking in the ministry of
man. And therefore for our measure of this knowledge, (which is our third and
last Part) we are to see, how Christian men, whose office it has been to
interpret Scriptures, that is, how the Catholic Church has understood these
words, Hic est Filius, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

How we are to receive the knowledge of the Trinity, 3 Part.
Athanasius has expressed as far as we can go; Whosoever will be saved, he
must believe it; but the manner of it is not exposed so far as to his belief.
That question of the Prophet, Quis enarrabit? who shall declare this? carries
the answer with it, Nemo enarrabit, No man shall declare it. But a
manifestation of the Being of the Trinity, they have always apprehended in
these words, Hic est Filius, This is my beloved Son. To that purpose therefore,
we take, first, the words to be expressed by this Evangelist S. Matthew, as the
voice delivered them, rather then as they are expressed by S. Mark, and S.
Luke; both which have it thus, Tu es, Thou art my beloved Son, and not Hic est,
This is; They two being only careful of the sense, and not of the words, as
it falls out often amongst the Evangelists, who differ oftentimes in recording
the words of Christ, and of other persons. But where the same voice spoke the
same words again, in the Transfiguration, there all the Evangelists express
it so, 2 Pet. 1.17.
Hic est, This is, and not Tu es, Thou art my beloved Son; And so it is, where
S. Peter makes use by application of that history, it is Hic est, and not Tu
es. So that this Hic est, This man, designs him who has that mark upon him,
that the holy Ghost was descended upon him, and tarried upon him; for so far
went the sign of distinction given to John, The holy Ghost was to descend and
tarry: Manet, says S. Hierome, The holy Ghost tarryes upon him, because he
never departs from him, sed operatur quando Christus vult, and quomodo vult,
The holy Ghost works in Christ, when Christ will, and as Christ will; and so
the holy Ghost tarryed not upon any of the Prophets; They spoke what he would,
but he wrought not when they would. S. Gregory objects to himself, that there
was a perpetual residence of the holy Ghost upon the faithful, out of those
words of Christ, The Comforter shall abide with you for ever; But as S. Gregory
answers himself, This is not a plenary abiding, and secundum omnia dona, in a
full operation, according to all his gifts, as he tarried upon Christ: Neither
indeed is that promise of Christ's to particular persons, but to the whole body
of the Church.

Now this residence of the holy Ghost upon Christ, was his unction; properly it
was that, by which he was the Messiah, That he was anointed above his fellows;
And therefore S. Hierome makes account, that Christ received his unction, and
so his office of Messiah, at this his Baptism, and this descending of the holy
Ghost upon him: And he thinks it therefore, because presently after Baptism,
he went to preach in the Synagogue, and he took for his Text those words of the
Prophet Esaias, Esaias 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor. And when he had read the Text, he began his
Sermon thus, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. But we may be
bold to say, that this is mistaken by S. Hierome; for the unction of Christ by
the holy Ghost, by which he was anointed, and sealed into the office of
Messiah, was in the over-shadowing of the holy Ghost in his conception, in his
assuming our nature: This Descending now at his baptism, and this Residence,
were only to declare, That there was a holy Ghost, and that holy Ghost dwelt
upon this person.

It is Hic, Est.
This person; And it is Hic est, This is my Son; It is not only Fuit, He was
my Son, when he was in my bosom, Nor only Erit, He shall be so, when he shall
return to my right hand again; God does not only take knowledge of him in
Glory; But Est, He is so now; now in the exinanition of his person, now in the
evacuation of his Glory, now that he is preparing himself to suffer scorn,
and scourges, and thorns, and nails, in the ignominious death of the Cross,
now he is the Son of the glorious God; Christ is not the less the Son of God
for this eclipse.

Hic est, This is he, who for all this lowness is still as high as ever he
was, Filius.
and that height is, Est Filius, He is the Son. He is not Servus, The Servant
of God; or not that only, for he is that also. Behold my servant, Esaias 41.1.
(says God of him, in the Prophet) I will stay upon him, mine elect, in whom
my soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him, and he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles. But Christ is this Servant, and a Son too: And not a
Son only; for so we observe diverse filiations in the School; Filiationem
vestigii, That by which all creatures, even in their very being, are the sons
of God, as Job calls God Pluviae patrem, The father of the rain; And so there
are other filiations, other ways of being the sons of God. But Hic est, This
person is, as the force of the Article expresses it, and presses it, Ille
Filius, The Son, That Son, which no son else is, neither can any else declare
how he is that which he is.

This person then is still The Son, And Meus Filius, says God, My Son. Meus.
He is the son of Abraham, and so within the Covenant; as well provided by
that inheritance, as the son of man can be naturally. He is the Son of a
Virgin, conceived without generation, and therefore ordained for some great
use. He is the son of David, and therefore royally descended; But his dignity
is in the Filius meus, that God avows him to be his Son; for, Unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, Thou art my son? Heb. 1.5.
But to Christ he says in the Prophet, I have called thee by thy name: And
what is his name? Meus es tu, Thou art mine. Quem a me non separat Deitas,
says Leo, non dividit potestas, non discernit aeternitas: Mine so, as that
mine infiniteness gives me no room nor space beyond him, he reaches as far
as I, though I be infinite; My Almightinesse gives me no power above him, he
has as much power as I, though I have all; My eternity gives me no being
before him, though I were before all: In mine Omnipotence, in mine
Omnipresence, in mine Omniessence, he is equal partner with me, and has all
that is mine, or that is my self, and so he is mine.

My Son, And My beloved Son; but so we are all, who are his sons, Deliciae
ejus, Dilectus. Prove. 8.31.
says Solomon, His delight, and his contentment is to be with the sons of men.
But here the Article is extraordinarily repeated again, Ille dilectus, That
beloved Son, by whom, those, who were neither beloved, nor Sons, became the
beloved Sons of God; For, there is so much more added, in the last phrase, In
quo complacui, In whom I am well pleased.

Now, these words are diversely read. S. Augustine says, In quo.
some Copies that he had seen, read them thus, Ego hodie genui te, This is my
beloved Son, this day have I begotten him: And with such Copies, it seems,
both Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus met, for they read these words so, and
interpret them accordingly: But these words are misplaced, and mis-transferred
out of the second Psalm, where they are. And as they change the words, and in
stead of In quo complacui, In whom I am well pleased, read, This day have I
begotten thee; S. Cyprian adds other words, to the end of these, which are,
Hunc audite, Hear him: Which words, when these words were repeated at the
Transfiguration, were spoken, but here, at the Baptism, they were not, what
Copy soever misled S. Cyprian, or whether it were the failing of his own
memory. But S. Chrysostom gives an express reason, why those words were
spoken at the Transfiguration, and not here: Because, says he, Here was only
a purpose of a Manifestation of the Trinity, so far, as to declare their
persons, who they were, and no more: At the Trans-figuration, where Moses and
Elias appeared with Christ, there God had a purpose to prefer the Gospel
above the Law, and the Prophets, and therefore in that place he adds that,
Hunc audite, Hear him, who first fulfills all the Law, and the Prophets, and
then preaches the Gospel. He was so well pleased in him, as that he was content
to give all them, that received him, Ephesians. 1.6.
power to become the Sons of God, too; as the Apostle says, By his grace, he
has made us accepted in his beloved.

Beloved, That you may be so, Come up from your Baptism, as it is said that
Christ did; Rise, and ascend to that growth, which your Baptism prepared you
to: And the heavens shall open, as then, even Cataractae coeli, All the
windows of heaven shall open, and rain down blessings of all kinds, in
abundance; And the Holy Ghost shall descend upon you, as a Dove, in his
peaceful coming, in your simple, and sincere receiving him; And he shall rest
upon you, to effect and accomplish his purposes in you. If he rebuke you, (as
Christ, when he promises the Holy Ghost, though he call him a Comforter, John
16.7.
says, That he shall rebuke the world of diverse things) yet he shall dwell
upon you as a Dove, Quae si mordet, osculando mordet, says S. Augustine: If
the Dove bite, it bites with kissing, if the Holy Ghost rebuke, he rebukes with
comforting. And so baptized, and so pursuing the contract of your Baptism, and
so crowned with the residence of his blessed Spirit, in your holy conversation,
he shall breathe a soul into your soul, by that voice of eternal life, You
are my beloved Sons, in whom I am well pleased.

SERMON. XLIV. Preached at S. Dunstanes upon Trinity-Sunday. 1627.
REV. 4.8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they
were full of eyes within; And they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.


THese words are part of that Scripture, which our Church has appointed to be
read for the Epistle of this day. This day, which besides that it is the Lords
day, the Sabbath day, is also especially consecrated to the memory, and honor
of the whole Trinity. The Feast of the Nativity of Christ, Christmas day, which
S. Chrysostom calls Metropolin omnium festorum, The Metropolitan festival of
the Church, is intended principally to the honor of the Father, who was
glorified in that humiliation of that Son, that day, because in that, was laid
the foundation, and first stone of that house and Kingdom, in which God
intended to glorify himself in this world, that is, the Christian Church. The
Feast of Easter is intended principally to the honor of the Son himself, who
upon that day, began to lift up his head above all those waters which had
surrounded him, and to shake off the chains of death, and the grave, and hell,
in a glorious Reserrection. And then, the Feast of Pentecost was appropriated
to the honor of the Holy Ghost, who by a personal falling upon the Apostles,
that day, enabled them to propagate this Glory of the Father, and this death,
and Resurrection of the Son, to the ends of the world, to the ends in
Extention, to all places, to the ends in Duration, to all times.

Now, as S. Augustine says, Nullus eorum extra quemlibet eorum est, Every
Person of the Trinity is so in every other person, as that you cannot think of
a Father, (as a Father) but that there falls a Son into the same thought, nor
think of a person that proceeds from others, but that they, from whom he, whom
ye think of, proceeds, falls into the same thought, as every person is in every
person; And as these three persons are contracted in their essence into one
Godhead, so the Church has also contracted the honor belonging to them, in
this kind of Worship, to one day, in which, the Father, and Son, and Holy
Ghost, as they are severally, in those three several days, might be
celebrated jointly, and altogether. It was long before the Church did institute
a particular Festival, to this purpose. For, before, they made account, that
that verse, which was upon so many occasions repeated in the Liturgy, and
Church Service, (Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost)
had a convenient sufficiency in it, to keep men in a continual remembrance of
the Trinity. But when by that extreme inundation, and increase of Arians,
these notions of distinct Persons in the Trinity, came to be obliterated, and
discontinued, the Church began to refresh her self, in admitting into to the
forms of Common Prayer, some more particular notifications, and remembrances
of the Trnity; And at last, (though it were very long first, for this Festival
of this Trinity-Sunday, was not instituted above four hundred years since)
they came to ordain this day. Which day, our Church, according to that
peaceful wisdom, wherewithal the God of Peace, of Unity, and Concord, had
inspired her, did, in the Reformation, retain, and continue, out of her
general religious tenderness, and holy loathnesse, to innovate any thing in
those matters which might be safely, and without superstition continued and
entertained. For our Church, in the Reformation, proposed not that for her end,
how she might go from Rome, but how she might come to the Truth; nor to cast
away all such things as Rome had depraved, but to purge away those
depravations, and conserve the things themselves, so restored to their first
good use.

For this day then, were these words appointed by our Church; Divisic.
And therefore we are sure, that in the notion, and apprehension, and
construction of our Church, these words appertain to the Trinity. In them
therefore we shall consider, first what, these four creatures were, which are
notified, and designed to us, in the names, and figures of four Beasts; And
then, what these four creatures did; Their Persons, and their Action will be
our two Parts of this Text. In each of which we shall have three Branches; In
the first these, first, simply who they were; And then, their qualification as
they are furnished with wings, Each of them had six wings; And then lastly, in
that first Part, what is intended in their eyes, for, They were full of eyes
within; And in these three, we shall determine that first Part, The Persons.
And then in the second, our first Branch will be, Their Alacrity, their
ingenuity, their free and open profession of their zeal to Gods Service; They
did it, says the Text, Dicentes, Saying, Publishing, Declaring; without
disguises or modifications. And our second Branch, Their Assiduity, That which
they did, they did incessantly, They ceased not day nor night, says our Text;
No occasional emergencies, no loss, no trouble interrupted their zeal to
Gods service. And then the last is, that that which they did, first with so
much ingenuity, and then with so much assiduity, first so openly, and then so
constantly, was the celebration of the Trinity, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; Which is the entire body of the
Christan Religion? That they professed openly, and constantly, all the parts of
their Religion, are also the three Branches, in which we shall determine our
second Part, Their Action.

First then, for our first Branch, in our first Part, 1. Part. Persons. Romans
15.4.
the Persons intended in these four creatures, the Apostle says, Whatsoever
things are written before time, are written for our learning; But yet, not so
for our learning, as that we should think always to learn, or always to have
a clear understanding of all that is written; for it is added there, That we,
through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope; Which may
well admit this Exposition, that those things which we understand not yet, we
may hope that we shall, and we must have patience till we do. For there may be
many places in Scripture, (especially in Prophetical Scripture) which,
perchance, the Church of God her self, shall not understand, till those
Prophesies be fulfilled, and accomplished. In the understanding of this place,
what, or who these four creatures are, there is so much difficulty, so much
perplexity, as that amongst the interpretations of very Learned, and very
Reverend, and very pertinent Expositors, it is easy to collect thirty several
opinions, thirty several significations of these four creatures.

The multiplicity of these Interpretations intimates thus much, that that man
that believes the Trinity, can scarce turn upon any thing, but it assists, and
advances, and illustrates that belief; As diverse from one another as their
thirty Expositions are, they all agree, that be our four creatures what they
will, that which they do, is to celebrate the Trinity; He that seeks proof
for every mystery of Religion, shall meet with much darkness; but he that
believes first, shall find every thing to illustrate his faith. And then, this
multiplicity of Interpretations intimates thus much more, That since we cannot
give Sonsum adaequatum, Any such Interpretation of these four creatures, but
that another, as probable as it, may be given, it may be sufficient, and it is
best, (as in all cases of like intricacy) to choose such a sense, as may most
advance the general purpose, and intention of the place; which is, in this
place, The celebration of the Trinity.

So therefore we shall do. And considering that amongst these manifold
Expositors, some bind themselves exactly, rigidly, superciliously, yea
superstitiously to the number of four, and that therefore these four
Creatures must necessarily signify something, that is limited in the number of
four, no more, no less, (either the four Monarchies, or the four
Patriarchs, or the four Doctors of the Church, or the four Cardinal Virtues,
or the four Elements, or the four Quarters of the World, into all which, and
many more such, rather Allusions, then Interpretations, these various
Expositors have scattered themselves) And then considering also that diverse
others of these Expositors out of a just observation, That nothing is more
ordinary in this Book of the Revelation, then by a certain and finite number,
to design and signify an uncertain and infinite, (for, otherwise when we are
told, that there were twelve thousand sealed of every Tribe, we should know
the certain number of all the Jews that were saved, which certainly is not S.
John's purpose in that place; but in the greatness of that number, to declare
the largeness of Gods goodness to that people) considering I say, that diverse
of these Expositors, have extended their interpretation beyond the number of
four, we make account that we do best, if we do both; if we stop upon the
number of four, and yet pass on to a greater number too. And so we shall
well do, if we interpret these four Creatures, to be first and principally
the four Evangelists, (and that is the most common Interpretation of the
Ancients) and then enlarge it to all the Ministers of the Gospel, which is
(for the most part) the Interpretation of the Later men. So then, the action
being an open and a continual profession of the whole Christian Religion, in
the celebration of the Trinity, which is the distinctive Character of a
Christian, the persons that do this, are all they that constitute the
Hierarchy, and order of the Church; All they that execute the Ministry, and
dispensation of the Gospel; which Gospel is laid down, and settled and
established radically in the four Evangelists; All they are these four
Creatures. And farther we need not carry this first branch, which is the
Notification of these persons; for, their Qualification is the larger
consideration.

And before we come to their Qualification, in the text, first, as they are
said to have six wings, and then as they are said to be full of eyes, we look
upon them, as they are formed, and designed to us, in the verse immediately
before the text; where, the first of these four Creatures has the face of a
Lion, the second of a Calfe, or an Ox, the third of a Man, and the fourth of
an Eagle. Now, Quatuor animalia sunt Ecclesiae Doctores, says S. Ambrose;
These four Creatures are the Preachers of the Gospel; that we had established
before; But then, we add with S. Ambrose, Eandem significationem habet primum
animal, quod secundum, quod tertium, quod quartum; All these four Creatures
make up but one Creature; all their qualities concur to the Qualification of
a Minister; every Minister of God is to have all, that all four had; the
courage of a Lion, the laboriousnesse of an Ox, the perspicuity and clear
sight of the Eagle, and the humanity, the discourse, the reason, the
affability, the appliablenesse of a Man. S. Dionys the Areopagite had the same
consideration as S. Ambrose had, before him. He imprints it, he expresses it,
and extends it thus; In Leone vis indomabilis; In every Minister, I look for
such an invincible courage, as should be of proof, against Persecution, (which
is a great) and against Preferment, which is a greater temptation; that neither
Fears, nor Hopes shake his constancy; neither his Christian constancy, to
stagger him, nor his Ministerial constancy, to silence him; For this is Vis
indomabilis, the courage required in the Minister as he is a Lion. And then
says that Father; In Bove vis salutaris, In every Minister, as he is said to
be an Ox, I look for labor; that he be not so over-growne, nor stall-fed,
that he be thereby lazy; He must labor; And then, as the labor of the Ox
is, his labor must be employed upon useful and profitable things, things that
conduce to the clearing, not the perplexing of the understanding; and to the
collecting, the uniting, the fixing, and not the scattering, the dissolving,
the pouring out of a fluid, an unstable, an irresolved conscience; things of
edification, not speculation; For this is that Vis salutaris, which we require
in every Minister; that he labor at the Plough, and plough the right ground;
that he Preach for the saving of souls, and not for the sharpning of wits. And
then again, In Aquila vis speculatrix; As the Minister is presented in the
notion and quality of an Eagle, we require both an Open eye, and a Piercing
eye; First, that he date look upon other men's sins, and be not feign to wink
at their faults, because he is guilty of the same himself, and so, for fear
of a recrimination, incur a prevarication; And then, that he be not so
dim-sighted, that he must be feign to see all through other men's spectacles,
and so preach the purposes of great men, in a factious popularity, or the
fancies of new men, in a Schismatic singularity; but, with the Eagle, be
able to look to the Sun; to look upon the constant truth of God in his
Scriptures, through his Church; For this is Vis speculatrix, the open and the
piercing eye of the Eagle. And then lastly, In homine vis ratiocinatrix; As the
Minister is represented in the notion and quality of a Man, we require a
gentle, a supple, an appliable disposition, a reasoning, a persuasive
disposition; That he do not always, press all things with Authority, with
Censures, with Excommunications; That he put not all points of Religion,
always upon that one issue, Quicunque vult salvus esse, If you will be saved,
you must believe this, all this, and Qui non credider it, damnabitur, If you
doubt of this, any of this, you are infallibly, necessarily damned; But, that
he be also content to descend to men's reason, and to work upon their
understanding, and their natural faculties, as well as their faith, and to
give them satisfaction, and reason (as far as it may be had) in that which they
are to believe; that so as the Apostle, though he had authority to command, yet
did Pray them in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, So the Minister of God,
though (as he is bound to do) he do tell them what they are bound to believe,
yet he also tells them, why they are to believe it; for this is Vis
ratiocinatrix, The holy gentleness and appliablenesse, implied in that form
of a Man.

And so you have this Man composed of his four Elements; this Creature made of
these four Creatures; this Minister made of a Lion, an Ox, an Eagle, and a
Man; For, no one of these, nor all these, but one, will serve; the Lion alone,
without the Eagle, is not enough; it is not enough to have courage and zeal,
without clear sight and knowledge; Nor enough to labor, except we apply our
selves to the capacity of the hearer; All must have all, or else all is
disordered; Zeal, Labor, Knowledge, Gentleness.

Now besides these general qualifications, laid down as the foundation of the
text, Alae.
in the verse before it, in the text it self these four Creatures, being
first the four Evangelists, and consequently, or by a just and fair
accommodation, all the Preachers of the Gospel, which limit themselves in the
doctrine laid down in the four Evangelists, have also wings added unto them;
Wings, first for their own behoof and benefit, and then, wings for the
benefit and behoof of others. They have wings to raise themselves from the
earth; that they do not entangle themselves in the businesses of this World;
but still to keep themselves upon the wing, in a Heavenly conversation, ever
remembering that they have another Element, then Sea or Land, as men whom Christ
Jesus has set apart, and in some measure made mediators between him, and
other men, as his instruments of their salvation. And then as for themselves,
so have they wings for others too, that they may be always ready to succor
all, in all their spiritual necessities. For as those words are well
understood by many of the Ancients, Revel. 12.14.
To the Woman were given two wings of an Eagle, that is, to the Church were
given able and sufficient Ministers, to carry and convey her over the Nations:
So are those words which are spoken of God himself, appliable to his Ministers,
that first, The Eagle stirs up her nest, Deuteronomy. 32.11.
The Preacher stirs and moves, and agitates the holy affections of the
Congregation, that they slumber not in a senselessness of that which is said,
The Eagle stirs up her nest, and then as it is added there, She fluttereth
over her young; The Preacher makes a holy noise in the conscience of the
Congregation, and when he has awakened them, by stirring the nest, he casts
some claps of thunder, some intimidations, in denouncing the judgments of God,
and he flings open the gates of Heaven, that they may hear, and look up, and
see a man sent by God, with power to infuse his fear upon them; So she
fluttereth over her young; but then, as it follows there, She spreads abroad
her wings; she over-shadowes them, she enwraps them, she arms them with her
wings, so as that no other terror, no other fluttering but that which comes
from her, can come upon them; The Preacher does so infuse the fear of God into
his Auditory, that first, they shall fear nothing but God, and then they shall
fear God, but so, as he is God; And God is Mercy; God is Love; and his
Minister shall so spread his wings over his people, as to defend them from all
inordinate fear, from all suspicion and jealousy, from all diffidence and
distrust in the mercy of God; which is farther expressed in that clause, which
follows in the same place, She takes them and bears them upon her wings;
when the Minister has awakened his flock by the stirring of the nest, and put
them in this holy fear, by this which the Holy Ghost calls a Fluttering; and
then provided, by spreading his wings, that upon this fear there follow not a
desperation; then he sets them upon the top of his best wings, and shows them
the best treasure that is committed to his Stewardship, he shows them Heaven,
and God in Heaven, sanctifying all their crosses in this World, inanimating all
their worldly blessings, rayning down his blood into their emptiness, and his
balm into their wounds, making their bed in all their sickness, and preparing
their seat, where he stands soliciting their cause, at the right hand of his
Father. And so the Minister has the wings of an Eagle, that every soul in the
Congregation may see as much as he sees, that is, a particular interest in all
the mercies of God, and the merits of Christ.

So then, these Ministers of God have that double use of their Eagles wings;
first, Vt volent ad escam, Job 9.26.
(as it is in Job) that they may fly up to receive their own food, their
instructions at the mouth and word of God; And then, Vt ubi cadaver sit, ibi
statim adsit, (as it is in Job also) where the dead are, Job 39.33.
they also may be; That where any lie, Pro mortuis, (as S. Paul speaks) for
dead, 1 Cor. 13.29.
as good as dead, ready to die, upon their deathbed, they may be ready to
assist them, and to minister spiritual Physic, opportunely, seasonably,
proportionably to their spiritual necessities; That they may power out upon
such sick souls, that name of Jesus, which is Oleum effusum, An oil, and a
balm, always pouring, and always spreading it self upon all green wounds,
and upon all old sores; That they may minister to one in his hot and pestilent
presumptions, an Opiat, of Christ's Tristis anima, A remembrance, that even
Christ himself had a sad soul toward his death, and a Quare dereliquisti,
some apprehension, that God, though his God, had forsaken him. And that
therefore, no man, how righteous soever, may presume, or pass away without
fear and trembling; And then, to minister to another, in his Lethargies, and
Apoplexies, and damps, and inordinate dejections of spirit, Christ's cordials,
and restoratives, in his Clarifica me Pater, In an assurance, that his Father,
though he have laid him down here, whether in an inglorious fortune, or in a
disconsolate bed of sickness, will raise him, in his time, to everlasting
glory. So these Eagles are to have wings, to fly Ad cadaver, to the dead, to
those that are so dying a bodily death, and also, where any lie dead in the
practice and custom of sin, to be industrious and earnest in calling them to
life again, so as Christ did Lazarus, by calling aloud; Not aloud in the ears
of other men, so to expose a sinner to shame, and confusion of face, but aloud
in his own ears, to put home the judgments of God, thereby to plough and
harrow that stubborn heart, which will not be kneaded, nor otherwise reduced to
an uprightness. For these uses, to raise themselves to heavenly
contemplations, and to make haste to them that need their assistance, the
Ministers of God have wings; wings of great use; especially now, when there is
Coluber in via, A snake in every path, a Seducer in every house; When as the
Devil is busy, because he knows his time is short, so his instruments are
busy, because they think their time is beginning again; therefore the
Minister of God has wings.

And then, Sex alae.
their wings are numbered in our Text; They have six wings. For by the consent
of most Expositors, those whom S. John presents in the figure of these four
Creatures here, Esa. 6.3.
and those whom the Prophet Esaias calls Seraphim, are the same persons; The same
Office, and the same Voice is attributed unto those Seraphim there, as unto
these four Creatures here; Those as well as these, spend their time in
celebrating the Trinity, an in crying Holy, Holy, Holy. The Holy Ghost
sometimes presents the Ministers of the Gospel, as Seraphim in glory, that they
might be known to be the Ministers and dispensers of the mysteries and secrets
of God, and to come A latere, From his Council, his Cabinet, his Bosom. And
then on the other side, that you might know, that the dispensation of these
mysteries of your salvation, is by the hand and means of men, taken from
amongst your selves, and that therefore you are not to look for Revelations,
nor Ecstasies, nor Visions, nor Transportations, but to rest in Gods ordinary
means, he brings those persons down again from that glorious representation,
as the Seraphim, to creatures of an inferior, of an earthly nature. For,
though it be by the sight, and in the quality and capacity of those glorious
Seraphim, that the Minister of God receives his commission, and instructions,
his orders, and his faculties, yet the execution of his commission, and the
pursuing of his instructions toward you, and in your behalf, is in that
nature, and in that capacity, as they have the courage of the Lion, the
laboriousnesse of the Ox, the perspicuity of the Eagle, and the affability of
Man.

These winged persons then, (winged for their own sakes, and winged for yours)
these Ministers of God, (thus designed by Esaias, as heavenly Seraphim, to
procure them reverence from you, and by S. John, as earthly Creatures, to teach
you, how near to your selves, God has brought the means of your Salvation,
in his visible, and sensible, in his appliable, and apprehensible Ordinances)
are, in both places, (that of Esaias, and this in our Text) said to have six
wings; And six, to this use, in Esaias, with two they cover their face, with two
their feet, and with two they fly. They cover their face; Not all over; for
then, neither the Prophet there, nor the Evangelist here, could have known
them to have had these likenesses, and these proportions. The Ministers of God
are not so covered, so removed from us, as that we have not means to know
them. We know them by their face; that is, by that declaration which the Church
has given of them to us, in giving them their orders, and their power over us;
and we know them by their voice; that is, by their preaching of such doctrine,
as is agreeable to those Articles which we have sucked in from our infancy. The
Ministers face is not so covered with these wings, as that the people have no
means to know him; For his calling is manifest, and his doctrine is open to
proof and trial: But they are said to cover their face, because they dare not
look confidently, they cannot look fully upon the majesty of the mysteries of
God. The Evangelists themselves, and they that ground their doctrine upon them,
(all which together, as we have often said, make up these four persons, whom
Esaias calls Seraphim, and S. John inferior Creatures) have not seen all that
belongs to the nature and essence of God, not all in the attributes and
properties of God, not all in the decrees and purposes of God, no, not all in
the execution of those purposes and decrees; we do not know all that God
intends to do; we do not know all that God intends in that which he has done.
Our faces are covered from having seen the manner of the eternal generation
of the Son, or of the eternal proceeding of the Holy Ghost, or the manner of
the presence of Christ in the Sacrament. The Ministers of God are so far
open-faced toward you, as that you may know them, and try them by due means
to be such; and so far open-faced toward God, as that they have seen in him
and received from him, all things necessary for the salvation of your souls;
But yet, their faces are covered too; somethings concerning God, they have not
seen themselves, nor should go about to reveal, or teach to you.

And it is not only their faces that are covered, but their feet too. Their
covered faces are especially directed to God; denoting their modesty in
forbearing unrevealed mysteries: Their covered feet are especially directed to
you; They should not be curious in searching into all Gods actions, nor you in
searching into all theirs; Their ways, their actions, their lives, their
conversations should not be too curiously searched, too narrowly pryed into,
too severely interpreted by private men, as they are but such, because, in so
doing, the danger and the detriment is thus far likely to fall upon your
selves, that when the infirmities of the Minister, and your infirmities, that
is, their faults, and your uncharitable censures of their faults, meet
together, that may produce this ill effect, that personal matters may be cast
upon the ministerial function, and so the faults of a Minister be imputed to
the Ministry; and by such a prejudice, and conceit of one man's ill life, you
may lose the taste and comfort of his, and perchance of others good Doctrine
too. All that is covered shall be made manifest, says Christ; You shall know
all their faults, and you shall know them then, when it shall most confound
them, and least endanger you, when it shall aggravate their torment, and do you
no harm; that is, at the day of Judgment. In the mean time, because it might
hurt you to know their faults, God has covered their feet so far, as that he
would not have your looking upon their feet, divert you from depending upon
their mouths, as long as by his permission they sit in Moses chair, and
execute Gods Commission. If they employ their middle wings, which were ordained
for them to fly withal, if they do their duties in breaking the bread of
life, and dispensing the Word and Sacraments, and assisting the sick in body,
and sick in soul, though God have, in part, covered their faces, that is, not
imparted to them such gifts, or such an open sight into deep points, as
perchance you desire, yet he has covered their feet too; he has for your
sakes removed their faults from your survey, as you are but private men. Take
the benefit of their two middle wings, their willingness to assist you with
their labors, and in their other four wings, be not too curious, too
censorious, too severe, either their face-wings, that is, the depth of their
learning, or their feet-wings, that is, the holiness of their lives.

They have six wings to these several purposes; Singuli senas
and singuli senas, says our Text, every one of them has six wings. For, for
the first couple, the face-wings, howsoever some of the Ministers of God have
gifts above their fellows, howsoever they have gained the names of Doctores
Seraphici, and Doctores illuminati, (with which titles they abound in the Roman
Church) yet their faces are in part covered, they must not think they see all,
understand all; The learned of all has defects, even in matter of learning.
And for the second couple, the feet-wings, howsoever some may make shift for
the reputation of being more pure, more sanctified then their fellows, yet the
best of them all need a covering for their feet too; All their steps, all their
actions will not endure examination. But for the last couple, however there may
be some intimation given of a great degree of perfection in matter of
knowledge, and in matter of manners, (for in those creatures which are
mentioned in the first of Ezekiel. (which also signify the Ministers of God)
there are but four wings spoken of, so that there are no face-wings, they have
an abundant measure of learning and knowledge, And the Cherubim (which may also
signify the same persons) have but two wings, no covering upon face or feet;
to denote, that some may be without any remarkable exception in their doctrine,
and in their manners too) yet for the last couple, the two middle wings, by
which they fly, and address themselves to every particular soul that needs
their spiritual assistance, the Ministers of God are never in any figure but
represented. Better they wanted face-wings, and feet-wings, (discretion to
cover either their insufficiency in knowledge, or their infirmity in manners)
then that they should want their middle-wings, that is, a disposition to apply
themselves to their flock, and to be always ready to distribute the promises
of God, and the seals of his promises, the Word and Sacraments, amongst them.
And this may be conveniently intended in their wings.

Now as they were Alati, Oculi.
they were Oculati in our Text; They have eyes as well as wings; They fly, but
they know whither they fly. In the doctrine of Implicit Obedience in the Roman
Church, To believe as the Church believes, or as that Confessor which
understands not what the Church believes, makes you believe the Church
believes, In their doctrine of that which they call Blind Obedience, that is,
to pursue and execute any commandment of any superior, without any
consideration; In both these there are wings enough, but there are no eyes: They
fly from hence to Rome, and Roman Jurisdictions, and they fly over hither
again, after Statutes, after Proclamations, after Banishments iterated upon
them; So that here are wings enough, but they lack those eyes by which they
should discern between Religion and Rebellion, between a Traitor and a
Martyr. And to take our consideration from them, and reflect upon our selves,
They that fly high at matter of mystery, and leave out matter of edification,
They that fly over Sea for plat-formes of discipline, and leave out that Church
that bred them, They that fly close to the service of great men's affections and
purposes, and do the work of God coldly, and faintly, They may be Alati, but
they are not Oculati, They may fly high, and fly fast, and fly far, and fly
close in the ways of preferment, but they see not their end; Not only not the
end that they shall come to, but not the end that they are put upon; not only
not their own ends, but not their ends whose instruments they are. Those birds
whose eyes are cieled, and sowed up, fly highest; but they are made a prey: God
exposes not his servants to such dangers; He gives them wings, that is, means
to do their office; but eyes too, that is, discretion and religious wisdom
how to do it.

And this is that which they seem to need most, Pleni.
for their wings are limited, but their eyes are not; Six wings, but full of
eyes, says our Text. They must have eyes in their tongues; They must see, that
they apply not blindly and inconsiderately Gods gracious promises to the
presumptuous, nor his heavy judgments to the broken hearted. They must have
eyes in their ears; They must see that they harken neither to a superstitious
sense from Rome, nor to a seditious sense of Scriptures from the Separation.
They must have eyes in their hands; They must see that they touch not upon any
such benefits or rewards, as might bind them to any other master then to God
himself. They must have eyes in their eyes; spiritual eyes in their bodily
eyes; They must see that they make a charitable construction of such things as
they see other men do, and this is that fullness of eyes which our Text speaks
of.

But then especially, Intus.
says our Text, They were full of eyes Within: The fullness, the abundance of
eyes, that is, of providence and discretion in the Ministers of God, was
intimated before: In the 6. verse it was said, That they were full of eyes
before and behind: that is, circumspect and provident for all that were about
them, and committed to them. But all is determined and summed up in this, that
They were full of eyes within. For as there is no profit at all (none to me,
none to God) if I get all the world and lose mine own soul, so there is no
profit to me, if I win other men's souls to God, and lose mine own. All my
wings shall do me no good, all mine eyes before and behind shall do me no
good, if I have no prospect inward, no eyes within, no care of my particular
and personal safety.

And so we have done with our first general part, the Persons denoted in these
four creatures, and the duties of their ministry; in which we have therefore
insisted thus long, that having so declared and notified to you our duties, you
also might be the more willing to hear of your own duties, as well as ours,
and to join with us in this Open, and Incessant, and Total profession of your
Religion, which is the celebration of the Trinity in this acclamation, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which is, which was, and which is to come.

To come therefore now to the second Part, 2 Part.
and taking the four Evangelists to be principally intended here, but
secundarily the Preachers of the Gospel too, and not only they, but in a fair
extension and accommodation the whole Church of God, first we noted their
Ingenuitie and opennesse in the profession of their Religion, they did it
Dicentes, Saying, declaring, publishing, manifesting their devotion, without
any disguise, any modification.

In that song of the three Children in the Furnace, Dicentes.
O all ye works of the Lord, etc. there is nothing presented speechless: To
every thing that is there, there is given a tongue; Not only all those
creatures which have all a Being, but even Privations, Privations that have no
Being, that are nothing in themselves, (as the Night, and Darkness) are there
called upon to bless the Lord, to praise him, and magnify him for ever. But
toward the end of that song, you may see that service drawn into a narrower
compass; You may see to whom this speech, and declaration does principally
appertain; For after he had called upon Sun, and Moon, and Earth, and Sea,
and Fowls, and Fishes, and Plants, and Night, and Darkness, to praise the
Lord, to bless him, and magnify him for ever, Then he comes to O ye children
of men, Primogeniti Dei, Gods beloved creatures, his eldest sons, and
firstborn, in his intention; And then, Domus Israel, O ye house of Israel,
you whom God has not only made men, but Christian men, not only planted in
the World, but in the Church, not only endued with Reason, but inspired with
Religion: And then again, O ye Priests of the Lord, O ye Servants of the Lord,
those of Gods portion, not only in the Church, but of the Church, and
appointed by him to deal between him and other men: And then also, O ye
spirits and souls of the righteous, those whom those instruments of God had
powerfully and effectually wrought upon, upon those especially, those men,
those Christian men, those Priests, those sanctified men, upon those he calls
to bless the Lord, to praise him, and magnify him for ever. This obligation
the holy Ghost lays upon us all, that the more God does for us, the more we
should declare it to other men; God would have us tell him our sins; God would
have us tell other men his mercies; It was no excuse for Moses that he was of
uncircumcised lips; Exodus 5.12. Ier. 1.6.
No excuse for Jeremy, to say, O Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a
child. Credidi, propterea locutus sum, is David's form of argument, I believed,
and therefore I spoke. If thou do not love to speak of God, and of his
benefits, thou do not believe in God, nor that those benefits came from him.

Remember that when thou wast a child, and presented to God in Baptism, God
gave thee a tongue in other men's mouths, and enabled thee, by them, to
establish a covenant, a contract between thy soul, and him then. And therefore
since God spoke to thee, when thou could not hear him, in the faith of the
Church; since God heard thee when thou could not speak to him, in the mouth
of thy sureties; Since that God that created thee was Verbum, The Word, (for,
Dixit, and facta sunt, God spoke, and all things were made) Since that God that
redeemed thee was Verbum, The Word, (for The Word was made flesh) Since that
God that sanctified thee is Verbum, The Word, (for therefore S. Basil calls the
holy Ghost Verbum Dei, quia interpres Filii, He calls the holy Ghost the Word
of God, because as the Son is the Word, because he manifests the Father unto
us, so the holy Ghost is the Word, because he manifests the Son unto us, and
enables us to apprehend, and apply to our selves, the promises of God in him)
since God, in all the three Persons, is Verbum, The Word to thee, all of them
working upon thee, by speaking to thee, Be thou Verbum too, A Word, as God was;
A Speaking, and a Doing Word, to his glory, and the edification of others. If
the Lord open thy lips, (and except the Lord open them, it were better they
were luted with the clay of the grave) let it be to show forth his praise, and
not in blasphemous, not in scurrile, not in profane language. If the Lord open
thy hand, (and if the Lord open it not, better it were manacled with thy
winding sheet) let it be, as well to distribute his blessings, as to receive
them. Let thy mouth, let thy hand, let all the Organs of thy body, all the
faculties of thy soul, concur in the performance of this duty, intimated
here, and required of all Gods Saints, Vt dicant, That they speak, utter,
declare, publish the glory of God. For this is that Ingenuity, that Alacrity,
which constitutes our first Branch. And then the second is the Assiduity, the
constancy, the incessantnesse, They rest not day nor night.

But have the Saints of God no Vacation? Assiduitas.
do they never cease? nay, as the word imports, Requiem non habent, They have
no Rest. Beloved, God himself rested not, till the seventh day; be thou
content to stay for thy Sabbath, till thou may have an eternal one. If we
understand this, of rest merely, of bodily rest, the Saints of God are least
likely to have it, in this life; For, this life, is (to them especially, above
others) a business, and a perplexed business, a warfare, and a bloody warfare,
a voyage, and a tempestuous voyage. If we understand this rest to be Cessation,
Intermission, the Saints in heaven have none of that, in this service. It is a
labor that never wearies, to serve God there. As the Sun is no wearier now,
then when he first set out, six thousand years since; As that Angel, which God
has given to protect thee, is not weary of his office, for all thy
perversenesses, so, howsoever God deal with thee, be not thou weary of bearing
thy part, in his Quire here in the Militant Church. God will have low voices,
as well as high; God will be glorified De profundis, as well as In excelsis;
God will have his tribute of praise, out of our adversity, as well as out of
our prosperity. And that is it which is intimated, and especially intended in
the phrase which follows, Day and night. For, it is not only that those
Saints of God who have their Heaven upon earth, do praise him in the night;
according to that of S. Jerome, Sanctis ipse somnus, oration; and that of S.
Basil, Etiam somnia Sanctorum preces sunt; That holy men do praise God, and
pray to God in their sleep, and in their dreams; nor only that which David
speaks of, of rising in the night, and fixing stationary hours for prayer; But
even in the depth of any spiritual night, in the shadow of death, in the
midnight of afflictions and tribulations, God brings light out of darkness,
and gives his Saints occasion of glorifying him, not only in the dark, (though
it be dark) but from the dark, (because it is dark.) This is a way
unconceiveable by any, unexpressible to any, but those that have felt that
manner of Gods proceeding in themselves, That be the night what night it will,
be the oppression of what Extention, or of what Duration it can, all this
retards not their zeal to Gods service; Nay, they see God better in the dark,
then they did in the light; Their tribulation has brought them to a nearer
distance to God, and God to a clearer manifestation to them. And so, to their
Ingenuity, that they profess God, and their Religion openly, is added an
Assiduity, that they do it incessantly; And then also, an Integrity, a
Totality, that they do not depart with, nor modifie in any Article of their
Religion; which is entirely, and totally enwrapt in this acclamation of the
Trinity, (which is our third, and last Branch in this last Part) Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

For the Trinity it self, Trinitas.
it is Lux, but Lux inaccessibilis; It is light, for a child at Baptism
professes to see it; but then, it is so inaccessible a light, as that if we
will make natural reason our Medium, Psalm. 18.11.
to discern it by, it will fall within that of David, Posuit tenebras
latibulum suum, God has made darkness his secret places; God, as God, will be
seen in the creature; There, in the creature he is light; light accessible to
our reason; but God, in the Trinity, is open to no other light, then the light
of faith. To make representations of men, or of other creatures, we find two
ways; Statuaries have one way, and Painters have another: Statuaries do it by
Substraction; They take away, they pare off some parts of that stone, or that
timber, which they work upon, and then that which they leave, becomes like that
man, whom they would represent: Painters do it by Addition; Whereas the cloth,
or table presented nothing before, they add colors, and lights, and shadows,
and so there arises a representation. Sometimes we represent God by
Substraction, by Negation, by saying, God is that, which is not mortal, not
passible, not moveable: Sometimes we present him by Addition; by adding our
bodily lineaments to him, and saying, that God has hands, and feet, and ears,
and eyes; and adding our affections, and passions to him, and saying, that God
is glad, or sorry, angry, or reconciled, as we are. Some such things may be
done toward the representing of God, as God; But toward the expressing of the
distinction of the Persons in the Trinity, nothing.

Then when Abraham went up to the great sacrifice of his son, he left his
servants, Genesis 22.5.
and his Ass below: Though our natural reason, and humane Arts, serve to
carry us to the hill, to the entrance of the mysteries of Religion, yet to
possess us of the hill it self, and to come to such a knowledge of the
mysteries of Religion, as must save us, we must leave our natural reason, and
humane Arts at the bottom of the hill, and climb up only by the light, and
strength of faith. Dimitte me quia lucescit, Genesis 32.26.
says that Angel that wrastled with Jacob; Let me go, for it grows light. If
thou think to see me by daylight, says that Angel, thou will be deceived; If
we think to see this mystery of the Trinity, by the light of reason,
Dimittemus, we shall lose that hold which we had before, our natural
faculties, our reason will be perplexed, and infeebled, and our supernatural,
our faith not strengthened that way.

Those testimonies, and proofs of the Trinity, which are in the old Testament,
are many, and powerful in their direct line; But they are truly, for the most
part, of that nature, as that they are rather Illustrations, and Confirmations
to him that believed the Trinity before, then Arguments of themselves, able to
convince him that has no such Preconception. We that have been catechized, and
brought up in the knowledge of the Trinity, find much strength, and much
comfort, in that we find, in the first line of the Bible, that Bara Elohim,
Creavit Dii, Gods created heaven and earth; In this, that there is the name of
God in the plural, joined to a Verb of the singular number, we apprehend an
intimation of diverse persons in one God; We that believe the Trinity before,
find this, in that phrase, and form of speech; The Jews, which believe not the
Trinity, find no such thing. So when we find that plural phrase, Faciamus
hominem, That God says, Let us, us in the plural, make man, we are glad to
find such a plural manner of expressing God, by the Holy Ghost, as may
concur with that, which we believed before; that is, diverse persons in one
God. To the same purpose also is that of the Prophet Esaias, where God says,
Esaias 6.8.
Whom shall I send, or who shall go for us? There we discern a singularity,
one God, (Whom shall I send?) and a plurality of persons too, (Who shall go for
us?) But what man, that had not been catachized in that Doctrine before, would
have conceived an opinion, or established a faith in the Trinity, upon those
phrases in Moses, or in Esaias, without other evidence? Certainly, it was the
Divine purpose of God, to reserve and keep this mystery of the Trinity,
unrevealed for a long time, even from those, who were, generally, to have their
light, and instruction from his word; They had the Law, and the Prophets, and
yet they had no very clear notions of the Trinity. For, this is evident, that
in Trismegistus, and in Zoroaster, and in Plato, and some other Authors of that
Air, there seem to be clearer, and more literal expressings of the Trinity,
then are in all the Prophets of the old Testament. We take the reason to be,
that God reserved the full Manifestation of this mystery, for the dignifying,
and glorifying of his Gospel. And therefore it is enough that we know, that
they of the old Testament, were saved by the same faith in the Trinity, that we
are; How God wrought that faith in them, amongst whom he had established no
outward means for the imprinting of such a faith, let us not too curiously
inquire. Let us be content, to receive our light there, where God has been
pleased to give it; that is, in those places of the new Testament, which admit
no contradiction, nor disputation. As where Christ says, Mat. 28.19.
Go, and teach all Nations, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And where it is said, There are three that bear
witness in heaven; The Father, 1 John 5.7.
the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. There are Obumbrations
of the Trinity, in Nature, and Illustrations of the Trinity, in the old
Testament; but the Declaration, the Manifestation thereof, was reserved for the
Gospel.

Now, this place, this Text, is in both, It is in the old, and it is in the new
Testament; here, and in Esaias; And in both places, agreed by all Expositors, to
be a confession of the Trinity, in that threefold repetition, Holy, holy,
holy. Where (by the way) you may have use of this note; that in the first
place, (in the Prophet Esaias) we have a fair intimation, that that use of
Subalternation in the service of God, of that, which we have called Antiphones,
and Responsaries in the Church of God, (when in that service, some things are
said or sung by one side of the Congregation, and then answered by the other,
or said by one man, and then answered by the whole Congregation) that this
manner of serving God, has a pattern from the practice of the Triumphant
Church. For there, the Seraphim cried to one another, or (as it is in the
Original) this Seraphim to this, Holy, Holy, Holy; so that there was a voice
given, and an answer made, and a reply returned in this service of God. And as
the pattern is in the Triumphant Church for this holy manner of praising God,
so in the practice thereof, the Militant prescribes; for it has been always in
use. And therefore, that religious vehemence of Damascen, (speaking of this
kind of service in the Church in his time) may be allowed us, Hymnum dicemus,
etsi Daemones disrumpantur; How much soever it anger the devil, or his devilish
instruments of schism and sedition, we will serve God in this manner, with holy
cheerefulness, with music, with Antiphones, with Responsaries, of which we
have the pattern from the Triumphant, and the practice from the Primitive
Church.

Now as this Totality, and Integrity of their Religion which they profess,
first, with an Ingenuity (openly) and then, with an Assiduity, (incessantly)
has (as it were) this dilatation, this extention of God into three Persons,
(which is the character and specification of the Christian Religion; for no
Religion, but the Christian, ever inclined to a plurality of Persons in one
God) so has it also such a contracting of this infinite Power into that one
God, as could not agree with any other Religion then the Christian, in either
of those two essential circumstances; first, that that God should be
Omnipotent, and then, that he should be Eternal; The Lord God Almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come.

All the Heathen gods were ever subordinate to one another; Omnipotens.
That which one god could not, or would not do, another would, and could; And
this oftentimes, rather to anger another god, then to please the party. And
then there was a Surveyor, a Controller over them all, which none of them could
resist, nor entreat, which was their Fatum, their Destiny. And so, in these
subsidiary gods, these occasional gods, there could be no Omnipotence, no
Almightinesse. Our God is so Omnipotent, Almighty so, as that his Power has no
limitation but his own Will. Tertul.
Nihil impossible nisi quod non vult, He can do whatsoever he will do; And he
can do more then that; For he could have raised sons to Abraham, out of stones
in the street.

And as their gods were not Omnipotent, Aeternus.
so neither were they Eternal. They knew the history, the generation, the
pedigree of all their gods; They knew where they were born, and where they went
to school, (as Justin Martyr says, that Esculapius, and Apollo their gods of
Physic, learnt their Physic of Chiron; so that the Scholars were gods, and
their Masters none) and they knew where their gods were buried; They knew their
Parents, and their Uncles, their Wives and their Children, yea their Bastards,
and their Concubines; so far were they from being eternal gods; But if we
remit and slacken this consideration of Eternity (which is never to have had
beginning) and consider only Perpetuity (which is never to have end) these gods
were not capable of a perpetual Honor, an Honor that should never end. For,
we see that of those three hundred several Jupiters, which were worshipped in
the World, before Christ came, though the World abound at this day with
Idolatry, yet there is not one of those Idols, not one of those three hundred
Jupiters celebrated with any solemnity, no, not known in any obscure corner of
the World. They were mortal before they were Gods; They are dead in their
Persons: and they were mortal when they were Gods; They are dead in their
Worship. In respect of Eternity (which is necessary in a God) Perpetuity is but
Mobilis Imago (as Plato calls it) a faint and transitory shadow of Eternity; and
Pindarus makes it less; Idolum Aeternitatis; Perpetuity is but an Idol
compared to eternity; And, an Idol is nothing, says the Apostle. Our souls
have a blessed perpetuity, our souls shall no more see an end, then God, that
has no Beginning; and yet our souls are very far from being eternal. But
those gods are so far from being eternal, as that, considered as Gods (that
is, celebrated with Divine worship) they are not perpetual. Psalm. 48.14. Psalm
102.11.
But God is our God for ever and ever; ever, without beginning; and ever,
without end. My days are like a shadow that fades, and I am withered like
grass; but thou O Lord do remain for ever, and thy remembrance from
generation to generation; It is a remaining, and it is a remembrance; which
words denote a former being. So that God, our God, and only he, is eternal.

To conclude all, with that which must be the conclusion of all at last, this
Eternity of our God is expressed here in a phrase which designs and presents
the last Judgment, that is, which was, and is, and is to come. For, though it
be Qui fuit, Which was, and Qui est, Which is, yet it is not Qui futurus, Which
is to be; but Qui venturus, Which is to come; that is, to come to Judgment; as
it is in diverse other places of this Book, Qui venturus, Which is to come. For,
though the last judiciary Power, the final Judgment of the World, be to be
executed by Christ, as he is the Son of Man, visibly, apparently in that
nature, yet Christ is therein as a Delegate of the Trinity; It is in the virtue
and power of that Commission, Data est mihi omnis potestas; He has all Power,
but that Power that he has as the Son of man, is given him. For, as the
Creation of the World was, so the Judgment of the World shall be the Act of the
whole Trinity. For if we consider the second Person in the Trinity, in both his
Natures, as he redeemed us, God and Man, so it cannot be said of him, that He
was; that is, that he was eternally; for there was a time, when that God, was
not that man; when that Person, Christ, was not constituted. And therefore this
word, in our Text, which was, (which is also true of the rest) is not
appropriated to Christ, but intended of the whole Trinity. So that it is the
whole Trinity that is to come, To come to Judgment.

And therefore, let us reverently embrace such provisions, and such assistances
as the Church of God has ordained, for retaining and celebrating the Trinity,
in this particular contemplation, as they are to come to Judgment. And let us
at least provide so far, to stand upright in that Judgment, as not to deny,
nor to dispute the Power, or the Persons of those Judges. A man may make a pety
larceny high treason so; If being called in question for that lesser offense,
he will deny that there is any such Power, any such Sovereign, any such King,
as can call him in question for it, he may turn his whipping into a
quartering. At that last Judgment, we shall be arraigned for not clothing,
not visiting, not harboring the poor; For, our not giving is a taking away;
our withholding, is a withdrawing; our keeping to our selves, is a stealing
from them. But yet, all this is but a pety larceny, in respect of that high
treason, of infidelity, of denying or doubting of the distinct Persons of the
holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity. To believe in God, one great, one
universal, one infinite power, does but distinguish us from beasts; For there
are no men that do not acknowledge such a Power, or that do not believe in it,
if they acknowledge it; Even they that acknowledge the devil to be God,
believe in the devil. But that which distinguishes man from man, that which
only makes his Immortality a blessing, (for, even Immortality is part of their
damnation that are damned, because it were an ease, it were a kind of pardon to
them to be mortal, to be capable of death, though after millions of
generations) is, to conceive aright of the Power of the Father, of the Wisdom
of the Son, of the Goodness of the Holy Ghost; Of the Mercy of the Father, of
the Merits of the Son, of the Application of the Holy Ghost; Of the Creation of
the Father, of the Redemption of the Son, of the Sanctification of the Holy
Ghost. Without this, all notions of God are but confused, all worship of God is
but Idolatry, all confession of God is but Atheism; For so the Apostle argues,
When you were without Christ, you were without God. Without this, all moral
virtues are but diseases; Liberality is but a popular bait, and not a benefit,
not an alms; Chastity is but a castration, and an impotency, not a temperance,
not mortification; Active valor is but a fury, whatsoever we do, and passive
valor is but a stupidity, whatsoever we suffer. Natural apprehensions of God,
though those natural apprehensions may have much subtilty, Voluntary elections
of a Religion, though those voluntary elections may have much singularity,
Moral directions for life, though those moral directions may have much
severity, are all frivolous and lost, if all determine not in Christianity, in
the Notion of God, so as God has manifested and conveyed himself to us; in God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, whom this day we celebrate, in
the Ingenuity, and in the Assiduity, and in the Totality, recommended in this
text, and in this acclamation of the text, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come.

SERMON. XLV. PREACHED UPON ALL SAINTS DAY.
APOC. 7.2, 3. And I saw another Angel ascending from the East, which had the
seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels, to
whom power was given to hurt the Earth, and the Sea, saying, Hurt ye not the
Earth, neither the Sea, neither the Trees, till we have sealed the servants of
our God in their foreheads.


THe solemnity and festival with which the sons of the Catholic Church of
God celebrate this day, is much mistaken, even by them who think themselves
the only Catholics, and celebrate this day, with a devotion, at least near
to superstition in the Church of Rome. For, they take it (for the most part) to
be a festival instituted by the Church, in contemplation of the Saints in
heaven only; and so carry and employ all their devotions this day, upon
consideration of those Saints, and invocation of them only. But the
institution of this day, had this occasion. The heathen Romans, who could not
possibly house all their gods in several Temples, they were so over-many,
according to their Law, Deos frugi colunto, to serve God as cheap as they
could, made one Temple for them all, which they called Pantheon, To all the
Gods. This Temple Boniface the Pope begd of the Emperor Phocas; (And yet, (by
the way) this was some hundreds of years after the Donation of the Emperor
Constantine, by which the Bishops of Rome pretend all that to be theirs; surely
they could not find this Patent, this Record, this Donation of Constantine,
then when Boniface begd this Temple in Rome, this Pantheon of the Emperor) And
this Temple, formerly the Temple of all their gods, that Bishop consecrated to
the honor of all the Martyrs, of all the Saints of that kind. But after him,
another Bishop of the same sea, enlarged the consecration, and accompanied it
with this festival, which we celebrate to day, in honor of the Trinity, and
Angels, and Apostles, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and Saints, and all the
elect children of God. So that it is truly a festival, grounded upon that
Article of the Creed, The Communion of Saints, and unites in our devout
contemplation, The Head of the Church, God himself, and those two noble
constitutive parts thereof, The Triumphant, and the Militant. And, accordingly,
has the Church applied this part of Scripture, to be read for the Epistle of
this day, to show, that All Saints day has relation to all Saints, both living
and dead; for those servants of God, which are here in this text, sealed in
their foreheads, are such (without all question) as receive that Seal here,
here in the militant Church. And therefore, as these words, so this festival,
in their intendiment, that applied these words to this festival, is also of
Saints upon Earth.

This day being then the day of the Communion of Saints, and this Scripture
being received for the Epistle of this universal day, that exposition will
best befit it, which makes it most universal. And therefore, with very good
authority, such as the expositions of this book of the Revelation can receive,
(of which book, no man will undertake to the Church, that he has found the
certain, and the literal sense as yet, nor is sure to do it, Irenaeus.
till the prophecies of this book be accomplished) (for prophetiae ingenium,
ut in obscuro delitescat, donec impleatur, It is the nature of prophecy to be
secret, till it be fulfilled, Dan. 12.4.
And therefore Daniel was bid to shut up the words, and to seal the book even
to the time of the end, that is, to the end of the prophecy) with good
authority, I say, we take that number of the servants of God, which are said to
be sealed in the fourth verse of this Chapter, which is one hundred forty four
thousand, and that multitude which none could number, of all Nations, which are
mentioned in the ninth verse, to be intended of one and the same company; both
these expressions denote the same persons. In the fourth verse of the
fourteenth Chapter, this number of one hundred forty four thousand is applied
to Virgins, but is intended of all Gods Saints; for every holy soul is a
virgin. And then this name of Israel, which is mentioned in the fourth verse of
this Chapter, (That there were so many sealed of the house of Israel) is often
in Scriptures applied to spiritual Israelites, to Believers, (for every
faithful soul is an Israelite) so that this number of one hundred forty four
thousand Virgins, and one hundred forty four thousand Israelites, which is not
a certain number, but a number expressing a numberless multitude, this
number, and that numberless multitude spoken of after, of all Nations, which
none could number, is all one; and both making up the great and glorious body
of all Saints, import and present thus much in general, That howsoever God
inflict great and heavy calamities in this world, to the shaking of the best
moral and Christianly constancies and consciences, yet all his Saints being
eternally known by him, shall be sealed by him, that is, so assured of his
assistance, by a good using of those helps which he shall afford them, in the
Christian Church, intended in this sealing on the forehead, that those
afflictions shall never separate them from him, nor frustrate his
determination, nor disappoint his gracious purpose upon them, all them, this
multitude, which no man could number.

To come then to the words themselves, Divisio.
we see the safety, and protection of the Saints of God, and his children, in
the person and proceeding of our Protector, in that it is in the hands of an
Angel, (I saw another Angel) And an Angel of that place, that came from the
East; The East, that is the fountain of all light and glory, (I saw another
Angel come from the East) And as the Word does naturally signify, (and is so
rendered in this last Translation) Ascending from the East, that is, growing and
increasing in strength; After that we shall consider our assurance in the
commission and power of this Angel, He had the seaele of the living God; And
then in the execution of this Commission; In which we shall see first, who our
enemies were; They were also Angels, (This Angel cried to other Angels) able to
do much by nature, because Angels; Then we shall see their number, they were
four Angels, made stronger by joining (This Angel cried to those four
Angels.) And besides their malignant nature, and united concord, (two shrewd
disadvantages, mischievous and many) They had a power, a particular, an
extraordinary power given them, at that time, to do hurt, (four Angels, to
whom power was given to hurt) And to do general, universal hurt, (power to
hurt the Earth, and the Sea.) After all this we shall see this Protector,
against these enemies, and their Commission, execute his, first by declaring
and publishing it, (He cried with a loud voice) And then lastly, what his
Commission was; It was, to stay those four Angels, for all their Commission,
from hurting the Earth, and the Sea, and the Trees. But yet, this is not for
ever; It is but till the servants of God were sealed in the forehead; that is,
till God had afforded them such helps, as that by a good use of them they
might subsist; which, if they did not, for all their sealing in the forehead,
this Angel will deliver them over to the other four destroying Angels. Of
which sealing, that is, conferring of Grace and helps against those spiritual
enemies, there is a pregnant intimation, that it is done by the benefit of the
Church, and in the power of the Church, which is no singular person, in that,
upon the sudden, the person and the number is varied in our text; and this
Angel, which when he is said to ascend from the East, and to cry with a loud
voice, is still a singular Angel, one Angel, yet when he comes to the act of
sealing in the forehead, to the dispensing of Sacraments, and sacramental
assistances, he does that as a plural person, he represents more, the whole
Church, and therefore says here, Stay, hurt nothing, Till we, we have sealed
the servants of our, our God in their foreheads. And by all these steps must we
pass through this garden of flowers, this orchard of fruits, this abundant
Text.

First then, Man being compassed with a cloud of witnesses of his own
infirmities, Angelus.
and the manifold afflictions of this life, (for, Dies diei eructat verbum,
Psalm. 19.2.
Day unto day utters the same, and night unto night teaches knowledge, The
bells tell him in the night, and fame tells him in the day, that he himself
melts and drops away piecemeal in the departing of parents, and wife, and
children out of this world, yea he hears daily of a worse departing, he hears
of the defection, and backsliding of some of his particular acquaintance in
matter of religion, or of their stiffness and obduration in some course of sin
(which is the worse consumption) Dies diei eructat, every day makes him
learneder then other in this sad knowledge, And he knows withal, Quod cuiquam
accidere potest, cuivis potest, that any of their cases may be his case too)
Man that is compassed with such a cloud of such witnesses, had need of some
light to show him the right way, and some strength to enable him to walk safely
in it. And this light and strength is here proposed in the assistance of an
Angel. Which being first understood of Angels in general, affords a great
measure of comfort to us, because the Angels are seduli animae pedissequae,
Bern.
faithful and diligent attendants upon all our steps. They do so, they do
attend the service and good of man, because it is illorum optimum, It is the
best thing that Angels (as Angels) can do, to do so: For evermore it is best
for every thing to do that for which it was ordained and made; and they were
made Angels for the service and assistance of man. Bern.
Vnum tui and Angeli optimum est; Man and Angels have one and the same thing in
them, which is better then any thing else that they have; Nothing has it but
they, and both they have it. Deus nihil sui optimum habet; unum optimum totus;
It is not so with God; Id^^
God has nothing in him that is Best; but he is altogether one entire Best.
But Man and Angels have one thing common to them both, which is the best thing
that naturally either of them has, that is, Reason, understanding, knowledge,
discourse, consideration. Angels and Men have grace too, that is infinitely
better then their Reason; but though Grace be the principal in the nature and
dignity thereof, yet it is but accessory to an Angel, or to man; Grace is not
in their nature at first, but infused by God, not to make them Angels and Men,
but to make them good Angels, and good men. This very reason then, which is
Illorum optimum, The best thing that Angels, as Angels, naturally have, teaches
them, that the best thing that they can do, is the performance of that for
which they were made. And then howsoever they were made spirits for a more
glorious use, to stand in the presence of God, and to enjoy the fullness of
that contemplation, yet he made his spirits Angels, for the love which he had
to be with the sons of men. Sufficit illis, Bern.
et pro magno habeant, Let this content the Angels, and let them magnify God
for this, Quod cum spiritus sint condition, ex gratia facti sunt Angeli, That
whereas by nature they are but spirits, (and the devil is so) by favor and by
office they are made Angels, messengers from God to man.

Now as the Angels are not defective in their best part, their Reason, and
therefore do their office in assisting us, so also let us exalt our best part,
our Reason too, to reverence them with a care of doing such actions only as
might not be unfit for their presence. Both Angels and we have the Image of God
imprinted in us; the Angels have it not in summo, though they have it in tuto;
They have it not in the highest degree, (for so Christ only is the Image of
the invisible God) but they have it in a deep impression, Colos. 1.15.
so as they can neither lose it, nor deface it. We have this Image of God so as
that we cannot lose it, but we may, and do deface it; Vri potest, non exuri;
The Devil has this Image in him, Bern.
and it cannot be burnt out in hell; for it is imprinted in the very natural
faculties of the soul. But if we consider how many waters beat upon us in this
world to wash off this Image, how many rusty and habitual sins gnaw upon us,
to eat out this Image, how many files pass over our souls in calamities, and
afflictions, in which though God have a purpose, Resculpere imaginem, to
re-engrave, to refresh, to polish this Image in us, August.
by those corrections, yet the devil has a harsh file too, that works a
murmuring, a comparing of our sins with other men's sins, and our
punishments with other men's punishments, and at last, either a denying of
Providence, (That things so unequally carried cannot be governed by God) or a
wilful renouncing of it in Desperation, That his Providence cannot be
resisted, and therefore it is all one what we do, If we consider this, we
had need look for Assistants.

Let us therefore look first to that which is best in us naturally, that is,
Reason; For if we lose that, our Reason, our Discourse, our Consideration, and
sink into an incapable and barren stupidity, there is no footing, no
subsistence for grace. All the virtue of Corn is in the seed; but that will
not grow in water, but only in the earth: All the good of man, considered
supernaturally, is in grace; but that will not grow in a washy soul, in a
liquid, in a watery, and dissolute, and scattered man. Grace grows in reason;
In that man, and in that mind, that considers the great treasure, what it is
to have the Image of God in him, naturally; for even that is our earnest of
supernatural perfection. And this Image of God, even in the Angels, being
Reason, and the best act of rectified Reason, The doing of that for which they
were made, It is that which the Angels are naturally inclined to do, to be
always present for the assistance of man; for therefore they are Angels. And
since they have a joy at the Conversion of a sinner, and every thing affects
joy, and therefore they endeavor our Conversion, yea, since they have an
increase of their knowledge by being about us, (for, S. Paul says, That he was
made a Preacher of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.10.
to the intent that Angels might know, by the Church, the manifold wisdom of
God) And every thing affects knowledge, these Saints of God upon earth,
intended in our Text, might justly promise themselves a strong and a blessed
comfort, and a happy issue in all tribulations, by this Scripture, if there
were no more intended in it, but only the assistance of Angels; I saw an Angel.

But our security of deliverance is in a safer, Angelus, Christus.
and a stronger hand then this; not in these Ministerial, and Missive Angels
only; but in his that sends them, yea in his that made them; Col. 1.16, 17.
By whom, and for whom, they, and the Thrones, and Dominions, and
Principalities, and Powers, and all things were created, and in whom they
consist. For, as the name of Angel is attributed to Christ, Mal. 3.1.
Angelus Testamenti, The Angel of the Covenant; And many of those miraculous
passages in the deliverances of Israel out of Egypt, which were done by the
second Person of the Trinity, by Christ, in Exodus, are by Moses there, and in
the abridgement of that story, Acts 7.
by Stephen after, attributed to Angels, So in this Text, this Angel, which
does so much for Gods Saints, is, not inconveniently, by many Expositors, taken
to be our Savior Christ himself. And will any man doubt of performance of
conditions in him? Will any man look for better security then him, who puts
two, and two such into the band, Christ, and Jesus; An anointed King, able, an
actual Savior, willing to discharge, not his, but our debt? He is a double
Person, God and Man; He ingages a double pawn, the old, and the new Testament,
the Law, and the Gospel; and you may be bold to trust him, that has paid so
well before; since you see a performance of the Prophesies of the old
Testament, in the free and glorious preaching of the Gospel, trust also in a
performance of the promises of the Gospel, in timely deliverances in this life,
and an infallible, and eternal reposednesse, in the life to come. He took
our nature, that he might know our infirmities experimentally; He brought down
a better nature, that he might recover us, restore us powerfully, effectually;
and that he might be sure to accomplish his work, he brought more to our
reparation, then to our first building, The Godhead wrought as much in our
Redemption, as in our Creation, and the Manhood more; for it began but then.
And to take from us all doubt of his power, or of his will in our deliverance,
he has taken the surest way of giving satisfaction, Esaias 53.4.
He has paid beforehand; Vere tulit, He has truly born all our infirmities,
He has, already; And with his stripes are we healed; we that are here now, are
healed by his stripes received sixteen hundred years since. Apoc. 13.8.
Nay, he was Occisus ab origin, The Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world; That day that the frame of the world was fully set up in the making of
man, That day that the fairest piece of that frame fell down again, in the fall
of Adam, That day that God repaired this ruin again, in the promise of a
Messiah, (all which we take ordinarily to have fallen in one day, the sixth day)
that day, in that promise, was this Lamb slain, and all the debts not only of
our forefathers, and ours, but of the last man, that shall be found alive at
the last day, were then paid, so long beforehand.

This security then, Angelus Ecclesiae.
for our deliverance and protection, we have in this Angel in our Text, (I saw
an Angel) as this Angel is Christ; but yet we have also another security, more
immediate, and more appliable to us. As men that lend money in the course of
the world, have a desire to have a servant in the band with the Master, not
that they hope for the money from him, but that they know better how to call
upon him, and how to take hold of him: so besides this general assistance of
Angels, and besides this all sufficiency of the Angel of the Covenant, Christ
Jesus, we have, for our security, in this Text, (I saw an Angel) the servants
of Christ too; This Angel is the Minister of his Word, the Administrer of his
Sacraments, the Mediator between Christ and Man, He is this Angel, as S. John,
so often in the Revelation, and the Holy Ghost in other places of Scripture,
styles them; This Angel is indeed, the whole frame, and Hierarchy of the
Christian Church. For though this Angel be called in this text The Angel, in
the singular, yet, (to make use of one note by Anticipation now, though in our
distribution of the Branches, we reserved it to the end, because it fits
properly our present consideration) though this Angel be named in the singular,
and so may seem to be restrained to Christ alone, yet, we see, the Office,
when it comes to execution after, is diffused, and there are more in the
Commission; for those phrases, that We, We may seal, the servants of Our,
Our God, have a plurality in them, a consent, a harmony, and imply a
Congregation, and do better agree with the Ministry of the Church, then with
the Person of Christ alone.

So then, to let go none of our assistants, our sureties, our safety is in the
Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, radically, fundamentally, meritoriously;
It is in the ministry of the Angels of heaven invisibly; but it is in the
Church of God, and in the power of his Ministers there, manifestly, sensibly,
discernibly; Mal. 2.7.
They should seek the Law at the Priests mouth, (They should, and therefore
they are to blame that do not, but fly to private expositions.) But why should
they? Quia angelus domini exercituum, (as it follows there) Because the Priest
is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. Yea, the Gospel which they preach, is above
all messages, which an Angel can bring of himself; Gal. 1.8.
If an Angel from heaven preach otherwise unto you, then we have preached, let
him be accursed. The ministry of celestial Angels is inferior to the
ministry of the Ecclesiastical; The Gospel (which belongs to us) is truly
Euangelium, the good Ministry of good Angels, the best ministry of the best
Angels; for though we compare not with those Angels in nature, we compare with
them in office; though our offices tend to the same end (to draw you to God)
yet they differ in the way; and though the service of those Angels, enlighten
your understanding, and assist your belief too, yet in the ministry of these
Angels in the Church, there is a blessed fulfilling, and verification of those
words, Now is salvation nearer, Romans 13.11.
then when we believed. You believe, because those celestial Angels have
wrought invisibly upon you, and dispersed your clouds, and removed impediments.
You believe, because the great Angel Christ Jesus, has left his history, his
action, and passion written for you; and that is a historical faith. But yet
salvation is nearer to you, in having all this applied to you, by them, who are
like you, men, and there, where you know how to fetch it, the Church; That as
you believe by reading the Gospels at home, that Christ died for the world, So
you may believe, by hearing here, that he dyed for you. This is Gods plenteous
Redemption, Quod linguam meam assumsit in opus suum; Bernar.
That having so great a work to do, as the salvation of souls, he would make
use of my tongue; And being to save the world by his word, that I should speak
that word. Docendo vos, quod per se facilius and suavius posset, That he calls
me up hither, to teach you that which he could teach you better, and sooner, at
home, by his Spirit; Indulgentia ejus est, non indigentia, It is the largeness
of his mercy toward you, not any narrowness in his power that he needs me.
And so have you this Angel in our text, in all the acceptations, in which our
Expositors have delivered him; It is Christ, It is the Angels of heaven, It is
the Ministry of the Gospel; And this Angel, whosoever, whatsoever, S. John
saw come from the East, (I saw an Angel come from the East) which was our
second Branch, and falls next into consideration.

This addition is intended for a particular addition to our comfort; Ab orient.
it is a particular endowment, or enlargement of strength and power in this
Angel, that he comes from the East. If we take it, (to go the same way that we
went before) first of natural Angels, even the Western Angels, Qui habuere
occasum, Those Angels which have had their Sunset, their fall, they came from
the East too; Quomodo cecidisti decoelo, Lucifer, filius orientis? Esaias 14 12.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, the Son of the morning? He had his
begetting, his Creation in the East, in the light, and there might have stayed,
for any necessity of falling, that God laid upon him. Take the Angel of the
text to be the Angel of the Covenant Christ Jesus, and his name is The East; he
cannot be known, he cannot be said to have any West. Zech. 6.12.
Ecce vir, Oriens nomen ejus, (so the vulgat reads that place) Behold the Man,
whose name is the East; you can call him nothing else; for so, the other
Zachary, the Zachary of the New Testament calls him too, Luke 1.78.
Per viscera misericordiae, Through the tender bowels of his mercy, Visitavit
nos Oriens, The East, the day spring from on high has visited us; And he was
derived a Patre luminum, He came from the East, begotten from all eternity of
the Father of lights, John 16.28.
I came out from the Father, and came into the world. Take this Angel to be the
Preacher of the Gospel, literally, really, the Gospel came out of the East,
where Christ lived and dyed; and Typically, figuratively, Paradise, which also
figured the place, to which the Gospel is to carry us, Heaven, that also was
planted in the East; and therefore S. Basil assigns that for the reason, why
in the Church service we turn to the East when we pray, Quia antiquam
requirimus patriam, We look toward our ancient country, where the Gospel of
our salvation was literally acted, and accomplished, and where Heaven, the end
of the Gospel, was represented in Paradise. Every way the Gospel is an Angel of
the East.

But this is that which we take to be principally intended in it, That as the
East is the fountain of light, so all our illumination is to be taken from the
Gospel. Spread we this a little thinner, and we shall better see through it.
If the calamities of the world, or the heavy consideration of thine own sins,
have benumbed and benighted thy soul in the vale of darkness, and in the
shadow of death; If thou think to wrestle and bustle through these strong
storms, and thick clouds, with a strong hand; If thou think thy money, thy
bribes shall conjure thee up stronger spirits then those that oppose thee; If
thou seek ease in thy calamities, that way to shake and shipwreck thine
enemies; In these cross winds, in these countermines, (to oppress as thou art
oppressed) all this is but a turning to the North, to blow away and scatter
these sadnesses, with a false, an illusory, and a sinful comfort. If thou
think to ease thy self in the contemplation of thine honor, thine offices;
thy favor, thy riches, thy health, this is but a turning to the South, the
Sunshine of worldly prosperity. If thou sink under thy afflictions, and can
not find nourishment (but poison) in Gods corrections, nor justice (but
cruelty) in his judgments, nor mercy (but slacknesse) in his forbearance till
now; If thou suffer thy soul to set in a cloud, a dark cloud of ignorance of
Gods providence and proceedings, or in a darker, of diffidence of his
performance toward thee, this is a turning to the West, and all these are
perverse and awry. But turn to the East, and to the Angel that comes from
thence, The Ministry of the Gospel of Christ Jesus in his Church; It is true,
thou may find some dark places in the Scriptures; Basil.
and, Est silentii species obscuritas, To speak darkly and obscurely is a
kind of silence, I were as good not be spoken to, as not be made to understand
that which is spoken, yet fix thy self upon this Angel of the East, the
preaching of the Word, the Ordinance of God, and thine understanding shall be
enlightened, and thy belief established, and thy conscience thus far
unburthened, that though the sins which thou have done, cannot be undone, yet
neither shall thou be undone by them; There, where thou art afraid of them, in
judgment, they shall never meet thee; but as in the round frame of the World,
the farthest West is East, where the West ends, the East begins, So in thee,
(who art a World too) thy West and thy East shall join, and when thy Sun, thy
soul comes to set in thy deathbed, the Son of Grace shall suck it up into
glory.

Our Angel comes from the East, Angelus Ascendens.
(a denotation of splendour, and illustration of understanding, and conscience)
and there is more, he comes Ascending, (I saw an Angel ascend from the East)
that is, still growing more clear, and more powerful upon us. Take the Angel
here of natural Angels; 1 Samuel 28.13.
and then, when the Witch of Endor (though an evil Spirit appeared to her) yet
saw him appear so, Ascending, she attributes that glory to it, I see gods
Ascending out of the earth. Take the Angel to be Christ, and then, his
Ascension was Foelix clausula totius itinerarii, Bernar.
The glorious shutting up of all his progress; and though his descending from
Heaven to earth, and his descending from earth to hell gave us our title, his
Ascending, by which he carried up our flesh to the right hand of his Father,
gave us our possession; His Descent, his humiliation gave us Ius ad rem, but
his Ascension Ius in re. But as this Angel is the Ministry of the Gospel, God
gave it a glorious ascent in the Primitive Church, Psalm. 19.6.
when as this Sun Exultavit ut gigas ad currendam viam, ascended quickly beyond
the reach of Heretics wits, and Persecutors swords, and as glorious an ascent
in the Reformation, when in no long time, the number of them that had forsaken
Rome was as great, as of them that staid with her.

Now to give way to this ascent of this Angel in thy self, make the way
smooth, and make thy soul souple; find thou a growth of the Gospel in thy
faith, and let us find it in thy life. It is not in thy power to say to this
Angel, as Joshua said to the Sun, Siste, Josh. 10.12.
stand still; It will not stand still; If thou find it not ascending, it
descends; If thy comforts in the Gospel of Christ Jesus grow not, they decay;
If thou profit not by the Gospel, thou losest by it; If thou live not by it,
(nothing can redeem thee) thou dyest by it. We speak of going up and down a
staire; it is all one staire; of going to, and from the City; it is all one
way; of coming in, and going out of a house; it is all one door: So is there
a savor of life unto life, and a savor of death unto death in the Gospel; but
it is all one Gospel. If this Angel of the East have appeared unto thee, (the
light of the Gospel have shined upon thee) and it have not ascended in thee, if
it have not made thee wiser and wiser, and better and better too, thou have
stopped that light, vexed, grieved, quenched that Spirit; for the natural
progress of this Angel of the East is to ascend; the natural motion and
working of the Gospel is, to make thee more and more confident in Gods
deliverance, less and less subject to rely upon the weak helps, and
miserable comforts of this world. To this purpose this Angel ascends, that is,
proceeds in the manifestation of his Power, and of his readiness to succor
us. Of his Power in this, That he has the seals of the living God; (I saw an
Angel ascending from the East, which had the seal of the living God) which is
our next Consideration.

Of the living God. The gods of the Nations are all dead gods; Sigillum Dei
viventis.
either such Gods as never had life, (stones, and gold and silver) or such gods
at best, as were never gods till they were dead; for men that had benefited the
world, in any public and general invention, or otherwise, were made gods
after their deaths; which was a miserable deification, a miserable godhead that
grew out of corruption, a miserable eternity that begun at all, but especially
that begun in death; and they were not gods till they dyed. But our Angel had
the Seal of the living God, that is, Power to give life to others. Now, if we
seek for this seal in the natural Angels, they have it not; for this Seal
is some visible thing whereby we are assisted to salvation, and the Angels have
no such. They are made keepers of this seal sometimes, but permanently they
have it not. This Seal of comfort was put into an Angels hand, Ezekiel. 9.4.
when he was to set a mark upon the foreheads of all them that mourned; He had
a visible thing, Ink, to mark them withal. But it was not said to him, Vade
and signa omnes Creaturas, Go, and set this mark upon every Creature, as it
was to the Minister of the Gospel, Go, and preach to every Creature. Mark
16.15.
If we seek this seal in the great Angel, the Angel of the Covenant, Christ
Jesus: It is true he has it, for, Omnis potestas d^ta, All power is given unto
me, in Heaven, and in earth; and, Omne judicium, Mat. 28.18. John 5.22.
The Father has committed all judgment to the Son; Christ, as the Son of man
executes a Judgment, and has a Power, which he has not but by gift, by
Commission, by virtue of this Seal, from his Father. But, because it is not
only so in him, That he has the Seal of the living God, but, He is this
Seal himself, Colos. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. John 6.27.
(He is the Image of the invisible God; He is the brightness of his glory,
and the express Image of his Person) It is not only his Commission that is
sealed, but his Nature, He himself is sealed, (Him has God the Father sealed)
since, I say, natural Angels though they have sometimes this seal, they have
it not always, they have not a Commission from God, to apply his mercies to
man, by any ordinary and visible means, since the Angel of the Covenant,
Christ Jesus has it, but has it so, as that he is it too, the third sort of
Angels, the Church-Angels, the Ministers of the Gospel, are they, who most
properly can be said to have this Seal by a fixed and permanent possession,
and a power to apply it to particular men, in all emergent necessities,
according to the institution of that living God, whose seal it is.

Now the great power which is given by God, in giving this seal to these
Angels, has a lively representation (such as a shadow can give) in the history
of Joseph. Pharaoh says to him, Thou shall be over my house, and over all the
land of Egypt, Genesis 41.40.
(steward of the Kings house, and steward of the Kingdom) And at thy word
shall all my people be armed, (Constable and Marshall too) and to invest him in
all these, and more, Pharaoh gave him his ring, his seal; not his seal only
to those several patents to himself, but the keeping of that seal for the
good of others; This temporal seal of Pharoh was a representation of the
seal of the living God. But there is a more express type of it in Exodus:
Thou shall grave (says God to Moses) upon a plate of pure gold, Lxod. 28.36.
as Signets are graved, Holiness to the Lord; and it shall be upon the
forehead of Aaron; What to do? That the people may be accepted of him. There
must be a holiness to the Lord, and that presented by Aaron the Priest to God,
that the people may be acceptable to the Lord; So that this seal of the living
God, in these Angels of our text, is, The Sacraments of the New Testament, and
the Absolution of sins, by which (when Gods people come to a Holiness to the
Lord, in a true repentance, and that that holiness, that is, that repentance,
is made known to Aaron, to the Priest, and he presents it to the Lord) that
Priest, his Minister seals to them, in those his Ordinances, Gods acceptance
of this degree of holiness, he seals this Reconciliation between God and his
people. And a contract of future concurrence, with his subsequent grace. This
is the power given by God to this ascending Angel; and we extend that no
farther, but hasten to his haste, his readiness to succor us; in which, we
proposed for the first consideration, That this Angel of light manifested and
discovered to us, who our enemies were: ( He cried out to them who were ready
to do mischief, with a loud voice) so that we might hear him, and know them.

Though in all Court-cases it be not good to take knowledge of enemies,
Manifestat inimicos.
(many times that is better forborne) yet in all cases, it is good to know
them. Especially in our case in the Text, Ephesians. 6.12.
because our enemies intended here, are of themselves, Princes of darkness;
They can multiply clouds, and disguisings, their kingdom is in the darkness,
Sagittant in obscuro, Psalm. 11.2: Psalm. 143.3.
They shoot in the dark, (I am wounded with a tentation, as with the plague,
and I know not whence the arrow came) Collocavit me in obscuris, The enemy has
made my dwelling darkness, I have no window that lets in light, but then this
Angel of light shows me who they are.

But then, Inimici, Angeli.
if we were left to our selves, it were but a little advantage to know who our
enemies were, when we knew those enemies to be Angels, persons so far above our
resistance. Ephesians. 6.12.
For, but that S. Paul mollifies and eases it with a milder word, Est nobis
colluctatio, That we wrestle with enemies, (that thereby we might see our
danger is but to take a fall, not a deadly wound, if we look seriously to our
work; we cannot avoid falling into sins of infirmity, but the death of
habitual sin we may: Quare moriemini domus Israel? He does not say, why would
ye fall? but why will ye die, ye house of Israel?) it were a consideration
enough to make us desperate of victory, to hear him say, that this (though it
be but a wrestling) is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places. None of us has got the
victory over flesh and blood, and yet we have greater enemies then flesh and
blood are. Some disciplines, some mortifications we have against flesh and
blood; we have S. Paul's probatum est, his medicine, (if we will use it) Castigo
corpus, 1 Cor. 9.27.
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; for that we have some
assistance; Even our enemies become our friends; poverty or sickness will
fight for us against flesh and blood, against our carnal lusts; but for these
powers and principalities, I know not where to watch them, how to encounter
them. I pass my time sociably and merrily in cheerful conversation, in
music, in feasting, in Comedies, in wantonness; and I never hear all this
while of any power or principality, my Conscience spies no such enemy in all
this. And then alone, between God and me at midnight, some beam of his grace
shines out upon me, and by that light I see this Prince of darkness, and then
I find that I have been the subject, the slave of these powers and
principalities, when I thought not of them. Well, I see them, and I try then to
dispossess my self of them, and I make my recourse to the powerfullest
exorcisme that is, I turn to hearty and earnest prayer to God, and I fix my
thoughts strongly (as I think) upon him, and before I have perfected one
petition, one period of my prayer, a power and principality is got into me
again. Esaias 29.10.
Spiritus soporis, The spirit of slumber closes mine eyes, and I pray drousily;
Esa. 19.14.
Or spiritus vertiginis, the spirit of deviation, and vain repetition, and I
pray giddily, and circularly, and return again and again to that I have said
before, Luke 9.55.
and perceive not that I do so; and nescio cujus spiritus sim, (as our Savior
said, rebuking his Disciples, who were so vehement for the burning of the
Samaritans, you know not of what spirit you are) I pray, and know not of what
spirit I am, I consider not mine own purpose in prayer; And by this advantage,
this door of inconsideration, enters spiritus erroris, 1 Timothy 4.1.
The seducing spirit, the spirit of error, and I pray not only negligently,
but erroniously, dangerously, for such things as disconduce to the glory of
God, and my true happiness, Hosea 4.12.5.4.
if they were granted. Nay, even the Prophet Hosea's spiritus fornicationum,
enters into me, The spirit of fornication, that is, some remembrance of the
wantonness of my youth, some mis-interpretation of a word in my prayer, that
may bear an ill sense, some unclean spirit, some power or principality has
depraved my prayer, and slackned my zeal. And this is my greatest misery of
all, that when that which fights for me, and fights against me too, sickness,
has laid me upon my last bed, then in my weakest estate, these powers and
principalities shall be in their full practice against me. And therefore it is
one great advancement of thy deliverance, to be brought by this Angel, that is,
by the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, to know that thou have Angels to
thine enemies; And then another is to know their number, and so the strength of
their confederacy; for, in the verse before the Text, they are expressed to be
four, (I saw four Angels etc.)

Four legions of Angels, four millions, nay, Quatuor Angeli.
four Creations of Angels could do no more harm, then is intended in these
four; for, (as it is said in the former verse) They stood upon the four
corners of the earth, they bestrid, they cantoned the whole world. Thou have
opposite Angels enough to batter thee every where, and to cut off and defeat all
succors, all supplies, that thou can procure, or propose to thy self;
absolute enemies to one another will meet and join to thy ruin, and even
presumption will induce desperation. We need not be so literal in this, as S.
Hierome, (who indeed in that followed Origin) to think that there is a
particular evil Angel over every sin; That because we find that mention of
the spirit of error, and the spirit of slumber, and the spirit of fornication,
we should therefore think that Christ meant by Mammon, Mat. 6.24.
a particular spirit of Covetousness, and that there be several princes over
several sins. This needs not; when thou art tempted, never ask that Spirits
name; his name is legio, for he is many. Mar. 5.9.
Take thy self at the largest, as thou art a world, there are four Angels at
thy four corners; Let thy four corners be thy worldly profession, thy
calling, and another thy bodily refection, thy eating, and drinking, and
sleeping, and a third thy honest and allowable recreations, and a fourth thy
religious service of God in this place, (which two last, that is, recreation,
and religion, God has been pleased to join together in the Sabbath, in which
he intended his own glory in our service of him, and then the rest of the
Creature too) let these four, thy calling, thy sleeping, thy recreation, thy
religion be the four corners of thy world, and thou shall find an Angel of
tentation at every corner; even in thy sleep, even in this house of God thou
have met them. The Devil is no Recusant; he will come to Church, and he will
lay his snares there; When that day comes, Job 1.6.
that the Sons of God present themselves before the Lord, Satan comes also
among them. Not only so, as S. Augustine confesses he met him at Church, to
carry wanton glances between men and women, but he is here, sometimes to work a
mis-interpretation in the hearer, sometimes to work an affectation in the
speaker, and many times does more harm by a good Sermon then by a weak, by
possessing the hearers with an admiration of the Preachers gifts, and
neglecting Gods Ordinance. And then it is not only their natural power, as
they are Angels, nor their united power, as they are many, nor their politic
power, that in the midst of that confusion which is amongst them, yet they
agree together to ruin us, but (as it follows in our text) it is potestas
data, a particular power, which, besides their natural power, God, at this
time, put into their hands; (He cried to the four Angels, to whom power was
given to hurt) All other Angels had it not, nor had these four that power at
all times, which, in our distribution at first we made a particular
Consideration.

It was potestas data, a special Commission that laid Job open to Satan's
malice; Potestas data.
It was potestas data, a special Commission, that laid the herd of swine open
to the Devils tranportation: Much more, no doubt, Mat. 8.32.
have the particular Saints of God in the assistances of the Christian Church,
(for Job had not that assistance, being not within the Covenant) and most of
all has the Church of God her self, an ability, in some measure, to defend it
self against many machinations and practices of the Devil, if it were not for
this Potestas data, That God, for his farther glory, in the trial of his
Saints, and his Church, does enable the Devil to raise whole armies of
persecutors, whole swarms of heretics, to sting and wound the Church, beyond
that ordinary power, which, the Devil in nature has. That place, Curse not
the King, no, not in thought, Eccles. 10.20.
for that which has wings shall tell the matter, is ordinarily understood of
Angels; that Angels shall reveal disloyal thoughts; now, naturally Angels do
not understand thoughts; but, in such cases, there is Potestas data, a
particular power given them to do it; and so to evil Angels, for the
accomplishment of Gods purposes, there is Potestas data, a new power given, a
new Commission, (that is beyond permission; for, though by Gods permission mine
eye see, and mine ear hear, yet my hand could not see nor hear by Gods
permission; for permission is but the leaving of a thing to the doing of that,
which by nature, (if there be no hindrance interposed) it could, and would do.)

This comfort then, and this hope of deliverance have thou here, that this
Angel in our text, that is, the Ministry of the Gospel, tells thee, that that
rage which the Devil uses against thee now, is but Potestas data, a temporary
power given him for the present; for, if thy afflictions were altogether from
the natural malice and power of the Devil, inherent in him, that malice would
never end, nor thy affliction neither, if God should leave all to him. And
therefore though those our afflictions be heavier, which proceed ex potestate
data, when God exalts that power of the Devil, which naturally he has, with
new Commissions, besides his Permission to use his natural strength, and
natural malice, yet our deliverance is the nearer too, because all these
accessory and occasional Commissions are for particular ends, and are limited,
how far they shall extend, how long they shall endure. Here, the potestas data,
the power which was given to these Angels was large, it was general, for, (as
it is in the former verse) it was a power to hold the four winds of the earth,
that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
What this withholding of the wind signifies, and the damnification of that, is
our next Consideration.

By the Land, Venti.
is commonly understood all the Inhabitants of the Land; by the Sea Ilanders,
and Seafaring men, half inhabitants of the Sea; and by the Trees, all those
whom Persecution had driven away, and planted in the wilderness. The
hinderance of the use of the wind, being taken by our Expositors to be a
general impediment of the increase of the earth, and of commerce at Sea. But
this Book of the Revelation must not be so literally understood, as that the
Winds here should signify merely natural winds; there is more in this then
so; Thus much more, That this withholding of the winds, is a withholding of the
preaching and passage of the Gospel; which is the heaviest misery that can fall
upon a Nation, or upon a man, because thereby, by the misery of not hearing, he
loses all light, and means of discerning his own misery. Now as all the
parts, and the style and phrase of this Book is figurative and Metaphorical,
so is it no unusual Metaphor, even in other Books of the Scripture too, to
call the Ministers, and Preachers of Gods Word, Cant. 4.16.
by the name of winds. Arise O North, and come O South, and blow on my Garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out, has always been understood to be an
invitation, a compellation from Christ to his Ministers, to dispense and convey
salvation, Psalm. 135.7.
by his Gospel, to all Nations. And upon those words, Producit ventos, He
brings winds out of his treasuries, and Educit nubes, He brings clouds from
the ends of the earth, Puto Praedicatores and nubes and ventos, August.
says S. Augustine, I think that the holy Ghost means both by his clouds, and
by his winds, the Preachers of his Word, the Ministers of the Gospel; Nubes
propter carnem, ventos propter spiritum, Clouds because their bodies are seen,
winds because their working is felt; Nubes cernuntur, venti sentiuntur; as
clouds they embrace the whole visible Church, and are visible to it; as winds
they pierce into the invisible Church, the souls of the true Saints of God,
and work, though invisibly, upon them. Psalm 18.10.
So also those words, God rode upon a Cherub, and did fly, He did fly upon the
wings of the wind, have been well interpreted of Gods being pleased to be
carried from Nation to Nation, by the service of his Ministers.

Now this is the nature of this wind, (of the Spirit of God breathing in his
Ministers) Spirat ubi vult, John 3.8.
that it blows where it lists; and this is the malice of these evil Angels,
that it shall not do so. But this Angel, which has the seal of the living
God, that is, the Ministry of the Gospel established by him, shall keep the
winds at their liberty; And howsoever waking dreamers think of alterations and
tolerations, howsoever men that disguise their expectations with an outward
conformity to us, may think the time of declaring themselves grows on apace;
howsoever the slumbring of capital laws, and reasonof State may suffer such
mistakers to flatter themselves, yet God has made this Angel of the East, this
Gospel of his to ascend so far now, and to take so deep root, as that now this
one Angel is strong enough for the other four, that is, The sincere preaching
of the Gospel, in our settled and well disciplined Church, shall prevail
against those four pestilent opposites, Atheists, and Papists, and Sectaries,
and Carnal indifferent men, who all would hinder the blowing of this wind, the
effect of this Gospel. And to this purpose our Angel in the Text is said to
have cried with a loud voice, (He cried with a loud voice to the four Angels.)

For our security therefore that this wind shall blow still, Clamavit.
that this preaching of the Gospel which we enjoy shall be transferred upon our
posterity in the same sincerity, and the same integrity, there is required an
assiduity, and an earnestness in us, who are in that service now, in which
this Angel was then, in our preaching. Clamavit, our Angel cried, (it was his
first act, nothing must retard our preaching) and voce magna, he cried with a
loud voice; (he gave not over with one calling) What is this crying aloud in
our Angel? Vocis modum, audientium necessitas definit; The voice must be so
loud, as they, Basil.
to whom we speak, are quick or thick of hearing. Submissa, quae ad susurrum
proprie accedit, damnanda. A whispering voice was not the voice of this Angel,
nor must it be of those Angels that are figured in him; for that is the voice
of a Conventicle, not a Church voice. That is a loud voice that is heard by
them whom it concerns. So the catechizing of children, though in a familiar
manner, is a loud voice, though it be not a Sermon: So writing in defense of
our Religion, is a loud voice, though in the mean time a man intermit his
preaching: So the speaking by another, when sickness or other services
withhold him that should, and would speak, is a loud voice even from him.

And therefore though there be no evident, no imminent danger of withholding
these winds, of inhibiting or scanting the liberty of the Gospel, yet because
it is wished by too many, and because we can imagine no punishment too great
for our neglecting the Gospel, it becomes us, the Ministers of God, by all
these loud voices, of catechizing, of preaching, of writing, to cry, and to
cry, (though not with vociferations, or seditious jealousies and suspicions of
the present government) yet to cry so loud, so assiduously, so earnestly, as
all whom it concerns (and it concerns all) may hear it: Hurt not the earth,
withhold not the winds, be you no occasions, by your neglecting the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, that he suffer it to be removed from you; and know withal, that
you do neglect this Gospel, (how often soever you hear it preached) if you
do not practice it. Nor is that a sufficient practice of hearing, to desire to
hear more, except thy hearing bring thee to leave thy sins; without that, at
the last day thou shall meet thy Sermons amongst thy sins; And when Christ
Jesus shall charge thee with false weights and measures in thy shop all the
week, with prevarication in judgment, with extortion in thy practice, and in
thine office, he shall add to that, And besides this, thou wast at Church
twice that Sunday; when he shall have told thee, Thou did not feed me, thou
did not clothe me, he shall aggravate all with that, Yet thou heardst two
Sermons that Sunday, besides thine interlineary week Lectures. The means to
keep this wind awake, (to continue the liberty of the Gospel) is this loud
voice, (assiduous and pertinent preaching) but Sermons unpractised are
threepiled sins, and God shall turn, as their prayers, so their preaching into
sin. For this injunction, this inhibition which this Angel serves upon the four
Angels, That they should not hurt the world by withholding the winds, that is,
not hinder the propagation and passage of the Gospel, was not perpetual; it
was limited with a Donec, Till something were done in the behalf and favor of
the world, and that was, Till the servants of God were sealed in their
foreheads, which is our last Consideration.

The servants of God being sealed in their foreheads in the Sacrament of
Baptism, Donec signentur.
when they are received into the care of the Church, all those means which God
has provided for his servants, in his Church, to refist afflictions and
tentations, are intended to be conferred upon them in that seal; This sealing
of them is a communicating to them all those assistances of the Christian
Church: Then they have a way of prevention of sin, by hearing; a way to
Absolution, by Confession; a way to Reconciliation, by a worthy receiving the
body and blood of Christ Jesus: And these helps of the Christian Church, thus
conferred in Baptism, keep open still, (if these be rightly used) that other
seal, the seal of the Spirit; After ye heard the Gospel, and believed, Ephesians.
1.13. 2 Cor. 1.22.
ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise: and so also, God has anointed
us, and sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. So
that besides the seal in the forehead, which is an interest and title to all
the assistances and benefits of the Church, public prayer, preaching,
Sacraments and sacramental helps, there is a seal of the Spirit of God, that
that Spirit bears witness with my spirit, that I perform the conditions
passed between God and me, under the first seal, my Baptism. But because this
second seal, (the obsignation and testification of the inward Spirit) depends
upon the good use of the first seal, (the participation of the helps of the
Church, given me in Baptism) therefore the Donec in our Text, (Hurt them not
till they be sealed) reaches but to to the first seal, the seal of Baptism,
and in that, of all Gods ordinary graces, ordinarily exhibited in his
Ordinances.

So then, this Angel takes care of us, till he have delivered us over to the
sweet and powerful helps of that Church, which God has purchased with his
blood; when he has placed us there, he looks that we should do something for
our selves, which, before we were there, and made partakers of Gods graces in
his Church by Baptism, we could not do; for in this, this Angels Commission
determines, That we be sealed in the foreheads, That we be taken from the
Common, into Gods enclosures, impayled in his Park, received into his Church,
where our salvation depends upon the good use of those means. Use therefore
those means well; and put not God to save thee by a miracle, without means.
Trust not to an irresistible grace, that at one time or other God will have
thee, Bernar.
whether thou will or no. Toll voluntatem, and non est infernus; If thou
could quench thine own will, thou had quenched hell; If thou could be
content, willing to be in hell, hell were not hell. So, if God save a man
against his will, heaven is not heaven; If he be loath to come thither, sorry
that he shall be there, he has not the joy of heaven, and then heaven is not
heaven. Put not God to save thee by miracle; God can save an Image by miracle;
by miracle he can make an Image a man; If man can make God of bread, certainly
God can make a man of an Image, and so save him; but God has made thee his own
Image, and afforded thee means of salvation: Use them. God compels no man.
Luke 14.23.
The Master of the feast invited many; solemnly, before hand; they came not: He
sent his servants to call in the poor, upon the sudden; and they came; so he
receives late comers. And there is a Compelle intrare, He sends a servant to
compel some to come in. But that was but a servants work, The Master only
invited; he compelled none. We the servants of God, have certain compulsories,
to bring men hither; The denouncing of Gods Judgments, the censures of the
Church, Excommunications, and the rest, are compulsories. The State has
compulsories too, in the penal Laws. But all this is but to bring them into
the house, to Church; Compelle intrare. We can compel them to come to the
first seal, to Baptism; we can compel men, to bring their children to that
Sacrament; But to salvation, only the Master brings; and (in that Parable) the
Master does only invite; he compells none: Though his corrections may seem to
be compulsories, yet even his corrections are sweet invitations; His
corrections are so far from compelling men to come to heaven, as that they
put many men farther out of their way, and work an obduration, rather then an
obsequiousness.

With those therefore that neglect the means, that he has brought them to, in
sealing them in the forehead, this Angel has no more to do, but gives them
over to the power of the four destroying Angels. With those that attend those
meanns, he proceeds; and, in their behalf, his Donec, (Spare them till I have
sealed them) becomes the blessed Virgins Donec, Mat. 1.25. Psalm. 110.1.
she was a Virgin till she had her Child, and a Virgin after too; And it
becomes our blessed Saviors Donec, He sits at his Fathers right hand, till his
enemies be made his footstool, and after too; So these destroying Angels,
that had no power over them till they were sealed, shall have no power over
them after they are sealed, but they shall pass from seal to seal; after
that seal on the forehead, Ne erubeseant Euangelium, Romans 1.16.
(We sign him with the sign of the Cross, in token, that hereafter he shall
not be ashamed, to confess the faith of Christ Crucified) He shall come also
to those seals, which our Savior recommends to his Spouse, Cant. 8.6.
Set me as a seal on thy heart, and as a seal on thine arm; S. Ambrose
collects them, and connects them together, Signaculum Christi in cord, ut
diligamus, in front, ut confiteamur, in brachio, ut operemur; God seals us in
the heart, that we might love him, and in the forehead, that we might profess
it, and in the hand, that we might declare and practice it; and then the whole
purpose of this blessed Angel in our Text, is perfected in us, and we our
selves are made partakers of the solemnity of this day, which we celebrate, for
we our selves enter in the Communion of Saints, by these three seals, Of
Belief, Of Profession, Of Works and Practice.

SERMONS Preached upon THE CONVERSION OF S. PAVL.
SERMON. XLVI. Preached at S. Paul's, The Sunday after the Conversion of S. PAUL.
1624.
ACTS 9.4. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?


LEt us now praise famous Men, and our Fathers that begat us, Ecclus. 44.1.
(says the Wiseman) that is, that assisted our second generation, our
spiritual Regeneration; Let us praise them, commemorate them. The Lord has
wrought great glory by them, Ver. 2.
through his power from the beginning, says he there, that is, It has always
been the Lords way to glorify himself in the conversion of Men, by the
ministry of Men. For he adds, Ver. 4.
They were leaders of the people by their counsel, and by their knowledge and
learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent men in their instructions; and
that is, That God who gives these gifts for this purpose, looks for the
employment of these gifts, to the edification of others, to his glory. There be
of them, that have left a name behind them. Ver. 8.
(as it is also added in that place) that is, That though God can amply reward
his servants in the next world, yet he does it sometimes in this world; and,
though not with temporal happinesses, in their life, yet with honor, and
commemorations, and celebrations of them, after they are gone out of this life,
they leave a name behind them. And amongst them, in a high place, shines our
blessed and glorious Apostle S. Paul, whose Conversion the Church celebrates
now, and for the celebration thereof, has appointed this part of Scripture
from whence this text arises, to be the Epistle of the Day, And he fell to the
earth, and heard a voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why persccutest thou me?

There are words in the text, that will reach to all the Story of S. Paul's
Conversion, Divisio.
embrace all, involve and enwrap all; we must contract them; into less then
three parts, we cannot well; those will be these; first, The Person, Saul, He,
He fell to the earth; and then, his humiliation, his exinanition of himself,
his devesting, putting off of himself, He fell to the earth; and lastly, his
investing of Christ, his putting on of Christ, his rising again by the power
of a new inanimation, a new soul breathed into him from Christ, He heard a
voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Now, a re-distribution, a
sub-division of these parts, into their branches, we shall present to you anon,
more opportunely, as we shall come in due order to the handling of the parts
themselves. In the first, the branches will be but these; Saul's indisposition
when Christ took him in hand, and Christ's work upon him; what he found him,
what he left him, will determine our first part, The person.

First then, what he was at that time, 1. Part. Quid ante.
the Holy Ghost gives evidence enough against him, and he gives enough against
himself. Of that which the Holy Ghost gives, you may see a great many heavy
pieces, a great many appliable circumstances, if at any time, at home, you do
but paraphrase, and spread to your selves the former part of this Chapter, to
this text. Take a little preparation from me; Adhuc spirans, says the first
verse, Saul yet breathing threatenings and slaughter, Then when he was in the
height of his fury, Christ laid hold upon him. It was, for the most part,
Christ's method of curing. Then when the Sea was in a tempestuous rage, Mat.
8.24.
when the waters covered the ship, and the storm shaked even that which could
remove mountains, the faith of the Disciples, then Christ rebukes the wind,
and commands a calm. Then when the Sun was gone out to run his race as a
Giant, (as David speaks) then God by the mouth of another, of Ioshuah, bids the
Sun stand still. Then when that unclean spirit foamed, and fumed, and tore,
and rent the possessed persons, then Christ commanded them to go out. Let the
fever alone, say our Physicians, till some fits be passed, and then we shall
see farther, and discern better. The note is S. Chrysostomes, and he applies
it to Christ's proceeding with Saul; Non expectavit ut fatigatus debacchando
mansuesceret, says he, Christ staid not till Saul being made drunk with
blood, were cast into a slumber, as satisfied with the blood of Christians; Sed
in media insania superavit, but in the midst of his fit, he gave him physic,
in the midst of his madness, he reclaimes him. So is it also part of the
evidence that the Holy Ghost gives against him, Quod petiit Epistolas, that he
sued to the State for a Commission to persecute Christians. When the State will
put men to some kind of necessity of concurring to the endamaging or
endangering of the cause of Christ, and will be displeased with them, if they
do not, men make to themselves, and to their consciences some faint color of
excuse: But when they themselves set actions on foot, which are not required
at their hands, where is their evasion? Then when Saul sued out this
Commission, That if he found any of that way, (that is, Christians) (for he had
so scattered them before, that he was not sure to find any, They did not
appear in any whole body, dangerous, or suspicious to the State) but, If he
found any, Any man or woman, That he might have the Power of the State, so as
that he need not fear men, That he might have the impartiality, and the
inflexibility of the State, so as that he need not pity women, Then when his
glory was to bring them bound to Jerusalem, that he might magnify his triumph
and greatness in the eye of the world, Then, then says Christ, to this
tempest, Be calm, to this unclean spirit, Come out, to this Sun, in his own
estimation, Go no farther.

Thus much evidence the Holy Ghost gives against him; and thus much more
himself, Act. 22.4.
I persecuted this way unto the death; I bound and delivered into prison, both
men and women; Act. 26.11.
And after, more then this, I punished them, and that often, and, in every
Synagogue, and, compelled them to blaspheme, and, was exceedingly mad against
them, and persecuted them even unto strange Cities. What could he say more
against himself? And then, says Christ, to this tempest, Quiesce, Be still,
to this glaring Sun, Siste, stand still, to this unclean spirit, 1 Cor. 15.2.
Veni for as, come forth. In this sense especially does S. Paul call himself
Abertivum, a person borne out of season, That whereas Christ's other Disciples
and Apostles, had a breeding under him, and came first ad Discipulatum, and
then ad Apostolatum, first to be Disciples, and after to be Apostles; S. Paul
was borne a man, an Apostle, not carved out, as the rest in time; but a fusil
Apostle, an Apostle powered out, and cast in a Mold; As Adam was a perfect man
in an instant, so was S. Paul an Apostle, as soon as Christ took him in hand.

Now, Beloved, will thou make this perverse use of this proceeding, God is rich
in Mercy, Therefore I cannot miss Mercy? Would thou say, and not be thought
mad for saying so, God has created a West Indies, therefore I cannot want
Gold? Will thou be so ill a Logician to thy self, and to thine own damnation,
as to conclude so, God is always the same in himself, therefore he must be
always the same to me? So ill a Musician as to say, God is all Concord,
therefore He and I can never disagree? So ill a Historian as to say, God has
called Saul, a Persecutor, then when he breathed threatenings and slaughter,
then when he sued to the State for a Commission to persecute Christ, God has
called a theife, then when he was at the last gasp; And therefore if he have a
mind to me, he will deal so with me too, and, if he have no such mind, no
man can imprint, or infuse a new mind in God? God forbid. It is not safe
concluding out of single Instances. It is true, that if a sour, and heavy, and
severe man, will add to the discomforts of a disconsolate soul, and in that
souls sadness, and dejection of spirit, will heap up examples, that God has
still suffered high-minded sinners to proceed and to perish in their
irreligious ways, and tell that poor soul, (as Jobs company did him) It is
true, you take God aright, God never pardons such as you, in these cases, these
singular, these individual examples, That God has done otherwise once, have
their use. One instance to the contrary destroys any peremptory Rule, no man
must say, God never does it; He did it to Saul here, He did it to the Theife
upon the Cross. But to that presumptuous sinner, who sins on, because God
showed mercy to One at last, we must say, a miserable Comforter is that Rule,
that affords but one example. Nay, is there one example? The Conversion of Saul
a Persecutor, and of the Theife upon the Cross, is become Proverbium
peccatorum, The sinners proverb, and serves him, Gregor.
and satisfies him in all cases. But is there any such thing? Such a story
there is, and it is as true as Gospel, it is the truth of Gospel it self; But
was this a late Repentance? Answer S. Cyril, Rogo te frater, Tell me, Beloved,
Thou that deferrest thy Repentance, do thou do it upon confidence of these
examples? Non in fine, sed in principio conversus latro; Thou deludest thine
own soul; The Theife was not converted at last, but at first; As soon as God
afforded him any Call, he came; And at how many lights have thou winked? And to
how many Calls have thou stopped thine ears, that deferrest thy repentance?
Christ said to him, Hodie mecum eris, This day thou shall be with me in
paradise; when thou can find such another day, look for such another mercy;
A day that cleft the grave-stones of dead men; A day that cleft the Temple it
self; A day that the Sun durst not see; A day that saw the soul of God (may
we not say so, since that Man was God too) depart from Man; There shall be no
more such days; and therefore presume not of that voice, Hodie, This day thou
shall be with me, if thou make thy last minute that day, though Christ, to
magnify his mercy, and his glory, and to take away all occasion of absolute
desperation, did here, under so many disadvantages call, and draw S. Paul to
him.

But we say no more of that, of the danger of sinning by precedent, Quid factus
and presuming of mercy by example; we pass from our first Consideration, From
what, to the other, To what, Christ brought this persecutor, this Saul. He
brought him to that remarkable height, as that the Church celebrates the
Conversion of no man but this. Many bloody Executioners were converted to
Christ, even in the act of that bloody Execution; Then when they took a
delight in tearing the bowels of Christians, they were received into the bowels
of Christ Jesus, and became Christians. Man that road to Market, and saw an
Execution upon the way; Men that opened a window to take air, and saw an
Execution in the street; The Ecclesiastical Story abounds with examples of
occasional Convertits, and upon strange occasions; but yet the Church
celebrates no Conversion, but this. The Church does not consider the Martyrs as
borne till they die; till the world see how they persevered to the end, she
takes no knowledge of them; Therefore she calls the days of their deaths,
Natalitia, their birth-dayes; Then she makes account they are borne, when they
die. But of S. Paul the Church makes her self assured the first minute; and
therefore celebrates his Conversion, and none but his. Here was a true
Transubstantiation, and a new Sacrament. These few words, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me, are words of Consecration; After these words, Saul was no
longer Saul, but he was Christ: Vivit in me Christus, says he, It is not I
that live, not I that do any thing, but Christ in me. It is but a little way
that S. Chrysostom goes, when he speaks of an inferior Transubstantiation, of
a change of affections, and says Agnus ex Lupo, that here is another manner of
Lycanthropy, then when a man is made a Wolf; for here a Wolf is made a Lamb,
Ex lupo Agnus. Ex vepribus racemus, says that Father, A bramble is made a
vine; Ex zizaniis frumentum, Cockle and tares become wheat; Ex pirata
gubernator, A Pirat becomes a safe Pilot; Ex novissimo primus, The lees are
come to swim on the top, and the last is grown first; and ex abortivo
perfectus, He that was borne out of time, has not only the perfection, but
the excellency of all his lineaments. S. Chrysostom goes farther then this, Ex
blasphemo, Os Christi, and lyraspiritus, He that was the mouth of blasphemy, is
become the mouth of Christ, He that was the instrument of Satan, is now the
organ of the Holy Ghost. He goes very far, when he says, In Coelis homo, in
terris Angelus, Being yet but upon earth, he is an Angel, and being yet but a
man, he is already in Heaven. Yet S. Paul was another manner of Sacrament, and
had another manner of Transubstantiation, then all this; As he was made Idem
spiritus cum Domino, Gal. 6.17.
The same spirit with the Lord, so in his very body, he had Stigmata, the very
marks of the Lord Jesus. From such a lowness, raised to such a height, as that
Origin says, many did believe, that S. Paul had been that Holy Ghost, which
Christ had promised to the world, after his departing from it.

It is but a little way that S. Jerome has carried his commendation neither,
when he calls him Rugitum leonis, The roaring of a Lion, if we consider in how
little a forest the roaring of a Lion is determined; but that he calls him
Rugitum Leonis nostri, The roaring of our Lion, of the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, That as far as Christ is heard, S. Paul is heard too; Quem quoties lego,
Idem.
non verba mihi videor audire, sed tonitrua, Wheresoever I open S. Paul's
Epistles, I meet not words, but thunder, and universal thunder, thunder that
passes through all the world. Theoder.
For, Ejus excaecatio totius or bis illuminatio, That that was done upon him,
wrought upon all the world; he was struck blind, and all the world saw the
better for that. So universal a Priest, (says S. Chrysostom, who loves to be
speaking of S. Paul) as that he sacrificed, not sheep and goats, sed seipsum,
but himself; and not only that, sed totum mundum, He prepared the whole
world, as a sacrifice to God. He built an Arc, that is, established a Church;
and to this day, receives, not eight, but all into that Arc: And whereas in
Noah's Ark, Quem corvum recepit, corvum emisit, If he came in a Raven, he went
out a Raven; S. Paul, in his Arc, Ex milvis facit columbas, as himself was, so
he transubstantiates all them, and makes them Doves of Ravens. Nay, so
overabsolutely did he sacrifice himself, and his state in this world, for this
world, as that he sacrificed his reversion, his future state, the glory and joy
of heaven, for his brethren, and chose rather to be Anathema, separated from
Christ, then they should. I love thee, says S. Chrysostom to Rome, for many
excellencies, many greatnesses; But I love thee so well, says he, therefore
because S. Paul loved thee so well. Qualem Rosam Roma Christo, (as he pursues
this contemplation) What a fragrant rose shall Rome present Christ with, when
he comes to Judgment, in re-delivering to him the body of S. Paul? And though
he join them both together, Iugati boves Ecclesiae, That S. Peter and S. Paul
were that yoke of oxen that ploughed the whole Church, Though he say of both,
Quot carceres sanctificastis? How many Prisons have you two consecrated, and
made Prisons Churches? Quot catenas illustrastis? How many fetters and chains
of iron have you two changed into chains of gold? Yet we may observe a
difference in S. Chrysostomes expressing of persons so equal to one another,
Quid Petro majus? says he, But, Quid Paulo par fuit? What can exceed Peter, or
what can equal Paul? Still be all this far from occasioning any man to presume
upon God, because he afforded so abundant mercy to a Persecuter: but still from
this, let every faint soul establish it self in a confidence in God; God that
would find nothing to except, nothing to quarrel at, in S. Paul, will not lie
heavy upon thy soul, though thou must say, as he did, Quorum ego maximus, That
thou art a greater sinner then thou know any other man to be.

We are, 2 Part.
in our order proposed at first, devolved now to our second Part; from the
person, and in that, what he was found, A vehement persecuter, And then, what
he was made, A laborious Apostle, To the Manner, to his Humiliation, Cecidit
super terram, He fell, and he fell to the ground, and he fell blind, as by the
history, and context appears. We use to call every declination, of any kind,
and in any subject, a falling; for, for our bodies, we say a man is fallen sick,
And for his state, fallen poor, And for his mind, fallen mad, And for his
conscience, fallen desperate; we are borne low, and yet we fall every way lower,
so universal is our falling sickness. Sin it self is but a falling; The
irremediable sin of the Angels, The undeterminable sin of Adam, is called but
so, The fall of Adam, The fall of Angels. And therefore the effectual
visitation of the holy Ghost to man, is called a falling too; we are fallen so
low, as that when the holy Ghost is pleased to fetch us again, and to infuse
his grace, he is still said to fall upon us. But the fall which we consider in
the Text, is not a figurative falling, not into a decay of estate, nor decay of
health, nor a spiritual falling into sin, a decay of grace; but it is a
medicinal falling, a falling under Gods hand, but such a falling under his
hand, as that he takes not off his hand from him that is fallen, but throws him
down therefore that he may raise him. To this posture he brings Paul, now,
when he was to re-inanimate him with his spirit; rather, to pre-inanimate him;
for, indeed, no man has a soul till he have grace.

Christ, who in his humane nature has received from the Father all Judgment,
and power, and dominion over this world, has received all this, upon that
condition that he shall govern in this manner, Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, says the
Father; How is he to use them, when he has them? Thus, Thou shall break them
with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. Now, God
meant well to the Nations, in this bruising and breaking of them; God intended
not an annihilation of the Nations, but a reformarion; for Christ asks the
Nations for an Inheritance, not for a triumph; therefore it is intended of his
way of governing them; and his way is to bruise and beat them; that is, first
to cast them down, before he can raise them up, first to break them before he
can make them in his fashion. August.
Novit Dominus vulnerare ad amorem; The Lord, and only the Lord knows how to
wound us, out of love; more then that, how to wound us into love; more then all
that, to wound us into love, not only with him that wounds us, but into love
with the wound it self, with the very affliction that he inflicts upon us; The
Lord knows how to strike us so, as that we shall lay hold upon that hand that
strikes us, and kiss that hand that wounds us. Ad vitam interficit, ad
exaltationem prosternit, says the same Father; No man kills his enemy
therefore, that his enemy might have a better life in heaven; that is not his
end in killing him: It is Gods end; Therefore he brings us to death, that by
that gate he might lead us into life everlasting; And he has not discovered,
but made that Northern passage, to pass by the frozen Sea of calamity, and
tribulation, to Paradise, to the heavenly Jerusalem. There are fruits that
ripen not, but by frost; There are natures, (there are scarce any other) that
dispose not themselves to God, but by affliction. And as Nature looks for the
season for ripening, and does not all before, so Grace looks for the assent of
the soul, and does not perfect the whole work, till that come. It is Nature
that brings the season, and it is Grace that brings the assent; but till the
season for the fruit, till the assent of the soul come, all is not done.

Therefore God begun in this way with Saul, and in this way he led him all his
life. Tot pertulit mortes, quot vixit dies, He dyed as many deaths, as he lived
days; Chrysostom.
for so himself says, Quotidie morior, I die daily; God gave him suck in
blood, and his own blood was his daily drink; He catechized him with
calamities at first, and calamities were his daily Sermons, and meditations
after; and to authorize the hands of others upon him, and to accustom him to
submit himself to the hands of others without murmuring, Christ himself strikes
the first blow, and with that, Cecidit, he fell, (which was our first
consideration, in his humiliation) and then, Cecidit in terram, He fell to the
ground, which is our next.

I take no farther occasion from this Circumstance, but to arm you with
consolation, In terram.
how low soever God be pleased to cast you, Though it be to the earth, yet he
does not so much cast you down, in doing that, as bring you home. Death is not
a banishing of you out of this world; but it is a visitation of your kindred
that lie in the earth; neither are any nearer of kin to you, then the earth it
self, and the worms of the earth. You heap earth upon your souls, and
encumber them with more and more flesh, by a superfluous and luxuriant diet;
You add earth to earth in new purchases, and measure not by Acres, but by
Manors, nor by Manors, but by Shires; And there is a little Quillet, a little
Close, worth all these, A quiet Grave. And therefore, when thou read, That
God makes thy bed in thy sickness, rejoice in this, not only that he makes
that bed, where thou do lie, but that bed where thou shall lie; That that
God, that made the whole earth, is now making thy bed in the earth, a quiet
grave, where thou shall sleep in peace, till the Angels Trumpet wake thee at
the Resurrection, to that Judgment where thy peace shall be made before thou
come, and writ, and sealed, in the blood of the Lamb.

Saul falls to the earth; So far; But he falls no lower. God brings his
servants to a great lowness here; but he brings upon no man a perverse sense,
or a distrustful suspicion of falling lower hereafter; His hand strikes us to
the earth, by way of humiliation; But it is not his hand, that strikes us into
hell, by way of desperation. Will you tell me, that you have observed and
studied Gods way upon you all your life, and out of that can conclude what God
means to do with you after this life? That God took away your Parents in your
infancy, and left you Orphans then, That he has crossed you in all your
labors in your calling, ever since, That he has opened you to dishonours, and
calumnies, and mis-interpretations, in things well intended by you, That he
has multiplied ficknesses upon you, and given you thereby an assurance of a
miserable, and a short life, of few, and evil days, nay, That he has
suffered you to fall into sins, that you your selves have hated, To continue in
sins, that you your selves have been weary of, To relapse into sins, that you
your selves have repented; And will you conclude out of this, that God had no
good purpose upon you, that if ever he had meant to do you good, he would
never have gone thus far, in heaping of evils upon you? Upon what do thou
ground this? upon thy self? Because thou should not deal thus with any man,
whom thou mean well to? How poor, how narrow, how impious a measure of God,
is this, that he must do, as thou would do, if thou were God! God has not
made a week without a Sabbath; no tentation, without an issue; God inflicts no
calamity, no cloud, no eclipse, without light, to see ease in it, if the
patient will look upon that which God has done to him, in other cases, or to
that which God has done to others, at other times. Saul fell to the ground,
but he fell no lower; God brings us to humiliation, but not to desperation.

He fell; Caecus. John 9.39.
he fell to the ground, And he fell blind; for so it is evident in the story.
Christ had said to the Pharisees, I came into the world, that they which see,
might be made blind; And the Pharisees ask him, Have you been able to do so
upon us? Are we blind? Here Christ gives them an example; a real, a literal,
an actual example; Saul, a Pharisee, is made blind. He that will fill a
vessel with wine, must take out the water; He that will fill a covetous man's
hand with gold, must take out the silver that was there before, says S.
Chrysostom. Christ, who is about to infuse new light into Saul, withdrawes
that light that was in him before; That light, by which Saul thought he saw all
before, and thought himself a competent Judge, which was the only true
Religion, and that all others were to be persecuted, Ier. 51.17.
even to death, that were not of his way. Stultus factus est omnis homo a
scientia, says God in the Prophet, Every man that trusts in his own wit, is a
fool. 1 Cor. 3.18.
But let him become a fool, that he may be wise, says the Apostle; Let him be
so, in his own eyes, and God will give him better eyes, better light, better
understanding. Saul was struck blind, but it was a blindness contracted from
light; It was a light that struck him blind, as you see in his story. This
blindness which we speak of, which is a sober and temperate abstinence from
the immoderate study, and curious knowledges of this world, this holy
simplicity of the soul, is not a darkness, a dimnesse, a stupidity in the
understanding, contracted by living in a corner, it is not an idle retiring
into a Monastery, or into a Village, or a Country solitude, it is not a lazy
affectation of ignorance; not darkness, but a greater light, must make us
blind.

The sight, and the Contemplation of God, and our present benefits by him, and
our future interest in him, must make us blind to the world so, as that we
look upon no face, no pleasure, no knowledge, with such an Affection, such an
Ambition, such a Devotion, as upon God, and the ways to him. Saul had such a
blindness, as came from light; we must affect no other simplicity, then arises
from the knowledge of God, and his Religion. And then, Saul had such a
blindness, as that he fell with it. There are birds, that when their eyes are
cieled, still soar up, and up, till they have spent all their strength. Men
blinded with the lights of this world, soar still into higher places, or
higher knowledges, or higher opinions; but the light of heaven humbles us, and
lays flat that soul, which the leaven of this world had puffed and swelled
up. That powerful light felled Saul; but after he was fallen, his own sight
was restored to him again; Ananias says to him, Brother Saul, receive thy
sight. To those men, who employ their natural faculties to the glory of God,
and their own, and others edification, God shall afford an exaltation of those
natural faculties; In those, who use their learning, or their wealth, or their
power, well, God shall increase that power, and that wealth, and that learning,
even in this world.

You have seen Saul's sickness, 3 Part.
and the exaltation of the disease, Then when he breathed threatenings, and
slaughter, Then when he went in his triumph; And you have seen his death, The
death of the righteous, His humiliation, He fell to the earth; And there
remains yet his Resurrection; The Angel of the great Counsel, Christ Jesus,
with the Trumpet of his own mouth, rayses him, with that, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?

First, Vox.
he affords him a call, A voice. Saul could not see; Therefore he deals not
upon him by visions. He gives a voice; and a voice that he might hear; God
speaks often, when we do not hear; He heard it, and heard it saying; Not a
voice only, but a distinct, and intelligible voice; and saying unto him, that
is, appliable to himself; and then, that that the voice said to him, was,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? We are unequal enemies, Thou see I am
too hard for thee, Curtu me? why will thou, thou in this weakness oppose me?
And then, we might be good friends, Thou see I offer parley, I offer treaty,
Cur tu me? Why will thou oppose me, me that declare such a disposition to be
reconciled unto thee? In this so great a disadvantage on thy part, why will thou stir at all? In this so great a peaceablenesse on my part, why will thou
stir against me? Cur tu me? Why persecutest thou me?

First then, God speaks: For, beloved, we are to consider God, not as he is in
himself, but as he works upon us: The first thing that we can consider in our
way to God, is his Word. Our Regeneration is by his Word; that is, by faith,
which comes by hearing; The seed is the word of God, says Christ himself;
Even the seed of faith. Luke 8.11.
Carry it higher, the Creation was by the word of God; Dixit, and facta sunt,
God spoke, and all things were made. Carry it to the highest of all, to
Eternity, the eternal Generation, the eternal Production, the eternal
Procession of the second Person in the Trinity, was so much by the Word, as
that he is the Word; Verbum caro, It was that Word, that was made Flesh. So
that God, who cannot enter into bands to us, has given us security enough; He
has given us his Word; His written Word, his Scriptures; His Essential Word,
his Son. Our Principal, and Radical, and Fundamental security, is his
Essential Word, his Son Christ Jesus. But how many millions of generations was
this Word in heaven, and never spoke? The Word, Christ himself, has been as
long as God has been: But the uttering of this Word, speaking has been but
since the Creation. Peter says to Christ, To whom shall we go? Thou have the
words of eternal life. It is not only, John 6.68.
Thou art the word of eternal life; (Christ is so) But thou have it; Thou have
it, where we may come to thee for it; In thy Treasury, in thine Ordinance, in
thy Church; Thou have it, to derive it, to convey it upon us. Here then is the
first step of Saul's cure, and of ours, That there was not only a word, the
Word, Christ himself, a Son of God in heaven, but a Voice, the word uttered,
and preached; Christ manifested in his Ordinance: He heard a voice.

He heard it. How often does God speak, and no body hears the voice? Audivit.
He speaks in his Canon, in Thunder, and he speaks in our Canon, in the rumor
of wars. He speaks in his music, in the harmonious promises of the Gospel,
and in our music, in the temporal blessings of peace, and plenty; And we
hear a noise in his Judgments, and we hear a sound in his mercies; but we
hear no voice, we do not discern that this noise, or this sound comes from
any certain person; we do not feel them to be mercies, nor to be judgments
uttered from God, but natural accidents, casual occurrencies, emergent
contingencies, which as an Atheist might think, would fall out though there
were no God, or no commerce, no dealing, no speaking between God and Man.
Though Saul came not instantly to a perfect discerning who spoke, yet he saw
instantly, it was a Person above nature, and therefore speaks to him in that
phrase of submission, Quis es Domine? Lord who art thou? And after, with
trembling and astonishment, (as the Text says) Domine quid me vis facere? Lord
what will thou have me to do? Then we are truliest said to hear, when we know
from whence the voice comes. Princes are Gods Trumpet, and the Church is Gods
Organ, but Christ Jesus is his voice. When he speaks in the Prince, when he
speaks in the Church, there we are bound to hear, and happy if we do hear.
Man has a natural way to come to God, by the eye, by the creature; Rom 2.
So Visible things show the Invisible God: But then, God has super-induced a
supernatural way, by the ear. For, though hearing be natural, yet that faith
in God should come by hearing a man preach, is supernatural. God shut up the
natural way, in Saul, Seeing; He struck him blind; But he opened the
super-naturall way, he enabled him to hear, and to hear him. God would have
us beholden to grace, and not to nature, and to come for our salvation, to his
Ordinances, to the preaching of his Word, and not to any other means. Though
he were blind, even that blindness, as it was a humiliation, and a diverting
of his former glaring lights, was a degree of mercy, of preparative mercy; yet
there was a voice, which was another degree; And a voice that he heard, which
was a degree above that; and so far we are gone; And he heard it, saying,
that is distinctly, and intelligibly, which is our next Circumstance.

He hears him saying, that is, He hears him so, as that he knows what he
says, so, Dicentem.
as that he understands him; for, he that hears the word, and understands it
not, is subject to that which Christ says, That the wicked one comes, Mat.
13.19.
and catches away that that was sown. S. Augustine puts himself earnestly
upon the contemplation of the Creation, as Moses has delivered it; he finds
it hard to conceive, and he says, Si esset ante me Moses, Confess. l. 1. c. 3.
If Moses who writ this were here, Tenerem eum, and per te obsecrarem, I would
hold him fast, and beg of him, for thy sake, O my God, that he would declare
this work of the Creation more plainly unto me. But then, says that blessed
Father, Si Hebraea voce loqueretur, If Moses should speak Hebrew to me, mine
ears might hear the sound, but my mind would not hear the voice; I might
hear him, but I should not hear what he said. This was that that
distinguished between S. Paul, and those who were in his company at this time;
Ver. 7. Acts 22.9.
S. Luke says in this Chapter, That they heard the voice, and S. Paul relating
the story again, after says, They heard not the voice of him that spoke to
me; they heard a confused sound, but they distinguished it not to be the voice
of God, nor discerned Gods purpose in it. Ver. 28.
In the twelfth of John, there came a voice from Heaven, from God himself, and
the people said, It thundered. So apt is natural man to ascribe even Gods
immediate and miraculous actions to natural causes; apt to rest and determine
in Nature, and leave out God. The Poet chides that weakness, (as he calls it)
to be afraid of Gods judgments, or to call natural accidents judgments; Quo
morbo mentem concusse? timore Deorum, says he; he says The Conscience may be
over-tender, and that such timorous men, are sick of the fear of God; But it
is a blessed disease The fear of God, and the true way to true health. And
though there be a moral constancy that becomes a Christian well, not to be
easily shaked with the variations and revolutions of this world, yet it becomes
him to establish his constancy in this, That God has a good purpose in that
action, not that God has no hand in that action; That God will produce good
out of it, not that God has nothing to do in it. The Magicians themselves
were forced to confess Digitum Dei, Exodus 6.16.
The finger of God, in a small matter. Never think it a weakness, to call
that a judgment of God, which others determine in Nature; Do so, so far as
works to thy edification, who see that judgment, though not so far, as to
argue, and conclude the final condemnation of that man upon whom that
judgment is fallen. Certainly, we were better call twenty natural accidents
judgments of God, then frustrate Gods purpose in any of his powerful
deliverances, by calling it a natural accident, and suffer the thing to vanish
so, and God be left unglorified in it, or his Church unedified by it. Then we
hear God, when we understand what he says; And therefore, as we are bound to
bless God, that he speaks to us, and hears us speak to him, in a language
which we understand, and not in such a strange language, as that a stranger
who should come in and hear it, 1 Cor. 14.23.
would think the Congregation mad; So also let us bless him for that holy
tenderness, to be apt to feel his hand in every accident, and to discern his
presence in every thing that befalls us. Saul heard the voice, saying; He
understood what it said, and by that, found that it was directed to him, which
is also another step in this last part.

This is an impropriation without sacrilege, Sibi.
and an enclosure of a Common without damage, to make God mine own, to find
that all that God says is spoken to me, and all that Christ suffered was
suffered for me. And as Saul found this voice at first, to be directed to him,
so ever after he bends his eye the same way, and observes the working of God
especially upon himself; As at the beginning, so in the way too: particularly
there, By the grace of God I am that I am; 1 Cor. 15.
and then, His grace was bestowed on me, And not in vain; and again, I have
labored more abundantly then all; And after all, still he considers himself,
and finds himself to be the greatest sinner, Quorum ego maximus. It is called
a greatness of spirit, or constancy, but it is indeed an incorrigible height
of pride, when a man will not believe that he is meant in a libel, if he be not
named in that libel. It is a fearful obduration, to be Sermon-proofe, or not
to take knowledge, that a judgment is denounced against him, because he is not
named in the denouncing of that judgment. Is not thy name Simon Magus, if thou
buy and sell spiritual things thy self? and is not thy servants name Gehazi,
if he exact after? Is not thy name Cain, if thou rise up against thy brother?
And is not thy name Zacheus, if thou multiply thy wealth by oppression? Is not
thy name Dinah, if thou gad abroad, to see who will solicit thee? And is not
the name of Putiphars Wife upon thee, if thou stay at home and solicit thy
servants? Postdate the whole Bible, and whatsoever thou hear spoken of such,
as thou art, before, believe all that to be spoken but now, and spoken to thee.
This was one happiness here, that Saul found this voice to be directed to him;
And another (which is our last Consideration) is what this voice said; it said,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Here, Saul.
to make sure of him, God calls him by his name, that he should not be able to
transfer the summons upon any other, or say it was not he. They say that our
Noctambulones, men that walk in their sleep, will wake if they be called by
their names. To wake Saul out of this dream, (for, to think to oppose Christ
and his cause, is, in the highest person of the world, of what power or of what
counsel soever, but a vertiginous dream, and a giddy vapor) to wake him, he
calls him by his name, to let him know he means him; and to wake him thoroughly,
he calls him twice, Saul, and Saul again. Saul, Saul. Ier. 22.29.
The great desolation which was to fall upon that land, God intimates, God
interminates, God intonates with such a vehemence, Terra, terra, terra, Earth,
earth, earth hear the word of the Lord. God should be heard at first, believed
at first; but such is his abundant goodness, as that he ingeminates,
multiplies his warnings; And to this whole land he has said, Terra, terra,
terra, Earth, earth, earth hear the Word of the Lord; Once in an Invasion,
once in a Powder Treason; and again, and again in pestilentiall contagions;
And to every one of us, he has said oftener then so, Dust, dust, dust why do
thou lift up thy self against thy Maker? Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me?

Here Christ calls the afflictions of those that are his, in his purpose, his
afflictions. Me.
Christ will not absolutely verify his own words, to his own ease; He had
said before this, upon the Cross, Consummatum est, All is finished; But though
all were finished in his Person, he has a daily passion in his Saints still.
This language which the Apostle learnt of Christ here, himself practiced, and
spoke after, Who is weak, and I am not weak? 2 Cor. 11.29.
who is offended, and I burn not? Since Christ does suffer in our sufferings,
be this our consolation, Till he be weary, we should not be weary, nor faint,
nor murmur under our burdens; and this too, That when he is weary, he will
deliver us even for his own sake; for he, though he cannot suffer pain, may
suffer dishonor in our sufferings; therefore attend his leisure.

We end all in this, Cur tu me? Why do Thou persecute Me? Why Saul Christ?
Tume.
Put it upon a Nation, (what is any Saul, any one man to a Nation?) Put it upon
all the Nations of the World, and you shall hear God ask with an indignation,
Quare fremuerunt Gentes? Why do the heathen rage, why do the people imagine a
vain thing? Psalm. 2.1. Ver. 4.
why will they do it? what can they get? He that sits in the Heavens shall
laugh; The Lord shall have them in derision. Christ came into the Temple and
disputed with the Doctors; but he did not despise them, he did not laugh at
them. When all the Midianites, and all the Amalekites, and all the Children of
the East, were in a body against Israel, Judge. 6.33.
God did not laugh at them. Gideon his General, mustered two and thirty
thousand against them. God would not employ so many in the day of Battle, yet
he did not laugh at them, he did not whip them out of the field, he made the
face of an Army, though it were but three hundred. But when God can choose his
way, He can call in Nation against Nation, he can cast a dampe upon any
Nation, and make them afraid of one another, He can do an execution upon them
by themselves, (I presume you remember those stories in the Bible, where God
did proceed by such ways) or he can sit still in a scorn, and let them melt
away of themselves; when he can cast down Saul to the earth, and never appear
in the cause, benight his noone, frustrate his purposes, evacuate his hopes,
annihilate him in the height of his glory, Cur tu me? why will any Saul, any
Nation, any World of Saul's persecute Christ, any sinner tempt him, who is so
much too hard for him?

Cur me? Why do thou offer this to me, who being thus much too hard for
thee, would yet feign be friends with thee? and therefore came to a parley, to
a treaty? for, verba haec, non tam arguentis, quam defendentis, says S.
Chrysostom: These are not so much offensive as defensive words; He would not
confound Saul, but he would not betray his own honor. To many Nations God has
never spoken; To the Jews he spoke, but suffered them to mistake him; To some
whole Christian Churches he speaks, but he lets them speak too; he lets them
make their word equal to his; To many of us he has spoken, and chidden, but
given over before we are cured; As he says of Israel, in a manner, That she is
not worth his anger, not worth his punishing, Esaias 1.4.
A people laden with sins, why should they any more be smitten? Why should I
go about to recover them? But if God speak to thee still, and speak in a mixed
voice, of Correction, and Consolation too, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Him that receives so little benefit by thee, and yet is so loath to lose thee,
Him that can so easily spare thee, and yet makes thy soul more precious then
his own life, Him that can resolve thee, scatter thee, annihilate thee with a
word, and yet afford so many words, so many hours conferences, so many Sermons
to reclaim thee, why persecutest Thou Him? Answer this question, with Saul's
answer to this question, by another question, Domine quid me vis facere? Lord
what will thou have me do? Deliver thy self over to the will of God, and God
shall deliver thee over, as he did Saul to Ananias; provide thee by his
Ministry in his Ordinance, means to rectify thee, in all dejection of spirit,
light to clear thee in all perplexities of conscience, in the ways of thy
pilgrimage, and more and more effectual seals thereof, at the hour of thy
transmigration into his joy, and thine eternal rest.

SERMON. XLVII. Preached at S. Paul's, The Sunday after the Conversion of S. PAUL.
27. Ian. 1627.
ACT. 20.25. And now, Behold, I know, that all ye among whom I have gone
preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.


WHen S. Chrysostom calls Christmas day, Metropolin omnium festorum, The
Metropolitan Holyday, the principal festival of the Church, he is likely to
intend only those festivalls which were of the Churches later institution, and
means not to enwrap the Sabbath in that comparison. As S. Augustine says of
the Sacrament of Baptism, that it is Limen Ecclesiae, The threshold over which
we step into the Church; so is Christmas day, Limen festorum, The threshold
over which we step into the festival celebration of some other of Christ's
actions, and passions, and victorious overcommings of all the Acts of his
Passion, such as his Resurrection, and Ascension; for, but for Christmas day,
we could celebrate none of these days; And so, that day is Limen festorum, The
threshold over which we pass to the rest. But the Sabbath is not only Limen,
or Ianua Ecclesiae, The door by which we enter into the Church, and into the
consideration what the Church has done, but Limen mundi, The door by which we
enter into the consideration of the World, how, and when the World was made of
nothing, at the Creation, without which, we had been so far from knowing that
there had been a Church, or that there had been a God, as that we our selves
had had no being at all. And therefore, as our very being is before all degrees
of well-being, so is the Sabbath, which remembers us of our being, before all
other festivalls, that present and refresh to us the memory of our well-being:
Especially to us, to whom it is not only a Sabbath, as the Sabbath is a day of
Rest, in respect of the Creation, but Dies Dominicus, The Lords day, in respect
of the Redemption of the world, because the consummation of that work of
Redemption, for all that was to be done in this world, which was the
Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, was accomplished upon that
day, Levit. 23.
which is our Sabbath. But yet, as it did please God, to accompany the Great
day, the Sabbath, with other solemn days too, The Passover, and Pentecost,
Trumpets, and Tabernacles, and others, and to call those other days Sabbaths,
as well as the Sabbath it self; so, since he is pleased that in the Christian
Church, other days of Holy Convocations should also be instituted, I make
account, that in some measure, I do both offices, both for observing those
particular festivalls that fall in the week, and also for the making of those
particular festivalls to serve the Sabbath, when upon the Sabbath ensuing, or
preceding such or such a festival in the week, I take occasion to speak of
that festival, which fell into the compass of that week; for, by this
course, that festival is not pretermitted, nor neglected, the particular
festival is remembered: And then, as God receives honor in the honor of his
Saints, so the Sabbath has an honor, when the festivalls, and commemorations
of those Saints, are reserved to wait upon the Sabbath.

Hence is it, that as elsewhere, I often do so, that is, Celebrate some
festival that falls in the week, upon the Sabbath: so, in this place, upon
this very day, I have done the like, and return now, to do so again, that is,
to celebrate the memory of our Apostle S. Paul to day, though there be a day
past, since his day was, in the ordinary course, to have been celebrated. The
last time that I did so, I did it in handling those words, And he fell to the
earth, and heard a voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? which
was the very act of his Conversion; A period, and a passage, which the Church
celebrates in none but in S. Paul; though many others were strangely converted
too, she celebrates none but his. In the words chosen for this day, And now
behold I know etc. we shall reduce to your memories, first, His proceeding in
the Church after he was called, (I have gone preaching the kingdom of God
among you) And then the ease, the reposednes, the acquiescence that he had in
that knowledge, which God by his Spirit had given him, of the approach of his
dissolution, and departure out of this life; (I know that all you shall see my
face no more.) As those things which we see in a glass, for the most part,
must be behind us, so that that makes our transmigration in death comfortable
unto us, must be behind us, in the testimony of a good Conscience, for things
formerly done; Now behold, I know, that all ye, among whom I have gone etc.

In handling of which words, our Method shall be this; Our general parts,
Divisio.
being (as we have already intimated) these two, His way, and his End, His
painful course, and his cheerful finishing of his course; His laborious
battle, and his victorious triumph: In the first, (I have gone preaching the
kingdom of God among you) we shall see, first, That there is a Transivi, as
well as a Requievi acceptable to God; A discharge of a Duty, as well in going
from one place to another, as in a perpetual Residence upon one; Transivi,
says our Apostle, I have gone among you. But then, in a second consideration,
in that first part, That that makes his going acceptable to God, is, because he
goes to preach, Transivi praedicans, I have gone preaching; And then lastly in
that first part, That that, that makes his Preaching acceptable, is, that he
preached the kingdom of God, Transivi praedicans regnum Dei, I have gone
amongst you, preaching the kingdom of God. And in these three characters of S.
Paul's Ministry, first, Labor and Assiduity; And then, Labor bestowed upon
the right means, Preaching; And lastly, Preaching to the right end, to
edification, and advancing the kingdom of God, we shall determine our first
part.

In our second part, we pass from his Transition, to his Transmigration; from
his going up and down in the world, to his departing out of the world, And
now, behold, I know, that ye shall see my face no more. In which, we shall
look first, how S. Paul contracted this knowledge, how he knew it; And
secondly, that the knowledge of it, did not disquiet him, not disorder him; he
takes knowledge of it, with a confidence, and a cheerfulness. When he says, I
know it, he seems to say, I am glad of it, or at least not troubled with it.
And lastly, that S. Paul continues here, that way, and method, which he always
uses; That is, to proceed by the understanding, to the affections, and so to
the conscience of those that hear him, by such means of persuasion, as are most
appliable to them, to whom he then speaks; And therefore knowing the power and
efficacy of a dying, a departing man's words, he makes that impression in them,
Observe, recollect, remember, practice that which I have delivered unto you,
for, I know, that all ye shall see my face no more. And so we shall bring up
that circle, which was begun in heaven, in our last exercise, upon this
occasion, in this place, when Christ said from thence, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? up into heaven again, in that Euge bone serve, which
Christ has said since unto him, Well done good and faithful servant, enter
into thy Masters joy; And our Apostle, whom, in our former Exercise, for
example of our humiliation, we found fallen to the Earth, in this, to the
assistance of our Exaltation, in his, we shall find, and leave, upon the last
step of Jacobs ladder, that is, entering into Heaven, by the gate of death.

First then, in our first Part, our first Branch is, 1 Part.
That there is a Transivi as acceptable to God, as a Requievi; That God was
served in S. Paul, by applying his labors to many places, as well as if he had
resided, and bestowed himself entirely upon any one. When Christ manifested
himself at first unto him, trembling and astonished, he said, Act. 9.6.
Lord what will thou have me to do? And when Christ had told him, That in
Damascus, from Ananias, he should receive his Instructions, which were, Ver. 15.
That he should bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children
of Israel, After this commission was exhibited by Ananias, and accepted by S.
Paul, that Prophetical Scripture laid hold upon him, by way of acclamation,
Psalm. 19.6.
Exultavit ut gigas ad currendam viam, He rejoiced as a strong man to run a
race, 1 Cor. 15.10. Romans 15.19.
He labored more abundantly then they all, He carried the Gospel from
Jerusalem to Illyricum, That is, as S. Hierome survayes it, a mari rubro ad
oceanum, from the Red Sea (a Sea within land) to the Ocean without, from all
within, to all without the Covenant, Gentiles as well as Jews, Deficiente eum
prius terra, quam studio praedicandi, He found an end of the world, but he
found no end of his zeal, but preached as long as he found any to preach to.
And as he exceeded in Action, so did he in Passion too; He joins both
together, 2 Cor. 11.23.
In labors more abundant, (There was his continual preaching) In stripes
above measure, And then, In prisons more frequent, In deaths often. Who dies
more then once? Yet he dies often. How often? Death that is every other man's
everlasting fast, and fills him his mouth with earth, was S. Paul's Panis
quotidianus, His daily bread, I protest, says he, by your rejoicing, which I
have in Christ, I die daily.

Though therefore we cannot give S. Paul a greater name then an Apostle,
(except there be some extraordinary height of Apostleship enwrapped in that
which he says of himself, Gal. 1.1.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, That in that
place he glory in a holy exultation, that he was made an Apostle by Jesus
Christ, then when Jesus Christ was nothing but Jesus Christ, then when he was
glorified in heaven, and not a mortal man upon earth, as he was when he made
his other Apostles; And that in his being an Apostle, there entered no such act
of men, as did in the election of Matthias to that office, (though Matthias
were made after the Ascension as well as he) in whose election those men
presented God two names, and God directed that lot upon him, and so Matthias
was reckoned amongst the eleven Apostles) Though we need not procure to him,
Acts 1. ult.
nor imagine for him, any other name then an Apostle, yet S. Paul was otherwise
an universal soul to the whole Church, then many of the other Apostles were,
and had a larger liberty to communicate himself to all places, then any of
them had. That is it which S. Chrysostom intends, when he extends S. Paul's
dignity, Angelis diversae Gentes commissae, To particular Angels particular
Nations are committed; sed nullus Angelorum, says that Father, No Angel
governed his particular Nation better then S. Paul did the whole Church. S.
Chrysostom carries it so high; Isidore modifies it thus; He brings it from the
Angels of heaven, to the Angels of the Church, Indeed the Archangels of the
Church, the Apostles themselves, And he says, Apostolorum quisque regionem
nactus unicam, Every Apostle was designed to some particular and certain
compass, and did but that, in that, which S. Paul did in the whole world. But
S. Chrysostom and Isidore both take their ground for that which they say, from
that which S. Paul says of himself, Besides these things which are without, 2
Cor. 11.28.
that which comes upon me daily, The care of all the Churches; for, says he,
who is weak, and I am not weak? That is, who lacks any thing, but I am ready to
do it for him? who suffers any thing, but I have compassion for him? We
receive by fair Tradition, and we entertain with a fair credulity, the other
Apostles to have been Bishops, and thereby to have had a more certain center,
to which, naturally, that is, by the nature of their office, they were to
incline. Not that nothing may excuse a Bishops absence from his Sea; for
natural things, even naturally, do depart from those places to which they are
naturally designed, and naturally affected, for the conservation of the whole
frame and course of nature; for, in such cases, water will ascend, and air
will descend; which motion is done naturally, though it be a motion from that
place, to which they are naturally affected; And so may Bishops from their
particular Churches; Cyprian.
for, Episcopus in Ecclesia, and Ecclesia in Episcopo, Every Bishop has a
superintendency, and a residence in the whole Church, and the whole Church a
residence, and a confidence in him. Therefore it is, that in some Decretall,
and some Synodall Letters, Bishops are called Monarchae, Monarchs, not only
with relation to one Diocese, but to the whole Church; not only Regal, but
Imperial Monarchs.

The Church of Rome makes Bishops every day, of Diocesses, to which they know
those Bishops can never come; Not only in the Dominions of Princes of the
Reformed Religion, (which are not likely to admit them) but in the Dominions of
the Turk himself. And into the Council of Trent, they threw and thrust, they
should and shoveld in such Bishops in abundance: They created (that their
numbers might carry all) new Titular Bishops of every place, in the Eastern,
the Greek Church, where there had ever been Bishops before, though those very
places were now no Cities; Not only not within his Jurisdiction, but not at
all, upon the face of the earth. But in better times then these, (though times,
in which the Church was much afflicted too) S. Cyril of Alexandria mentions six
thousand Bishops at once, against Nestorius. Now if the Church had six thousand
Bishops at once, certainly all of them had not Diocesses to reside upon;
sometimes collateral necessities enforce a departing from exact regularity, in
matter of government. So it did, when S. Ambrose was chosen Bishop of Milan in
the West, and Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople in the East, when they were
both not only Laymen, but unbaptized. But yet, though there be diverse cases
in which Bishops may justly be excused from residence, (for they are still
resident upon the Church of God, if not upon the Church of that City) yet
naturally, and regularly an obligation falling upon them, of Residence, the
Apostles were more bound to certain limits, by being Bishops, then S. Paul
was, of whom it does not appear that he was ever so. I know some later men
have thought S. Paul a Bishop: And they have found some satisfaction in that,
That Niger, Acts 13.3.
and Lucius, and Manaen laid their hands upon Barnabas and Paul; and that
Imposition of hands, say they, was a Consecration; And this reason supplies
them too, That Paul did consecrate other Bishops, as Timothy of Ephesus, and
Titus of Crete. But since Niger, Tit. 1.5.
and Lucius, and Manaen that laid their hands upon Paul, were not Bishops
themselves, Paul cannot therefore be concluded to be a Bishop, because he laid
his hands upon others. Neither has any of those few Authors, which have
imagined him to be a Bishop, ever assigned or named any place of which he
should be Bishop; So that S. Paul had still another manner of liberty, and
universality over the Church, then the rest had, and therefore still avowes his
Transivi, his peregrination, I have gone among you.

So then our blessed Savior having declared this to be his way for the
propagation of the Gospel, that besides the men that reside constantly upon
certain places, there should be Bishops that should spread farther then to a
Parish, and Apostles farther then to a Diocese, and a Paul farther then to a
Nation; As in the first Plantation Christ found this necessary, so may it be
still convenient, that in some cases, some persons, at some times, may be
admitted to forbear their service, in some particular place, so they do not
defraud the whole Church of God by that forbearance. For so S. Paul, though he
accuse himself, That he robbed other Churches, taking wages of them, 2 Cor.
11.11.
and yet served the Corinthians, thinks himself excusable in this, That he did
this service in some part of the Church of Christ, though not always to them
in particular, from whom he received that recompense.

Now as this condemns our Brownists abroad, that have published their opinion
to be, That no particular Church, given to one man's cure, may consist of more
persons then may always hear that man, all together, so neither does this
afford any favor to those men, who absent themselves from their charge,
unnecessarily; and every thing is unnecessary in a Churchman, that is not done
for the farther advancement of the Church of God in general, and does
prejudice, or defraud a particular Church. Therefore is S. Paul's Transivi in
this Text, accompanied with a Praedicavi, I have not resided in one place, I
have gone among you, but I have gone among you preaching.

Athanasius in his Epistle to Dracontius, who refused to be Bishop, says,
Praedicando.
If all men had been of your mind, who should have made you a Christian? who
should have been enabled to have ministered Sacraments unto you, if there had
been no Bishop? But when he saw that he refused it therefore, because men when
they come to that state, give themselves more liberty then such as labored in
inferior places did, and Dracontius seemed loath to open himself to the
danger of that tentation, Athanasius says, Licebit tibi in Episcopatu esurire,
sitire, Fear not, I warrant you, you may be poor enough in a Bishopric; or
if you be rich, no man will hinder you from living soberly in a plentiful
fortune; Novimus Episcopos jejunantes, says he, and Monachos comedentes, I
have known a Bishop fast, when a Monk, or an Hermit has made a good meal;
Nec corona pro locis, sed pro factis redditur, God does not crown every man
that comes to the place, but him only that does the duties of the place, when
he is in it. And here one of the Duties that induce our crown, is Preaching, I
have gone among you preaching.

Howsoever it be in practice in the Church of Rome, that Church durst not
appear to the world, but in that Declaration, Praecipuum Episcoporum munus est
praedicatio, Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. c. 2.
The principal office of the Bishop is to preach. And as there is no Church in
Christendom, (nay, let us magnify God in the fullness of an evident truth)
not all the Churches of God in Christendom, have more, or more useful
preaching, then ours has, from those to whom the Cure of Souls belongs: so
neither were there ever any times, in which more men were preferred for former
preaching, nor that continued it more, after their preferments, then in these
our times. There may be, there should be a Transiverunt, A passing from place
to place, but still it is as it should be, Praedicando, A passing for
Preaching, and a passing to Preaching; And then, a Preaching conditioned so, as
S. Paul's was, I have gone among you, preaching the Kingdom of God.

The Kingdom of God, Regnum Dei.
is the Gospel of God; that Gospel which the Apostle calls the glorious Gospel
of God. A Kingdom consists not of slaves; slaves that have no will of their
own. The children of the Kingdom have so a will of their own, as that no man
is damned, but for that, which he would not avoid, nor saved against his will;
So we preach a Kingdom. A Kingdom acknowledges all their happiness from the
King; So do we all the good use of all our faculties, will and all from the
grace of the King of heaven; so we preach a Kingdom. A Kingdom is able to
subsist of it self, without calling in Forrainers; The Gospel is so too,
without calling in Traditions; and so we preach a Kingdom. A Kingdom
requires, besides fundamental subsistence, grounded especially in offensive,
and defensive power, a support also of honor, and dignity, and outward
splendour; The Church of God requires also, besides unanimity in fundamental
Doctrines, an equanimity, and a mildness, and a charity, in handling
problematicall points, and also requires order, and comeliness in the outward
face, and habit thereof; And so we preach a Kingdom. So we preach a Kingdom,
as that we banish from thence, all imaginary fatality, and all decretory
impossibility of concurrence, and cooperation to our own salvation, And yet we
banish all pride, and confidence, that any natural faculties in us, though
quickened by former grace, can lead us to salvation, without a continual
succession of more and more grace; And so we preach a Kingdom; So, as that we
banish all spiritual treason, in setting up new titles, or making any thing
equal to God, or his Word, And we banish all spiritual felony or robbery, in
despoyling the Church, Psalm. 45.13.
either of Discipline, or of Possessions, either of Order, or of Ornaments. Be
the Kings Daughter all glorious within; Yet, all her glory is not within; For,
Her clothing is of wrought gold, says that text. Still may she glory in her
internal glory, in the sincerity, and in the integrity of Doctrinall truths,
and glory too in her outward comeliness, and beauty. So pray we, and so preach
we the Kingdom of God. And so we have done with our first Part.

Our second Part, 2 Part.
to which in our order we are now come, is a passionate valediction, Now I
know, that all you shall see my face no more; where first we inquire how he
knew it. But why do we inquire that? They that heard him did not so: They
heard it, and believed it, Acts 17.10.
and lamented it. When S. Paul preached at Berea, his story says, that he was
better believed there, then at Thessalonica; And the reason is given, That
there were Nobler persons there; Persons of better quality, of better natures,
and dispositions, and of more ingenuity; and so, as it is added, They received
the word with all readiness of mind. Prejudices, and disaffections, and
under-valuations of the abilities of the Preacher, in the hearer, disappoint
the purpose of the Holy Ghost, frustrate the labors of the man, and injure and
defraud the rest of the Congregation, who would, and would justly, like that
which is said, if they were not misled, and shaked by those hearers: And so
work also such jealousies and suspicions, that though his abilities be good,
yet his end upon his Auditory, is not their edification, but to work upon them,
to other purposes. Though we require not an implicit faith in you, that you
believe, because we say it, yet we require a holy Nobleness in you, A
religious good nature, a conscientious ingenuity, that you remember from whom
we come, from the King of heaven, and in what quality, as his Ambassadors; And
so be apt to believe, that since we must return to him that sent us, and give
him a relation of our negotiation, we dare not transgress our Commission. The
Bereans are praised for this, That they searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those things that Paul said were so; But this begun not at a jealousy, or
suspicion in them, that they doubted, that that which he said, was not so, nor
proceeded not to a gladness, or to a desire, that they might have taken him in
a lie, or might have found, that that which he said, was not so; But they
searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so, that so, having formerly
believed him when he preached, they might establish that belief, which they
had received, by that, which was the infallible rock, and foundation of all,
The Scriptures; They searched; but they searched for confirmation, and not upon
suspicion.

In our present case, they to whom S. Paul said this, do not ask S. Paul how
he knew, that they should see his face no more; they believed as we do, that
he had it by revelation from God; and such knowledge is faith. Tricubitalis er
at, and coelum attingit, says S. Chrysostom; S. Paul was a man of low
stature; but four foot and a half high, says he; and yet his head reached to
the highest heaven, and his eyes saw, and his ears heard the counsels of God.
Scarce any Ambassador can show so many Letters of his Masters own hand, as S.
Paul could produce Revelations; His King came to him, as often as other Kings
write to their Ambassadors. Acts 9.4. Gal. 1.1. Gal. 2. Acts 13. Acts 16. Acts
18. Acts 17.
He had his first calling by Revelation; He had his Commission, his
Apostle-ship by Revelation; So he was directed to Jerusalem, And so to Rome;
to both by Revelation; and so to Macedonia also. So he was confirmed, and
comforted in the night, by Vision, by Revelation; And so he was assured of the
lives of all them, that suffered shipwreck with him at Malta. All his Cate
chismes in the beginning, all his Dictats in his proceeding, all his
encouragements at his departing, were all Revelation.

Every good man has his conversation in heaven, and heaven it self had a
conversation in S. Paul; And so, even the book of the Acts of the Apostles, is,
as it were, a first Part of the book of Revelation; Revelations to S. Paul, as
the other was to S. John. This is the way that Christ promised to take with
him, I will show him, Acts 9.16. Acts 20.11.
how great things he must suffer for my sake. And this way Christ pursued, At
Caesarea, Agabus a Prophet came from Iudaea to Paul, and took Paul's girdle, and
bound his own hands, and feet, and said, Thus says the Holy Ghost, So shall
the Jews bind the man that owes the girdle, and shall deliver him into the
hands of the Gentiles. This then was his case in our text, (for, that
revelation, by Agabus his Prophecy, of his suffering was after this) he had a
revelation that he should never be seen by them more; but when, or how, or
where he should dye, he had not had a particular revelation then. He says, a
little before our text, Ver. 12.
I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem: That is, so bound by the Spirit, that
if I should not go, I should resist the Spirit; But, says he, I know not the
things that shall befall me there; not at Jerusalem; much less the last, and
bitterest things, which were farther off; the things that should befall him at
Rome, where he died. But from the very first, he knew enough of his death, to
shake any soul, that were not sustained by the Spirit of God; which is another
Branch in this Part, That no revelations, no apprehensions of death removed him
from his holy intrepidnesse, and religious constancy.

We have a story in an Author of S. Hieromes time, Palladius, Non perterritus.
that in a Monastery of S. Isidors, every Monk that dyed in that house, was
able, and ever did tell all the society, that at such a time he should die. God
does extraordinary things, for extraordinary ends; but since we see no such
ends, nor use of this, we are at our liberty, to doubt of the thing it self.
God told Simeon, that he should not die, till he had seen Christ; but he did
not tell him, that he should die as soon as he had seen him; But so much as
was told him, was enough to make him content to die, when he had seen him, and
to come to his Nunc dimittis, to that cheerfulness, as to sing his own
Requiem. God accustomed S. Paul, no doubt, to such notifications from him, and
such apprehensions in himself of death, as, because it was not new, it could
not be terrible. When S. Paul was able to make that protestation, I protest by
your rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily; 1 Cor.
15.31. 2 Cor. 11.23.
And again, I am in prisons often, and often in deaths, I die often; No
Executioner could have told him, you must die to morrow, but he could have
said, Alas I died yesterday, and yesterday was twelvemonth, and seven year,
and every year, and month, and week, and day, and hour before that. There is
nothing so near Immortality, as to die daily; for not to feel death, is
Immortality; and only he shall never feel death, that is exercised in the
continual Meditation thereof; Continual Mortification is Immortality.

As Cordials lose their virtue and become no Cordials, if they be taken every
day, so poisons do their venom too; If a man use himself to them, in small
proportions at first, he may grow to take any quantity: He that takes a dram of
Death to day, may take an ounce to morrow, and a pound after; He that begins
with that mortification of denying himself his delights, (which is a dram of
Death) shall be able to suffer the tribulations of this world, (which is a
greater measure of death) and then Death it self, not only patiently, but
cheerfully; And to such a man, death is not a dissolution, but a
redintegration; not a divorce of body and soul, but a sending of both diverse
ways, (the soul upward to Heaven, the body downward to the earth) to an
indissoluble marriage to him, who, for the salvation of both, assumed both, our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Psalm. 2.17.
Therefore does S. Paul say of himself, If I be offered upon the sacrifice,
and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all, that is, It is a
just occasion of our common joy, on your part, and on mine too; And therefore
does S. Augustine say in his behalf, whatsoever can be threatened him, Si
potest vivere, tolerabile est, Whatsoever does not take away life, may be
endured; for, if it could not be endured, it would take away life; and, Si non
potest vivere, says he, If it do take away life, what shall he feel, when
he is dead? He adds the reason of all, Opus cum fine, merces sine fine; Death
has an end, but their reward that dye for Christ, and their peace, that dye in
Christ, has no end. Therefore was not S. Paul afraid of melancholique
apprehensions, by drawing his death into contemplation, and into discourse; he
was not afraid to think, nor to talk of his death; But then S. Paul had
another end in doing so here, (which is our last consideration) To make the
deeper impression in them, to whom he preached then, by telling them, that he
knew they should see his face no more.

This that S. Paul says, Moriturus.
he says to the Ephesians; but not at Ephesus: He was departed from thence the
year before: for, upon the news that Claudius the Emperor, who persecuted
the Christians, was dead, he purposed to go by Jerusalem to Rome. In that
peregrination and visitation of his, his way fell out after to be by Miletus, a
place not far from Ephesus; Ver. 22.
He was bound in the Spirit, as he says here, to go to Jerusalem; and
therefore he could not visit them at Ephesus. A man may have such obligations,
even for the service of God upon him, as that it shall not be in his power, to
do that service which he may owe, and desire to pay in some particular Church.
It was in part S. Paul's case: Verse 17.
But yet he did what he could; from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, to call the
Elders of that Church thither; And then he preached this short, but powerful
Sermon. And, as his manner ever was, (though still without prevaricating or
forbearing to denounce the judgments of God upon them, in cases necessary) to
make those whom he preached or writ to, as benevolent, and well-affected to him
as he could, (for he was Omnia omnibus, Made all things to all men) to which
purpose it is that he speaks, and poures out himself, Gal 4.14.
with such a loving thankfulness to the Galatians, Ye received me as an Angel
of God, even as Christ Jesus himself; pursuing, I say, this manner of a
mutual endearing, and a reciprocal embowelling of himself in the
Congregation, and the Congregation in him, (as, certainly, if we consider all
unions, (the natural union of Parents and children, the matrimonial union of
Husband and Wife) no union is so spiritual, nor so near to that, by which we
are made Idem spiritus cum Domino, The same Spirit with the Lord, as when a
good Pastor, and a good flock meet, and are united in holy affections to one
another) to unite himself to his Ephesians inseparably, even after his
separation, to be still present with them, in his everlasting absence, and to
live with them even after death, to make the deeper impressions of all his
past, and present instructions, he speaks to them as a dying man, I know you
shall see my face no more.

Why did he so? S. Paul did not dye in eleven years after this: But he dyed to
them, for bodily presence, now; They were to see him no more. As the day of my
death is the day of Judgment to me, so this day of his departing was the day
of his death to them. And for himself, from this time, when he gave this
judgment of death upon himself, all the rest of his life was but a leading
far off, to the place of execution. For first, very soon after this, Agabus
gave him notice of manifold afflictions, in that Girdle which we spoke of
before. There he was bound, and emprisoned at Jerusalem; from thence sent bound
to Caesarea; practiced upon to be killed by the way; forced to appeal to
Caesar; upon that Appeal sent prisoner to Rome; ship-wracked upon the way at
Malta; Emprisoned under guard, though not close prisoner, two years after his
coming thither; and, though dismissed, and so enabled to visit some Churches,
yet laid hold upon again by Nero, and executed. So that as it was literally
true, that the Ephesians never saw his face, after this valediction, so he may
be said to have dyed then, in such a sense, as himself says to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.
That some men were baptized, Pro mortuis, for dead, that is, as good as dead,
past all hope of recovery. So he dyed then.

Now beloved, who has seen a Father, or a friend, or a neighbor, or a
malefactor dye, Luke 16.30.
and has not been affected with his dying words? Nay Father Abraham, says
Dives, that will not serve, That they have Moses and the Prophets; Sermons will
not serve their turns; But if one went to them from the Dead, they would
repent. And the nearest to this is, if one speak to them that is going to the
dead. If he had been a minute in Heaven thou would believe him; and will thou not believe him a minute before? Did not Jacob observe the Angels
ascending, as well as descending upon that ladder? Trust a good soul going to
God, as well as coming from God? And then, as our Casuists say, That
whatsoever a man is bound to do, In articulo mortis, at the point of death, by
way of Confession or otherwise, he is bound to do, when he comes to the
Sacrament, or when he undertakes any action of danger, because then he should
prepare himself as if he were dying: so, when you come to hear us here, who
are come from God, hear us with such an affection, as if we were going to God,
as if you heard us upon our deathbeds. The Pulpit is more then our deathbed;
for, we are bound to the same truth, and sincerity here, as if we were upon our
deathbed, and then Gods Ordinance is more expressly executed here, then there.
He that mingles falsehood with his last dying words, deceives the world
inexcusably, because he speaks in the person of an honest man, but he that
mingles false informations in his preaching, does so much more, because he
speaks in the person of God himself.

They to whom S. Paul spoke there, are said all to have wept, and to have
fallen on Paul's neck, and to have kissed him; But it is added, they sorrowed
most of all for those words, That they should see his face no more. When any of
those men, to whom for their holy calling, and their religious pains in their
calling, you owe and pay a reverence, are taken from you by death, or
otherwise, there is a godly sorrow due to that, and in a great proportion. In
the death of one Elisha, King Ioash apprehended a ruin of all; He wept over
his face, 2 King. 13.14.
and said, O my father, my father, the Charet of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof; He lost the solicitude of a father, he lost the power and strength of
the Kingdom, in the loss of one such Prophet. But when you have so sorrowed
for men, upon whom your devotion has put, and justly put such a valuation,
remember that a greater loss, then the loss of a thousand such men may fall
upon you. Consider the difference between the Candle and the Candlestick,
between the Preacher of the Gospel, and the Gospel it self; between a
religious man, and Religion it self: The removing of the Candlestick, and the
withdrawing of the Gospel, and the profaning of Religion, is infinitely a
greaten loss, then if hundreds of the present laborers should be taken away
from us. Mat. 8.12.21.43. Apoc. 2.5.
The children of the kingdom may be cast into utter darkness; and That
kingdom may be given to others which shall bring forth the fruits thereof;
and, The Lord may come, and come quickly and remove our Candlestick out of his
place; pray we that in our days he may not. And truly where God threatens to
do so in the Revelation, it is upon a Church, of which God himself gives good
testimony, The Church of Ephesus; of her Labors, that is, Preaching; Ver. 2.
of her Patience, that is, suffering; of her Impatience, her not suffering the
evil, that is, her integrity and impartiality, without connivence or
toleration; And of her not fainting, that is, perseverance; and of her having
the Nicolaitans, that is, sincerity in the truth, Ver. 6.
and a holy animosity against all false Doctrines: And yet, says he, I have
something to say against thee.

When thou have testified their assiduity in Preaching, their constancy in
suffering, their sincerity in believing, their integrity in professing, their
perseverance in continuing, their zeal in hating of all error in others, when
thou thy self have given this evidence in their behalf, can thou Lord Jesu
have any thing to say against them? what then shall we, we that fail in all
these, look to hear from thee? what was their crime? Because they had left
their first love; Left the fullness of their former zeal to Gods cause. Now,
if our case be so much worse then theirs, as that we are not only guilty of
all those sins, of which Christ discharges them, and have not only left our
first love, but in a manner lost all our love, all our zeal to his glory, and
be come to a luke warmness in his service, and a general neglect of the
means of grace, how justly may we fear, not only that he will come, and come
quickly, but that he may possibly be upon his way already, to remove our
Candlestick, and withdraw the Gospel from us? And if it be a sad thing to you,
to hear a Paul, a holy man say, You shall see my face no more, on this side
the Ite maledicti, Go ye accursed into hell fire, there cannot be so sad a
voice, as to hear Christ Jesus say, You shall see my face no more. Facies Dei
est, qua Deus nobis innotescit, says S. Augustine, That is the face of God to
us, by which God manifests himself to us. God manifests himself to us in the
Word, and in the Sacraments. If we see not them in their true lines and
colors, (the Word and Sacraments sincerely and religiously preached and
administered) we do not see them, but masks upon them; And, if we do not see
them, we do not see the face of Christ; And I could as well stand under his
Nescio vos, which he said to the negligent Virgins, I know you not, or his
Nescivi vos, which he said to those that boast of their works, Mat. 7.22.
I never knew you, as under this fearful thunder from his mouth, You shall see
my face no more, I will absolutely withdraw, or I will suffer profaneness to
enter into those means of your salvation, Word, and Sacraments, which I have
so long continued in their sincerity toward you, and you have so long abused.

Blessed God say not so to us yet; yet let the tree grow another year, before
thou cut it down; And as thou have dug about it, by bringing judgments
upon our neighbors, so water it with thy former rain, the dew of thy grace,
and with thy later rain, the tears of our contrition, that we may still
seethy face; here and hereafter; here, in thy kingdom of Grace; hereafter in
thy kingdom of Glory, which thou have purchased for us, with the inestimable
price of thine incorruptible blood. Amen.

SERMON. XLVIII. Preached at S. Paul's in the Evening, Upon the day of S. PAUL'S
Conversion. 1628.
ACTS 28.6. They changed their minds, and said, That he was a God.


THe scene, where this canonization, this super-canonization, (for, it was not
of a Saint, but of a God) was transacted, was the I Will of Malta: The person
canonized, and proclaimed for a God, was S. Paul, at that time by shipwreck
cast upon that Island. And having for some years heretofore continued that
custom in this place, at this time of the year, when the Church celebrates the
Conversion of S. Paul, (as it does this day) to handle some part of his Story,
pursuing that custom now, I chose that part, which is knit and wound up in
this Text, Then they changed their minds, and said, He is a God. S. Paul found
himself in danger of being oppressed in judgment, and thereby was put to a
necessity of Appealing to Caesar: By virtue of that Appeal being sent to Rome,
by Sea, he was surprised with such storms, as threatened inevitable ruin; But
the Angel of God stood by him, and assured him, that none of those two hundred
seaventy six persons, which were in the ship with him, should perish; According
to this assurance, though the ship perished, all the passengers were saved, and
recovered this land, Malta. Where being courteously received by the
Inhabitants, though otherwise Barbarians, S. Paul doing so much for himself
and for his company, as to gather a bundle of sticks to mend the fire, there
flew a Viper from the heat, and fastened on his hand. They thereupon said among
themselves, No doubt, this man is a murderer, whom, though he have escaped the
Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to live. But when he shaked off the Viper into
the fire, and received no harm, and they had looked, that he should have
swollen, and fallen down dead suddenly, after they had looked a great while, and
saw no harm come to him, Then (and then enters our Text) They changed their
minds, and said, He is a God. Almighty God had bred up S. Paul so; so he had
catechized him all the way, with vicissitudes, and revolutions from extreme to
extreme. He had taught him how to want, and how to abound; how to bear honor,
and dishonor: He permitted an Angel of Satan to buffet him, (so he gave him
some sense of Hell) He gave him a Rapture, an Ecstasy; and in that, an
appropinquation, an approximation to himself, and so some possession of Heaven
in this life. So God proceeded with him here in Malta too; He passed him in
their mouths from extreme to extreme; A Viper serses him, and they condemn him
for a murderer; He shakes off the Viper; and they change their minds, and say,
He is a God.

The first words of our Text carry us necessarily so far back, Divisio.
as to see from what they changed; And their periods are easily seen; Their
Terminus a quo, and their Terminus ad quem, were these; first, that he was a
Murderer, Then that he was a God. An error in Morality; They censure deeply
upon light evidence: An error in Divinity; They transfer the Name and
estimation of a God, upon an unknown Man. Place both the errors in Divinity;
(so you may justly do) And then there is an error in Charity, a hasty and
inconsiderate condemning; And an error in faith, a superstitious creating of an
imaginary God. Now, upon these two general Considerations will this Exercise
consist; first, that it is natural Logique, an argumentation naturally
imprinted in Man, to argue, and conclude thus, Great calamities are inflicted,
therefore God is greatly provoked; These men of Malta were but natural men,
but Barbarians, (as S. Luke calls them) and yet they argue, and conclude so;
Here is a judgment executed, therefore here is evidence, that God is
displeased. And so far they kept within the limits of humanity and piety too;
But when they descended hastily and inconsiderately, to particular, and
personal applications, This judgment upon this man is an evidence of his
guiltiness in this offense, then they transgressed the bounds of charity; That
because a Viper had seized Paul's hand, Paul must needs be a murderer.

And then when we shall have passed thorough those things, which belong to that
first Consideration, which consists of these two Propositions, That to conclude
so, God strikes, therefore he is angry, is natural, but hastily to apply this
to the condemnation of particular persons, is uncharitable, we shall descend to
our second Consideration, to see what they did, when they changed their minds,
They said, He is a God. And, as in the former part, we shall have seen, That
there is in man a natural Logique, but that strays into uncharitableness; So
in this we shall see, That there is in man a natural Religion, but that
strayes into superstition and idolatry; Naturally man is so far from being
divested of the knowledge and sense of God, from thinking that there is no God,
as that he is apt to make more Gods then he should, and to worship them for
Gods, whom he should not. These men of Malta were but Natural men, but
Barbarians, (says S. Luke) yet they were so far from denying God, as that they
multiplied Gods, and because the Viper did Paul no harm, they change their
minds, and say, He is a God.

And from these two general considerations, and these two branches in each,
That there is in man a Natural Logique, but that strayes into Fallacies; And a
Natural Religion, but that strayes into Idolatry, and Superstition, we shall
derive, and deduce unto you, such things as we conceive most to conduce to your
edification, from this knot, and summary abridgement of this Story, Then they
changed their minds, and said, He is a God.

First then for the first Proposition of our first part, That this is natural
Logique, 1. Part.
an argumentation imprinted in every man, God strikes, therefore God is angry,
He, whom they that even hate his name, (our Adversaries of the Roman
persuasion) do yet so far tacitly reverence, as that, though they will not
name him, they will transfer, and insert his expositions of Scriptures, into
their works, and pass them as their own, that as Calvin, He, Calvin, collects
this proposition from this story, Passim receptum omnibus saeculis, In all
ages, and in all places this has ever been acknowledged by all men, That when
God strikes, God is angry, And when God is angry, God strikes; and therefore,
says he, Quoties occurrit memorabilis aliqua calamitas, simul in mentem
veniat, as often as you see any extraordinary calamity, conclude that God has
been extraordinarily provoked, and hasten to those means, by which the anger
and indignation of God may be appeased again. So that for this Doctrine, a man
needs not be preached unto, a man needs not be catechized; A man needs not
read the Fathers, nor the Councels, nor the Schoolmen, nor the Ecclesiastical
story, nor Summists, nor Casuists, nor Canonists, no nor the Bible it self for
this Doctrine; for this Doctrine, That when God strikes he is angry, and when
he is angry he strikes, the natural man has as full a Library in his bosom,
as the Christian.

We, we that are Christians have one Author of ours, that tells us, Vindicta
mihi, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
Revenge is mine, says the Lord; Moses tells us so; And in that, we have a
first and a second Lesson; First, that since Revenge is in Gods hands, it will
certainly fall upon the Malefactor, God does not mistake his mark; And then,
since Revenge is in his hands, no man must take Revenge out of his hands, or
make himself his own Magistrate, or revenge his own quarrel. And as we, we
that are Christians, have our Author, Moses, that tells us this, the natural
man has his secular Author, Theocritus, that tells him as much, Reperit Deus
nocentes, God always finds out the guilty man. In which, the natural man has
also a first, and a second Lesson too; First, that since God finds out the
Malefactor, he never scapes; And then, since God does find him at last, God
sought him all the while; Though God strike late, yet he pursued him long
before; and many a man feels the sting in his conscience, long before he feels
the blow in his body. That God finds, and therefore seeks, That God overtakes,
and therefore pursues, That God overthrows, and therefore resists the wicked,
is a Natural conclusion as well as a Divine.

The same Author of ours, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Moses, tells us, The Lord our God is Lord of Lords, and God of gods, and
regards no man's person. The natural man has his Author too, that tells him,
Semper Virgins Furiae, The Furies, (they whom they conceive to execute Revenge
upon Malefactors) are always Virgins, that is, not to be corrupted by any
solicitations. That no dignity shelters a man from the justice of God, is a
natural conclusion, as well as a Divine. Psalm. 55.23.
We have a sweet Singer of Israel that tells us, Non dimidiabit dies, The bloody
and deceitful man shall not live out half his days: And the natural man
has his sweet singer too, a learned Poet that tells him, that seldom any
enormous Malefactor enjoyes siccam mortem, (as he calls it) a dry, an un-bloody
death. That blood requires blood, is a natural conclusion, as well as a
Divine. Our sweet Singer tells us again, That if he fly to the farthest ends of
the earth, or to the sea, or to heaven, or to hell, he shall find God there;
And the natural man has his Author, that tells him, Qui fugit, non effugit, He
that runs away from God, does not escape God. That there is no sanctuary, no
privileged place against which Gods Quo Warranto does not lie, is a natural
conclusion, as well as a divine; Sanguis Abel, is our Proverb, That Abels blood
cries for revenge, And sanguis Aesopi is the natural man's Proverb, That Esops
blood cries for revenge; for Esops blood was shed upon an indignation taken at
sacrifice, as Abels was. S. Paul's Deus Remunerator, That there is a God, and
that that God is a just rewarder of men's actions, is a natural conclusion, as
well as a Divine.

When God speaks to us, us that are Christians, in the Scriptures, he speaks as
in a Primitive, and Original language; when he speaks to the natural man, by
the light of nature, though speak as in a translation into another language,
yet he speaks the same thing; Every where he offers us this knowledge, That
where he strikes, he is angry, and where he is angry, he does strike. Therefore
Calvin might, as he does, safely and piously establish his Quoties occurrit, As
often as you see an extraordinary calamity, conclude that God is
extraordinarily provoked: And he might as safely have established more then
that, That wheresoever God is angry, and in that anger strikes, God sees sin
before; No punishment from God, where there is no sin. God may have glory in
the condemnation of man; but except that man were a sinful man, God could have
no glory in his condemnation. Dan. 9.23.
At the beginning of thy prayer, the commandment went out, says Gabriel to
Daniel; But till Danicl prayed, there went out no commandment. At the beginning
of the sinners sin, God bends his bow, and whets his arrows, and at last he
shoots; But if there were no sin in me, God had no mark to shoot at; for God
hates not me, nor any thing that he has made.

And farther we carry not your consideration upon this first branch of our
first Part, Naturally man has this Logique, to conclude, where God strikes,
God is angry; when God is angry, he will strike: But God never strikes in such
anger, but with relation to sin. These men of Malta, natural men, did so, and
erred not in so doing; They erred when they came to particulars, to hasty and
inconsiderate applications, for that is uncharitableness, and constitutes our
second branch of this part.

When one of the Consuls of Rome, Charitas.
Caninius, dyed the same day that he was made Consul, Cicero would needs pass
a jest upon that accident, and say, The State had had a vigilant Conful of
Caninius, a watchful Consul, because he never slept in all his Consulship; for
he dyed before he went to bed. But this was justly thought a fault in Cicero,
for calamities are not the subject of jests; They are not so casual things.
But yet, though they come from a sure hand, they are not always evidences of
Gods displeasure upon that man upon whom they fall. That was the issue between
Job and his friends; They relied upon that, Job 4.7.
pursued that which they had laid down, Remember, who ever perished being
innocent, or where were the righteous cut off? Job relied upon that, pursued
that which he had laid down; If I justify my self, mine own words shall
condemn me; Job 9.20.
(selfe-justification is a selfe-condemnation) If I say I am perfect, that also
shall prove me perverse, says Job. (No man is so far from purity and
perfection, as he that thinks himself perfect and pure) But yet, says he
there, Though I were perfect, this is one thing, and therefore I say it, God
destroys the perfect and the wicked. Gods outward proceeding with a man in
this world, is no evidence to another, what he intends him in the next. In no
case? In no case, (on this side of Revelation) for the world to come. Till I be
a Judge of that man's person and actions, and being his Judge have clear
evidence, and be not misled by rumors from others, by passion, and prejudices
in my self, I must pass no judgment upon him, in this world, nor say, This
fell upon him for this crime. But whatsoever my capacity be, or whatsoever the
Evidence, I must suspend my judgment for the world to come. Therefore says
the Apostle, Judge nothing before the time: 1 Cor. 4.5.
When is the time? When I am made Judge, and when I have clear evidence, then
is the time to pass my judgment for this world; But for a final condemnation
in the world to come, the Apostle expresses himself fully in that place, Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and manifest the counsels of the heart.

It was a wise and a pious counsel that Gamaliel gave that State, Abstinete,
Acts 5.33.
forbear a while, give God sea-roome, give him his latitude, and you may
find, that you mistook at first; for God has diverse ends in inflicting
calamities, and he that judges hastily, may soon mistake Gods purpose. It is a
remarkable expressing which the holy Ghost has put into the mouth of Naomi,
Call not me Naomi, says she there; Naomi is lovely, Ruth 1.10.
and loving, and beloved; But call me Mara, says she, Mara is bitterness: But
why so? For, says she, The Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me:
Bitterly, and very bitterly. But yet so he has with many that he loves full
well. It is true, says Naomi, but there is more in my case then so; The
Almighty has afflicted me, and the Lord has testified against me; Testified,
there is my misery; that is, done enough, given evidence enough for others to
believe, and to ground a judgment upon it, that he has abandoned me utterly,
forsaken me for ever. Yet God meant well to Naomi for all this Testification,
and howsoever others might mis-interpret Gods proceeding with her.

That Ostracisme which was practiced amongst the Athenians, and that Petalisme
which was practiced amongst the Syracusians, by which Laws, the most eminent,
and excellent persons in those States were banished, not for any crime imputed
to them, nor for any popular practices set on foot by them, but to conserve a
parity, and equality in that State, this Ostracisme, this Petalisme was not
without good use in those governments. If God will lay heaviest calamities upon
the best men, If God will exercise an Ostracisme, a Petalisme in his state, who
shall search into his Arcana imperii, into the secrets of his government? who
shall ask a reason of his actions? who shall doubt of a good end in all his
ways? Our Savior Christ has shut up that way of rash judgment upon such
occasions, Luke 13.2.
when he says, Suppose ye, that those Galileans whom Herod slew, or those
eighteen whom the fall of the Tower of Siloe slew, were greater sinners then
the rest? It is not safely, it is not charitably concluded. And therefore he
carries their thoughts, as far on the other side, That he that suffered a
calamity, was not only not the greatest, but no sinner; for so Christ says,
John 9.3.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents; (speaking of the man that was
born blind.) Not that he, or his Parents had not sinned; but that that
calamity was not laid upon him, in contemplation of any sin, but only for an
occasion of the manifestation of Christ's Divinity, in the miraculous recovery
of that blind man. Therefore says Luther excellently, and elegantly, Non
judicandum de cruce, secundum praedicamentum Quantitatis, sed Relationis; We
must not judge of a calamity, by the predicament of Quantity, How great that
calamity is, but by the predicament of Relation, to what God referres that
calamity, and what he intends in it; For, Deus ultionum Deus, Psalm. 93.1.
(as S. Hierome reads that place) God is the God of revenge, And, Deus
ultionum libere agit, This God of revenge, revenges at his own liberty, when,
and where, and how it pleases him.

And therefore, as we are bound to make good constructions of those corrections
that God lays upon us, so are we to make good interpretations of those
judgments which he casts upon others. First, for our selves, that which is
said in S. Matthew, Mat. 24.30.
That at the day of judgment shall appear in heaven, the sign of the Son of
Man, is frequently, ordinarily received by the Fathers, to be intended of the
Cross; That before Christ himself appear, his sign, the Cross shall
appear in the clouds. Now, this is not literally so, in the Text, nor is it
necessarily deduced, but ordinarily by the Ancients it is so accepted, and
though the sign of the Son of Man, may be some other thing, yet of this sign,
the Cross, there may be this good application, That when God affords thee,
this manifestation of his Cross, in the participation of those crosses and
calamities that he suffered here, when thou have this sign of the Son of Man
upon thee, conclude to thy self that the Son of Man Christ Jesus is coming
toward thee; and as thou have the sign; thou shall have the substance, as
thou have his Cross, thou shall have his Glory. For, this is that which the
Apostle intends; Phil. 1.29.
Unto you it is given, (not laid upon you as a punishment, but given you as a
benefit) not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer for Christ. Where, the
Apostle seems to make our crosses a kind of assurance, as well as our faith;
for so he argues, Not only to believe, but to suffer; for, howsoever faith be
a full evidence, yet our suffering is a new seal even upon that faith. And an
evident seal, a conspicuous, a glorious seal. Cyprian.
Quid gloriosius, quam Collegam Christi in passione factum fuisse? What can be
more glorious, then to have been made a Colleague, a partner with Christ in his
sufferings, and to have fulfilled his sufferings in my flesh. For that is the
highest degree, which we can take in Christ's school, as S. Denis the
Areopagite expresses it, A Deo doctus, non solum divina discit, sed divina
patitur, (which we may well translate, or accommodate thus) He that is
thoroughly taught by Christ, does not only believe all that Christ says, but
conformes him to all that Christ did, and is ready to suffer as Christ
suffered. Truly, if it were possible to fear any defect of joy in heaven, all
that could fall into my fear would be but this, that in heaven I can no longer
express my love by suffering for my God, for my Savior. A greater joy cannot
enter into my heart then this, To suffer for him that suffered for me. As God
saw that way prosper in the hands of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.30.
he sent for Ioab, and Ioab came not, he came not when he sent a second time,
but when he sent Messengers to burn up his corn, then Ioab came, and then he
time, but when he sent Messengers to burn up his corn, then Ioab came, and
then he complied with Absalom, and seconded and accomplished his desires: So
God calls us in his own outward Ordinances, and, a second time in his temporal
blessings, and we come not; but we come the sooner, if he burn our Corn, if
he draw us by afflicting us.

Now, as we are able to argue thus in our own cases, and in our own behalfes,
as when a vehement calamity lies upon me, I can plead out of Gods precedents,
and out of his method be able to say, 2 Samuel 5.4.
This will not last: David was not ten years in banishment, but he enjoyed the
Kingdom forty: God will recompense my hours of sorrow, with days of joy; If
the calamity be both vehement and long, yet I can say with his blessed servant
Augustine; Et cum blandiris pater es, and pater es cum caedis, I feel the hand
of a father upon me when thou strokest me, and when thou strikest me I feel
the hand of a father too, Blandiris ne deficiam, caedis ne peream, I know thy
meaning when thou strokest me, it is, lest I should faint under thy hand, and I
know thy meaning when thou strikest me, it is, lest I should not know thy hand;
If the weight, and continuation of this calamity testify against me, (as Naomi
said) that is, give others occasion to think, and to speak ill of me, as of a
man, for some secret sins, forsaken of God, still Nazianzens refuge is my
refuge, Hoc mihi commentor, This is my meditation, Si falsa objicit
convitiator, non me attingit, If that which mine enemy says of me, be false,
it concerns not me, he cannot mean me, It is not I that he speaks of, I am
no such man; And then, Si vera dicit, If that which he says betrue, it begun
not to be true, then when he said it, but was true when I did it; and therefore
I must blame my self for doing, not him for speaking it; If I can argue thus
in mine own case, and in mine own behalf, and not suspect Gods absence from
me, because he lays calamities upon me, let me be also as charitable toward
another, and not conclude ill, upon ill accidents; for there is nothing so ill,
out of which, God, and a godly man cannot draw good. When John Hus was at the
stake to be burnt, his eye fixed upon a poor plain Country-fellow, whom he
observed to be busier then the rest, and to run oftener, to fetch more and more
fagots, to burn him, and he said thereupon no more but this, O sancta
simplicitas! O holy simplicity! He meant that that man, being then under an
invincible ignorance, misled by that zeal, thought he did God service in
burning him. But such an interpretation will hardly be appliable to any of
these hasty and inconsiderate Judges of other men, that give way to their own
passion; for zeal, and uncharitableness are incompatible things; zeal and
uncharitableness cannot consist together: and there was evident
uncharitableness in these men of Maltas proceeding, when, because the Viper
seized his hand, they condemned him for a murderer.

It is true, they saw a concurrence of circumstances, and that is always more
weighty, then single evidence. They saw a man who had been near drowning; yet
he escaped that. They saw he had gathered a bundle of sticks, in which the Viper
was enwrapped, and yet did him no harm when it was in his hand; He escaped
that. And then they saw that Viper dart it self out of the fire again, and of
all the company fasten upon that man. What should they think of that man? In
Gods Name, what they would, to the advancement of Gods glory. They might justly
have thought that God was working upon that man, and had some great work to
do upon that man. We put no stop to zeal; we only tell you, where zeal
determines; where uncharitableness enters, zeal goes out, and passion
counterfeits that zeal. God seeks no glory out of the uncharitable condemning
of another man. And then, in this proceeding of these men, we justly note the
slipperinesse, the precipitation, the bottomelesnesse of uncharitableness, in
judgment; they could consist no where, till they charged him with murder,
Surely he is a murderer. Many crimes there were, and those capital, and such
as would have indueed death, on this side of murder, but they stopped at none,
till they came to the worst. And truly it is easy to be observed, in the
ways of this world, that when men have once conceived an uncharitable opinion
against another man, they are apt to believe from others, apt to imagine in
themselves any kind of ill, of that man; Sometimes so much, and so falsely, as
makes even that which is true, the less credible. For, when passionate men
will load a man with all, sad and equitable men begin to doubt whether any be
true; and a Malefactor scapes sometimes by being overcharged.

But I move not out of mine own sphere; my sphere is your edification, upon
this center, The proceeding of these men of Malta with S. Paul; upon them, and
upon you I look directly, and I look only, without any glance, any reflection
upon any other object. And therefore having said enough of those two Branches
which constitute our first Part, That to argue out of Gods judgments, his
displeasure is natural, but then that natural Logique should determine in the
zeal of advancing Gods glory, and not stray into an uncharitable condemning of
particular persons, because in this uncharitableness there is such a
slipperinesse, such a precipitation, such a bottomelesnesse, as that these
hasty censurers could stop no where till they came to the highest charge;
having said enough of this, we pass, in our order, to our second Part, to
that which they did, when they changed their minds, They changed their minds,
and said he was a God.

In this second part we consider first, 2 Part.
the incongruity of depending upon any thing in this world; for, all will
change. Men have considered usefully the incongruity of building the tower of
Babel, in this, That to have erected a Tower that should have carried that
height that they intended in that, the whole body of the earth, the whole
Globe, and substance thereof would not have served for a basis, for a
foundation to that Tower. If all the timber of all the forests in the world,
all the quarries of stones, all the mines of Lead and Iron had been laid
together, nay if all the earth and sea had been petrified, and made one stone,
all would not have served for a basis, for a foundation of that Tower; from
whence then must they have had their materials for all the superedifications?
So to establish a trust, a confidence, such an acquiescence as a man may rely
upon, all this world affords not a basis, a foundation; for every thing in this
world is fluid, and transitory, and sandy, and all dependence, all assurance
built upon this world, is but a building upon sand; all will change. It is
true, that a fair reputation, a good opinion of men, is, though not a
foundation to build upon, yet a fair stone in the building, and such a stone,
as every man is bound to provide himself of. For, for the most part, most men
are such, as most men take them to be; Neminem omnes, nemo omnes fefellit; All
the world never joined to deceive one man, nor was ever any one man able to
deceive all the world. Contemptu famae contemnuntur and virtutes, was so well
said by Tacitus, as it is pity S. Augustine said it not, They that neglect the
good opinion of others, neglect those virtues that should produce that good
opinion. Therefore S. Hierom protests to abhor that Paratum de trivio, as he
calls it, that vulgar, that street, that dunghill language, Satis mihi, as long
as mine own conscience reproaches me of nothing, I care not what all the world
says. We must care what the world says, and study that they may say well of
us. But when they do, though this be a fair stone in the wall, it is no
foundation to build upon, for, They change their minds.

Who do? Populus.
our text does not tell us who; The story does not tell us, of what quality and
condition these men of Malta were, who are here said to have changed their
minds. Likeliest they are to have been of the vulgar, the ordinary, the
inferior sort of people, because they are likeliest to have flocked and
gathered together upon this occasion of Paul's shipwreck upon that Island. And
that kind of people are always justly thought to be most subject to this
levity, To change their minds. The greatest Poet lays the greatest levity and
change that can be laid, to this kind of people; that is, In contraria, That
they change even from one extreme to another; Scinditur incertum studia in
contraria vulgus Where that Poet does not only mean, that the people will be
of diverse opinions from one another, for, for the most part they are not so;
for the most part they think, and wish, and love, and hate together; and they
do all by example, as others do, and upon no other reason, but therefore,
because others do. Neither was that Poet ever bound up by his words, that he
should say In contraria, because a milder, or more modified word would not
stand in his verse; but he said it, because it is really true, The people will
change into contrary opinions; And whereas an Angel it self cannot pass from
East to West, from extreme to extreme, without touching upon the way
between, the people will pass from extreme to extreme, without any middle
opinion; last minutes murderer, is this minutes God, and in an instant, Paul,
whom they sent to be judged in hell, Prove. 14.28.
is made a judge in heaven. The people will change. In the multitude of people
is the Kings honor; 2 Samuel 24.3.
And therefore Ioab made that prayer in the behalf of David, The Lord thy God
add unto thy people, how many soever they be, a hundred fold. But when David
came to number his people with a confidence in their number, God took away the
ground of that confidence, and lessened their number seventy thousand in three
days. Therefore as David could say, Psalm. 3.6.
I will not be afraid of ten thousand men, so he should say, I will not confide
in ten thousand men, though multiplied by millions; for they will change, and
at such an ebb, the popular man will lie, as a Whale upon the sands deserted
by the tide. We find in the Roman story, many examples (particularly in
Commodus his time, upon Cleander, principal Gentleman of his Chamber) of
severe executions upon men that have courted the people, though in a way of
charity, and giving them corn in a time of dearth, or upon like occasions.
There is danger in getting them, occasioned by jealousy of others, there is
difficulty in holding them, by occasion of levity in themselves; Therefore we
must say with the Prophet, Ier. 17.5.
Cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord. For, They, the people, will change their minds.

But yet there is nothing in our text, Principes.
that binds us to fix this levity upon the people only. The text does not
say, That there was none of the Princes of the People, no Commanders, no
Magistrates present at this accident, and partners in this levity. Neither is
it likely, but that in such a place as Malta, an Island, some persons of quality
and command resided about the coast, to receive and to give intelligence, and
directions upon all emergent occasions of danger, and that some such were
present at this accident, and gave their voice both ways, in the exclamation,
and in the acclamation, That he was a murderer, and that he was a God. For,
They will change their minds; All, High as well as low, will change. A good
Statesman Polybius says, That the people are naturally as the Sea; naturally
smooth, and calm, and still, and even; but then naturally apt to be moved by
influences of Superior bodies; and so the people apt to change by them who
have a power over their affections, or a power over their wills. So says he,
the Sea is apt to be moved by storms and tempests; and so, the people apt to
change with rumors and windy reports. So, the Sea is moved, So the people are
changed, says Polybius. But Polybius might have carried his politic
consideration higher then the Sea, to the Air too; and applied it higher then
to the people, to greater persons; for the Air is shaked and transported with
vapors and exhalations, as much as the sea with winds and storms; and great
men as much changed with ambitions in themselves, and flatteries from others,
as inferior people with influences, and impressions from them. All change
their minds; Mal. 3.6.
High, as well as low will change. But I am the Lord; I change not. I, and
only I have that immunity, Immutability; And therefore, says God there, ye
sons of Jacob are not consumed; Therefore, because I, I who cannot change have
loved you; for they, who depend upon their love, who can change, are in a
woeful condition. And that involves all; all can, all will, all do change, high
and low.

Therefore, It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in man.
What man? Psalm. 118.8. Ver. 9. Psalm. 146.3.
Any man. It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in Princes.
Which David thought worth the repeating; for he says it again, Put not your
trust in Princes. Not that you may not trust their royal words, and gracious
promises to you; not that you may not trust their Counsels, and executions of
those Counsels, and the distribution of your contributions for those
executions; not that you may not trust the managing of affairs of State in
their hands, without jealous inquifitions, or suspicious mis-interpretations of
their actions. In these you must trust Princes, and those great persons whom
Princes trust; But when these great persons are in the balance with God, there
they weigh as little, as less men. Nay, as David has ranked and disposed
them, less; for thus he conveyes that consideration, Surely men of low degree
are vanity; that is sure enough; Psalm. 62.5.
there is little doubt of that; men of low degree can profit us nothing; they
cannot pretend or promise to do us good; But then says David there, Men of
high degree are a lie; They pretend a power, and a purpose to do us good, and
then disappoint us. Many times men cannot, many times men will not; neither can
we find in any but God himself, a constant power, and a constant will, upon
which we may rely: The men of Malta, of what rank soever they were, did; all
men, low and high, will change their minds.

Neither have these men of Malta (consider them in what quality you will) so
much honor afforded them, in the Original, as our translation has given
them. We say, they changed their minds; the Original says only this, they
changed, and no more. Alas, they, we, men of this world, worms of this
dunghill, whether Basilisks or blind worms, whether Scarabs or Silkworms,
whether high or low in the world, have no minds to change. The Platonique
Philosophers did not only acknowledge Anima^ in homine, a soul in man, but
Mentem in anima, a mind in the soul of man. They meant by the mind, the
superior faculties of the soul, and we never come to exercise them. Men and
women call one another inconstant, and accuse one another of having changed
their minds, when, God knows, they have but changed the object of their eye,
and seen a better white or red. An old man loves not the same sports that he
did when he was young, nor a sick man the same meats that he did when he was
well: But these men have not changed their minds; The old man has changed his
fancy, and the sick man his taste; neither his mind.

The Mind implies consideration, deliberation, conclusion upon premises; and
we never come to that; we never put the soul home; we never bend the soul
up to her height; we never put her to a trial what she is able to do toward
discerning a tentation, what toward resisting a tentation, what toward
repenting a tentation; we never put her to trial what she is able to do by
her natural faculties, whether by them she cannot be as good as a Plato, or a
Socrates, who had no more but those natural faculties; what by virtue of Gods
general grace, which is that providence, in which he inwraps all his
creatures, whether by that she cannot know her God, as well as the Ox knows
his Crib, and the Stork her nest; what by virtue of those particular graces,
which God offers her in his private inspirations at home, and in his public
Ordinances here, whether by those she cannot be as good an hour hence, as she
is now; and as good a day after, as that day that she receives the Sacrament;
we never put the soul home, we never bend the soul up to her height; and the
extent of the soul is this mind. When David speaks of the people, he says,
They imagine a vain thing; It goes no farther, Psalm. 2.2.
then to the fancy, to the imagination; it never comes so near the mind, as
Consideration, Reflection, Examination, they only imagine, fancy a vain thing,
which is but a waking dream, for the fancy is the seat, the scene, the theater
of dreams. When David speaks there of greater persons, he carries it farther
then so, but yet not to the mind; The Rulers take counsel, says David; but
not of the mind, not of rectified and religious reason; but, They take
counsel together, says he; that is, of one another; They sit still and harken
what the rest will do, and they will do accordingly. Now, this is but a
Herding, it is not an Union; This is for the most part, a following of
affections, and passions, which are the inferior servants of the soul, and
not of that, which we understand here by the Mind, The deliberate resolutions,
and executions of the superior faculties thereof.

They changed, says our Text; not their minds; there is no evidence, no
appearance, that they exercised any, that they had any; but they changed their
passions. Nay, they have not so much honor, as that afforded them, in the
Original; for it is not They changed, but They were changed, passively; Men
subject to the transportation of passion, do nothing of themselves, but are
merely passive; And being possessed with a spirit of fear, or a spirit of
ambition, as those spirits move them, in a minute their yea is nay, their smile
is a frown, their light is darkness, their good is evil, their Murderer is a
God. These men of Malta changed, not their minds, but their passions, and so
did not change advisedly, but passionately were changed, and in that distemper,
they said, He is a God.

In this hasty acclamation of theirs, Deus.
He is a God, we are come to that which was our principal intention in this
part, That as man has in him a natural Logique, but that strayes into
Fallacies, in uncharitable judgments, so man has in him a natural Religion,
but that strayes into idolatry, and superstition. The men of Malta were but
mere natural men, and yet were so far from denying God, as that they
multiplied Gods to themselves. The soul of man brings with it, into the body,
a sense and an acknowledgment of God; neither can all the abuses that the body
puts upon the soul, whilst they dwell together, (which are infinite) divest
that acknowledgement, or extinguish that sense of God in the soul. And
therefore by what several names soever the old heathen Philosophers called
their gods, still they meant all the same God. Chrysippus presented God to the
world, in the notion and apprehension of Divina Necessitas, That a certain
divine necessity which lay upon every thing, that every thing must necessarily
be thus and thus done, that that Necessity was God; and this, others have
called by another name, Destiny. Zeno presented God to the world, in the notion
and apprehension of Divina lex; That it was not a constraint, a necessity, but
a Divine law, an ordinance, and settled course for the administration of all
things; And this law was Zenoes God; and this, others have called by another
name, Nature. The Brachmans, which are the Priests in the East, they present
God, in the notion and apprehension of Divina lux, That light is God; in which,
they express themselves, not to mean the fire, (which some natural men
worshipped for God) nor the Sun, (which was worshipped by more) but by their
light, they mean that light, by which man is enabled to see into the next
world; and this we may well call by a better Name, for it is Grace. But still
Chrysippus by his Divine Necessity, which is Destiny, and Zeno by his Divine
law, which is Nature, and the Brachmans by their Divine light, which is Grace,
(though they make the operations of God, God) yet they all intend in those
diverse names, the same power.

The natural man knows God. But then, to the natural man, who is not only
finite, and determined in a compass, but narrow in his compass, not only not
bottomless, but shallow in his comprehensions, to this natural, this smite,
and narrow, and shallow man, no burden is so insupportable, no consideration so
inextrieable, no secret so inscrutable, no conception so incredible, as to
conceive One infinite God, that should do all things alone, without any more
Gods. That that power that establishes counsails, that things may be carried in
a constancy, and yet permits Contingencies, that things shall fall out
casually, That the God of Certainty, and the God of Contingency should be all
one God, That that God that settles peace, should yet make wars, and in the
day of battle, should be both upon that side that does, and that side that is
overcome, That the conquered God, and the victorious God, should be both one
God, That that God who is all goodness in himself, should yet have his hand
in every ill action, this the natural man cannot digest, not comprehend. And
therefore the natural man eases himself, and thinks he cases God, by
dividing the burden, and laying his particular necessities upon particular
Gods. Hence came those enormous multiplications of Gods; Hesiods thirty
thousand Gods; and three hundred Jupiters. Hence came it that they brought
their children into the world under one God, and then put them to nurse, and
then to school, and then to occupations and professions under other several
Gods. Hence came their Vagitanus, a God that must take care that children do
not burst with crying; and their Fabulanus, a God that must take care, that
children do not stammer in speaking; Hence came their Statelinus, and their
Potinus, a God that must teach them to go, and a God that must teach them to
drink. So far, as that they came to make Febrem Deam, To erect Temples and
Altars to diseases, to age, to death it self; and so, all those punishments,
which our true God laid upon man for sin, all our infirmities they made Gods.
So far is the natural man from denying God, as that he thus multiplies them.

But yet never did these natural men, the Gentiles ascribe so much to their
Gods, (except some very few of them) as they of the Roman persuasion may seem
to do to their Saints. For they limited their devotions, and sacrifices, and
supplications, in some certain and determined things, and those, for the most
part, in this world; but in the Roman Church, they all ask all of all, for
they ask even things pertaining to the next world. And as they make their
Saints verier Gods then the Gentiles do theirs, in asking greater things at
their hands, so have they more of them. For, if there be not yet more Saints
celebrated by Name, then will make up Hesiods thirty thousand, yet they have
more, in this respect, that of Hesiods thirty thousand, one Nation worshipped
one, another another thousand; In the Roman Church, all worship all. And
howsoever it be for the number, yet, says one, we may live to see the number
of Hesiods thirty thousand equalled, and exceeded; for, if the Jesuit, who have
got two of their Order into the Consistory, (they have had two Cardinals) and
two of their Order into heaven, (they have had two Saints Canonized) if they
could get one of their Order into the Chair, one Pope; As we read of one
General that knighted his whole Army at once; so such a Pope may Canonize his
whole Order, and then Hesiods thirty thousand would be literally fulfilled.

And, that, as we have done, in the multiplication of their gods, so, in their
superstition to their created gods, we may also observe a congruity, a
conformity, a concurrence between the Heathen and the Roman Religion; As the
Heathen east such an intimidation, such an infatuation, not only upon the
people, but upon the Princes too, as that in the Story of the Egyptian Kings
we find, that whenever any of their Priests signified unto any of their
Kings, that it was the pleasure of his God, that he should leave that kingdom,
and come up to him, that King did always without any contradiction, any
hesitation, kill himself; so are they come so near to this in the Roman
Church, as that, though they cannot infatuate such Princes, as they are weary
of to kill themselves, yet when they are weary of Princes, they can infatuate
other men, to those assassinats, of which our neighbor kingdom has felt the
blow more then once, and we the offer, and the plotting more then many times.

That that I drive to, in this consideration, is this, That since man is
naturally apt to multiply Gods to himself, we do with all Christian diligence
shut up our selves in the belief and worship of our one and only God; without
admitting any more Mediators, or Intercessors, or Advocates, in any of those
Modifications or Distinctions, with which the later men have painted and
disguized the Religion of Rome, to make them the more passable, and without
making any one step toward meeting them, in their superstitious errors, but
adhere entirely to our only Advocate, and Mediator, and Intercessor Christ
Jesus; for he does no more need an Assistant, in any of those offices, then in
his office of Redeemer, or Savior; and therefore, as they require no fellow
Redeemer, no fellow-Saviour, so neither let us admit any fellow-Advocate,
fellow-Mediator, fellow-Intercessor in heaven. For why may not that reason hold
all the year, which they assign in the Roman Church, for their forbearance
of prayers to any Saint, upon certain days? Upon Good-Fryday, and Easter Day,
and Whit sunday, say they, we must not pray to any Saint, no not to the blessed
Virgin, Quia Christus, and Spiritus Sanctus, sunt tune temporis, supremi, and
unici Advocati. Because upon those days, Christ, and the Holy Ghost, are our
principal, nay upon those days, our only Advocares. Garantus in Rubr.
Missal. par. 1. Tit. 9.. 8.
And are Christ, and the Holy Ghost out of office a week after Easter, or
after Whitsontide? Since man is naturally apt to multiply Gods, let us be
Christianly diligent, to conclude our selves in One.

And then, since man is also naturally apt to stray into a superstitious
worship of God, let us be Christianly diligent, to preclude all ways, that may
lead us into that tentation, or incline us toward superstition. In which, I
do not intend, that we should decline all such things, as had been
superstitiously abused, in a superstitious Church; But, in all such things, as
being in their own nature indifferent, are, by a just commandment of lawful
authority, become more then indifferent (necessary) to us, though not
Necessitate medii, yet Necessitate praecepti, (for, though salvation consist
not in Ceremonies, Obedience does, and salvation consists much in Obedience)
That in all such things, we always inform our selves, of the right use of
those things in their first institution, of their abuse with which they have
been depraved in the Roman Church, and of the good use which is made of them in
ours. That because pictures have been adored, we do not abhor a picture; Nor
sit at the Sacrament, because Idolatry has been committed in kneeling. That
Church, which they call Lutheran, has retained more of these Ceremonies, then
ours has done; And ours more then that which they call Calvinist; But both the
Lutheran, and ours, without danger, because, in both places, we are diligent to
preach to the people the right use of these indifferent things. For this is a
true way of shutting out superstition, Not always to abolish the thing it
self, because in the right use thereof, the spiritual profit, and edification
may exceed the danger, but by preaching, and all convenient ways of
instruction, to deliver people out of that ignorance, which possesses people in
the Roman captivity.

From which natural inclination of man, Atheista.
we raise this, by way of conclusion of all, That since man is naturally apt to
multiply Gods to himself, and naturally apt to worship his Gods
superstitiously, since there is a pronenesse to many Gods, and to superstition,
in nature, There cannot be so unnatural a thing, no such Monster in nature, or
against nature, as an Atheist, that believes no God. For, when we, we that are
Christians, have reproached this Atheist, thus far, our way, Can not thou
believe one God? such a debility, such a nullity in thy faith, as not to
believe one God? we require no more, and can thou not do that, not one? when
we, we that are Christians, have reproached him so far, The natural man of
whose company he will pretend to be, will reproach him so much farther, as to
say, Can not thou believe one God? We, we who proceed by the same light that
thou do, believe a thousand. So that the natural man is as ready, readier
then the Christian, to excommunicate the Atheist; For, the Atheist that denies
all Gods, does much more oppose the natural man, that believes a thousand,
then the Christian, that believes but one.

Poor intricated soul! Riddling, perplexed, labyrinthicall soul! Thou
could not say, that thou beleevest not in God, if there were no God; Thou
could not believe in God, if there were no God; If there were no God, thou
could not speak, thou could not think, not a word, not a thought, no
not against God; Thou could not blaspheme the Name of God, thou could not
swear, if there were no God: For, all thy faculties, how ever depraved, and
perverted by thee, are from him; and except thou can seriously believe, that
thou art nothing, thou can not believe that there is no God. If I should ask
thee at a Tragedy, where thou should see him that had drawn blood, lie
weltring, and surrounded in his own blood, Is there a God now? If thou could
answer me, No, These are but Inventions, and Representations of men, and I
believe a God never the more for this; If I should ask thee at a Sermon, where
thou should hear the Judgments of God formerly denounced, and executed,
re-denounced, and applied to present occasions, Is there a God now? If thou
could answer me, No, These are but Inventions of State, to souple and
regulate Congregations, and keep people in order, and I believe a God never the
more for this; Be as confident as thou can, in company; for company is the
Atheists Sanctuary; I respit thee not till the day of Judgment, when I may see
thee upon thy knees, upon thy face, begging of the hills, that they would fall
down and cover thee from the fierce wrath of God, to ask thee then, Is there
a God now? I respit thee not till the day of thine own death, when thou shall
have evidence enough, that there is a God, though no other evidence, but to
find a Devil, and evidence enough, that there is a Heaven, though no other
evidence, but to feel Hell; To ask thee then, Is there a God now? I respit
thee but a few hours, but six hours, but till midnight. Wake then; and then
dark, and alone, Hear God ask thee then, remember that I asked thee now, Is
there a God? and if thou dare, say No.

And then, as there is an universal Atheist, an Athiest over all the world,
that believes no God, so is he also an Atheist, over all the Christian world,
that believes not Christ. That which the Apostle says to the Ephesians; Absque
Christo, absque Deo, As long as you were without Christ, you were without God,
is spoken (at least) to all that have heard Christ preached; not to believe
God, so, as God has exhibited, and manifested himself, in his Son Christ
Jesus, is, in S. Paul's acceptance of that word, Atheism: and S. Paul, and he
that speaks in S. Paul, is too good a Grammarian, too great a Critique for thee
to dispute against.

And then, as there is an universal Atheist, he that denies God, And a more
particular Atheist, he that denies Christ; so in a narrower, and yet large
sense of the word, there is an actual Atheist, a practical Atheist, who
though he do pretend to make God, and God in Christ the object of his faith,
yet does not make Christ, and Christ in the holy Ghost, that is, Christ working
in the Ordinances of his Church, the rule and pattern of his actions, but
lives so, as no man can believe that he believes in God.

This universal Atheist, that believes no God, the heavens, and all the powers
therein, shall condemn at the last day; The particular Atheist, that believes
no Christ, the glorious company of the Apostles, that established the Church of
Christ, shall condemn at that day; And the practical Atheist, the ungodly
liver, the noble army of Martyrs, that did, and suffered so much for Christ,
shall then condemn. And condemn him, not only as the most impious thing, but
as the most inhumane; Not only as the most ungodly, but as the most unnatural
thing: for an Atheist is not only a Devil in Religion, but a monster in
nature; not only elemented and composed of Heresies in the Church, but of
paradoxes, and absurdities in the world; Natural men, the men of Malta, even
Barbarians, though subject to levity and changing their minds, yet make this
their first act after their change, to constitute a God, though in another
extreme, yet in an evident and absolute averseness from Atheism; They changed
their minds, and said, he was a God. And be this enough for the Explication of
the words, and their Application, and Complication to the celebration of the
day.

The God of heaven rectify in us our natural Logique; That in all his
Judgments we glorify God, without uncharitable condemning other men. The God
of heaven sanctify to us our natural Religion, That it be never quenched nor
damped in us, never blown out by Atheism, nor blown up by an Idolatrous
multiplying of false, or a superstitious worship of our true God. The God of
heaven preserve us in safety, by the power of the Father; In saving knowledge,
by the wisdom of the Son; And in a peaceful unity of affections, by the love
and goodness of the holy Ghost. Amen.

SERMON. XLIX. Preached on the Conversion of S. PAUL. 1629.
ACTS 23.6, 7. But when Paul perceived that one part were Sadduces, and the
other Pharisees, he cried out in the Council, Men and Brethren, I am a
Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee; Of the hope and resurrection of the dead I
am called in question.

And when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and
the Sadduces, and the multitude was divided.


WE consider ordinarily in the old Testament, God the Father; And in the
Gospels, God the Son; And in this Book, the Acts, and in the Epistles, and the
rest, God the Holy Ghost, that is, God in the Government and Administration of
his Church, as well in the ordinary Ministry and constant callings therein, as
in the extraordinary use of general Counsels; of which, we have the Model,
and Platform, and precedent in the fifteenth Chapter of this Book. The Book
is noted to have above twenty Sermons of the Apostles; and yet the Book is not
called The Sermons, The Preaching of the Apostles, but the Practice, the Acts
of the Apostles. Our actions, if they be good, speak louder then our Sermons;
Our preaching is our speech, our good life is our eloquence. Preaching
celebrates the Sabbath, but a good life makes the whole week a Sabbath, that
is, A savor of rest in the nostrils of God, Genesis 8. Chrysostom. Hieron.
as it is said of Noah's Sacrifice, when he came out of the Ark. The Book is
called The Acts of the Apostles; But says S. Chrysostom, and S. Hierome too,
it might be called the Acts of S. Paul, so much more is it conversant about
him, then all the rest. In which respect, at this time of the year, and in
these days, when the Church commemorates the Conversion of S. Paul, I have,
for diverse years successively, in this place, determined my self upon this
Book. Once upon the very act of his Conversion, in those words, Acts 9.4. Acts
20.25.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Once upon his valediction to his
Ephesians at Miletus, in those words, Now I know that all ye shall see my face
no more; And once upon the escape from the Vipers teeth, and the viperous
tongues of those inconstant and clamorous beholders, Acts 28.6.
who first rashly cried out, He is a murderer, and then changed their minds,
and said, He is a God. And now, for the service of your devotions, and the
advancement of your edification, I have laid my meditations upon this his
Stratagem, and just avoiding of an unjust Judgment, When Paul percived that
one part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, etc.

In handling of which words, Divisio.
because they have occasioned a Disputation, and a Problem, whether this that
Paul did, were well done, To raise a dissension amongst his Judges, we shall
stop first upon that Consideration, That all the actions of holy men, of
Apostles in the new Testament, of Patriarchs in the old, are not to be drawn
into example and consequence for others, no nor always to be excused and
justified in them that did them; All actions of holy men, are not holy; that is
first. And secondly, we shall consider this action of S. Paul, in some
circumstances that invest it, and in some effects that it produced in our Text,
as dissension amongst his Judges, and so a reprieving, or rather a putting off
of the trial for that time; and these will determine our second Consideration.
And in a third, we shall lodge all these in our selves, and make it our own
case, and find that we have all Sadduces and Pharisees in our own bosoms,
(contrary affections in our own hearts) and find an advantage in putting these
home- Sadduces, and home- Pharisees, these contrary affections in our own
bosoms, in colluctation, and opposition against one another, that they do not
combine, and unite themselves to our farther disadvantage; A Civil war, is,
in this case, our way to peace; when one sinful affection crosses another, we
escape better, then when all join, without any resistance. And in these three,
first the General, How we are to estimate all actions, And then the
Particular, what we are to think of S. Paul's Action, And lastly, the
Individual, How we are to direct and regulate our own Actions, we shall
determine all.

First then, 1. Part.
though it be a safer way, to suspect an action to be sin that is not, then to
presome an action to be no sin, that is so, yet that rule holds better in our
selves, then in other men; for, in judging the actions of other men, our
suspicion may soon stray into an uncharitable mis-interpretation, and we may
sin in condemning that in another, which was no sin in him that did it. But, in
truth, Transilire lineam, To depart from the direct and straight line, is sin,
as well on the right hand, as on the left; And the Devil makes his advantages
upon the over-tender, and scrupulous conscience, as well as upon the
over-confident, and obdurate; and many men have erred as much, in justifying
some actions of holy men, as in calumniating, or mis-condemning of others. If
we had not evidence in Scripture, that Abraham received that Commandment from
God, who could justify Abraham's proceeding with his son Isaac? And therefore
who shall be afraid to call Noah's Drunkenness, and his undecent lying in his
Tent, Or Lots Drunkenness, and his iterated Incest with his Daughters, or his
inconsiderate offer to prostitute his Daughters to the Sodomites, Or to call
David's complicated and multiplied sin, a sin? When the Church celebrates
Samsons death, though he killed himself, it is upon a tender and holy
supposition, that he might do this not without some instinct and inspiration
from the Spirit of God. But howsoever the Church interprets such actions, it is
a dangerous and a fallacious way, for any private man to argue so, The Spirit
of God directed this man in many actions, therefore in all; And dangerous to
conclude an action to be good, either because he that did it, had a good
purpose in doing it, or because some good effects proceeded from it. Bonum
been, are the two horses that must carry us to heaven; To do good things, and
to do them well; To propose good ends, and to go by good ways to those good
ends. The Mid-wives lie, in the behalf of the Israelites children, was a lie,
and a sin, howsoever God, out of his own goodness, found something in their
piety, to reward. I should not venture to say, as he said, nor to say that he
said well, when Moses said, Dele me, Forgive their finne, or blot me out of
thy Book; Exodus 32.32. Romans 9 3.
Nor when S. Paul said, Anathema pro fratribus, I could wish that my self were
separated from Christ for my Brethren. I would not, I could not without sin, be
content that my name should be blotted out of the Book of Life, or that I
should be separated from Christ, though all the world beside were to be
blotted out, and separated, if I staid in.

The benefit that we are to make of the errors of holy men, is not that, That
man did this, therefore I may do it: but this, God suffered that holy man to
fall, and yet loved that good soul well, God has not therefore cast me away,
though he have suffered me to fall too. Bread is man's best sustenance, yet
there may be a dangerous surfeit of bread: Charity is the bread that the soul
lives by; yet there may be a surfeit of charity; I may mis-lead my self
shrewdly, if I say, surely my Father is a good man, my Master a good man, my
Pastor a good man, men that have the testimony of Gods love, by his manifold
blessings upon them; and therefore I may be bold to do whatsoever I see them
do. Be perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven, is perfect, Mat. 5.48.
1 Cor. 11.1.
is the example that Christ gives you. Be ye followers of me, as I am of
Christ, is ^he example that the Apostle gives you. Good Examples are good
Assistances; but no Example of man is sufficient to constitute a certain and
constant rule; All the actions of the holiest man are not holy.

Hence appears the vanity and impertinency of that calumny, with which our
adversaries of the Roman persuasion labor to oppress us, That those points in
which we depart from them, cannot be well established, because therein we
depart from the Fathers; As though there were no condemnation to them, that
pretended a perpetual adhering to the Fathers, nor salvation to them, who
suspected any Father of any mistaking. And they have thought that one thing
enough, to discredit, and blast, and annihilate that great and useful labor,
which the Centuriators, the Magdeburgenses took in compiling the
Ecclesiastical Story, that in every age as they pass, those Authors have laid
out a particular section, a particular Chapter De navis Patrum, to note the
mistakings of the Fathers in every age; This they think a criminal and a
heinous thing, enough to discredit the whole work; As though there were ever
in any age, any Father, that mistook nothing, or that it were blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost, to note such a mistaking. And yet, if those blessed Fathers,
now in possession of heaven, be well affected with our celebrating, or ill,
with our neglecting their works, certainly they find much more cause to
complain of our adversaries, then of us. Never any in the Reformation has
spoken so lightly, nay, so heavily; so negligently, nay, so diligently, so
studiously in diminution of the Fathers, as they have done. One of the first
Jesuits proceeds with modesty and ingenuity, and yet says, Quaelibet aetas
antiquitati detulit, Salmeron.
Every age has been apt to ascribe much to the Ancient Fathers; Hoc autem
asserimus, says he, Iuniores Doctores perspicaciores, This we must necessarily
acknowledge, that our later Men have seen farther then the elder Fathers did.
His fellow Jesuit goes farther; Hoc omnes dicunt, Maldon.
sed non probant, says he, speaking of one person in the Genealogy of Christ,
This the Fathers say, says he, and later men too; Catholics, and Heretics;
All: But none of them prove it; He will not take their words, not the whole
Churches, though they all agree. But a Bishop of as much estimation and
authority in the Council of Trent, as any, Cornel. Mussu^
goes much farther; Being pressed with S. Augustins opinion, he says, Nec nos
tantillum moveat Augustinus, Let it never trouble us, which way S. Augustine
goes; Hoc enim illi peculiare, says he, ut alium errorem expugnans, alteri
ansam praebeat, for this is inseparable from S. Augustine, That out of an
earnestness to destroy one error, he will establish another. Nor does that
Bishop impute that distemper only to S. Augustine, but to S. Hierome too; Of
him he says, In medio positus certamine, ar door feriendi adversarios, premit
and socios, S. Hierome lays about him, and rather then miss his enemy, he
wounds his friends also. But all that might better be borne then this, Turpiter
errarunt Patres, The Fathers fell foully into errors; And this, better then
that, Eorum opinio, opinio Haereticorum, The Fathers differ not from the
Heretics, concur with the Heretics. Who in the Reformation has charged
the Fathers so far? and yet Baronius has.

If they did not oppress us with this calumny of neglecting, or undervaluing
the Fathers, we should not make our recourse to this way of recrimination; for,
God knows, if it be modestly done. and with the reverence, in many respects,
due to them, it is no fault to say the Fathers fell into some faults. Yet, it
is rather our Adversaries observation then ours, That all the Ancient Fathers
were Chiliasts, Millenarians, and maintained that error of a thousand years
temporal happiness upon this earth, between the Resurrection, and our
actual and eternal possession of Heaven; It is their observation rather then
ours, That all the Ancient Fathers denied the dead a fruition of the sight of
God, till the day of Judgment; It is theirs rather then ours, That all the
Greek Fathers, and some of the Latin, assigned Gods foreknowledge of man's
works, to be the cause of his predestination. It is their note, That for the
first six hundred years, the general opinion, and general practice of the
Church was, To give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to Infants newly
baptized, as a thing necessary to their salvation. They have noted, That the
opinion of the Ancient Fathers was contrary to the present opinion in the
Church of Rome, concerning the conception of the blessed Virgin without
Original sin. These notes and imputations arise from their Authors, and not
from ours, and they have told it us, rather then we them.

Indeed neither we nor they can dissemble the mistakings of the Fathers. The
Fathers themselves would not have them dissembled. Hieron.
De me, says S. Hierom, ubicunque de meo sensu loquor, arguat me quilibet,
August.
For my part, wheresoever I deliver but mine own opinion, every man has his
liberty to correct me. It is true, S. Augustine does call Julian the Pelagian
to the Fathers; but it is to vindicate and redeem the Fathers from those
calumnies which Julian had laid upon them, that they were Multitudo caecorum, a
herd, a swarm of blind guides, and followers of one another, And that they
were Conspiratio perditorum, Damned Conspirators against the truth. To set the
Fathers in their true light, and to restore them to their luster and dignity,
and to make Julian confess what reverend persons they were, S. Aug. calls him
to the consideration of the Fathers, but not to try matters of faith by them
alone. Lactant.
For, Sapientiam sibi adimit, qui sine judicio majorum inventa probat, That man
devests himself of all discretion, who, without examination, captivates his
understanding to the Fathers.

It is ingenuously said by one of their later Writers, (if he would but give
us leave to say so too) Sequamur Patres, Cajetan.
tanquam Duces, non tanquam Dominos, Let us follow the Fathers as Guides, not
as Lords over our understandings, as Counselors, not as Commanders. Nicephor.
Chrysostom.
It is too much to say of any Father that which Nicephorus says of S.
Chrysostom, In illius perinde at que in Dei verbis quiesco, I am as safe in
Chrysostomes words, as in the Word of God; Sophron. Leo.
That is too much. It is too much to say of any Father that which Sophronius
says of Leo, That his Epistles were Divina Scriptura, tanquam ex ore Petri
prolata, and fundamentum fidei, That he received the Epistles that Leo writ, as
holy writ, as written by S. Peter himself, and as the foundation of his faith;
that is too much. It is too much to say of S. Peter himself that which
Chrysologus says, Chrysolog.
That he is Immobile fundamentum salutis, The immovable foundation of our
salvation, and Mediator noster apud Deum, The Mediator of man to God. Azorius.
Their Jesuit Azorius gives us a good Caution herein; He says it is a good
and safe way, in all emergent doubts, to govern our selves Per communem
opinionem, by the the common opinion, by that, in which most Authors agree; But
says he, how shall we know which is the common opinion? Since, not only that
is the common opinion in one Age, that is not so in another, (The common
opinion was in the Primitive Church, that the blessed Virgin was conceived in
Original sin, The common opinion now, is that she was not) But if we confider
the same Age, that is the common opinion in one place, in one country, which
is not so in another place, at the same time; That Jesuit puts his example in
the worship of the Cross of Christ, and says, That, at this day, in Germany
and in France it is the common opinion, and Catholic Divinity, That (...),
Divine worship is not due to the Cross of Christ; In Italy and in Spain it is
the common opinion, and Catholic Divinity, that it is due. Now, how shall he
govern himself, that is unlearned, and not able to try, which is the common
opinion? Or how shall the learnedest of all govern himself if he have
occasion to travail, but to change his Divinity, as often as he changes his
Coin, and when he turns his Dutch Dollers into Pistolets, to go out of
Germany, into Spain, turn his Devotion, and his religious worship according to
the Clime? To end this Consideration, The holy Patriarchs in the Old Testament,
were holy men, though they straid into some sinful actions; the holy Fathers
in the Primitive Church, were holy men, though they straied into some erroneous
opinions; But neither are the holiest men's actions always holy, nor the
soundest Fathers opinions always sound. And therefore the question has been
not impertinently moved, whether this that S. Paul did here, were justifiably
done, Who, when he perceived that one part were Sadduces, and the other
Pharisees, etc. And so we are come to our second part, from the consideration
of Actions in general, to this particular action of S. Paul.

In this second part we make three steps. First we shall consider, what
Council, 2 Part.
what Court this was, before whom S. Paul was convented, ( He cried out in the
Council, says the text) whether they were his competent Judges, and so he
bound to a clear, and direct proceeding with them; And secondly, what his end
and purpose was, that he proposed to himself; which was to divide the Judges,
and so to put off his trial to another day; for, when he had said that, (says
the text) that that he had to say, there arose a Dissension, and the multitude,
All, both Judges, and spectators, and witnesses, were divided; And then lastly,
by what way he went to this end; which was by a double protestation; first
that, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee; And then that, Of the hope and
Resurrection of the dead, I am called in question.

First then, for the competency of his Judges, Whether a man be examined before
a competent Judge or no, he may not lie: we can put no case, Iudex Competens.
in which it may be lawful for any man to lie to any man; not to a midnight,
nor to a noone thief, that breaks my house, or assaults my person, I may not
lie. And though many have put names of disguise, as Equivocations, and
Reservations, yet they are all children of the same father, the father of lies,
the devil, and of the same brood of vipers, they are lies. To an Incompetent
Judge, if I be interrogated, I must speak truth, if I speak; but to a
Competent Judge, I must speak: With the Incompetent I may not be false, but
with the Competent, I may not be silent. Certainly, that standing mute at the
Bar, which, of late times has prevailed upon many distempered wretches, is, in
it self, so particularly a sin, as that I should not venture to absolve any
such person, nor to administer the Sacrament to him, how earnestly soever he
desired it at his death, how penitently soever he confessed all his other sins,
except he repented in particular, that sin, of having stood mute and refused a
just trial, and would be then content to submit himself to it, if that favor
might possibly at that time be afforded him. To an incompetent Judge I must not
lie, but I may be silent, to a competent I must answer.

Consider we then the competency of S. Paul's Judges, what this Council, this
Court was. It was that Council, which is so often in the New Testament called
(...), and in our Translation, the Council. The Jews speak much of their Lex
Oralis, their Oral, their Traditionall Law; that is, That Exposition of the
Law, which, say they, Moses received from the mouth of God, without writing, in
that forty days conversation which he had with God, in the Mount; for, it is
not probable, say they, that Moses should spend forty days in that, which
another man would have done in one or two, that is, in receiving only that Law
which is written: But he received an exposition too, and delivered that to
Ioshuah, and he to the principal men, and according to that exposition, they
proceeded in Judgment, in this Council, in this their Synedrion. Which
Council having had the first institution thereof, Numb. 11.16. where God said
to Moses, Gather me seventy men of the Elders of Israel, Officers over the
people, Numb. 11.16.
and I will take of the Spirit that is upon thee, and put it upon them, and
they shall bear the burden; that is, I will impart to them that exposition of
the Law, which I have imparted to thee, and by that they shall proceed in
Judgment, in this Council, this Synedrion of Seventy, had continued (though
with some variations) to this time, when S. Paul was now called before them. Of
this Council of Seventy, this Synedrion, our blessed Savior speaks, when he
says, He that says Raca, (that is, declares his anger by any opprobrious
words of defamation,) shall be subject to the Council. Of this Council he
speaks, when he says, Mat. 5.22. John 10.17.
for my sake, they will deliver you up to the Council; And from this Council it
is, not inconveniently, thought, that those messengers were sent, which were
sent to examine John Baptist, John 1.19.
whether he were the Messiah or no; for there it is said, That Priests and
Levites were sent; and this Council, says Josephus, at first, (and for a long
time) consisted of such persons, though, after, a third Order was taken in,
that is, some principal men of the other Tribes. To this Council belonged the
Conusance of all causes, Ecclesiastical and Civil, and of all persons; no
Magistrate, no Prophet was exempt from this Court. Before this Council was
Herod himself called, for an execution done by his command, which, Joseph. l
14. c. 17.
though it were done upon a notorious malefactor, yet was done without due
proceedings in law, and therefore Herod called before this Council for it.

But (by the way) this was not done when Herod was King, as Baronius does
mischievously and seditiously infer and argue, as though this Council were
above the King. Herod at that time, was very far from any imagination of being
King; His Father, Antipater, who then was alive, having, at that time, no
pretense to the Kingdom. But Herod, though young, was then in a great place of
Government, and for a misdemeanor there, was called before this Council, which
had jurisdiction over all but the King. For so, in the Talmud it self, the
difference is expressly put; Sacerdos magnus judicat and judicatur, The High
Priest, the greatest Prelate in the Clergy, may have place in this Council, and
may be called in question by this Council, Iudicat and judicatur; So,
Testimonium dicit, and de eo dicitur, He may go from the Bench, and be a
witness against any man, and he may be put from the Bench, and any man's
witness be received against him. But then of the King, it is as expressly said,
of this Council, in that Talmud, Nec judicat, nec judicatur, The King sits in
Judgment upon no man, lest his presence should intimidate an accused person,
or draw the other Judges from their own opinion to his; Much less can the King
be judged by any; Nec testimonium dicit, nec de eo dicitur, The King descends
not to be a witness against any man, neither can any man be a witness against
him. It was therefore mischievously, and seditiously, and treacherously, and
traitorously, and (in one comprehensive word) Papistically argued by Baronius,
That this Council was above the King.

But above all other persons it was; In some cases, in the whole body of the
Council; for, Matters of Religion, Innovations in points of doctrine,
Imputations upon great persons in the Church, were not to be judged by any
selected Committee, but by the whole Council, the entire body, the Seaventy;
Pecuniary matters, and matters of defamation, might be determined by a
Committee of any three; Matters that induced bodily punishments, though it were
but flagellation, but a whipping matter, not under a Committee of twenty three.
But so were all persons, and all causes distributed, as that that Court, that
Council had conusance of all. So that then S. Paul was before a competent and a
proper Judge, and therefore bound to answer; Did he that? That is our next
disquisition, and our second Consideration in this part, His end, his purpose
in proceeding as he did.

His End was to dissolve the Council for the present. He saw a tumultuary
proceeding; for, Finis.
as the Text says, he was fain to cry out in the Council, before he could be
heard. He saw the President of the Council, Ver. 2.
Ananias the high Priest, so ill-affected toward him, as that he commanded him
extrajudicially to be smitten. He saw a great part of his Judges, and
spectators, amongst whom were the witnesses, to be his declared enemies. He saw
that if he proceeded to a trial then, he perished infallibly, irrecoverably,
and therefore desired to put off the trial for that time. He did not deny nor
decline the jurisdiction of that Court; He had no eye to any foreign Prince,
nor Prelate: There are amongst us that do so; that deny that they can be
traitors, though they commit treason, because they are subjects to a foreign
Bishop, and not to their natural King; S. Paul did not so. He did not
calumniate nor traduce the proceedings of that Court, nor put into the people
ill opinions of their superiors, by laying aspersions upon them; There are that
do so; S. Paul did not. But his end and purpose was only to put off the
trial for that time, till he might be received to a more sober, and calm, and
equitable hearing. And this certainly was no ill end, so his way were good.
What was that? That is our next, our third and last Consideration in this part.

His way was by a twofold Protestation; Viae. Pharisaei.
The first this, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee. The Pharisees were a sect
amongst the Jews, who are ordinarily conceived to have received their Name from
Division, from Separation, from departing from that liberty, which other men
did take, to a stricter form of life. Of which, amongst many others, S.
Hierome gives us this evidence, that the Pharisees would fringe their long
robes with thorns, that so they might cut, and tear, and mangle their heels
and legs as they went, in the sight of the people. Outward mortification and
austerity was a specious thing, and of great estimation amongst the Jews: you
may see that in John Baptist; who was as much followed, and admired for that,
as Christ for his Miracles, though John Baptist did no Miracles. For,
extraordinary austerity is a continual Miracle. As S. Hierome says of
Chastity, Habet servata pudicitia martyrium suum, Chastity is a continual
Martyrdom; So to surrender a man's self to a continual hunger, and thirst,
and cold, and watching, and forbearing all which all others enjoy, a continual
mortification is a continual Miracle. This made the Pharisees gracious and
acceptable to the people: Phil. 3.5. Act. 26.5.
Therefore S. Paul does not make his Protestation here only so, That he had
been as touching the Law, a Pharisee, nor as he makes it in this book, After
the strictest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee, that is, heretofore I
did, but now, after his Conversion, and after his Apostolical Commission, he
makes it, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee.

Beloved, there are some things in which all Religions agree; The worship of
God, The holiness of life; And therefore, if when I study this holiness of
life, and fast, and pray, and submit my self to discreet, and medicinal
mortifications, for the subduing of my body, any man will say, this is
Papisticall, Papists do this, it is a blessed Protestation, and no man is the
less a Protestant, nor the worse a Protestant for making it, Men and brethren,
I am a Papist, that is, I will fast and pray as much as any Papist, and enable
my self for the service of my God, as seriously, as sedulously, as laboriously
as any Papist. So, if when I startle and am affected at a blasphemous oath, as
at a wound upon my Savior, if when I avoid the conversation of those men, that
profane the Lords day, any other will say to me, This is Puritanicall,
Puritans do this, It is a blessed Protestation, and no man is the less a
Protestant, nor the worse a Protestant for making it, Men and Brethren, I am a
Puritan, that is, I will endeavor to be pure, as my Father in heaven is pure,
as far as any Puritan.

Now of these Pharisees, who were by these means so popular, Sadducaei.
the numbers were very great. The Sadduces, who also were of an exemplary
holiness in some things, but in many and important things of different
opinions, even in matter of Religion, from all other men, were not so many in
number, but they were men of better quality and place in the State, then, for
the most part, the Pharisees were. And as they were more potent, and able to do
more mischief, so had they more declared themselves to be bent against the
Apostles, then the Pharisees had done. In the fourth Chapter of this Book,
Ver. 1.
The Priests, and the Sadduces, (no mention of Pharisees) came upon Peter and
John, being grieved, that they preached, thorough Jesus, the resurrection of
the dead. And so again, Act. 5.17.
The high Priest rose up, and all they that were with him, which is (says that
Text expressly) the sect of the Sadduces, and were filled with indignation. And
some collect out of a place in Eusebius, that this Ananias, who was high Priest
at this time, and had declared his ill affection to S. Paul, (as you heard
before) was a Sadduce: But, I think those words of Eusebius will not bear, at
least, not enforce that, nor be well applied to this Ananias. Howsoever, S.
Paul had just cause to come to this protestation, I am a Pharisee, and in so
doing he can be obnoxious to nothing; if he be as safe in his other
protestation, all is well, for the hope and resurrection of the dead, am I
called in question; consider we that.

It is true, that he was not, at this time, called in question, Resurrectio.
Act. 21.23.
directly and expressly for the Resurrection; you may see, where he was
apprehended, that it was for teaching against that people, and against that
law, and against that Temple. So that, he was endited upon pretense of
sedition, and profanation of the Temple. And therefore, when S. Paul says
here, I am called in question for preaching the Resurrection, he means this, If
I had not preached the Resurrection, I should never have been called in
question, nor should be, if I would forbear preaching the Resurrection; No man
persecutes me, no man appears against me, but only they that deny the
Resurrection; The Sadduces did deny it; The Pharisees did believe it; and
therefore this was a likely and a lawful way to divide them, and to gain
time, with such a purpose, (so far) as David had, when he prayed, O Lord, Psalm.
55.9.
divide their tongues. For it is not always unlawful to sow discord, and to
kindle dissension amongst men; for men may agree too well, to ill purposes. So
have ye then seen, That though it be not safe to conclude, S. Paul, or any
holy man did this, therefore I may do it, (which was our first part) yet in
this which S. Paul did here, there was nothing that may not be justified in
him, and imitated by us, (which was our second part) Remains only the third,
which is the accommodation of this to our present times, and the appropriation
thereof to our selves, and making it our own case.

The world is full of Sadduces, and Pharisees, and the true Church of God
arraigned by both. The Sadduces were the greater men, the Pharisees were the
greater number; 3 Part. Sadducaei.
so they are still. The Sadduces denied the Resurrection, and Angels, and
Spirits; So they do still. For, those Sadduces, whom we consider now, in this
part, are mere carnal men; men that have not only no Spirit of God in them,
but no soul, no spirit of their own; mere Atheists. And this Carnality, this
Atheism, this Sadducisme is seen in some Countries to prevail most upon
great persons, (the Sadduces were great persons) upon persons that abound in
the possessions, and offices, and honors of this world; for they that have
most of this world, for the most part, think least of the next.

These are our present Sadduces; Pharisaei.
and then the Pharisee has his name from Pharas, which is Division,
Separation; But Calvin derives the name (not inconveniently) from Pharash,
which is Exposition, Explication. We embrace both extractions, and acceptations
of the word, both Separation, and Exposition; for the Pharisee whom we consider
now, in this part, is he that is separated from us, (there it is Pharas,
separation) and separated by following private Expositions, (there it is
Pharash, Exposition) with a contempt of all Antiquity; and not only an
undervaluation, but a detestation of all opinions but his own, and his, whom
he has set up for his Idol. And as the Sadduce (our great and worldly man) is
all carnal, all body, and believes no spirit: so our Pharisee is so
superspirituall, as that he believes, that is, considers no body; He imagines
such a Purification, such an Angelification, such a Deification in this life,
as though the heavenly Jerusalem were descended already, or that God had given
man but that one commandment, Love God above all, and not a second too, Love
thy neighbor as thy self. Our Sadduces will have all body, our Pharisees all
soul, and God has made us of both, and given us offices proper to each.

Now of both these, Duplex Sadducaus.
the present Sadduce, the carnal Atheist, and the present Pharisee, the
Separatist, that overvalues himself, and bids us stand farther off, there are
two kinds. For, for the Atheist, there is David's Atheist, and S. Paul's Atheist;
David's, that ascribes all to nature, Psalm. 14.2.
and says in his heart, There is no God; That will call no sudden death, nor
extraordinary punishment upon any enormous sinner, a judgment of God, nor any
such deliverance of his servants, a miracle from God, but all is Nature, or all
is Accident, and would have been so, though there had been no God: This is
Natures Sadduce, David's Atheist; And then S. Paul's Atheist is he, who though he
do believe in God, yet does not believe God in Christ; Ephesians. 2.12.
for so S. Paul says to the Ephesians, Absque Christo, absque Deo, If ye be
without Christ, ye are without God. For as it is the same absurdity in nature,
to say, There is no Sun, and to say, This that you call the Sun is not the Sun,
this that shines out upon you, this that produces your fruits, and
distinguishes your seasons is not the Sun: so is it the same Atheism, in these
days of light, to say, There is no God, and to say, This Christ whom you call
the Son of God, is not God, That he in whom God has manifested himself, He
whom God has made Head of the Church, and Judge of the world, is not God. This
then is our double Sadduce, David's Atheist that believes not God, S. Paul's
Atheist that believes not Christ. And as our Sadduce is, so is our Pharisee
twofold also.

There is a Pharisee, Duplex Pharisaeus.
that by following private expositions, separates himself from our Church,
principally for matter of Government and Discipline, and imagines a Church that
shall be defective in nothing, and does not only think himself to be of that
Church, but sometimes to be that Church, for none but himself is of that
persuasion. And there is a Pharisee that dreams of such an union, such an
identification with God in this life, as that he understands all things, not by
benefit of the senses, and impressions in the fancy and imagination, or by
discourse and ratiocination, as we poor souls do, but by immediate, and
continual infusions and inspirations from God himself; That he loves God, not
by participation of his successive Grace, more and more, as he receives more
and more grace, but by a communication of God himself to him, entirely and
irrevocably; That he shall be without any need, and above all use of
Scriptures, and that the Scriptures shall be no more to him, then a Catechism
to our greatest Doctors; That all that God commands him to do in this world,
is but as an easy walk down a hill; That he can do all that easily, and as
much more, as shall make God beholden to him, and bring God into his debt, and
that he may assign any man to whom God shall pay the arrerages due to him,
that is, appoint God upon-what man he shall confer the benefit of his works of
Supererogation; For in such Propositions as these, and in such Paradoxes as
these, do the Authors in the Roman Church delight to express and celebrate
their Pharisaicall purity, as we find it frequently, abundantly in them.

In a word, some of our home-Pharisees will say, That there are some, who by
benefit of a certain Election, cannot sin; That the Adulteries and Blasphemies
of the Elect, are not sins: But the Rome-Pharisee will say, that some of them
are not only without sin in themselves, but that they can save others from
sin, or the punishment of sin, by their works of Supererogation; and that they
are so united, so identified with God already, as that they are in possession
of the beatificall Vision of God, and see him essentially, and as he is, in
this life: (for, that Ignatius the father of the Jesuits did so, Sandaeus
Theolog. p^r. 1. fo. 760.
some of his Disciples say, it is, at least probable, if not certain) And that
they have done all that they had to do for their own salvation, long ago,
and stay in the world now, only to gather treasure for others, and to work
out their salvation. So that these men are in better state in this life, then
the Saints are in heaven; There, the Saints may pray for others, but they
cannot merit for others; These men here can merit for other men, and work out
the salvation of others. Nay, they may be said in some respect to exceed Christ
himself; for Christ did save no man here, but by dying for him; These men save
other men, with living well for them, and working out their salvation.

These are our double Sadduces, and our double Pharisees; and now, beloved,
Dissentio.
if we would go so far in S. Paul's way, as to set this twofold Sadduce,
David's Atheist, without God, and S. Paul's Atheist, without Christ, against our
twofold Pharisee, our home-Catharist, and our Rome-Catharist, If we would spend
all our wit, and all our time, all our Ink, and our gall, in showing them the
deformities and iniquities of one another, by our preaching and writing against
them, The truth, and the true Church might (as S. Paul did in our Text) escape
the better. But when we (we that differ in no such points) tear, and wound, and
mangle one another with opprobrious contumelies, and odious names of
sub-division in Religion, our Home-Pharisee, and our Rome-Pharisee, maligners
of our Discipline, and maligners of our Doctrine, gain upon ns, and make their
advantages of our contentions, and both the Sadduces, David's Atheist that
denies God, and S. Paul's Atheist that denies Christ, join in a scornful
asking us, Where is now your God? Are not we as well that deny him absolutely,
as you that profess him with wrangling?

But stop we the floodgates of this consideration; it would melt us into
tears. Sadducaei and Pharisaei interni.
End we all with this, That we have all, all these, Sadduces and Pharisees in
our own bosoms: Sadduces that deny spirits; carnal apprehensions that are
apt to say, Is your God all Spirit, and has bodily eyes to see sin? All
Spirit, and has bodily hands to strike for a sin? Is your soul all spirit,
and has a fleshly heart to fear? All spirit, and has sensible sinews to
feel a material fire? Was your God, who is all Spirit, wounded when you
quarrelled? or did your soul, which is all spirit, drink when you were drunk?
Sins of presumption, and carnal confidence are our Sadduces; and then our
Pharisees are our sins of separation, of division, of diffidence and distrust
in the mercies of our God; when we are apt to say, after a sin, Cares God, who
is all Spirit, for my eloquent prayers, or for my passionate tears? Is the
giving of my goods to the poor, or of my body to the fire, any thing to God
who is all Spirit? My spirit, and nothing but my spirit, my soul, and nothing
but my soul, must satisfy the justice, the anger of God, and be separated
from him for ever. My Sadduce, my Presumption suggests, that there is no
spirit, no soul to suffer for sin; and my Pharisee, my Desperation suggests,
That my soul must perish irremediably, irrecoverably, for every sin that my
body commits.

Now if I go S. Paul's way, to put a dissension between these my Sadduces, and
my Pharisees, Via Pauli.
to put a jealousy between my presumption and my desperation, to make my
presumption see, that my desperation lies in wait for her; and to consider
seriously, that my presumption will end in desperation, I may, as S. Paul did
in the Text, escape the better for that. But if, without farther troubling these
Sadduces and these Pharisees, I be content to let them agree, and to divide my
life between them, so as that my presumption shall possess all my youth, and
desperation mine age, I have heard my sentence already, The end of this man
will be worse then his beginning, How much soever God be incensed with me, for
my presumption at first, he will be much more inexorable for my desperation at
last. And therefore interrupt the prescription of sin; break off the
correspondence of sin; unjoynt the dependency of sin upon sin. Bring every
single sin, as soon as thou committest it, into the presence of thy God, upon
those two legs, Confession, and Detestation, and thou shall see, that, as,
though an entire Island stand firm in the Sea, yet a single clod of earth cast
into the Sea, is quickly washed into nothing; so, howsoever thine habitual, and
customary, and concatenated sins, sin enwrapped and complicated in sin, sin
entrenched and barricadoed in sin, sin screwed up, and riveted with sin, may
stand out, and wrestle even with the mercies of God, in the blood of Christ
Jesus; yet if thou bring every single sin into the sight of God, it will be but
as a clod of earth, but as a grain of dust in the Ocean. Keep thy sins then
from mutual intelligence; That they do not second one another, induce
occasion, and then support and disguise one another, and then, neither shall
the body of sin ever oppress thee, nor the exhalations, and damps, and vapors
of thy sad soul, hang between thee, and the mercies of thy God; But thou shall
live in the light and serenity of a peaceable conscience here, and die in a
fair possibility of a present melioration and improvement of that light. All
thy life thou shall be preserved, in an Oriental light, an Eastern light, a
rising and a growing light, the light of grace; and at thy death thou shall be
super-illustrated, with a Meridionall light, a South light, the light of glory.
And be this enough for the explication, and application of these words, and
their complication with the day; for the justifying of S. Paul's Stratagem in
himself, and the exemplifying, and imitation thereof in us. Amen.

That God that is the God of peace, grant us his peace, and one mind toward
one another; That God that is the Lord of Hosts, maintain in us that war,
which himself has proclaimed, an enmity between the seed of the Woman, and the
seed of the Serpent, between the truth of God, and the inventions of men; That
we may fight his battles against his enemies without, and fight his battles
against our enemies within, our own corrupt affections; That we may be
victorious here, in our selves, and over our selves, and triumph with him
hereafter, in eternal glory.

SERMONS Preached upon the PENITENTIAL PSALMS.
SERMON. L. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 6.1. O Lord, Rebuke me not in thine Anger, neither chasten me in thy het
Displeasure.


GOD imputes but one thing to David, but one sin; The matter of Vriah the
Hittite: nor that neither, but by way of exception, not till he had first
established an assurance, that David stood well with him. First he had said, 1
King. 25.5.
David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside
from any thing, that he had commanded him all the days of his life: Here was
rectitude, He did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord; no obliquity,
no departing into by-ways, upon collateral respects; Here was integrity to
Gods service, no serving of God and Mammon, He turned not from any thing that
God commanded him; And here was perpetuity, perseverance, constancy, All the
days of his life: And then, and not till then, God makes that one, and but
that one exception, Except the matter of Vriah the Hittite. When God was
reconciled to him, he would not so much as name that sin; that had offended him:

And herein is the mercy of God, in the merits of Christ, a sea of mercy, that
as the Sea retains no impression of the Ships that pass in it, (for Navies
make no path in the Sea) so when we put out into the boundless Sea of the
blood of Christ Jesus, by which only we have reconciliation to God, there
remains no record against us; for God has cancelled that record which he
kept, and that which Satan kept God has nailed to the Cross of his Son. That
man which has seen me at the sealing of my Pardon, and the seal of my
Reconciliation, at the Sacrament, many times since, will yet in his passion, or
in his ill nature, or in his uncharitableness, object to me the fins of my
youth; whereas God himself, if I have repented to day, knows not the sins
that I did yesterday. God has rased the Record of my sin, in Heaven; it
offends not him, it grieves not his Saints nor Angels there; and he has rased
the Record in hell; it advances not their interest in me there, nor their
triumph over me. And yet here, the uncharitable man will know more, and see
more, and remember more, then my God, or his devil remembers, or knows, or
sees: He will see a path in the Sea; he will see my sin, when it is drowned in
the blood of my Savior. After the Kings pardon, perchance it will bear an
action, to call a man by that infamous name, which that crime, which is
pardoned, did justly cast upon him before the pardon: After Gods reconciliation
to David, he would not name David's sin in the particular.

But yet for all this, though God will be no example, of upbraiding or
reproaching repented sins, when God has so far expressed his love, as to bring
that sinner to that repentance, and so to mercy, yet, that he may perfect his
own care, he exercises that repentant sinner with such medicinal corrections,
as may enable him to stand upright for the future. And to that purpose, was no
man evermore exercised then David. David broke into another family; he built
upon another ground; he planted in another Seminary; and God broke into his
family, his ground, his Seminary. In no story, can we find so much Domestic
affliction, such rapes, and incests, and murders, and rebellions, from their
own children, as in David's story. Under the heavy weight and oppression of
some of those, is David, by all Expositors, conceived to have conceived, and
uttered this Psalm. Some take it to have been occasioned by some of his
temporal afflictions; either his persecution from Saul, or bodily sickness in
himself, of which traditionally the Rabbis speak much, or Absoloms
unnatural rebellion. Some others, with whom we find more reason to join,
find more reason to interpret it, of a spiritual affliction; that David, in
the apprehension, and under the sense of the wrath and indignation of God, came
to this vehement exclamation, or deprecation, O Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

In which words we shall consider, Divisio.
first the person, upon whom David turned for his succor, and then what
succor he seeks at his hands. First his word, and then his end; first to whom,
and then for what he supplicates. And in the first of these, the Person, we
shall make these three steps; first that he makes his first access to God
only, O Lord rebuke me not; do not thou, and though I will not say, I care
not, yet I care the less who do. And secondly, that it is to God by Name, not
to any universal God, in general notions; so natural men come to God; but to
God whom he considers in a particular name, in particular notions, and
attributes, and manifestations of himself; a God whom he knows, by his former
works done upon him. And then, that name in which he comes to him here, is
the name of Jehovah; his radical, his fundamental, his primarie, his
essential name, the name of being, Jehovah. For, he that deliberately, and
considerately believes himself to have his very being from God, believes
certainly that he has his well being from him too; He that acknowledges, that
it is by Gods providence that he breathes, believes that it is by his
providence that he eats too. So his access is to God, and to God by name,
that is by particular considerations, and then, to God in the name of Jehovah,
to that God that has done all, from his first beginning, from his Being. And
in these three we shall determine our first part.

First, 1. Part. To God.
in this first branch of this part, David comes to God, but without any
confidence in himself. Here is Reus ad rostra sine patrono, here is the
prisoner at the Bar, and no Counsel allowed him. He confesses Indictments,
faster then they can be read: If he hear himself indicted, that he looked
upon Bathsheba, that he lusted after Bathsheba, he cries, Alas, I have done
that, and more; dishonored her, and my self, and our God; and more then that,
I have continued the act into a habit; and more then that, I have drowned that
sin in blood, lest it should rise up to my sight; and more then all that, I
have caused the Name of God to be blasphemed; and lest his Majesty, and his
greatness should be a terror to me, I have occasioned the enemy to undervalue
him, and speak despightfully of God himself. And when he has confessed all,
all that he remembers, he must come to his Ab occultis meis, Lord cleanse me
from my secret sins; for there are sins, which we have labored so long to
hide from the world, that at last, they are hidden from our selves, from our
own memories, our own consciences. As much as David stands in fear of this
Judge, he must entreat this Judge, to remember his sins; Remember them, O
Lord, for else they will not fall into my pardon; but remember them in mercy,
and not in anger; for so they will not fall into my pardon neither.

Whatsoever the affliction then was, temporal, or spiritual, (we take it
rather to be spiritual) David's recourse is presently to God. 1 Samuel 16.14.
He does not, as his predecessor Saul did, when he was afflicted, send for one
that was cunning upon the Harp, to divert sorrow so. If his Subjects rebel, he
does not say, Let them alone, let them go on, I shall have the juster cause,
by their rebellion, of confiscations upon their Estates, of executions upon
their persons, of revocations of their laws, and customs, and privileges,
which they carry themselves so high upon. If his son lift up his hand against
him, he does not place his hope in that, that that occasion will cut off his
son, and that then the peoples hearts which were bent upon his son, will
return to him again. David knew he could not retire himself from God in his
bedchamber; Guards and Ushers could not keep him out. He knew he could not
defend himself from God in his Army; for the Lord of Hosts is Lord of his
Hosts. If he fled to Sea, to Heaven, to Hell, he was sure to meet God there;
and there thou shall meet him too, if thou fly from God, to the relief of
outward comforts, of music, of mirth, of drink, of cordialls, of Comedies,
of conversation. Not that such recreations are unlawful; the mind has her
physic as well as the body; but when thy sadness proceeds from a sense of thy
sins, (which is Gods key to the door of his mercy, put into thy hand) it is
a new, and a greater sin, to go about to overcome that holy sadness, with
these profane diversions; to fly Ad consolatiunculas creaturulae (as that
elegant man Luther expresses it, according to his natural delight in that
elegancy of Diminutives, with which he abounds above all Authors) to the little
and contemptible comforts of little and contemptible creatures. And as Luther
uses the physic, Job uses the Physician; Luther calls the comforts, Miserable
comforts; and Job calls them that minister them, Onerosos consolatores,
Miserable comforters are you all. David could not drown his adultery in blood;
never think thou to drown thine in wine. The Ministers of God are Sons of
Thunder, they are falls of waters, trampling of horses, and runnings of
Chariots; and if these voices of these Ministers, cannot overcome thy music,
thy security, yet the Angels trumpet will; That Surgite qui dermitis, Arise ye
that sleep in the dust, in the dust of the grave, is a Treble that
over-reaches all; That Ite maledicti, Go ye accursed into Hell fire, is a
Base that drowns all. There is no recourse but to God, no relief but in God;
and therefore David applied himself to the right method, to make his first
access to God.

It is to God only, and to God by name, and not in general notions; To God by
Name.
for it implies a nearer, a more familiar, and more presentiall knowledge of
God, a more cheerful acquaintance, and a more assiduous conversation with God,
when we know how to call God by a Name, a Creator, a Redeemer, a Comforter,
then when we consider him only as a diffused power, that spreads it self over
all creatures; when we come to him in Affirmatives, and Confessions, This thou
have done for me, then when we come to him only in Negatives, and say, That
that is God, which is nothing else. God is come nearer to us then to others,
when we know his Name. For though it be truly said in the School, that no name
can be given to God, Ejus essentiam adaequate repraesentans, No one name can
reach to the expressing of all that God is; And though Trismegistus do humbly,
and modestly, and reverently say, Non spear, it never fell into my thought, nor
into my hope, that the maker and founder of all Majesty, could be
circumscribed, or imprisoned by any one name, though a name compounded and
complicated of many names, as the Rabbis have made one name of God, of all his
names in the Scriptures; Genesis 32.29.
Though Jacob seem to have been rebuked for asking Gods name, when he wrastled
with him; And so also the Angel which was to do a miraculous work, Judge.
13.18.
a work appertaining only to God, to give a Child to the barren, because he
represented God, and had the person of God upon him, would not permit Manoah to
enquire after his name, Because, as he says there, that name was secret and
wonderful; And though God himself, Exodus 23.20.
to dignifie and authorize that Angel, which he made his Commissioner, and the
Tutelar and National Guide of his people, says of that Angel, to that people,
Fear him, provoke him not, for my Name is in him, and yet did not tell them,
what that name was; Yet certainly, we could not so much as say, God cannot be
named, except we could name God by some name; we could not say, God has no
name, except God had a name; for that very word, God, is his name. God calls
upon us often in the Scriptures, To call upon his Name; and in the Scriptures,
he has manifested to us diverse names, by which we may call upon him. Do
thou know what name to call him by, when thou call him to bear false
witness, to aver a falsehood? Has God a name to swear by? Do thou know
what name to call him by, when thou would make him thy servant, thy
instrument, thy executioner, to plague others, upon thy bitter curses and
imprecations? Has God a name to curse by? Can thou wound his body, exhaust
his blood, tear off his flesh, break his bones, excruciate his soul; and all
this by his right name? Has God a name to blaspheme by? and has God no name
to pray by? is he such a stranger to thee? Do thou know every fair house in
thy way, as thou travellest, whose that is; and do thou not know, in whose
house thou stand now?

Beloved, to know God by name, and to come to him by name, is to consider his
particular blessings to thee; to consider him in his power, and how he has
protected thee there; and in his wisdom, and how he has directed thee there;
and in his love, and how he has affected thee there; and expressed all, in
particular mercies. He is but a dark, but a narrow, a shallow, a lazy man in
nature, that knows no more, but that there is a heaven, and an earth, and a
sea; He that will be of use in this world, comes to know the influences of the
heavens, the virtue of the plants, and mines of the earth, the course and
divisions of the Sea. To the natural man, God gives general notions of
himself; a God that spreads over all as the heavens; a God that sustaines all
as the earth; a God that transports, and communicates all to all as the sea:
But to the Christian Church, God applies himself in more particular notions;
as a Father, as a Son, as a holy Ghost; And to every Christian soul, as a
Creator, a Redeemer, a Benefactor; that I may say, This I was not born to, and
yet this I have from my God; this a potent adversary sought to evict from me,
but this I have recovered by my God; sickness had enfeebled my body, but I
have a convalescence; calumny had defamed my reputation, but I have a
reparation; malice in other men, or improvidence in my self, had ruined my
fortune, but I have a redintegration from my God. And then by these, which are
indeed but Cognomina Dei, his sir-names, names of distinction, names of the
exercise of some particular properties, and attributes of his, to come to the
root of all, to my very Being, that my present Being in this world, and my
eternal Being in the next, is made known to me by his name of Jehovah, which
is his Essential name, to which David had recourse in this exinanition; when
his affliction had even annihilated, and brought him to nothing, he fled to
Jehovah, the God of all Being, which is the foundation of all his other
Attributes, and includes all his other names, and is our next and last branch
in this first Part.

This name then of Jehovah that is here translated Lord, Jehovah.
is agreed by all to be the greatest name by which God has declared and
manifested himself to man. This is that name which the Jews falsely, but
peremptorily, (for falsehood lives by peremptorinesse, and feeds and arms it
self with peremptorinesse) deny ever to have been attributed to the Messiah,
in the Scriptures. This is that name, in the virtue and use whereof, those
Calumniators of our Saviors miracles do say, that he did his miracles,
according to a direction, and schedule, for the true and right pronouncing of
that name, which Solomon in his time had made, and Christ in his time had
found, and by which, say they, any other man might have done those miracles, if
he had had Solomon's directions for the right sounding of this name, Jehovah.
This is that name, which out of a superstitious reverence the Jews always
forbore to found, or utter, but ever pronounced some other name, either Adonai,
or Elohim, in the place thereof, wheresoever they found Jehovah. But now their
Rabbis will not so much as write that name, but still express it in four
other letters. So that they dare not, not only not sound it, not say it, but
not see it.

How this name which we call Jehovah, is truly to be sounded, because in that
language it is expressed in four Consonants only, without Vowels, is a perplexed
question; we may well be content to be ignorant therein, since our Savior
Christ himself, in all those places which he cited out of the Old Testament,
never sounded it; he never said, Jehovah. Nor the Apostles after him, nor
Origin, nor Jerome; all persons very intelligent in the propriety of language;
they never sounded this name Jehovah. For though in S. Ieromes Exposition upon
the 8. Psalm, we find that word Jehovah, in some Editions which we have now,
yet it is a clear case, that in the old Copies it is not so; in Ieroms mouth
it was not so; from Ieroms hand it came not so. Neither does it appear to me,
that ever the name of Jehovah was so pronounced, till so late, as in our
Fathers time; for I think Petrus Gallatinus was the first that ever called it
so. But howsoever this name be to be sounded, that which falls in our
consideration at this time, is, That David in his distresses fled presently to
God, and to God by name, that is, in consideration and commemoration of his
particular blessings; and to a God that had that name, the name of Jehovah, the
name of Essence, and Being, which name carried a confession, that all our
wel-being, and the very first being it self, was, and was to be derived from
him.

David therefore comes to God In nomine totali; in nomine integrali; He
considers God totally, entirely, altogether; Not altogether, that is,
confusedly; but altogether, that is, in such a Name as comprehends all his
Attributes, all his Power upon the world, and all his benefits upon him. The
Gentiles were not able to consider God so; not so entirely, not altogether; but
broke God in pieces, and changed God into single money, and made a fragmentarie
God of every Power, and Attribute in God, of every blessing from God, nay of
every malediction, and judgment of God. A clap of thunder made a Jupiter, a
tempest at sea made a Neptune, an earthquake made a Pluto; Fear came to be a
God, and a Fever came to be a God; Every thing that they were in love with, or
afraid of, came to be canonized, and made a God amongst them. David considered
God as a center, into which and from which all lines flowed. Neither as the
Gentiles did, nor as some ignorants of the Roman Church do, that there must be
a stormy god, S. Nicholas, and a plaguie god, S. Rook, and a sheepshearing
god, and a swineherd god, a god for every Parish, a god for every occupation,
God forbid. Acknowledge God to be the Author of thy Being; find him so at the
springhead, and then thou shall easily trace him, by the branches, to all that
belongs to thy well-being. The Lord of Hosts, and the God of peace, the God of
the mountains, and the God of the valleys, the God of noone, and of midnight,
of all times, the God of East and West, of all places, the God of Princes, and
of Subjects, of all persons, is all one and the same God; and that which we
intend, when we say Jehovah, is all He.

And therefore has S. Bernard a patheticall and useful meditation to this
purpose: Every thing in the world, says he, can say, Creator meus es tu, Lord
thou have made me; All things that have life, and growth, can say, Pastor meus
es tu, Lord thou have fed me, increast me; All men can say, Redemptor meus es
tu, Lord I was sold to death through original sin, by one Adam, and thou have
redeemed me by another; All that have fallen by infirmity, and risen again by
grace, can say, Susceptor meus es tu, Lord I was fallen, but thou have
undertaken me, and do sustain me; But he that comes to God in the name of
Jehovah, he means all this, and all other things, in this one Petition, Let me
have a Being, and then I am safe, for In him we live, and move, and have our
Being. If we solicit God as the Lord of Hosts, that he would deliver us from
our enemies, perchance he may see it fitter for us to be delivered to our
enemies: If we solicit him as Proprietarie of all the world, as the beasts
upon a thousand mountains are his, as all the gold and silver in the earth is
his, perchance he sees that poverty is fitter for us: If we solicit him for
health, or long life, he gives life, but he kills too, he heales, but he wounds
too; and we may be ignorant which of these, life or death, sickness or health,
is for our advantage. But solicit him as Jehovah, for a Being, that Being
which flows from his purpose, that Being which he knows fittest for us, and
then we follow his own Instructions, Fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done upon
us, and we are safe.

Now that which Jehovah was to David, Jesus is to us. Jesus.
Man in general has relation to God, as he is Jehovah, Being; We have
relation to Christ, as he is Jesus, our Salvation; Salvation is our Being,
Jesus is our Jehovah. And therefore as David delights himself with that name
Jehovah, for he repeats it eight or nine times in this one short Psalm, and
though he ask things of a diverse nature at Gods hands, though he suffer
afflictions, of a diverse nature, from Gods hands, yet still he retains that
one name, he speaks to God in no other name in all this Psalm but in the name
of Jehovah: So in the New Testament, he which may be compared with David,
because he was under great sins, and yet in great favor with God, S. Paul, he
delights himself with that name of Jesus so much, as that S. Jerome says, Que^
superflue diligebat, extraordinary nominavit, As he loved him excessively, so
he named him superabundantly. It is the name that cost God most, and therefore
he loves it best; it cost him his life to be a Jesus, a Savior. The name of
Christ, which is Anointed, he had by office; he was anointed as King, as
Priest, as Prophet. All those names which he had in Isaiah, The Counselor, The
Wonderful, The Prince of Peace, Esaias 9.
and the name of Jehovah it self, which the Jews deny ever to be given to him,
and is evidently given to him in that place, Christ had by nature; But his name
of Jesus, a Savior, he had by purchase, and that purchase cost him his blood.
And therefore, as Jacob preferred his name of Israel, Genesis 32.28.
before his former name of Jacob, because he had that name upon his wrestling
with God, and it cost him a lamenesse; so is the name of Jesus so precious to
him who bought it so dearly, that not only every knee bows at the name of Jesus
here, but Jesus himself, and the whole Trinity, bow down toward us, to give us
all those things which we ask in that name. For even of a devout use of that
veryname, do some of the Fathers interpret that, Oleu^ effusum Nomen tuu, That
the name of Jesus should be spread as an ointment, breathed as perfume,
diffused as a soul over all the petitions of our prayers; As the Church
concludes for the most part, all her Collects so, Grant this O Lord, for our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus sake. And so much does S. Paul abound in the use
of this name, as that he repeats it thrice, in the superscription of one of his
Letters the title of one of his Epistles, his first to Timothy. And with the
same devotion, S. August. says, even of the name, Melius est mihi non esse,
qua^ sine Jesus esse, I were better have no being, then be without Jesus; Melius
est non vivere, quam vivere sine vita, I were better have no life, then any
life without him. For as David could find no being without Jehovah, a
Christian finds no life without Jesus. Both these names imply that which is in
this Text, in our Translation, The Lord, Dominus; to whom only, and entirely we
appertain; his we are. And therefore whether we take Dominus, to be Do minas,
to threaten, to afflict us, or to be Do manus, to succor, and relieve us, (as
some have pleased themselves with those obvious derivations) as David did
still, we must make our recourse to him, from whom, as he is Jehovah, Being,
or being our wel-beeing, our eternal being, our Creation, Preservation, and
Salvation is derived; all is from him.

Now when he has his access to the Lord, 2 Part.
to this Lord, the Lord that has all, and gives all, and is all, the first
part of David's prayer, and all his prayer which falls into our Text, is but
Deprecatory; he does but pray that God would forbear him. He pretends no
error, he enterprises no Reversing of Judgment; no at first, he dares not sue
for pardon; he only desires a Reprieve, a respit of execution, and that not
absolutely neither; but he would not be executed in hot blood; Ne in ira, ne in
furore, not in Gods anger, not in his hot displeasure.

First then, Deprecation.
Deprecari, is not Refragari, to Deprecate, is not to Contend against a Judge,
nor to defend ones self against an Officer, but it is only in the quality,
and in the humility of a Petitioner, and Suppliant, to beg a forbearance. The
Martyrs in the Primitive Church would not do that. Nihil de causa sua
deprecatur, qui nihil de condition sua miratur, says Tertullian; and in that
he describes a patience of Steel, and an invincible temper. He means that the
Christians in those times of Persecution, did never entreat the Judge for
favor, because it was not strange to them, to see themselves, whose
conversation was in heaven, despised, and contemned, and condemned upon earth:
Nihil mirantur de condition, They wondered not at their misery, they thought it
a part of their Profession, a part of the Christian Religion, to suffer, and
therefore, Nihil deprecati de causa, They never solicited the Judge for favor.
They had learnt by experience of daily tribulation, the Apostles Lesson, Think
it not strange, when tentations and tribulations fall; That is, make that your
daily bread, and you shall never sterve, use your selves to suffering, at least
to the expectation, the contemplation of suffering, acquaint your selves with
that, accustom your selves to that before it come, and it will not be a
stranger to you when it comes. Tertullians Method may be right, and it may work
that effect in very great afflictions; a man may be so used to them, as that he
will not descend to any low deprecation, or suit to be delivered of them. But
David's affliction was spiritual; and howsoever, as a natural man, nay; as a
devout and religious man, (for even in rectified men there are affections of a
middle nature, that participate of nature, and of grace too, and in which the
Spirit of God moves, and natural affections move too; for nature and grace do
not so destroy one another, as that we should conclude, He has strong
natural affections, therefore he has no grace) David I say, that might justly
wonder at his own condition, and think it strange, that he that put his trust
so entirely in God, should so entirely be delivered over to such afflictions,
might also justly deprecate, and boldly say, Ne facias, O Lord deal not thus
with thy servant.

Our Savior Christ's Transeat calix, Let this cup pass from me, was a
deprecation in his own behalf; And his Pater dimitte illis, Father,
forgivethem, they know not what they do, was a deprecation in the behalf of
his enemies; And so was Stephens, Ne statuas illis, O Lord, lay not this sin to
their charge, A deprecation in the behalf of his Executioners. And these
Deprecations for others, for our selves, are proposed for our imitation. But
for Moses his Dele me, Pardon this people, or blot my name out of thy Book,
and for S. Paul's Anathema, rather then his brethren should not be saved, let
himself be condemned, for such Deprecations for others, as were upon the
matter, Imprecations upon themselves, those may not well be drawn into
consequence, or practice; for in Moses and S. Paul themselves, there was, if
not an irregularity, and an inordinatenesse, at least an inconsideration, not
to be imitated by us now, not to be excused in them then; but for the Prayer
that is merely deprecatory, though some have thought it less lawful then the
postulatory prayer, because when God is come to the act of afflicting us, he
has then revealed, and declared, and manifested his will to be such, and
against the revealed and manifested will of God we may not pray, yet because
his afflictions are not peremptory, but we have ever day to show cause, why
that affliction should be taken off, and because all his judgments are
conditional, and the condition of every particular judgment is not always
revealed to us, and this is always revealed to us, Miserationes ejus super
omnia opera ejus, That his mercy is above all his judgments, therefore we may
come to that Deprecation, that God will make his hand lighter upon us, and his
corrections easier unto us.

As the Saints in heaven have their Vsqucquo, How long Lord, holy and true,
before thou begin to execute judgment? So the Saints on earth have their
Vsquequo, How long Lord, before thou take off the execution of this judgment
upon us? For, our Deprecatory prayers, are not Mandatory, they are not
Directory, they appoint not God his ways, nor his times; but as our
Postulatory prayers are, they also are submitted to the will of God, and have
all in them, that ingredient, that herb of grace, which Christ put into his
own prayer, that Veruntamen, Yet not my will, but thy will be fulfilled; And
they have that ingredient, which Christ put into our prayer, Fiat volunt as,
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven; In heaven there is no resisting
of his will; yet in heaven there is asoliciting, a hastening, an accelerating of
the judgment, and the glory of the Resurrection; So though we resist not his
corrections here upon earth, we may humbly present to God, the sense which we
have of his displeasure; for this sense, and apprehension of his corrections,
is one of the principal reasons, why he sends them; he corrects us therefore,
that we might be sensible of his corrections; that when we, being humbled under
his hand, have said with his Prophet, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, Micah
7.9.
because I have sinned against him, He may be pleased to say to his Correcting
Angel, as he did to his Destroying Angel, This is enough, and so burn his
rod now, as he put up his sword then.

For though David do, well for himself, and well for our example, deprecate
the anger of God, expressed in those Judgments, yet we see he spends but one
verse of the Psalm in that Deprecation. In all the rest he leaves God wholly
to his pleasure, how far he will extend, or aggravate that Judgment; and he
turns wholly upon the Postulatory part, That God would have mercy upon him, and
save him, and deliver his soul. And in that one verse, he does not deprecate
all afflictions, all corrections. David knows what moves God to correct us; It
is not only our illness that moves him; for he corrects us when we are not ill
in his sight, but made good by his pardon: But his goodness, as well as our
illness, moves him to correct us; If he were not good, not only good in
himself, but good to us, he would let us alone, and never correct us. But,
Wisd. 12.1.
Ideo cos qui errant corripis, quia bonus and suavis es Domine, as the Vulgate
reads that place, The Lord corrects us, not only as he is good, but as he is
gentle; he were more cruel, more unmercifull, if he did always show mercy;
That David intends, when he says, Propitius fuisti, Thou wast a Merciful God,
because thou did punish all their inventions.

So then, our first work is to consider, that that in the Prophet, is a
promise, Ier. 30.11.
and has the nature of a mercy, I will correct thee in measure; where the
promise does not fall only upon the measure, but upon the correction it self;
and then, since this is a promise, a mercy, a part of our daily bread, we may
pray as the same Prophet directs us, Psalm. 10.24.
O Lord correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger; Where also the
petition seems to fall, not only upon the measure, but upon the correction it
self; and then, when I have found some correction fit to be prayed for and
afforded me by God upon my prayer, if that correction at any time grow heavy,
or wearisome unto me, I must relieve my self upon that consideration, Whether
God have smitten me, as he smote them that smote me, Esaias 27.7.
Whether it be not another manner of execution, which God has laid upon mine
enemies then that which he has laid upon me, in having suffered them to be
smitten with the spirit of sinful glory, and triumph in their sin, and my
misery, and with excecation, and obdurateness, with impenitence, and
insensiblenesse of their own case. Or at least, let me consider, as it is in
the same place, Whether I be slain according to the slaughter of them that were
slain by me; That is, whether my oppression, my extortion, my prevarication
have not brought other men to more misery, then God has yet brought me unto.
And if we consider this, as no doubt David did, and find that correction is
one loaf of our daily bread, and find in our heaviest corrections, that God
has been heavier upon our enemies, then upon us, and we heavier upon others,
then God upon us too, we shall be content with any Rebuke, and any
Chastisement, so it be not in anger, and in hot displeasure, which are the
words that remain to be considered.

Now these two phrases, Argui in furore, and Corripi in ira, which we
translate, To rebuke inanger, and to chasten in hot displeasure, are by some
thought, to signify one and the same thing, that David intends the same thing,
and though in diverse words, yet words of one and the same signification. But
with reverence to those men, (for some of them are men to whom much reverence
is due) they do not well agree with one another, nor very constantly with
themselves. S. Jerome says, Furor and ira maxim unum sunt, That this anger,
and hot displeasure, are merely, absolutely, entirely, one and the same thing,
and yet he says, that this Anger is executed in this world, and this hot
Displeasure reserved for the world to come. And this makes a great difference;
no weight of Gods whole hand here, can be so heavy, as any finger of his in
hell; the highest exaltation of Gods anger in this world, can have no
proportion to the least spark of that in hell; nor a furnace seven times heat
here, to the embers there. So also S. Augustine thinks, that these two words,
to Rebuke, and to Chasten, do not differ at all; or if they do, that the
latter is the lesser. But this is not likely to be David's method, first to make
a prayer for the greater, and that being granted, to make a second prayer for
the lesser, included in that which was asked, Ayguanus.
and granted before. A later man in the Roman Church, allows the words to
differ, and the later to be the heavier, but then he refers both to the next
life; that to Rebuke in anger, should be intended of Purgatory, and of a short
continuance there, and to be Chastened in hot displeasure, should be intended
of hell, and of everlasting condemnation there. And so David must make his
first petition, Rebuke me not in thine anger, to this purpose, Let me pass at
my death immediately to Heaven, without touching at any fire, and his second
petition, Chasten me not in thy hot displeasure to this purpose, If I must
touch at any fire, let it be but Purgatory, and not Hell.

But by the nature, and propriety, and the use of all these words in the
Scriptures, it appears, that the words are of a different signification, which
S. Jerome it seems did not think; and that the last is the heaviest, which S.
Augustine it seems did not think; and then, that they are to be referred to
this life, which Ayguanus did not think. For the words themselves, all our
three Translations retain the two first words, to Rebuke and to Chasten;
neither that which we call the Bishops Bible, nor that which we call the Geneva
Bible, and that which we may call the Kings, depart from those two first
words. But then for the other two, Anger and Hot displeasure, in them all three
Translations differ. The first calls them Indignation and Displeasure, the
second Anger and Wrath, and the last Anger and Hot displeasure.

To begin with the first, Rebuke.
to be Rebuked was but to be chidden, but to be Chastened, was to be beaten;
and yet David was heartily afraid of the first, of the least of them, when it
was to be done in anger: This word that is here to Rebuke, Iacach, is for the
most part, to Reprove, Esaias 1.18.
to Convince by way of argument, and disputation. So it is in Esaias, Come now,
and let us reason together, says God. The natural man is confident in his
Reason, in his Philosophy; and yet God is content to join in that issue, If he
do not make it appear, even to your reason, that he is God, Choose whom ye
will serve, as Ioshuah speaks; If he do not make it appear, that he is a
good God, change him for any other God that your reason can present to be
better. Micah 6.2.
In Micah, the word has somewhat more vehemence; The Lord has a quarrel
against his people, and he will plead with Israel. This is more then a
Disputation; it is a Suite. God can maintain his possession other ways;
without Suite; but he will recover us, by matter of Record, openly, and in the
face of the County; he will put us to a shame, and to an acknowledgement, of
having disloially divested our Allegiance. Yea, the word has sometimes
somewhat more sharpness then this; for in the book of Proverbs, it comes to
Correction, The Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does the
child, in whom he delights. Though it be a fatherly correction, yet it is a
correction; and that is more then the Reasoning or Disputing, more then the
Suing or Impleading.

Now though all this, Disputing, Impleading, Correcting, in S. Augustines
interpretation, amount but to an Instruction, and an Amendment, yet says he of
David, In ira emendari non vult, erudiri non vult, He is loath to fall into
Gods hands, loath to come into Gods fingers at all, when God is angry; he would
not be disputed withal, not Impleaded, not Corrected, no, not Instructed, not
Amended by God in his Anger. The Anger of God is such a Pedagogie, such a
Catechism, such a way of teaching, as the Law was. Lex paedagogus; the Law is
a Schoolmaster, says the Apostle; but Litera occidi^, the Law is such a
Schoolmaster, as brings not a rod, but a sword. Gods Anger should instruct us,
but if we use it not aright, it hardens us. And therefore, Psalm. 2.
Kiss the Son lest he be angry, says David, And what is the danger if he be?
that which follows, Lest ye perish in the way; Though his Anger be one of his
ways, yet it is such a way, as you may easily stumble in; and, as you would
certainly perish without that way, so you may easily perish in that way. For
when a sinner considers himself to be under the Anger of God, naturally he
conceives such a horror, as puts him farther off. As soon as Adam heard the
voice of God, and in an accent of Anger, or as he tuned it in his guilty
conscience, to an accent of Anger, (for as a malicious man will turn a Sermon
to a Satyr, and a Panegyricke to a Libel, so a despairing soul will set Gods
comfortablest words, to asad tune, and force a Vae even in Gods Euge, and find
Anger, and everlasting Anger in every Access, in every Action of God) when
Adam heard God but walking in the Garden, but the noise of his going, and
approaching toward him, (for God had then said nothing to him, not so much as
called him) Adam fled from his presence and hid himself amongst the trees.
When the guilty man was but spoken to, and spoken to mildly, by the Master of
the Marriage feast, Amice quomodo intrasti? Friend how came you in? we see he
was presently speechless, and being so, not able to speak, to come to any
confessin, any excuse, he fell farther and farther into displeasure, till he
was bound hand and foot, Job 9.12.
and cast irrecoverably away. For Si repent interroget, quis respondebit ei?
If God surprise a Conscience with a sudden question, if God deprehend a man in
the Act of his sin, and while he accomplishes and consummates that sin, say to
his soul, Why do thou this, upon which mine anger hangs? there God speaks to
that sinner, but he confounds him with the question; It is not a leading
Intergatorie, it gives him no light to answer, Esaias 38.14.
till Gods anger be out of his contemplation, he cannot so much as say Domine
vim patior, responde pro me, O Lord I am oppressed, do thou answer for me; do
thou say to thy self for me, My Spirit shall not always strive with man,
because he is but flesh. Genesis 6.3.
If the Lord come in anger, if he speak in Anger, if he do but look in
Anger, a sinner perishes; Aspexit and dissolvit Gentes; He did but look, and
he dissolved, he melted the Nations; Hab. 3.6.
he powered them out as water upon the dust, and he blew them away as dust into
the Sea, The everlasting mountains were broken, and the ancient hills did bow.

It is not then the disputing, not the impleading, not the correcting, which
this word Iacach imports, that David declines, or deprecates here, but that
Anger, which might change the nature of all, and make all the Physic poison,
all that was intended for our mollifying, to advance our obduration. For when
there was no anger in the case, David is a forward Scholar, to hearken to Gods
Reasoning, and Disputing, and a tractable Client, and easy Defendant, to
answer to Gods Suite, and Impleading, Psalm. 26.1.
and an obsequious Patient, to take any Physic at his hands, if there were no
Anger in the cup. Ure renes and cor meum, says David, he provokes God with all
those emphaticall words, Judge me, Prove me, Try me, Examine me, and more, Ure
renes, bring not only a candle to search, but even fire, to melt me; But upon
what confidence all this? For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes. If
Gods Anger, and not his loving kindness had been before his eyes, it had
been a fearful apparition, and a dangerous issue to have gone upon. So also
he surrenders himself entirely to God in another Psalm, Psalm. 139.23.
Try me O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts, and
consider, if there be any way of wickedness in me. But how concludes he? And
lead me in the right way for ever. As long as I have God by the hand, and feel
his loving care of me, I can admit any weight of his hand; any furnace of his
heating. Let God mould me, and then melt me again, let God make me, and then
break me again, as long as he establishes and maintains a rectified
assurance in my soul, that at last he means to make me a Vessel of honor,
to his Glory, howsoever he Rebuke or Chastise me, yet he will not Rebuke me in
Anger, much less Chasten me in hot Displeasure, which is the last, and the
heaviest thing, that David deprecates in this Prayer.

Both these words, which we translate to Chasten, and Hot displeasure, are
words of a heavy, and of a vehement signification. They extend both, to
express the eternity of Gods indignation, even to the binding of the soul and
body in eternal chains of darkness. For the first, Iasar, signifies
oftentimes in the Scriptures, Vincire, to bind, often with ropes, often with
chains; to fetter, or manacle, or pinion men, that are to be executed; so that
it imports a slaverie, a bondage all the way, and a destruction at last. And so
the word is used by Rehoboam, 1 Reg. 12.11.
My Father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions.
And then, the other word, Camath, does not only signify Hot displeasure, but
that effect of Gods hot displeasure, which is intended by the Prophet Esaias,
Therefore has he powered forth his fieree wrath, Esaias 42. ult.
and the strength of battle, and that set him on fire round about, and he knew
it not, and it burnt him up, and he considered it not; These be the fearfully
conditions of Gods hot displeasure, to be in a furnace, and not to feel it; to
be in a habit of sin, and not know what leads us into temptation; to be burnt
to ashes, and so not only without all moisture, all holy tears, but, as
ashes, without any possibility, that any good thing can grow in us. And yet
this word, Camath, has a heavier signification then this; for it signifies
Poison it self, Destruction it self, for so is it twice taken in one verse,
Psalm. 58.4.
Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent; so that this Hot displeasure, is
that poison of the soul, obduration here, and that extention of this
obduration, a final impenitence in this life, and an infinite impenitiblenesse
in the next, to dye without any actual penitence here, and live without all
possibility of future penitence for ever hereafter.

David therefore foresees, that if God Rebuke in anger, it will come to a
Chastening in hot displeasure. 1 Samuel 2.25.
For what should stop him? For, If a man sin against the Lord, who will plead
for him? says Eli; Plead thou my cause, says David; It is only the Lord,
that can be of counsel with him, and plead for him; and that Lord, is both the
Judge, and angry too. So David's prayer has this force, Rebuke me not in anger,
for though I were able to stand under that, yet thou will also Chasten me in
thine hot displeasure, and that no soul can bear; for as long as Gods anger
lasts, so long he is going on toward our utter destruction. In that State, (it
is not a State) in that Exinanition, in that annihilation of the soul, (it is
not an annihilation, the soul is not so happy as to come to nothing) but in
that misery, which can no more receive a name, then an end, all Gods
corrections are borne with grudging, with murmuring, with comparing our
righteousness with others righteousness; Job 7.20.
In Jobs impatience, Quare posuisti me contrarium tibi? Why have thou set me up
as a mark against thee, O Thou preserver of men? Thou that preservest other
men, have bent thy bow, I. am. 3.12.
and made me a mark for thine arrows, says the Lamentation: In that state we
cannot cry to him, that he might answer us; If we do cry, and he answer, we
cannot hear; Job 9.16.
if we do hear, we cannot believe that it is he. Cum invocantem exaudierit,
says Job, If I cry, and he answer, yet I do not believe that he heard my
voice. We had rather perish utterly, Ver. 23.
then stay his leisure in recovering us. Si flagellat, occidat semel, says Job
in the Vulgat, If God have a mind to destroy me, let him do it at one blow;
Et non de poenis rideat, Let him not sport himself with my misery. Whatsoever
come after, we would be content to be out of this world, so we might but change
our torment, whether it be a temporal calamity that oppresses our state or
body, or a spiritual burden, a perplexity that sinks our understanding, or a
guiltiness that depresses our conscience. Vt in inferno protegas, Job 14.13.
as Job also speaks, O that thou would hide me, In inferno, In the grave,
says the afflicted soul, but in Inferno, In hell it self, says the
dispairing soul, rather then keep me in this torment, in this world!

This is the miserable condition, or danger, that David abhors, and deprecates
in this Text, To be rebuked in anger, without any purpose in God to amend him;
and to be chastned in his hot displeasure; so, as that we can find no interest
in the gracious promises of the Gospel, no conditions, no power of revocation
in the severe threatenings of the Law; no difference between those torments
which have attached us here, and the everlasting torments of Hell it self.
That we have lost all our joy in this life, and all our hope of the next; That
we would feign die, though it were by our own hands, and though that death do
but unlock us a door, to pass from one Hell into another. This is Ira tua
Domine, and faror tuus, Thy anger, O Lord, and, Thy hot displeasure. For as
long as it is but Ira patris, the anger of my Father, which has dis-inherited
me, Gold is thine, and silver is thine, and thou can provide me. As long as
it is but Ira Regis, some misinformation to the King, some mis-apprehension in
the King, Cor Regis in manu tua, The Kings heart is in thy hand, and thou can
rectify it again. As long as it is but Furor febris, The rage and distemper
of a pestilent Fever, or Furor furoris, The rage of madness it self, thou will consider me, and accept me, and reckon with me according to those better
times, before those distempers overtooke me, and overthrew me. But when it
comes to be Ira tua, furor tuus, Thy anger, and, Thy displeasure, as David did,
so let every Christian find comfort, if he be able to say faithfully this
Verse, this Text, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in
thy hot displeasure; for as long as he can pray against it, he is not yet so
fallen under it, but that he has yet his part in all Gods blessings, which we
shed upon the Congregation in our Sermons, and which we seal to every soul in
the Sacrament of Reconcilation.

SERMON. LI. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 6.2, 3. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me,
for my bones are vexed: My soul is also sore vexed; But thou, O Lord, how long?


THis whole Psalm is prayer; And the whole prayer is either Deprecatory, as in
the first verse, or Postulatory. Something David would have forborne, and
something done. And in that Postulatory part of David's prayer, which goes
through six verses of this Psalm, we consider the Petitions, and the
Inducements; What David asks, And why: of both which, there are some mingled,
in these two verses, which constitute our Text. And therefore, in them, we
shall necessarily take knowledge of some of the Petitions, and some of the
Reasons. For, in the Prayer, there are five petitions; First, Miserere, Have
mercy upon me, Think of me, look graciously toward me, prevent me with thy
mercy; And then Sana me, O Lord, heal me, Thou did create me in health, but
my parents begot me in sickness, and I have complicated other sicknesses with
that, Actual with Original sin, O Lord, heal me, give me physic for them;
And thirdly, Convertere, Return, O Lord, Thou did visit me in nature,
return in grace, Thou did visit me in Baptism, return in the other
Sacrament, Thou do visit me now, return at the hour of my death; And, in a
fourth petition, Eripe, O Lord, deliver my soul, Every blessing of thine
because a snare unto me, and thy benefits I make occasions of sin, In all
conversation, and even in my solitude, I admit such tentations from others, or
I produce such tentations in my self, as that, whenever thou art pleased to
return to me, thou find me at the brinke of some sin, and therefore Eripe
me, O Lord, take hold of me, and deliver me; And lastly, Salvum me fac, O Lord,
save me, Manifest thy good purpose upon me so, that I may never be shaken, or
never overthrown in the faithful hope of that salvation, which thou have
preordained for me. These are the five petitions of the Prayer, and two of the
five, The Miserere, Have mercy upon me, and the Sana, O Lord, heal me, are in
these two verses. And then, the Reasons of the prayer, arising partly out of
himself, and partly out of God; and some being mixed, and growing out of both
roots together, some of the Reasons of the first nature, that is, of those that
arise out of himself, are also in this Text.

Therefore in this Text, we shall consider, first the extent of those two
petitions that are in it, Quid miserere, what David intends by this prayer,
Have mercy upon me, And then, Quid sana me, what he intends by that, O Lord,
heal me. And secondly, we shall consider the strength of those Reasons, which
are in our text, Quia infirmus, why God should be moved to mercy with that,
Because David was weak, And then Quia turbata ossa, why, Because his bones
were vexed; And again, Quia turbata anima valde, Because his soul was sore
vexed. And in a third Consideration, we shall also see, that for all our
petitions, for mercy, and for spiritual health, and for all our Reasons,
weakness, vexation of bones, And sore vexation of the soul it self, God does
not always come to a speedy remedy, but puts us to our Vsquequo, But thou, O
Lord, how long? How long will thou delay? And then lastly, That how long soever
that be, yet we are still to attend his time, still to rely upon him; which is
intimated in this, That David changes not his Master, but still applies
himself to the Lord; with that Name, that he begun with in the first verse, he
proceeds; and thrice in these few words he calls upon him by this name of
Essence, Iehova, O Lord have mercy upon me, O Lord heal me, O Lord how long
will thou delay? He is not weary of attending the Lord, he is not inclinable to
turn upon any other then the Lord; Have mercy upon me O Lord, etc.

First then in our first part, 1 Part. Quid misereri.
that part of David's postulatory prayer in this Text, Have mercy upon me, This
mercy that David begs here, is not that mercy of God which is above all his
works; for those works which follow it, are above it; To heal him, in this
Text, To return to him, To deliver his soul, To save him, in the next verses,
are greater works then this, which he calls here in that general name of
Mercy. For this word Chanan used in this place, is not Dele iniquitates, Have
mercy upon me so, as to blot out all mine iniquities; It is not Dimitte debita,
Have mercy upon me so, as to forgive all my sins; but it is only Des mihi
gratiam, Lord shed some drops of grace upon me, or as Tremellius has it,
Gratiosus sis mihi, Be a gracious Lord unto me. For this word is used, where
Noah is said to have found grace in the eyes of the Lord; Genesis 6.8.
which grace was, that God had provided for his bodily preservation in the
Arc. And this word is used, not only of God toward men, Psalm. 102.14.
but also of men toward God; when they express their zeal toward Gods
house, and the compassion, and holy indignation which they had of the ruins
thereof, they express it in this word, Thy servants delight in the stones of
Sion, and miserti sunt pulveris ejus, They had mercy, they had compassion upon
the dust and rubbish thereof. So that here this Miserere mei, which is the
first groan of a sick soul, the first glance of the soul directed toward
God, imports only this, Lord turn thy countenance toward me, Lord bring me
to a sense that thou art turned toward me, Lord bring me within such a
distance, as my soul may feel warmth and comfort in the rising of that Sun;
Miserere mei, Look graciously upon me.

At the first meeting of Isaac and Rebecca, Genesis 24.63.
he was gone out to meditate in the fields, and she came riding that way, with
his fathers man, who was employed in making that marriage; and when upon asking
she knew that it was he who was to be her husband, she took a veil and
covered her face, says that story. What freedom, and nearness soever they
were to come to after, yet there was a modesty, and a bashfulnesse, and a
reservednesse required before; and her first kindness should be but to be
seen. A man would be glad of a good countenance from her that shall be his,
before he asked her whether she will be his or no; A man would be glad of a
good countenance from his Prince, before he intend to press him with any
particular suit: And a sinner may be come to this Miserere mei Domine, to
desire that the Lord would think upon him, that the Lord would look graciously
toward him, that the Lord would refresh him with the beams of his favor,
before he have digested his devotion into a formal prayer, or entered into a
particular consideration, what his necessities are.

Upon those words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1. Bern. De 4. modis orandi.
I exhort you that supplications, and prayers, and Intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men, S. Bernard makes certain gradations, and steps,
and ascensions of the soul in prayer, and intimates thus much, That by the
grace of Gods Spirit inanimating and quickening him, (without which grace he can
have no motion at all) a sinner may come Ad supplicationes, which is S. Paul's
first step, To supplications, which are a suppliciis, That out of a sense of
some Judgment, some punishment, he may make his recourse to God; And then, by
a farther growth in that grace, he may come Adorationes, which are Oris
rations, The particular expressing of his necessities, with his mouth; and a
faithful assurance of obtaining them, in his prayer; And after, he may come
farther, Ad Intercessiones, to an Intercession, to such an interest in Gods
favor, as that he durst put himself betwixt God and other men, as Abraham in
the behalf of Sodom, to intercede for them, with a holy confidence that God
would do good to them, for his sake; And to a farther step then these, which
the Apostle may intend in that last, Ad gratiarum actiones, to a continual
Thanksgiving, That by reason of Gods benefits multiplied upon him, he find
nothing to ask, but his Thanksgivings, and his acknowledgements, for former
blessings, possess and fill all his prayers; Though he be grown up to this
strength of devotion, To Supplications, to Prayers, to Intercessions, to
Thanksgivings, yet, says S. Bernard, at first, when he comes first to
deprehend himself in a particular sin, or in a course of sin, he comes
Verecunde affectu, Bashfully, shamefastly, tremblingly; he knows not what to
ask, he dares ask no particular thing at Gods hand; But though he be not come
yet, to particular requests, for pardon of past sins, nor for strength against
future, not to a particular consideration of the weight of his sins, nor to a
comparison betwixt his sin, and the mercy of God, yet he comes to a Miserere
mei Domine, To a sudden ejaculation, O Lord be merciful unto me, how dare I
do this in the sight of my God?

It is much such an affection as is sometimes in a Felon taken in the manner,
or in a condemned person brought to execution: One desires the Justice to be
good to him, and yet he sees not how he can Bail him; the other desires the
Sheriff to be good to him, and yet he knows he must do his Office. A sinner
desires God to have mercy upon him, and yet he has not descended to particular
considerations requisite in that business. But yet this spiritual Malefactor
is in better case, then the temporal are; They desire them to be good to them,
who can do them no good; but God is still able, and still ready to reprieve
them, and to put off the execution of his Judgments, which execution were to
take them out of this world under the guiltiness, and condemnation of
unrepented sins. And therefore, as S. Basil says, In scala, prima ascensio est
ab humo, Basal.
He that makes but one step up a staire, though he be not got much nearer to
the top of the house, yet he is got from the ground, and delivered from the
foulness, and dampnesse of that; so in this first step of prayer, Miscrere
mei, O Lord be merciful unto me, though a man be not established in heaven,
yet he is stepped from the world, and the miserable comforters thereof; He that
commits sin, is of the Devil: Yea, he is of him, in a direct line, 1 John
3.8.
and in the nearest degree; he is the Offspring, the son of the Devil; John
8.44.
Ex patre vestro estis, says Christ, You are of your father the Devil.

Now, Qui se a maligni patris affinitate submoverit, He that withdraws himself
from such a Fathers house, though he be not presently come to means to live of
himself, Basil.
Quam feliciter patre suo orbatus! How blessed, how happy an Orphan is he
become! How much better shall he find it, to be fatherless in respect of such
a father, then masterlesse in respect of such a Lord, as he turns toward in
this first ejaculation, and general application of the soul, Miserere mei,
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, so much mercy, as to look graciously toward me!
And therefore, as it was, by infinite degrees, a greater work, to make earth of
nothing, then to make the best creatures of earth; So in the regeneration of a
sinner, when he is to be made up a new creature, his first beginning, his first
application of himself to God, is the hardest matter. But though he come not
presently to look God fully in the face, nor conceive not presently an
assurance of an established reconciliation, a fullness of pardon, a cancelling
of all former debts, in an instant, Though he dare not come to touch God, and
lay hold of himself, by receiving his Body and Blood in the Sacrament, yet the
Evangelist calls thee to a contemplation of much comfort to thy soul, in
certain preparatory accesses, and approaches. Behold, says he; that is, Look
up, and consider thy pattern: Behold, Mat. 9.20.
a woman diseased came behind Christ, and touched the hem of his garment; for
she said in her self, If I may but touch the hem of his garment only, I shall
be whole. She knew there was virtue to come out of his Body, and she came as
near that, as she durst: she had a desire to speak; but she went no farther,
but to speak to her self; she said to her self, says that Gospel, if I may
but touch, etc. But Christ Jesus supplied all, performed all on his part,
abundantly. Presently he turned about, says the Text: And this was not a
transitory glance, but a full sight, and exhibiting of himself to the fruition
of her eye, that she might see him. He saw her, says S. Matthew: Her; he did
not direct himself upon others, and leave out her; And then, he spoke to her,
to overcome her bashfulnesse; he called her Daughter, to overcome her
diffidence; He bids her be of comfort, for she had met a more powerful
Physician, then those, upon whom she had spent her time, and her estate; one
that could cure her; one that would; one that had already; for so he says
presently, Thy faith has made thee whole. From how little a spark, how great a
fire? From how little a beginning, how great a proceeding? She desired but the
hem of his garment, and had all him.

Beloved in him, his power, and his goodness ended not in her; Mat. 14.36.
All that were sick were brought, that they might but touch the hem of his
garment, and as many as touched it, were made whole. It was far from a
perfect faith, that made them whole; To have a desire to touch his garment,
seems not, was not much: Neither was that desire that was, always in
themselves, but in them that brought them. But yet, come thou so far: Come,
or be content to be brought, to be brought by example, to be brought by a
statute, to be brought by curiosity, come any way to touch the hem of his
garment, yea the hem of his servant, of Aarons garment, and thou shall
participate of the sweet ointment, which flows from the head to the hem of the
garment. Come to the house of God, his Church; Join with the Congregation of
the Saints; Love the body, and love the garments too, that is, The Order, the
Discipline, the Decency, the Unity of the Church; Love even the hem of the
garment, that that almost touches the ground; that is, Such Ceremonies, as had
a good use in their first institution, for raising devotion, and are freed and
purged from that superstition, which, as a rust, was grown upon them, though
they may seem to touch the earth, that is, to have been induced by earthly
men, and not immediate institutions from God, yet love that hem of that
garment, those outward assistances of devotion in the Church.

Bring with thee a disposition to incorporate thy self with Gods people here;
and though thou be not yet come to a particular consideration of thy sins,
and of the remedies, Though that spirit that possesses thee, that sin that
governes thee, lie still a while, and sleep under all the thunders, which we
denounce from this place, so that for a while thou be not moved nor affected
with all that is said, yet Appropinquas, and nescis, (as S. Augustine said,
when he came only out of curiosity to hear S. Ambrose preach at Milan) Thou
do come nearer and nearer to God, though thou discern it not, and at one
time or other, this blessed exorcisme, this holy Charm, this Ordinance of God,
the word of God in the mouth of his servant, shall provoke and awaken that
spirit of security in thee, and thou shall feel him begin to storm, and at
first that spirit, thy spirit, 1 Kings 18.
will say to the spirit of the Preacher, Tune qui conturbas? Art thou he that
troublest Israel? (as Ahab said to Eliah) Art thou he that troublest the peace
of my conscience, and the security of my ways? And, when the Spirit of God
shall search farther and farther, even ad occulta, to thy secretest sins, and
touch upon them, and that that spirit of disobedience, 1 King 21.20.
when he feels this powerful Exorcisme, shall say in thee, and cry as Ahab
also did, Invenisti me? Have thou found me, O mine enemy? God shall answer,
Inveni te, I have found thee, and found that thou had sold thy self to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, And so shall bring thee to a more
particular consideration of thine estate, and from thy having joined with the
Church, Psalm. 1^2.13.
in a Dominus miserebitur Sion, In an assurance, and acknowledgement, that the
Lord will arise, and have mercy upon Sion, that is, of his whole Catholic
Church, Psalm. 67.1.
And then come to a Dominus misereatur nostri, God be merciful unto us, and
bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us, upon us that are met here,
according to his Ordinance, and in confidence of his promise, upon this
Congregation, of which thou make thy self a part, thou will also come to
this of David here, Domine miserere mei, Have mercy upon me, me in particular,
and thou shall hear God answer thee, Miserans miserebor tibi, With great mercy
will I have mercy upon thee; upon thee; For, with him is plentiful Redemption;
Mercy for his whole Church, mercy for this whole Congregation, mercy for every
particular soul, that makes her self a part of the Congregation. Accustom
thy self therefore to a general devotion, to a general application, to
general ejaculations toward God, upon every occasion, and then, as a wedge of
gold, that comes to be coined into particular pieces of current money, the Lord
shall stamp his Image upon all thy devotions, and bring thee to particular
confessions of thy sins, and to particular prayers, for thy particular
necessities. And this we may well conceive and admit, to be the nature of
David's first prayer, Miserere mei, Have mercy upon me; And then, the reason,
upon which this first petition is grounded, (for so it will be fittest to
handle the parts, first the prayer, and then the reason) is, Quia infirmus,
Have mercy upon me, for I am weak.

First then, Quia.
how imperfect, how weak soever our prayers be, yet still if it be a prayer, it
has a Quia, a Reason, upon which it is grounded. It has in it, some implied,
some interpretative consideration of ourselves, how it becomes us to ask that,
which we do ask at Gods hand, and it has some implied, and interpretative
consideration of God, how it conduces to Gods glory to grant it: for, that
prayer is very far from faith, which is not made so much as with reason; with
a consideration of some possibility, and some convenience in it. Every man that
says Lord, Lord, enters not into heaven; Every Lord, Lord, that is said,
enters not into heaven, but vanishes in the air. A prayer must be with a
serious purpose to pray; for else, those fashionall and customary prayers, are
but false fires without shot, they batter not heaven; It is but an
Interjection, that slips in; It is but a Parenthesis, that might be left out,
whatsoever is uttered in the manner of a prayer, if it have not a Quia, a
Reason, a ground for it. And therefore, when our Savior Christ gave us that
form of prayer, which includes all, he gave us in it a form of the reason
too, Quia tuum, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. It were not a prayer, to say
Adveniat Regnum, Thy Kingdom come, if it were not grounded upon that faithful
assurance, that God has a Kingdomehere; Nor to say Sanctificetur nomen,
Hallowed be thy name, If he desired not to be glorified by us; Nor to ask
daily bread, nor forgiveness of sins, but for the Quia potestas, Because he
has all these in his power. We consider this first access to God, Miserere
mei, Have mercy upon me, to be but a kind of imperfect prayer, but the first
step; but it were none at all, if it had no reason, and therefore it has this,
Quia infirmus, Because I am weak.

This reason of our own weakness is a good motive for mercy, Quia infirmus.
John 11.3.
if in a desire of farther strength we come to that of La^arus sisters, to
Christ, Ecce, quam amas, infirmatur, Behold Lord, that soul that thou love,
and have dyed for, is weak, and languishes. Christ answered then, Non est
infirmitas ad mortem, This weakness is not unto death, but that the Son of God
might be glorified. He will say so to thee too; if thou present thy weakness
with a desire of strength from him, he will say, Quare moriemini, domus Israel?
why will ye die of this disease? Gratia mea sufficit; you may recover for all
this; you may repent, you may abstain from this sin, you may take this
spiritual physic, the Word, the Sacraments, if you will; Tantummodo robustus
esto, (as God says to Ioshuah) Only be valiant, and fight against it, and thou
shall find strength grow in the use thereof. But for the most part, De
infirmitate blandimur, says S. Bernard, De gradibus humilitatis.
we flatter our selves with an opinion of weakness; and ut liberius peccemus,
libenter infirmamur, we are glad of this natural and corrupt weakness, that
we may impute all our licentiousness to our weakness, and natural infirmity.
But did that excuse Adam, (says that Father) Quod per uxorem tanquam per
carnis infirmitatem peceavit, That he took his occasion of sinning from his
weaker part, from his wife? Quia infirmus, That thou art weak of thy self, is
a just motive to induce God to bring thee to himself; Qui vere portavit
languores tuos, who has surely borne all thine infirmities; Esaias 53.4.
But to leave him again when he has brought thee, to refuse so light and
easy yoke as his is, not to make use of that strength which he by his grace
offers thee, this is not the affection of the Spouse, Languor amantis, when the
person languishes for the love of Christ, but it is Languor amoris, when the
love of Christ languishes in that person. And therefore if you be come so far
with David, as to this Miserere quia infirmus, that an apprehension of your
own weakness have brought you to him, in a prayer for mercy, and more
strength, go forward with him still, to his next Petition, Sana me, O Lord
heal me, for God is always ready to build upon his own foundations, and
accomplish his own beginnings.

Acceptus in gratiam, hilariter veni ad postulationes: Sanae.
When thou art established in favor, thou may make any suit; when thou art
possessed of God by one prayer, thou may offer more. This is an encouragement
which that Father S. Bernard gives, in observing the diverse degrees of
praying, That though servandae humilitatis gratia, divina pietas ordinavit, To
make his humility the more profitable to him, God imprints in an humble and
penitent sinner, this apprehension, Vt quanto plus profecit, eo minus se
reputet profecisse, That the more he is in Gods favor, the more he fears he
is not so, or the more he fears to lose that favor, because it is a part, and
a symptom of the working of the grace of God, to make him see his own
unworthiness, the more manifestly, the more sensibly, yet, it is a religious
insinuation, and a circumvention that God loves, when a sinner husbands his
graces so well, as to grow rich under him, and to make his thanks for one
blessing, a reason, and an occasion of another; so to gather upon God by a
rolling Trench, and by a winding staire, as Abraham gained upon God, in the
behalf of Sodom; for this is an act of the wisdom of the Serpent, which our
Savior recommends unto us, in such a Serpentine line, (as the Artists call it)
to get up to God, and get into God by such degrees, as David does here, from
his Miserere, to a Sana, from a gracious look, to a perfect recovery; Luke 10.
from the act of the Levite that looked upon the wounded man, to the act of the
Samaritane that undertook his cure; from desiring God to visit him as a
friend, (as Abraham was called the friend of God) to study him as a Physician.
James 2.23. Esaias 55.1. Esaias 53.4.
Because the Prophet Esaias makes a Proclamation in Christ's name, Ho, every one
that thirsts, etc. And because the same Prophet says of him, Vere portavit,
He has truly born upon himself (and therefore taken away from us) all our
diseases, Tertullian says elegantly, that Esaias presents Christ, Praedicatorem,
and Medicatorem, as a Preacher, and as a Physician; Indeed he is a Physician
both ways; in his Word, and in his Power, and therefore in that notion only,
as a Physician, David presents him here.

Now Physicians say, That man has in his Constitution, in his Complexion, a
natural virtue, which they call Balsamum suum, his own Balsamum, by which,
any wound which a man could receive in his body, would cure it self, if it
could be kept clean from the anoiances of the air, and all extrinsique
encumbrances. Something that has some proportion and analogy to this Balsamum
of the body, there is in the soul of man too: The soul has Nardum suam,
Cant. 1.12.
her Spikenard, as the Spouse says, Nardus meadedit odorem suum, Basil:
she had a spikenard, a perfume, a fragrancy, a sweet savor in her self. For,
Virtutes germanius attingunt animam, quam corpus sanitas, Virtuous
inclinations, and a disposition to moral goodness, is more natural to the
soul of man, and nearer of kin to the soul of man, then health is to the
body. And then, if we consider bodily health, Nulla oration, nulla doctrinae
formula nos docet morbum odiisse, says that Father: There needs no Art, there
needs no outward Eloquence, to persuade a man, to be loath to be sick: Ita in
anima inest naturalis, and citra doctrinam mali evitatio, says he; So the
soul has a natural and untaught hatred, and detestation of that which is
evil. The Church at thy Baptism does not require Sureties at thy hands, for
this: Thy Sureties undertake to the Church in thy behalf, That thou shall
forsake the flesh, the world, and the devil, That thou shall believe all the
Articles of our Religion, That thou shall keep all the Commandments of God;
But for this knowledge and detestation of evil, they are not put to undertake
them then, neither does the Church Catechize thee, in that after: for, the
sum of all those duties which concern the detestation of evil, consists in
that unwritten law of thy conscience which thou know naturally. Scis quod
boni proximo faciendum, says that Father, Naturally thou know what good
thou art bound to do to another man; Idem enim est, quod ab aliis tute tibi
fieri velis; for, it is but asking thy self, What thou would that that
other man should do unto thee: Non ignoras quid sit ipsum malum, Thou can not
be ignorant, what evil thou should abstain from offering to another, Est
enim quod ab alio fieri nolis, It is but the same, which thou think another
should not put upon thee. So that the soul of man has in it Balsamum suum,
Nardum suam, A medicinal Balsamum, a fragrant Spikenard in her self, a
natural disposition to Moral goodness, as the body has to health. But
therein lies the souls disadvantage, that whereas the causes that hinder the
cure of a bodily wound, are extrinsique offenses of the Air, and putrefaction
from thence, the causes in the wounds of the soul, are intrinsique, so as no
other man can apply physic to them; Nay, they are hereditary, and there was no
time early enough for our selves to apply any thing by way of prevention, for
the wounds were as soon as we were, and sooner; Here was a new soul, but an
old sore; a young child, but an inveterate disease. As S. Augustine cannot
conceive any interim, any distance, between the creating of the soul, and the
infusing of the soul into the body, but eases himself upon that, Creando
infundit, and infundendo creat, The Creation is the Infusion, and the Infusion
is the Creation, so we cannot conceive any Interim, any distance, between the
infusing and the sickning, between the coming and the sinning of the soul.
So that there was no means of prevention; I could not so much as wish, that I
might be no sinner, for I could not wish that I might be no Child. Neither is
there any means of separation now; our concupiscencies dwell in us, and
prescribe in us, and will gnaw upon us, as worms, till they deliver our bodies
to the worms of the grave, and our consciences to the worm that never dies.

From the dangerous effects then of this sickness, David desires to be healed,
and by God himself, Sana me Domine, O Lord heal me; for that physic that Man
gives, is all but drugs of the earth; Moral and Civil counsels, rather to
cover then recover, rather to disguise then to avoid: They put a clove in the
mouth, but they do not mend the lungs. To cover his nakedness Adam took but
fig leaves; Esaias 38.11.
but to recover Ezechias, God took figs themselves. Man deals upon leaves,
that cover, and shadow, God upon fruitful and effectual means, 2 King. 20.7.
that cure, and nourish. And then, God took a lump of figs; God is liberal
of his graces, and gives not over a cure, at one dressing: And they were dry
figs too, says that story; you must not look for figs from the Tree, for
immediate Revelations, for private inspirations from God; but the medicinal
preaching of the Word, medicinal Sacraments, medicinal Absolution, are such
dry figs as God has preserved in his Church for all our diseases. S. Paul had
a strong desire, and he expressed it in often prayer to God, to have this
peccant humor, this malignity clean purged out, to have that Stimulus carnis,
that concupiscence absolutely taken away. God would not do so; but yet he
applied his effectual physic, sufficient Grace.

This then is the souls Panacaea, The Pharmacum Catholicum, the Medicina
omnimorbia, The physic that cures all, the sufficient Grace, the seasonable
mercy of God, in the merits of Christ Jesus, and in the love of the Holy Ghost.
This is the physic; but then, there are ever Vehicula medicinae, certain
syrups, and liquors, to convey the physic; water, and wine in the Sacraments;
And certain Physicians to ordain and prescribe, The Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments; The Father sends, The Son makes, The Holy Ghost brings, The
Minister lays on the plaster. For, Medicinae ars a Deo data, Basil;
ut inde rationem animae curandae disceremus, Gods purpose in giving us the
science of bodily health, was not determined in the body: but his large and
gracious purpose was, by that restitution of the body, to raise us to the
consideration of spiritual health. When Christ had said to him, who was
brought sick of the palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee, Mark 2.
and that the Scribes and Pharisees were scandalized with that, as though he,
being but man, had usurped upon the power of God, Christ proves to them, by an
actual restoring of his bodily health, that he could restore his soul too, in
the forgiveness of sins: He asks them there, Whether is it easier to say, Thy
sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk. Christus
facit sanitatem corporalem argumentum spiritualis; Bernar.
Christ did not determine his doctrine in the declaration of a miraculous power
exercised upon his body, but by that, established their belief of his
spiritual power, in doing that, which in their opinion was the greater work.
Pursue therefore his method of Curing; And if God have restored thee in any
sickness, by such means, as he of his goodness has imprinted in natural
herbs, and Simples, think not that that was done only or simply for thy
bodies sake, but that, as it is as easy for God to say, Thy sins are forgiven
thee, as Take up thy bed and walk, so it is as easy for thee, to have
spiritual physic, as bodily; because, as God has planted all those
medicinal Simples in the open fields, for all, though some do tread them under
their feet, so has God deposited and prepared spiritual helps for all, though
all do not make benefit of those helps which are offered. It is true, that God
says of his Church, Hortus conclusus soror mea, My sister, Cant. 4.12.
my Spouse is a Garden enclosed, as a spring shut in, and a fountain sealed up;
But therein is our advantage, who, by being enwrapped in the Covenant, as the
seed of the faithful, as the children of Christian Parents, are borne if not
within this walled Garden, yet with a key in our hand to open the door, that
is, with a right and title, to the Sacrament of Baptism. The Church is a
Garden walled in, for their better defense and security that are in it; but not
walled in to keep any out, who, either by being borne within the Covenant,
inherit a right to it, or by accepting the grace which is offered them,
acquire, and profess a desire to enter thereinto. For, as it is a Garden, full
of Spikenard, and of Incense, and of all spices, (as the Text says there) so
that they who are in this Garden, in the Church, are in possession of all these
blessed means of spiritual health; So are these spices, and Incense, and
Spikenard, of a diffusive and spreading nature, and breath even over the walls
of the Garden: Oleum effusum nomen ejus; The name of Christ is unction,
Ointment; Cant. 1.3. 4.16.
but it is an Ointment powered out, an Ointment that communicates the fragrancy
thereof, to persons at a good distance; And, as it is said there, Christ calls
up the North and the South to blow upon his Garden, he raises up men to
transport and propagate these means of salvation to all Nations, so that, in
every Nation, they that fear him are acceptable to him; not that that fear of
God in general, as one universal power, is sufficient in it self, to bring
any man to God immediately, but that God directs the Spikenard, and Incense of
this Garden upon that man, and seconds his former fear of God, with a love of
God, and brings him to a knowledge, and to a desire, and to a possession, and
fruition of our more assured means of salvation. When he does so, this is his
method, as in restoring bodily health, he said, Surge, Toll, Ambula, Arise,
Take up thy bed, and Walk: So to every sick soul, whose cure he undertakes,
he says so too, Surge, Toll, Ambula. Our beds are our natural affections;
These he does not bid us cast away, nor burn, nor destroy; since Christ
vouchsafed Induere hominem, we must not Exuere hominem; Since Christ invested
the nature of man, and became man, we must not pretend to divest it, and become
Angels, or flatter our selves in the merit of Mortifications, not enjoined, or
of a retiredness, and departing out of the world, in the world, by the
withdrawing of our selves from the offices of mutual society, or an
extinguishing of natural affections. But, Surge, says our Savior, Arise from
this bed, sleep not lazily in an over-indulgency to these affections; but,
Ambula, walk sincerely in thy Calling, and thou shall hear thy Savior say,
Non est infirmitas haec ad mortem, These affections, nay, these concupiscencies
shall not destroy thee.

David then does not pray for such an exact and exquisite state of health, as
that he should have no infirmity; Physicians for our bodies tell us, that there
is no such state; The best degree of health is but Neutralitas; He is well
(that is, as well as Man can be) that is not dangerously sick; for, absolutely
well no man can be. Spiritual Physicians will tell you so too; He that says
you have no sin, or that God sees not your sin, if you be of the Elect,
deceives you. It is not for an Innocence that David prays; but it is against
deadly diseases, and against violent accidents of those diseases. He does not
beg, he cannot hope for an absolute peace: Nature has put awarre upon us; True
happiness, and apparent happiness fight against one another: sin has put a
war upon us; The flesh and the Spirit fight against one another: Christ Jesus
himself came to put a war upon us; The zeal of his glory, and the course of
this world, fight against one another. It is not against all war; nay, it is
not against all victory that David prays; He cannot hope that he should be
overcome by no Tentations; but against such a war, and such a victory, as
should bring him to servility, and bondage to sin, That sin entering by
Conquest upon him, should govern as a tyran over him, against such a sickness
as should induce a consumption, it is that he directs this prayer, Sana me
Domine, Not, Lord make me impeccable, but Lord make me penitent, and then heal
me. And he comes not to take physic upon wantonness; but because the disease
is violent, because the accidents are vehement; so vehement, so violent, as
that it has pierced Ad ossa, and Ad animam, My bones are vexed, and my soul
is sore troubled, Therefore heal me; which is the Reason upon which he grounds
this second petition, Heal me, because. my bones are vexed etc.

We must necessarily insist a little upon these terms, Ossa.
The Bones, The Soul, The Trouble, or Vexation. First, Ossa, Bones, We know in
the natural and ordinary acceptance, what they are; They are these Beams,
and Timbers, and Rafters of these Tabernacles, these Temples of the Holy Ghost,
these bodies of ours. But Immanebimus nativae significationi? says S. Basil,
Shall we dwell upon the native and natural signification of these Bones? Et
intelligentia passim obvia contenti erimus? Shall we who have our conversation
in heaven, find no more in these Bones, then an earthly, a worldly, a natural
man would do? By S. Basils example, we may boldly proceed farther: Membra
etiam animae sunt, Esaias 42.
says he: The soul has her limbs as well as the body. Surdi audite, caeci
aspicite, says God in Esaias; If their souls had not ears and eyes, the blind
could not see, the deaf could not hear, and yet God calls upon the deaf and
blind, to hear and see. As S. Paul says to the Ephesians, The eyes of your
understanding being enlightened; so David says, Psalm. 3.7.
Dentes peccatorum contrivisti, Thou have broken the teeth; That is, the pride
and the power, the venom and malignity of the wicked: Membra etiam animae sunt,
The soul has her Bones too; and here David's Bones were the strongest powers
and faculties of his soul, and the best actions and operations of those
faculties, and yet they were shaken. For this hereditary sickness, Original
sin, prevayles so far upon us, that upon our good days we have some
grudgings of that Fever; Even in our best actions, we have some of the leaven
of that sin. So that if we go about to comfort our selves, with some
dispositions to Gods glory, which we find in our selves, with some sparks of
love to his precepts, and his commandments, with some good strength of faith,
with some measure of good works, yea, with having something for the Name, and
glory of Christ Jesus: yet if we consider what humane and corrupt affections
have been mingled in all these, Conturbabuntur ossa, our Bones will be
troubled, even those that appeared to be strong works, and likely to hold out,
will need a reparation, an exclamation, Sana me Domine, O Lord heal these too,
or else these are as weak as the worst: Ossa non dolent; The Bones themselves
have no sense, they feel no pain. We need not say, That those good works
themselves, which we do, have in their nature, the nature of sin; That every
good work considered alone, and in the substance of the act it self is sin;
But membranae dolent; Those little membrans, those filmes, those thin skins,
that cover, and that line some bones, are very sensible of pain, and of any
vexation. Though in the nature of the work it self, the work be not sin,
yet in those circumstances that invest, and involve the work, in those things
which we mingle with the work, whether desire of glory toward men, or opinion
of merit toward God; Whenever those bones, those best actions come to the
examination of a tender and a diligent Conscience, Si ossa non dolent,
membranae dolent, If the work be not sinful, the circumstances are, and
howsoever they may be conceived to be strong, as they are Ossa, Bones, works,
in a moral consideration, good, yet, as they are Ossa mea, says David, as
they are My bones, such good works as taste of my ill corruptions, so long they
are vexed, and troubled, and cannot stand upright, nor appear with any
confidence in the sight of God.

Thus far then first David needed this sanation, this health that he prays
for, Anima.
that his best actions were corrupt; But the corruption went farther, to the
very root and fountain of those actions, Ad ipsam animam, His very soul was
sore vexed. It is true, that as this word Anima, the soul, is sometimes taken
in the Scriptures, this may seem to go no farther then the former, no more
that his soul was vexed, then that his bones were so: for, Anima, in many
places, is but Animalis Homo, The soul signifies but the natural man: And so
opponitur spiritui, The soul is not only said to be a diverse thing, but a
contrary thing to the Spirit. When the Apostle says to the Thessalonians, 1
These. ult. 23.
Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit,
and soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And where the same Apostle says to the Hebrews, The word of God
divides asunder the soul and the spirit; Heb. 4.12.
here is a difference put between corrupt nature, and the working of the Spirit
of God, the Holy Ghost in man: for here, the soul is taken for Animalis home,
The natural man, and the Spirit is taken for the Spirit of God. But besides
this, these two words, Soul and Spirit, are sometimes used by the Fathers, in
a sense diverse from one another, and as different things, and yet still as
parts of one and the same man; Man is said by them, not only to have a body,
and a soul, but to have a soul, and a spirit; not as Spirit is the Spirit of
God, and so an extrinsecall thing, but as Spirit is a constitutive part of the
natural man. So, in particular, amongst many, Gregory Nyssen takes the Body to
be spoken De nutribili, The flesh and blood of man, And the soul De sensibili,
The operation of the senses, And the Spirit De Intellectuali, The
Intellectual, the reasonable faculties of man; That in the body, Man is
conformed to Plants that have no sense, In the soul, to Beasts, that have no
reason, In the spirit, to Angels. But so, The Spirit is but the same thing with
that, which now we do ordinarily account the soul to be; for we make account,
that the Image of God is imprinted in the soul, and that gives him his
conformity to Angels: But diverse others of the Ancients have taken Soul and
Spirit, for different things, even in the Intellectual part of man, somewhat
obscurely, I confess, and, as some venture to say, unnecessarily, if not
dangerously. It troubled S. Hierome sometimes, Ad Hedibiam. l. 12. Epist. 150
how to understand the word Spirit in man: but he takes the easiest way, he
dispatches himself of it, as fast as he could, that is, to speak of it only
as it was used in the Scriptures: Famosa quaestio, says he, sed brevi sermon
tractanda; It is a question often disputed, but may be shortly determined, Idem
spiritus hic, ac in iis verbis, Nolite extinguere spiritum; When we hear of
the Spirit in a Man, in Scriptures, we must understand it of the gifts of the
Spirit; for so, fully to the same purpose, says S. Chrysostom, Spiritus est
charisma spiritus, The Spirit is the working of the Spirit, The gifts of the
Spirit: and so when we hear, The Spirit was vexed, The Spirit was quenched,
still it is to be understood, The gifts of the Spirit. And so, as they
restrain the signification of Spirit, to those gifts only, (though the word
do indeed, in many places, require a larger extension) so do many restrain
this word in our text, The Soul, only Ad sensum, to the sensitive faculties
of the soul, that is, only to the pain and anguish that his body suffered;
But so far, at least, David had gone, in that which he said before, My bones
are vexed.

Now, Ingravescit morbus, The disease festers beyond the bone, even into the
marrow it self. His Bones were those best actions that he had produced, and he
saw in that Contemplation, that for all that he had done, he was still, at
best, but an unprofitable servant, if not a rebellious enemy; But then, when he
considers his whole soul, and all that ever it can do, he sees all the rest
will be no better; The poison, he sees, is in the fountain, the Canker in the
root, the rancor, the venom in the soul it self. Corpus instrumentum, anima
ars ipsa, says S. Basil: The body, and the senses are but the tools, and
instruments, that the soul works with. But the soul is the art, the science
that directs those Instruments; The faculties of the soul are the boughs that
produce the fruits; and the operations, and particular acts of those faculties
are the fruits, but the soul is the root of all. And David sees, that this
art, this science, this soul can direct him, or establish him in no good way;
That not only the fruits, his particular acts, nor only the boughs, and
arms, his several faculties, but the root it self, the soul it self, was
infected. His bones are shaken, he dares not stand upon the good he has done,
his soul is so too, he cannot hope for any good he shall do: He has no merit
for the past, he has no free will for the future; that is his case.

This troubles his bones, Turbata.
this troubles his soul, this vexes them both; for, the word is all one, in
both places, as our last Translators have observed, and rendered it aright; not
vexed in one place, and troubled in the other, as our former Translators had
it; But in both places it is Bahal, and Bahal imports a vehemence, both in the
intensnesse of it, and in the suddenness, and inevitableness of it: And
therefore it signifies often, Praecipitantiam, A headlong downfall and
irrecoverablenesse; And often, Evanescentiam, an utter vanishing away, and
annihilation. David, (whom we always consider in the Psalms, not only to
speak literally of those miseries which were actually upon himself, but
prophetically too, of such measures, and exaltations of those miseries, as
would certainly fall upon them, as did not seek their sanation, their recovery
from the God of all health) looking into all his actions, (they are the fruits)
and into all his faculties, (they are the boughs) and into the root of all, the
soul it self, considering what he had done, what he could do, he sees that as
yet he had done no good, he sees he should never be able to do any; His bones
are troubled, He has no comfort in that which is grown up, and past, And his
soul is sore troubled, (for to the trouble of the soul, there is added in the
Text, that particle, Valde, It is a sore trouble that falls upon the soul, A
troubled spirit who can bear?) because he has no hope in the future; He was
no surer for that which was to come, then for that which was past; But he,
(that is, all, considered in that case which he proposes) he comes (as the word
signifies) ad praecipitantiam, That all his strength can scarce keep him from
precipitation into despair, And he comes (as the word signifies too) ad
Evanescentiam, to an evaporating, and a vanishing of his soul, that is, even
to a renouncing, and a detestation of his immortality, and to a willingness,
to a desire, that he might die the death of other Creatures, which perish
altogether, and go out as a Candle. This is the trouble, the sore trouble of
his soul, who is brought to an apprehension of Gods indignation for not
performing Conditions required at his hands, and of his inability to perform
them, and is not come to the contemplation of his mercy, in supply thereof.

There is Turbatio Timoris, Mat. 2.3. Psalm. 107.27.
A trouble out of fear of danger in this world, Herod's trouble; When the Magi
brought word of another King, Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
There is Turbatio confusionis, The Mariners trouble in a tempest; Their soul
melts for trouble, Luke 10.41. Luke 1.29.
says David. There is Turbatio occupationis; Martha's trouble; Martha thou art
troubled about many things, says Christ. There is Turbatio admirationis, The
blessed Virgins trouble, When she saw the Angel, she was troubled at his
saying. To contract this, John 11.33.
There is Turbatio compassionis, Christ's own trouble, When he saw Mary weep
for her brother Lazarus, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled in
himself. But in all these troubles, Herod's fear, The Mariners irresolution,
Martha's multiplicity of business, The blessed Virgins sudden amazement, Our
Saviors compassionate sorrow, as they are in us, worldly troubles, so the
world administers some means to extemiate, and alleviate these troubles; for,
fears are overcome, and storms are appeased, and businesses are ended, and
wonders are understood, and sorrows wear out; But in this trouble of the
bones, and the soul, in so deep and sensible impressions of the anger of God,
looking at once upon the pravity, the obliquity, the malignity of all that I
have done, of all that I shall do, Man has but one step between that state,
and despair, to stop upon, to turn to the Author of all temporal, and all
spiritual health, the Lord of life, with David's prayer, Psalm. 51.10.
Cor mundum crea, Create a clean heart within me; Begin with me again, as
thou begunst with Adam, in innocence; and see, if I shall husband and govern
that innocence better then Adam did; for, for this heart which I have from him,
I have it in corruption; and, Job 4.
who can bring a clean thing out of uncleanness? Therefore David's prayer goes
farther in the same place, Renew a constant spirit in me; Present cleanness
cannot be had from my self; but if I have that from God, mine own clothes
will make me foul again, and therefore do not only create a clean spirit,
but renew a spirit of constancy and perseverance. Therefore I have also another
Prayer in the same Psalm, Psalm. 51.12.
Spiritu principali confirma me, Sustain me, uphold me with thy free spirit,
thy large, thy munificent spirit: for thy ordinary graces will not defray me,
nor carry me through this valley of tentations; not thy single money, but thy
Talents; not as thou art thine own Almoner, but thine own Treasurer; It is
not the dew, but thy former and later rain that must water, though it be thy
hand that has planted; Not any of the Rivers, though of Paradise, but the
Ocean it self, that must bring me to thy Jerusalem. Create a clean heart; Thou
did so in Adam, and in him I defiled it. Renew that heart; Thou did so in
Baptism; And thy upholding me with thy constant spirit, is thy affording me
means, which are constant, in thy Church; But thy confirming me with thy
principal spirit, is thy making of those means, instituted in thy Church,
effectual upon me, by the spirit of Application, the spirit of Appropriation,
by which the merits of the Son, deposited in the Church, are delivered over
unto me.

This then is the force of David's reason in this Petition, Ossa implentur
vitiis, Job 20.11.
as one of Jobs friends speaks, My bones are full of the sins of my youth, That
is, my best actions, now in mine age, have some taste, some tincture from the
habit, or some sinful memory of the acts of sin in my youth; Adhaeret os meum
carni, as David also speaks, Psalm. 102.5. Lam. 4.8.
My bones cleave to my flesh, my best actions taste of my worst; And My skin
cleaves to my bones, as Jeremy laments, That is, My best actions call for a
skin, for something to cover them: And Therefore, not Therefore because I have
brought my self into this state, but because by thy grace I have power to
bring this my state into thy sight, by this humble confession, Sana me Domine,
O Lord heal me; Thou that art my Messiah, be my Moses, Exodus 13.19.
and carry these bones of thy Joseph out of Egypt; Deliver me, in this
consideration of mine actions, from the terror of a self-accusing, and a
jealous, and suspicious conscience: 1 King. 13.31.
Bury my bones beside the bones of the man of God; Beside the bones of the Son
of God: Look upon my bones as they are coffind, and shrouded in that sheet, the
righteousness of Christ Jesus. Accedant ossa ad ossa, as in Ezekiels vision,
Let our bones come together, Ezekiel. 37.7.
bone to bone, mine to his, and look upon them uno intuitu, all together, and
there shall come sinews, and flesh, and skin upon them, and breathe upon them,
and in Him, in Christ Jesus, I shall live; My bones being laid by his, though
but gristles in themselves, my actions being considered in his, though
imperfect in themselves, shall bear me up in the sight of God. And this may be
the purpose of this prayer, this sanation, grounded upon this reason, O Lord
heal me, for my bones are vexed, etc. But yet David must, and does stop upon
this step, he stays Gods leisure, and is put to his Vsquequo? But thou, O
Lord, how long?

David had cried Miserere, he had begged of God to look toward him, Vsquequo.
and consider him; He had revealed to him his weak and troublesome estate, and
he had entreated relief; but yet God gave not that relief presently, nor
seemed to have heard his prayer, nor to have accepted his reasons. David comes
to some degrees of expostulation with God; but he dares not proceed far; it is
but usquequo Domine? which if we consider it in the Original, and so also in
our last Translation, requires a serious consideration. For it is not there as
it is in the first Translation, How long will thou delay? David charges God
with no delay: But it is only, Et tu Domine, usquequo? But thou O Lord, how
long? And there he ends in a holy abruptness, as though he had taken himself
in a fault, to enterprise any expostulation with God. He does not say, How long
ere thou hear me? If thou hear me, how long ere thou regard me? If thou
regard me, how long ere thou heal me? How long shall my bones, how long shall
my soul be troubled? He says not so; but leaving all to his leisure, he
corrects his passion, he breaks off his expostulation. As long as I have that
commission from God, Dic animae tuae, Salus tua sum, Psalm. 35.3.
Say unto thy soul, I am thy salvation, my soul shall keep silence unto God,
of whom comes my salvation: Silence from murmuring, how long soever he be in
recovering me; not silence from prayer, that he would come; for that is our
last Consideration; David proposed his Desire, Miserere, and Sana, Look
toward me, and Heal me, that was our first; And then his Reasons, Ossa,
Anima, My bones, my soul is troubled, that was our second; And then he grew
sensible of Gods absence, for all that, which was our third Proposition; for
yet, for all this, he continues patient, and solieites the same God in the same
name, The Lord, But thou O Lord, how long?

Need we then any other example of such a patience then God himself, Domine.
who stays so long in expectation of our conversion? But we have David's
example too, who having first made his Deprecation, Ver. 1.
That God would not reprove him in anger, having prayed God to forbear him, he
is also well content to forbear God, for those other things which he asks,
till it be his pleasure to give them. But yet he neither gives over praying,
nor does he incline to pray to any body else, but still Domine miserere, Have
mercy upon me O Lord, and Domine fana, O Lord heal me: Industry in a lawful
calling, favor of great persons, a thankful acknowledgement of the ministry
and protection of Angels, and of the prayers of the Saints in heaven for us,
all these concur to our assistance; But the root of all, all temporal, all
spiritual blessings, is he, to whom David leads us here, Dominus, The Lord;
Lord, as he is Proprietary of all creatures; He made All, and therefore is Lord
of All; as he is Jehovah, which is the name of Essence, of Being, as all things
have all their being from him, their very being, and their well-being, their
Creation, and their Conservation; And in that Name of Recognition and
acknowledgement, that all that can be had, is to be asked of him, and him
only, Him, as he is Jehovah, The Lord, does David solicit him here; Acts 4.12.
for, as there is no other Name under heaven, given amongst men, whereby we
must be saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ; So is there no other Name above in
heaven proposed to men, whereby they should receive these blessings, but the
Name of Jehovah; for Jehovah is the name of the whole Trinity, and there are no
more, no Queen Mother in heaven, no Counsaylors in heaven in Commission with
the Trinity.

In this Name therefore David pursues his Prayer: for, from a River, from a
Cisterne, a man may take more water at once, then he can from the first spring
and fountain head; But he cannot take the water so sincerely, so purely, so
intemerately from the channel as from the fountain head. Princes and great
persons may raise their Dependants faster then God does his; But sudden riches
come like a land-water, and bring much foulness with them. Esaias 5.7.
We are Gods vineyard; The vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, is the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant, says the Prophet. And God
delights to see his plants prosper, and grow up seasonably. More then once
Christ makes that profession, That he goes down into the Garden of Nuts, Cant.
6.10. Cant. 7.12.
to see the fruits of the valley, And to see whether the Vine flourished, and
whether the Pomegranet budded; And he goes up early into the vineyard, to see
whether the tender grape appeared. He had a pleasure in the growth and
successive increase of his plants, and did not look they should come hastily
to their height and maturity. If worldly blessings, by a good industry, grow up
in us, it is natural; But if they fall upon us, Psalm 11.6. Exodus 9.23. Rev.
16.21.
Pluit laqueos, God rains down springes and snares, occasions of sin in
those abundances, and Pluit grandinem, He will rain down Hailstones;
Hailstones as big as Talents, as in the Revelation; as big as Milstones; He
will make our riches occasions of raising enemies, and make those enemies
Grindstones to grind our fortunes to powder. Make not too much haste to be
rich: Even in spiritual riches, in spiritual health make not too much haste.
Pray for it; for there is no other way to get it. Pray to the Lord for it: For,
Saints and Angels have but enough for themselves. Make haste to begin to have
these spiritual graces; To desire them, is to begin to have them: But make not
too much haste in the way; Do not think thy self purer then thou art,
because thou see another do some such sins, as thou have forborne.

Beloved, at last, when Christ Jesus comes with his scales, thou shall not be
waighed with that man, but every man shall be waighed with God: Be pure as your
Father in heaven is pure, is the weight that must try us all; and then, the
purest of us all, that trusts to his own purity, must hear that fearful Mean
Tekel Vpharsin, Thou art waighed, Thou art found too light, Thou art divided,
separated from the face of God, because thou have not taken the purity of that
Son upon thee, who not only in himself, but those also who are in him, in him
are pure, as his, and their Father in heaven is pure. Neither make so much
haste to this spiritual riches, and health, as to think thy self whole before
thou art: Neither murmr, nor despair of thy recovery, if thou be not
whole so soon as thou desiredst. If thou wrestle with tentations, and can
not overcome them, If thou purpose to pray earnestly, and find thy mind
presently strayed from that purpose, If thou intend a good course, and meet
with stops in the way, If thou seek peace of conscience, and scruples out of
zeal interrupt that, yet discomfort not thy self. God (...) in the Creation,
before he came to make thee; yet all that while he wrought for thee. Thy
Regeneration, to make thee a new creature, is a greater work then that, and it
cannot be done in an instant. God has purposed a building in thee; he has sat
down, and considered, Luke 14.28.
that he has sufficient to accomplish that building, as it is in the Gospel,
and therefore leave him to his leisure.

When thou have begun with David, with a Domine ne arguas, O Lord rebuke me
not, and followed that, with a Domine miserere, O Lord look graciously toward
me, and pursued that, with a Domine sana me, O Lord heal me, If thou find a
Domine usqucquo? Any degree of weariness of attending the Lords leisure,
arising in thee, suppress it, overcome it, with more and more petitions, and
that which God did by way of Commandment, in the first Creation, do thou by
way of prayer, in this thy second Creation; First he said, Piat lux, Let there
be light: Pray thou, that he would enlighten thy darkness. God was satisfied
with that light for three days, and then he said, Fiant luminaria, Let there
be great lights; Bless God for his present light, but yet pray that he will
enlarge that light which he has given thee; And turn all those his
Commandments into prayers, till thou come to his Faciamus hominem, Let us make
man according to our own Image; Pray that he will restore his Image in thee,
and conform thee to him, who is the Image of the invisible God, our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus. Coloss. 1.15.
He did his greatest work upon thee, before time was, thine Election; And he
has reserved the confummation of that work, till time shall be no more, thy
Glorification: And as forthy Vocation he has taken his own time, (He did not
call thee into the world in the time of the Primitive Church, nor, perchance,
call thee effectually, though in the Church, in the days of thy youth) So stay
his time for thy Sanctification, and, if the dayspring from on high have
visited thee, but this morning, If thou be come to a fiat lux but now, that
now God have kindled some light in thee, he may come this day seaven-night to
a siant luminaria, to multiply this light by a more powerful means. If not so
soon, yet still remember, that it was God that made the Sun stand still to
Ioshaah, as well as to run his race as a Giant to David; And God was as much
glorified in the standing still of the Sun, as in the motion thereof; And shall
be so in thy Sanctification, though it seem to stand at a stay for a time,
when his time shall be to perfect it, in a measure acceptable to thee. Nothing
is acceptable to him, but that which is seasonable; nor seasonable, except it
come in the time proper to it: And, as S. Augustine says, Natura rei est, quam
indidit Deus, That is the nature of every thing, which God has imprinted in
it, So that is the time for every thing, which God has appointed for it. Pray,
and Stay, are two blessed Monosy lables; To ascend to God, To attend Gods
descent to us, is the Motion, and the Rest of a Christian; And as all Motion is
for Rest, so let all the Motions of our soul in our prayers to God be, that
our wills may rest in his, and that all that pleases him, may please us,
therefore because it pleases him; for therefore, because it pleases him, it
becomes good for us, and then, when it pleases him, it becomes seasonable unto
us, and expedient for us.

SERMON. LII. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 6.4, 5. Return, O Lord; Deliver my soul; O Lord save me, for thy
mercies sake.

For in Death there is no Remembrance of thee; and in the Grave, who shall give
thee thanks?


THe whole Psalm is Prayer; and Prayer is our whole service to God. Earnest
Prayer has the nature of Importunity; We press, we importune God in Prayer;
Yet that puts not God to a morosity, to a frowardness; God flings not away
from that; God suffers that importunity, and more. Prayer has the nature of
Impudency; We threaten God in Prayer; as Gregor: Nazi: adventures to express
it; He says, his Sister, in the vehemence of her Prayer, would threaten God,
Et honesta quadam impudentiae, egit impudentem; She came, says he, to a
religious impudency with God, and to threaten him, that she would never depart
from his Altar, till she had her Petition granted; And God suffers this
Impudency, and more. Prayer has the nature of Violence; In the public
Prayers of the Congregation, we besiege God, says Tertul: and we take God
Prisoner, and bring God to our Conditions; and God is glad to be straightened by
us in that siege. This Prophet here executes before, what the Apostle
counsels after, Pray incessantly; Even in his singing he prays; And as S.
Basil says, Etiam somniajustorum preces sunt, A Good man's dreams are Prayers,
he prays, and not sleepily, in his sleep, so David's Songs are Prayers. Now in
this his besieging of God, he brings up his works from a far off, closer; He
begins in this Psalm, at a deprecatory Prayer; He asks nothing, but that God
would do nothing, that he would forbear him; Rebuke me not, Correct me not.
Now, it costs the King less, to give a Pardon, then to give a Pension; and
less to give a Reprieve, then to give a Pardon; and less to Connive, not to
call in Question, then either Reprieve, Pardon or Pension; To forbear, is not
much. But then, as the Mathematician said, That he could make an Engine, a
Screw, that should move the whole frame of the World, if he could have a place
assigned him, to fix that Engine, that Screw upon, that so it might work upon
the World: so Prayer, when one Petition has taken hold upon God, works upon
God, moves God, prevails with God, entirely for all. David then having got
this ground, this footing in God, he brings his works closer; he comes from the
Deprecatory, to a Postulatory Prayer; not only that God would do nothing
against him, but that he would do something for him. God has suffered man to
see Arcana imperii, The secrets of his State, how he governs; He governs by
Precedent; by precedents of his Predecessors, he cannot; He has none; by
precedents of other Gods, he cannot; There are none; And yet he proceeds by
precedents; by his own Precedents; He does as he did before; Habenti dat, To
him that has received, he gives more, and is willing to be wrought, and
prevailed upon, and pressed with his own example. And, as though his doing good,
were but to learn how to do good better, still he writes after his own copy;
And Nulla dies sine linea, He writes something to us, that is, he does
something for us, every day. And then, that which is not often seen, in other
Masters, his Copies are better then the Originals; his later mercies larger
then his former: And in this Postulatory Prayer, larger then the Deprecatory,
enters our Text, Return O Lord; Deliver my soul; O save me, etc.

David, Divisio.
who every where remembers God of his Covenant, as he was the God of Abraham,
remembers also, how Abraham proceeded with God, in the behalf of Sodom; And he
remembers, that when Abraham had gained upon God, and brought him from a
greater, to a less number of righteous men, for whose sakes God would have
spared that City, yet Abraham gave over asking, before God gave over granting;
And so Sodom was lost. A little more of S. Augustines Importunity, of Nazi:
Impudence, of Tertul: violence in Prayer, would have done well in Abraham; If
Abraham had come to a less price, to less then ten, God knows what God would
have done; for God went not away, says the text there, till he had left
communing with Abraham; that is, till Abraham had no more to say to him. In
memory and contemplation of that, David gives not over in this text, till he
come to the utter most of all, as far as man can ask, as far as God can give;
He begins at first, with a Revertere Domine, Return O Lord, and higher then
that, no man can begin; no man can begin at a Veni Domine; no man can pray to
God, to come, till God be come into him; Quid peto, ut venias in me, says S.
August: Qui non essem, si nonesses in me? How should I pray, that God would
come into me, who not only could not have the Spirit of praying, but not the
Spirit of being, not life it self, if God were not in me already? But then,
this prayer is, that when God had been with him, and for his sins, or his
coldness, and slacknesse in prayer, was departed aside from him, yet he would
vouchsafe to return to him again, and restore to him that light of his
countenance which he had before, Revertere Domine, O Lord return. And then he
passes to his second petition, Eripe animam, Deliver my soul; That when God in
his return saw those many and strong snares which entangled him, those many
and deep tentations and tribulations which surrounded him, God, being in his
mercy thus Returned, and in his Providence seeing this danger, would not now
stand neutrall, between them, and see him, and these tentations fight it our,
but fight on his side and deliver him; Eripe animam, Deliver my soul. And
then, by these two petitions, he makes way for the third and last, which is
the perfection and consummation of all, as far as he can carry a Prayer or a
Desire, Salvum me fac, O Lord save me; that is, Imprint in me a strong hope of
Salvation in this life, and invest me in an irremoveable possession, in the
life to come. Lord I acknowledge that thou have visited me heretofore, and for
my sins have absented thy self, O Lord return; Lord, now thou art returned,
and see me unable to stand in these tentations and tribulations, Deliver thou
my soul; Lord thou have delivered me again and again, and again and again
I fall back to my former danger, and therefore, O Lord save me, place me where
I may be safe; safe in a constant hope, that the Savior of the World intended
that salvation to me; And these three Petitions constitute our first part in
David's postulatory Prayer.

And then the second part, which is also within the words of this text, and
consists of those reasons, by which David inclines God to grant his three
Petitions, which are two, first, Propter misericordiam tuam, Do this O Lord,
for thine own mercy sake, And then, Quia non in morte, Do it O Lord, for thine
own honors sake, Because in death there is no remembrance of thee, that
second part will be the subject of another exercise, for, that which belongs to
the three Petitions, will employ the time allowed for this.

First then, the first step in this Prayer, Revertere, O Lord return, implies
first a former presence, Revertere.
and then a present absence, and also a confidence for the future; Whosoever
says, O Lord return, says all this, Lord thou wast here, Lord thou art
departed hence, but yet, Lord thou may return hither again. God was with
us all, before we were any thing at all; And ever since our making, has been
with us, in his general providence; And so, we cannot say, O Lord Return,
because, so, he was never gone from us. But as God made the earth, and the
fruits thereof, before he made the Sun, whose force was to work upon that
earth, and upon the natural fruits of that earth, but before he made Paradise,
which was to have the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge, he made the Sun
to do those offices, of shining upon it, and returning daily to it: So God
makes this earth of ours, that is our selves, by natural ways, and sustaines
us by general providence, before any Son of particular grace be seen to shine
upon us. But before man can be a Paradise, possessed of the Tree of life, and of
Knowledge, this Sun is made and produced, the particular graces of God rise to
him, and work upon him, and awaken, and solicit, and exalt those natural
faculties which were in him; This Son fills him, and fits him, compasses him,
and disposes him, and does all the offices of the Sun, seasonably, opportunely,
maturely, for the nourishing of his soul, according to the several
necessities thereof. And this is Gods returning to us, in a general
apprehension; After he has made us, and blessed us in our nature, and by his
natural means, he returns to make us again, to make us better, first by his
first preventing grace, and then by a succession of his particular graces. And
therefore we must return to this Returning, in some more particular
considerations.

There are beside others, three significations in the Scripture, of this word
Shubah, which is here translated, to Return, appliable to our present purpose.
The first is the natural and native, the primary and radical signification of
the word. And so, Shubah, To Return, is Redire ad locum suum, To return to
that place, to which a thing is naturally affected; So heavy things return to
the Center, and light things return to the Expansion; So Man's breath
departs, Psalm. 146.4.
says David, Et redit in terr am suam, He returns into his Earth; That earth,
which is so much his, as that it is he himself; Of earth he was, and therefore
to earth he returns. But can God return in such a sense as this? Can we find
an Vbi for God? A place that is his place? Yes; And an Earth which is his
earth; Surely the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, Esaias 5.
is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant. So the
Church, which is his Vineyard, is his Vbi, his place, his Center, to which he
is naturally affected. And when he calls us hither, and meets us here, upon his
Sabbaths, and sheds the promises of his Gospel upon the Congregation in his
Ordinance, he returns to us here, as in his Vbi, as in his own place. And as
he has a place of his own here, so he has an Earth of his own in this
place. Our flesh is Earth, and God has invested our flesh, and in that flesh
of ours, which suffered death for us, he returns to us in this place, as often
as he makes us partakers of his flesh, and his blood, in the blessed
Sacrament. So then, though in my days of sin, God have absented himself
from me, (for God is absent when I do not discern his presence) yet if to day
I can hear his voice, as God is returned to day to this place, as to his Vbi,
as to his own place; so in his entering into me, in his flesh and blood, he
returns to me as to his Earth, that Earth which he has made his by assuming
my nature, I am become his Vbi, his place; Delitiae ejus, His delight is to be
with the sons of men, and so with me; and so in the Church, in the Sermon, in
the Sacrament he returns to us, in the first signification of this word
Shubah, as to that place to which he is naturally affected and disposed.

In a second signification, this word is referred, not to the place of God, not
to the person of God, but (if we may so speak) to the Passion of God, to the
Anger of God; And so, the Returning of God, that is, of Gods Anger, is the
allaying, the becalming, the departing of his Anger; and so when God returns,
God stays; his Anger is returned from us, Esaias 5.25.
but God is still with us. The wrath of the Lord was kindled, says the Prophet
Esaias; and He smote his people, so that the mountains trembled, and their
carcasses were torn in the midst of the streets. Here is the tempest, here is
the visitation, here is Gods coming to them; He comes, but in anger, and we
hear of no return; nay, we hear the contrary, Et non redibat furor, For all
this, his wrath, his fury did not return, that is, did not depart from them;
for, as God never comes in this manner, till our multiplied sins call him,
and importune him, so God never returns in this sense, in withdrawing his
anger and judgments from us, till both our words and our works, our prayers
and our amendment of life, join in a Revertere Domine, O Lord Return,
withdraw this judgment from us, for it has effected thy purpose upon us. And
so the Original, which expresses neither signification of the word, for it is
neither Return to me, nor Return from me, but plainly and only Return,
leaves the sense indifferent; Lord, thou have withdrawn thy self from me,
therefore in mercy return to me, or else, Lord, thy Judgments are heavy upon
me, and therefore return, withdraw these Judgments from me; which shows the
ductilenesse, the appliablenesse of Gods mercy, that yields almost to any form
of words, any words seem to fit it.

But then, the comfort of Gods returning to us, comes nearest us, in the third
signification of this word Shubah; not so much in Gods returning to us, nor in
his anger returning from us, Psalm. 80.3.
as in our returning to him, Turn us again, O Lord, says David, Et salvi
erimus, and we shall be saved; There goes no more to salvation, but such a
Turning. So that this Returning of the Lord, is an Operative, an Effectual
returning, that turns our hearts, and eyes, and hands, and feet to the ways
of God, and produces in us Repentance, and Obedience. For these be the two
legs, which our conversion to God stands upon; Deuteronomy. 32.2.
For so Moses uses this very word, Return unto the Lord and hear his voice;
There is no returning, without hearing, nor hearing without believing, nor
believing, to be believed, Mat. 11.21.
without doing; Returning is all these. Therefore where Christ says, That if
those works had been done in Tire and Sidon, Tire and Sidon would have repented
in sackcloth and ashes; In the Syriack Translation of S. Matthew, we have this
very word Shubah, They would have Returned in sackcloth and ashes. So that the
word which David receives from the Holy Ghost in this Text, being only
Returned, and no more, applies it self to all three senses, Return thy self,
that is, Bring back thy Mercy; Return thy Wrath, that is, Call back thy
Judgments, or Return us to thee, that is, make thy means, and offers of
grace, in thine Ordinance, powerful, and effectual upon us.

Now when the Lord comes to us, by any way, though he come in corrections, in
chastisements, not to turn to him, is an irreverent, and unrespective
negligence. If a Pursevant, if a Sergeant come to thee from the King, in any
Court of Justice, though he come to put thee in trouble, to call thee to an
account, yet thou receivest him, thou entertainest him, thou paiest him fees.
If any Messenger of the Lord come to attach thee, whether sickness in thy
body, by thine own disorder, decay in thy estate, by the oppression of others,
or terror in thy Conscience, by the preaching of his Ministers, turn thou to
the Lord, in the last sense of the word, and his mercy shall return to thee,
and his anger shall return from thee, and thou shall have fullness of
Consolation in all the three significations of the word. If a Worm be trodden
upon, it turns again; We may think, that is done in anger, and to revenge;
But we know not; The Worm has no sting, and it may seem as well to embrace,
and lick his foot that treads upon him. When God treads upon thee, in any
calamity, spiritual or temporal, if thou turn with murmuring, this is the
turning of a Serpent, to sting God, to blaspheme him; This is a turning upon
him, not a turning to him; But if thou turn like a Worm, then thou turnest
humbly to kiss the rod, to lick and embrace his foot that treads upon thee,
that is, to love his Ministers, which denounce his judgments upon thy sins,
yea, to love them, from whom thou receivest defamation in thy credit, or
detriment in thy state.

We see how it was imputed to Asa, when God trod upon him, that is, 2 Chro.
16.12.
diseased him in his feet, and exalted his disease into extremity, Yet in his
disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. He turned a by-way;
at least, though a right way, too soon, to the Physician before the Lord. This
is that, that exasperated God so vehemently, Esaias. 9.13.
Because the people turns not to him that smites them; neither do they seek
the Lord of Hosts; when the Lord of Hosts lies with a heavy Army upon them.
Therefore, says the Prophet there, The Lord will cut off from Israel, head and
tail, branch and rush in one day. God is not so vehement, when they neglected
him in their prosperity, as when, though he afflicted them, yet they turned not
to him. Measure God by earthly Princes; (for we may measure the world by a
Barley corn) If the King come to thy house, thou will profess to take it for
an honor, and thou will entertain him; and yet his coming cannot be without
removes, and troubles, and charges to thee. So when God comes to thee, in his
word, or in his actions, in a Sermon, or in a sickness, though his coming
dislodge thee, remove thee, put thee to some inconvenience, in leaving thy bed
of sin, where thou did sleep securely before, yet here is the progress of
the Holy Ghost, intended to thy soul, that first he comes thus to thee, and
then if thou turn to him, he returns to thee, and settles himself, and dwells
in thee.

This is too lovely a Prospect, to depart so soon from; therefore look we by
S. Augustines glass, upon Gods coming and returning to man. God has
imprinted his Image in our souls; and God comes, says that Father, Vt videat
imaginem; Where I have given my Picture, I would see how it is respected: God
comes to see in what case his Image is in us; If we shut doors, if we draw
Curtains between him and his Image, that is, cover our souls, and disguise
and palliate our sins, he goes away, and returns in none of those former
senses. But if we lay them open, by our free confessions, he returns again;
that so, in how ill case soever he find his Image, he may wash it over with
our tears, and renew it with his own blood, and, Vt resculpat imaginem, that
he may refresh and re-engrave his Image in us again, and put it in a richer
and safer Tablet. And as the Angel which came to Abraham at the promise and
conception of Isaac, Genesis 18.10.
gave Abraham a farther assurance of his Return at Isaaes birth, I will
certainly return unto thee, and thy wife shall have a Son; So the Lord,
which was with thee in the first conception of any good purpose, Returns to
thee again, to give thee a quickening of that blessed child of his, and
again, and again, to bring it forth, and to bring it up, to accomplish and
perfect those good intentions, which his Spirit, by over-shadowing thy soul,
has formerly begotten in it. So then, he comes in Nature, and he returns in
Grace; He comes in preventing, and returns in subsequent graces; He comes in
thine understanding, and returns in thy will; He comes in rectifying thine
actions, and returns in establishing habits; He comes to thee in zeal, and
returns in discretion; He comes to thee in fervor, and returns in
perseverance; He comes to thee in thy peregrination, all the way, and he
returns in thy transmigration, at thy last gasp. So God comes, and so God
returns.

Yet I am loath to depart my self, loath to dismiss you from this air of
Paradise, of Gods coming, and returning to us. Therefore we consider again,
that as God came long ago, six thousand years ago, in nature, when we were
created in Adam, and then in nature returned to us, in the generation of our
Parents: so our Savior Christ Jesus came to us long ago, sixteen hundred
years ago, in grace, and yet in grace returns to us, as often as he
assembles us, in these holy Convocations. He came to us then, as the Wisemen
came to him, with treasure, and gifts, and gold, and incense, and myrrh; As
having an ambition upon the souls of men, he came with that abundant treasure
to purchase us. And as to them who live upon the Kings Pension, it is some
comfort to hear that the Exchequer is full, that the Kings moneys are come
in: so is it to us, to know that there is enough in Gods hands, paid by his
Son, for the discharge of all our debts; He gave enough for us all at that
coming; But it is his returning to us, that applies to us, and derives upon us
in particular, the benefit of this general satisfaction. When he returns to us
in the dispensation and distribution of his graces, in his Word and Sacraments;
When he calls upon us to come to the receipt; When the greater the sum is,
the gladder he is of our coming, that where sin abounds, grace might abound
too; When we can pursue this Prayer, Revertere Domine, Return O Lord in grace,
in more and more grace, and when we are in possession of a good measure of that
grace, we can pray again, Revertere Domine, Return O Lord in glory, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly; When we are so rectified by his Ordinances here, that in a
sincerity of soul, we are not only contented, but desirous to depart from
hence, then have we religiously followed our example, that man according to
Gods heart, David, in this prayer of his. If Christ have not been thus fully
in thine heart, before, this is his coming; entertain him now: If he have
been there, and gone again, this is his returning; bless him for that: And
meet him, and love him, and embrace him, as often as he offers himself to thy
soul, in these his Ordinances: Wish every day a Sunday, and every meal a
Sacrament, and every discourse a Homily, and he shall shine upon thee in all
dark ways, and rectify thee in all ragged ways, and direct thee in all
cross ways, and stop thee in all doubtful ways, and return to thee in
every corner, and relieve thee in every danger, and arm thee even against
himself, by advancing thy work, in which thou besiegest him, that is, this
Prayer, and enabling thee to prevail upon him, as in this first Petition,
Revertere Domine, O Lord return, so in that which follows next, Eripe animam,
Deliver my soul.

In this Prayer, Eripo anima^.
we may either consider David in that affection which S. Paul had when he
desired to be delivered ab angelo Satanae, from the messenger of Satan that
buffeted him, that so that Stimulus carnis which he speaks of, that vexation,
and provocation of the flesh, might have been utterly removed from him, whereby
he might have past his life in Gods service in a religious calm, without any
storm, or opposition, or contradiction arising in his flesh: Or we may
consider it as a Prayer agreeable to that Petition in our Lords Prayer, Libera
nos a malo, Deliver us from evil; which is not from being attempted by evil,
but by being swallowed up by it. Eripe me, may be, Deliver me from rebellions,
or Deliver me in rebellions; Either that they come not, or that they overcome
not.

In that prayer of S. Paul, that God would remove Angelum Satanae, and take
away Stimulum carnis, first, S. Paul is not easily understood, and then, it may
be, not safely imitated. It is hard to know what S. Paul means in his Prayer,
and it may be dangerous to pray as he prayed. For the actions of no man, how
holy soever, till we come to Christ himself, lay such an obligation upon us,
as that we must necessarily do as t^^y did. Nay the actions of Christ himself
lay not that obligation upon us, to fast as he fasted; no nor to pray as he
prayed. A man is not bound in an Affliction, or Persecution, at least at all
times, to that Prayer, Si possibile, or Transeat calix, If it be possible let
this cup pass; But if God vouchsafe him a holy constancy, to go through with
his Martyrdom, he may proceed in it without any such Deprecation to God, or
Petition to the Judge.

But first, before we consider whether he might be imitated, if we understood
him, we find it hard to understand him. S. Augustines free confession, Se
nescire quid sit angelus Satanae, That he never understood what S. Paul meant
by that Messenger of Satan, is more ingenuous then their interpretation, who, I
know not upon what Tradition, refer it to an extreme pain in the head, that
S. Paul should have, as Theophylact says; or refer it Ad morbum Iliacum, which
Aquinas speaks of, or to the Gout, or pains in the Stomach, as Nazianzen, and
Basil interpret it. Oecumenius understands this Angel, this Messenger of Satan,
to be those Heretics, which were his Adversaries, in his preaching of the
Gospel; according to that signification of the word Satan, in which Solomon
uses it to Hiram, 1 King. 5.4.
Non est mihi Satan, I have no Adversary. Others, even amongst the Fathers,
understand it particularly, and literally, of that concupiscence, and those
lusts of the flesh, which even the most sanctified men may have some sense of,
and some attempts by. Others understand it generally of all calamities,
spiritual, and temporal, incident to us in this life. But Cajetan goes
farthest, who reads it not as we do, Angelum Satanae, but Angelum Satanam; not
that Angel which comes from Satan, but that Angel that is Satan himself. So
that he conceives it to be a prayer against all tentations and tribulations
here, and hereafter, which the Devil or the Devils Instruments can frame
against us.

Now, if we think we understand it aright, in understanding it so generally,
then enters our second doubt, whether we may imitate S. Paul in so general a
prayer. We dispute in the School, whether, if it were in his powerto do it,
man might lawfully destroy any entire species of creatures in the world, though
offensive, and venerhous, as Vipers, or Scorpions. For every species being a
link of Gods great chain, and a limb of his great creature, the whole world,
it seems not to be put into our power, to break his chain, and take out a
link, to maime his great creature, and cut off a limb, by destroying any entire
species, if we could. So neither does it soeme conduceable to Gods purposes in
us, (which is the rule of all our prayers) to pray utterly against all
tentations, as vehemently as against sins. God should lose by it, and we should
lose by it, if we had no tentations; for God is glorified in those victories,
which we, by his grace, gain over the Devil. Nescit Diabolus, quant a bona de
illo fiunt, etiam cum saevit; August.
Little knows the Devil, how much good he does us, when he tempts us; for by
that we are excited to have our present recourse to that God, whom in our
former security, we neglected, who gives us the issue with the tentation. Ego
novi quid apposuerim, Idem.
I know what infirmities I I have submitted thee to, and what I have laid and
applied to thee. Ego novi unde aegrotes, ego novi unde saneris; I know thy
sickness, and I know thy physic. Sufficit tibi gratiamea; Whatsoever the
disease be, my grace shall be sufficient to cure it. For whether we understand
that, as S. Chrysostom does, De gratia miraculorum, That it is sufficient for
any man's assurance, in any tentation, or tribulation, to consider Gods
miraculous deliverances of other men, in the like cases; or whether we
understand it according to the general voice of the Interpreters, that is, Be
content that there remain in thy flesh, Matter and Subject for me to produce
glory from thy weakness, and Matter and Subject for thee to exercise thy faith
and allegiance to me, still these words will carry an argument against the
expedience of absolute praying against all tentations; for still, this
Gratiamea sufficit, will import this, amount to this, I have as many Antidotes,
as the Devil has poisons, I have as much mercy as the Devil has malice;
There must be Scorpions in the world; but the Scorpion shall cure the Scorpion;
there must be tentations; but tentations shall add to mine, and to thy glory,
and, Eripiam, I will deliver thee.

This word is in the Original, Chalatz; which signifies Eripere in such a
sense, as our language does not fully reach in any one word. So there is some
defectivenesse, some slacknesse in this word of our Translation, Delivering.
For it is such a Delivering, as is a sudden catching hold, and snatching at the
soul of a man, then, when it is at the brink, and edge of a sin. So that if
thy facility, and that which thou will make shift to call Good Nature, or Good
Manners, have put thee into the hands of that subtle woman, that Solomon
speaks of, That is come forth to mect thee, and seek thy face; Prove. 7.10.15.
If thou have followed her, As an Ox goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to
the correction of the stocks; Even then, when the Axe is over thy head, then
when thou have approacht so near to destruction, then is the season of this
prayer, Eripe me Domine, Catch hold of me now O Lord, Genesis 39.10.
and Deliver my soul. When Joseph had resisted the tentations of his Masters
Wife, and resisted them the only safe way, not only not to yield, but as the
Text says, not to come in her company, and yet she had found her opportunity
when there was none in the house but they, he came to an inward Eripe me
Domine, O Lord take hold of me now, and she caught, and God caught; She caught
his garment, and God his soul; She delivered him, and God delivered him; She
to Prison, and God from thence. If thy curiosity, or thy considence in thine
own spiritual strength, carry thee into the house of Rimmon, to Idolatry, to
a Mass, trust not thou to Naamans request, Ignoscat Dominus servo in bacre, 2
Kings 5.
That God will pardon thee, as often as thou do so; but since thou have done
so now, now come to this Eripe animam, O Lord deliver my soul now, from taking
harm now, and hereafter, from exposing my self to the like harm. For this is
the purpose of David's prayer in this signification of this word, that howsoever
infirmity, or company, or curiosity, or confidence, bring us within the
distance, and danger, within the Sphere, and Latitude of a tentation, that
though we be not lodged in Sodom, yet we are in the Suburbs, though we be not
impailed in a sin, yet we are within the purlues, (which is not safely done; no
more then it is in a State, to trust always to a Defensive War) yet when we
are engaged, and enthralled in such a tentation, then, though God be not
delighted with our danger, yet then is God most delighted to help us, when we
are in danger; and then, he comes not only to deliver us from that imminent,
and particular danger, according to that signification of this word, but
according to that Interpretation of this word, which the Septuagint have given
it, in the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 58.11.
Iachalitz, Pinguefaciet; He shall proceed in his work, and make fat thy
soul; That is, Deliver thee now, and preserve, and establish thee after, to
the fulfilling of all, that belongs to the last Petition of this prayer, Salvum
me fac, O Lord save me; Though he have been absent, he shall Return; and being
Returned, shall not stand still, nor stand Neutrall, but deliver thee; and
having delivered thee, shall not determine his love in that one act of mercy,
but shall Save thee, that is, Imprint in thee a holy confidence, that his
salvation is thine.

So then, Salvum me fac. Esaias 19.20.
in that manner is Gods Deliverance expressed, They shall cry unto him, (till we
cry, he takes no knowledge at all) and then he sends to them, (there is his
returning upon their cry) and then, He shall deliver them, says that Prophet;
and so, the two former Petitions of this prayer are answered; but the
Consummation, and Establishment of all, is in the third, which follows in the
same place, He shall send them a Savior, and a great one. Esaias 62.11.
But who is that? what Savior? Doubtless he that is proclaimed by God, in the
same Prophet, Behold, the Lord has proclaimed unto the end of the world,
Behold thy salvation comes. For, that word which that Prophet uses there, and
this word, in which David presents this last Petition here, is in both places,
Iashang, and Iashang is the very word, from which the name of Jesus is derived;
so that David desires here, that salvation which Esaias proclaimed there,
salvation in the Savior of the world, Christ Jesus, and an interest in the
assurance of his merits.

We find this name of Savior attributed to other men in the Scriptures, then
to Christ. In particular distresses, when God raised up men, to deliver his
people sometimes, those men were so called, Saviors. And so S. Jerome
interprets those words of the Prophet, Ascendent salvatores, Obad. 1.21.
Saviors shall come up, on Mount Sion, of Prophets, and Preachers, and such
other Instruments, as God should raise for the salvation of souls. Those, whom
in other places, he calls Angels of the Church, here he calls by that higher
name, Saviors. But such a Savior as is proclaimed to the ends of the world,
to all the world, a Savior in the Mountains, in the height of presumptuous
sins, and a Savior in the valleys, in the dejection of inordinate melancholy
too, A Savior of the East, of rising, and growing men, and a Savior of the
West, of withering, declining, languishing fortunes too, A Savior in the state
of nature, by having infused the knowledge of himself, into some men then,
before the light, and help of the Law was afforded to the world, A Savior in
the state of the Law, by having made to some men then, even Types
Accomplishments, and Prophesies Histories, And, as himself Calls things that are
not, as though they were, So he made those men see things that were not, as
though they were, (for so Abraham saw his day and rejoiced) A Savior in the
state of the Gospel, and so, as that he saves some there, for the fundamental
Gospels sake, that is, for standing fast in the fundamental Articles thereof,
though they may have been darkened with some ignorances, or may have strayed
into some errors, in some Circumstantiall points, A Savior of all the world,
of all the conditions in the world, of all times through the world, of all
places of the world, such a Savior is no man called, but Christ Jesus only.
For when it is said that Pharaoh called Joseph, Salvatorem mundi, A Savior of
the world, (besides, Genesis 41.45.
that if it were so, that which is called all the world, can be referred but to
that part of the world which was then under Pharaoh; as when it is said, that
Augustus taxed the world, that is intended De orb Romano, so much of the
world, as was under the Romans) there is a manifest error in that Translation,
which calls Joseph so, for that name which was given to Joseph there, in that
language in which it was given, does truly signify Revelatorem Secretorum, and
no more, a Revealer, a Discoverer, a Decypherer of secret and mysterious
things; according to the occasion, upon which that name was then given, which
was the Decyphering, the Interpreting of Pharaohs Dream.

Be this then thus established, that David for our example considers, and
referres all salvation, Psalm. 98.2.
to salvation in Christ. As he does also where he says after, Notum fecit
salutare tuum, The Lord has made known his salvation. Quid est salutare tuum?
says S. Basil; Luke 2.
What is the Lords salvation? And he makes a safe answer out Simeons mouth,
Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, when he had seen Christ Jesus. This then is
he, which is not only Satvator populi sui, The Savior of his people, the Jews,
to whom he has betrothed himself, In Pacto salis, A Covenant of salt, an
everlasting Covenant: Nor only Salvator corporis sui, The Savior of his own
body, as the Apostle calls him; of that body which he has gathered from the
Gentiles, in the Christian Church: Nor only Salvator mundi, A Savior of the
world, so, as that which he did, and suffered, was sufficient in it self, and
was accepted by the Father, for the salvation of the world; but, as Tertullian,
for the most part reads the word, he was Salutificator; not only a Savior,
because God made him an instrument of salvation, as though he had no interest
in our salvation, till in his flesh he died for us; but he is Salutificator, so
the Author of this salvation, as that from all eternity, he was at the making
of the Decree, as well as in the fullness of time he was at the executing
thereof. In the work of our salvation, if we consider the merit, Christ was
sole and alone, no Father, no Holy Ghost trod the Wine Press with him; And if
in the work of our salvation we consider the mercy, there, though Christ were
not sole, and alone, (for that mercy in the Decree was the joynt-act of the
whole Trinity) yet even in that, Christ was equal to the Father, and the Holy
Ghost. So he is Salutificator, the very Author of this salvation, as that when
it came to the act, he, and not they, died for us; and when it was in Council,
he, as well as they, and as soon as they, decreed it for us.

As therefore the Church of God scarce presents any petition, any prayer to
God, but it is subscribed by Christ; the Name of Christ, is for the most part
the end, and the seal of all our Collects; all our prayers in the Liturgy,
(though they be but for temporal things, for Plenty, or Peace, or
Faire-weather) are shut up so, Grant this O Lord, for our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus sake: So David for our example, drives all his petitions in this
Text, to this Conclusion, Salvum me fac, O Lord save me; that is, apply that
salvation, Christ Jesus to me. Now beloved, you may know, that your selves have
a part in those means, which God uses to that purpose, your selves are
instruments, though not causes of your own salvation. Salvus factus es pro
nihilo, non de nihilo tamen; Bernard.
Thou bring nothing for thy salvation, yet something to thy salvation;
nothing worth it, but yet something with it; Thy new Creation, by which thou art
a new creature, that is, thy Regeneration, is wrought as the first Creation was
wrought. God made heaven and earth of nothing; but he produced the other
creatures, out of that matter, which he had made. Thou had nothing to do in
the first work of thy Regeneration; Thou could not so much as wish it; But in
all the rest, thou art a fellow-worker with God; because, before that, there
are seeds of former grace shed in thee. And therefore when thou come to this
last Petition, Salvum me fac, O Lord save me, remember still, that thou have
something to do, as well as to say; that so thou may have a comfortable
answer in thy soul, to the whole prayer, Return O Lord, Deliver my soul, and
Save me. And so we have done with our first Part, which was the Prayer it
self; and the second, which is the Reasons of the Prayer, we must reserve for
a second exercise.

SERMON. LIII. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 6.4, 5. Return, O Lord; Deliver my soul; O Lord save me, for thy
mercy sake.

For in Death there is no Remembrance of thee; and in the Grave, who shall give
thee thanks?


WE come now to the Reasons of these Petitions, in David's Prayer; For, as
every Prayer must be made with faith, (I must believe that God will grant my
Prayer, if it conduce to his glory, and my good to do so, that is the limit of
my faith) so I must have reason to ground a likelihood, and a fair probability
that that particular which I pray for, does conduce to his glory and my good,
and that therefore God is likely to grant it. David's first Reason here is
grounded on God himself, Propter misericordiam, Do it for thy mercy sake; and
in his second Reason, though David himself, and all men with him, seem to
have a part, yet at last we shall see, the Reason it self to determine wholly
and entirely in God too, and in his glory, Quoniam non in morte, Do it O Lord,
For in Death there is no remembrance of thee, etc.

In some other places, Propter misericordiam. Psalm. 40.11.
David comes to God with two reasons, and both grounded merely in God;
Misericordia, and veritas, Let thy Mercy and thy Truth always preserve me. In
this place he puts himself wholly upon his mercy, for mercy is all, or at
least, the foundation that sustaines all, or the wall that embraces all. That
mercy, which the word of this text, Casad imports, is Benignitas in non
promeritum; Mercy is a good disposition toward him, who has deserved nothing
of himself; For, where there is merit, there is no mercy. Nay, it imports more
then so, For mercy, as mercy, presumes not only no merit in man, but it takes
knowledge of no promise in God, properly; For that is the difference between
Mercy and Truth, that by Mercy at first, God would make promises to man, in
general; and then by Truth, he would perform those promises: but Mercy goes
first; and there David begins and grounds his Prayer, at Mercy; Mercy that can
have no pre-mover, no pre-relation, but begins in it self. For if we consider
the mercy of God to mankind subsequently, I mean, after the Death of Christ,
so it cannot be properly called mercy. Mercy thus considered, has a ground;
And God thus considered, has received a plentiful, and an abundant
satisfaction in the merits of Christ Jesus; And that which has a ground in
man, that which has a satisfaction from man, (Christ was truly Man) falls not
properly, precisely, rigidly, under the name of mercy. But consider God in his
first disposition to man, after his fall, That he would vouchsafe to study our
Recovery, and that he would turn upon no other way, but the shedding of the
blood of his own and innocent and glorious Son, Quid est homo, aut filius
hominis? What was man, or all mankind, that God should be mindful of him so,
or so merciful to him? When God promises that he will be merciful and
gracious to me, if I do his Will, when in some measure I do that Will of his,
God begins not then to be merciful; but his mercy was awake and at work
before, when he excited me, by that promise, to do his Will. And after, in my
performance of those duties, his Spirit seals to me a declaration, that his
Truth is exercised upon me now, as his mercy was before. Still, his Truth is
in the effect, in the fruit, in the execution, but the Decree, and the Root is
only Mercy.

God is pleased also when we come to him with other Reasons; When we remember
him of his Covenant; When we remember him of his holy servants, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; yea when we remember him of our own innocence, in that particular,
for which we may be then unjustly pursued; God was glad to hear of a
Righteousness, and of an Innocence, and of clean and pure hands in David,
when he was unjustly pursued by Saul. But the root of all is in this, Propter
misericordiam, Do it for thy mercy sake. For when we speak of Gods Covenant,
it may be mistaken, who is, and who is not within that Covenant; What know I?
Of Nations, and of Churches, which have received the outward profession of
Christ, we may be able to say, They are within the Covenant, generally taken;
But when we come to particular men in the Congregation, there I may call a
Hypocrite, a Saint, and think an excomunicate soul, to be within the
Covenant; I may mistake the Covenant, and I may mistake Gods servants, who did,
and who did not dye in his favor, What know I? We see at Executions, when men
pretend to dye cheerfully for the glory of God, half the company will call
them Traitors, and half Martyrs. So if we speak of our own innocence, we may
have a pride in that, or some other vicious and defective respect (as
uncharitableness toward our malicious Persecutors, or laying seditious
aspersions upon the justice of the State) that may make us guilty toward God,
though we be truly innocent to the World, in that particular. But let me make
my recourse to the mercy of God, and there can be no error, no mistaking.

And therefore if that, and nothing but that be my ground, God will Return to
me, God will Deliver my soul, God will Save me, For his mercy sake; that is,
because his mercy is engaged in it. And if God were to sell me this Returning,
this Delivering, this Saving, and all that I pray for; what could I offer God
for that, so great as his own mercy, in which I offer him the Innocence, the
Obedience, the Blood of his only Son. If I buy of the Kings land, I must pay
for it in the Kings money; I have no Mine, nor Mint of mine own; If I would
have any thing from God, I must give him that which is his own for it, that
is, his mercy; And this is to give God his mercy, To give God thanks for his
mercy, To give all to his mercy, And to acknowledge, that if my works be
acceptable to him, nay if my very faith be acceptable to him, it is not because
my works, no nor my faith has any proportion of equivalencie in it, or is
worth the least flash of joy, or the least spangle of glory in Heaven, in it
self, but because God in his mercy, only of his mercy, merely for the glory
of his mercy, has past such a Covenant, Creed, and fac hoc, Believe this, and
do this, and thou shall live, not for thy deed sake, not nor for thy faith
sake, but for my mercy sake. And farther we carry not this first reason of the
Prayer, arising only from God.

There remains in these words another Reason, In morte.
in which David himself, and all men seem to have part, Quia non in morte,
For in death there is no remembrance of thee, etc. Upon occasion of which
words, because they seem to imply a lothnesse in David to dye, it may well be
inquired, why Death seemed so terrible to the good and godly men of those
times, as that evermore we see them complain of shortness of life, and of the
neerenesse of death. Certainly the rule is true, in natural, and in civil,
and in divine things, as long as we are in this World, Nolle meliorem, est
corruption primae habitudinis, Picus Heptapl. l. 7. proem.
That man is not well, who desires not to be better; It is but our corruption
here, that makes us loath to hasten to our incorruption there. And besides, many
of the Ancients, and all the later Casuists of the other side, and amongst our
own men, Peter Martyr, and Calvin, assign certain cases, in which it has
Rationem boni, The nature of Good, and therefore is to be embraced, to wish our
dissolution and departure out of this World; and yet, many good and godly men
have declared this lothnesse to dye. Beloved, weigh Life and Death one against
another, and the balance will be even; Throw the glory of God into either
balance, and that turns the scale. S. Paul could not tell which to wish, Life,
or Death; There the balance was even; Then comes in the glory of God, the
addition of his soul to that Quire, that spend all their time, eternity it
self, only in glorifying God, and that turns the scale, and then, he comes to
his Cupio dissolvi, To desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. But then,
he puts in more of the same weight in the other scale, he sees that it advances
Gods glory more, for him to stay, and labor in the building of Gods Kingdom
here, and so add more souls then his own to that state, then only to enjoy
that Kingdom in himself, and that turns the scale again, and so he is
content to live.

These Saints of God then when they deprecate death, and complain of the
approaches of death, they are, at that time, in a charitable ecstasy,
abstracted and withdrawn from the consideration of that particular happiness,
which they, in themselves, might hay in heaven; and they are transported and
swallowed up with this sorrow, that the Church here, and gods kingdom upon
earth, should lack those means of advancement, or assistance, which God, by
their service, was pleased to afford to his Church. Whether they were good
Kings, good Priests, or good Prophets, the Church lost by their death; and
therefore they deprecated that death, Esaias 38.18.
and desired to live. The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate
thee; But the living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day,
says Hezekias; He was affected with an apprehension of a future barrenness
after his death, and a want of propagation of Gods truth; I shall not see the
Lord, even the Lord, says he. He had assurance, that he should see the Lord in
Heaven, when by death he was come thither; But, says he, I shall not see him
in the land of the living; Well, even in the land of the living, even in the
land of life it self, he was to see him, if by death he were to see him in
Heaven; But this is the loss that he laments, this is the misery that he
deplores with so much holy passion, I shall behold man no more, with the
Inhabitants of the world; Howsoever, I shall enjoy God my self, yet I shall be
no longer a means, an instrument of the propagation of Gods truth amongst
others; And, till we come to that joy, which the heart cannot conceive, it is,
I think, the greatest joy that the soul of man is capable of in this life,
(especially where a man has been any occasion of sin to others) to assist
the salvation of others. And even that consideration, that he shall be able to
do Gods cause no more good here, may make a good man loath to die. Quid facies
magno nomini tuo? Jos. 7.9.
says Ioshuah in his prayer to God; if the Canaanites come in, and destroy us,
and blaspheme thee, What will thou do unto thy mighty Name? What will thou do
unto thy glorious Church, said the Saints of God in those Deprecations, if thou
take those men out of the world, whom thou had chosen, enabled, qualified for
the edification, sustentation, propagation of that Church. In a word, David
considers not here, what men do, or do not in the next world; but he
considers only, that in this world he was bound to propagate Gods Truth, and
that that he could not do, if God took him away by death.

Consider then this horror, and detestation, and deprecation of death, in
those Saints of the old Testament, with relation to their particular, and then
it must be, Quia promissiones obscurae, Because Moses had conveyed to those
men, all Gods future blessings, all the joy and glory of Heaven, only in the
types of earthly things, and said little of the state of the soul after this
life. And therefore the promises belonging to the godly after this life, were
not so clear then, not so well manifested to them, not so well fixed in them,
as that they could, in contemplation of them, step easily, or deliver
themselves confidently into the jaws of death; he that is not fully satisfied
of the next world, makes shift to be content with this; and he that cannot
reach, or does not feel that, will be glad to keep his hold upon this.
Consider their horror, and ^etestation, and deprecation of death, not with
relation to themselves, but to Gods Church, and then it will be, Quia operarii
pauci, Because God had a great harvest in hand, and few laborers in it, they
were loath to be taken from the work.

And these Reasons might, at least, by way of excuse and extenuation, in those
times of darkness, prevail somewhat in their behalf; They saw not whither
they went, and therefore were loath to go; and they were loath to go, because
they saw not how Gods Church would subsist, when they were gone. But in these
times of ours, when Almighty God has given an abundant remedy to both these,
their excuses will not be appliable to us. We have a full cleernesse of the
state of the soul after this life, not only above those of the old Law, but
above those of the Primitive Christian Church, which, in some hundreds of
years, came not to a clear understanding in that point, whether the soul
were immortal by nature, or but by preservation, whether the soul could not
die, or only should not die. Or (because that perchance may be without any
constant cleernesse yet) that was not clear to them, (which concerns our case
nearer) whether the soul came to a present fruition of the sight of God after
death or no. But God having afforded us cleernesse in that, and then blessed our
times with an established Church, and plenty of able workmen for the present,
and plenty of Schools, and competency of endowments in Universities, for the
establishing of our hopes, and assurances for the future, since we have both
the promise of Heaven after, and the promise that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church here; Since we can neither say, Promissiones
obseurae, That Heaven hangs in a Cloud, nor say, Operarii pauci, That dangers
hang over the Church, it is much more inexcusable in us now, then it was in any
of them then, to be loath to die, or to be too passionate in that reason of the
deprecation, Quia non in morte, Because in death there is no remembrance of
thee etc.

Which words, being taken literally, may fill our meditation, and exalt our
devotion thus; If in death there be no remembrance of God, if this remembrance
perish in death, certainly it decays in the neernesse to death; If there be a
possession in death, there is an approach in age; And therefore, Remember now
thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Eccles. 12.1.
There are spiritual Lethargies, that make a man forget his name; forget that
he was a Christian, and what belongs to that duty. God knows what
forgetfulness may possess thee upon thy deathbed, and freeze thee there; God
knows what rage, what distemper, what madness may scatter thee then; And
though in such cases, God reckon with his servants, according to that
disposition which they use to have toward him before, and not according to
those declinations from him, which they show in such distempered sicknesses,
yet Gods mercy toward them can work but so, that he returns to those times,
when those men did remember him before. But if God can find no such time, that
they never remembered him, then he seals their former negligence with a present
Lethargy; they neglected God all their lives, and now in death there is no
remembrance of him, nor there is no remembrance in him; God shall forget him
eternally; and when he thinks he is come to his Consummatum est, The bell
tolls, and will ring out, and there is an end of all in death, by death he
comes but to his Secula Seculorum, to the beginning of that misery, which shall
never end.

This then which we have spoken, arises out of that sense of these words, which
seems the most literal; that is, of a natural death. But as it is well noted
by diverse Expositors upon this Psalm, this whole Psalm is intended of a
spiritual agony, and combat of David, wrestling with the apprehension of
hell, and of the indignation of God, even in this world, whilst he was alive
here. And therefore S. Augustine upon the last words of this verse, in that
Translation which he followed, In inferno quis consitchitur tibi? Not, In the
grave, but In hell, who shall confess unto thee? puts himself upon this, In
Inferne Dives confessus Domino, and oravit pro fratribus, In hell Dives did
confess the name of the Lord, and prayed there for his brethren in the world.
And therefore he understands not these words of a literal, and natural, a
bodily death, a departing out of this world; but he calls Peccatum Mortem, and
then, Caecitatem animae Infernum; He makes the easiness of sinning to be
Death, and then, blindness, and obduration, and remorslesnesse, and
impenitence, to be this Hell. And so also does S. Jerome understand all that
passionate deploring of Hezekias, (which seems literally to be spoken of
natural death) of this spiritual death, of the habit of sin, and that he
considered, and lamented especially his danger of that death, of a departing
from God in this world, rather then of a departing out of this world. And
truly many pieces and passages of Hezekias his lamentation there, will fall
naturally enough into that spiritual interpretation; though perchance all will
not, though S. Jerome with a holy purpose drive them, and draw them that way.
But whether that of Hezekias be of natural, or of a spiritual death, we have
another Author ancienter then S. Augustine, and S. Jerome, and so much esteemed
by S. Iereme, as that he translated some of his Works, which is Didymus of
Alexandria, who says, it is Impia opinio, not an inconvenient, or unnatural,
but an impious and irreligious opinion, to understand this verse of natural
death; because, says he, The dead do much more remember God then the living
do. And he makes use of that place, Deus non confunditur, Heb. 11.16.
God is not ashamed to be called the God of the dead, for he has prepared them
a City. And therefore reading these words of our Text, according to that
Translation which prevailed in the Eastern Church, which was the Septuagint,
he argues thus, he collects thus, that all that David says here, is only
this, Non est in morte qui memor est Dei, Not that he that is dead remembers
not God, but that he that remembers God, is not dead; not in an irreparable,
and irrecoverable state of death; not under such a burden of sin as devastates
and exterminates the conscience, and evacuates the whole power and work of
grace, but that if he can remember God, confess God, though he be fallen under
the hand of a spiritual death, by some sin, yet he shall have his resurrection
in this life; for, Non est in morte, says Didymus, He that remembers God, is
not dead, in a perpetual death.

And then this reason of David's Prayer here, (Do this and this, for in death
there is no remembrance of thee) will have this force, That God would return
to him in his effectual grace, That God would deliver his soul in dangerous
tentations, That God would save him in applying to him, and imprinting in him a
sober, but yet confident assurance that the salvation of Christ Jesus belongs
to him; Because if God did not return to him, but suffer him to wither in a
long absence, If God did not deliver him, by taking hold of him when he was
ready to fall into such sins as his sociablenesse, his confidence, his
inconsideration, his infirmity, his curiosity brought him to the brinke of, If
God did not save him, by a faithful assurance of salvation after a sin
committed and resented, This absence, this slipperinesse, this pretermitting,
might bring him to such a deadly, and such a hellish state in this world, as
that In death, that is, In that death, he should have no remembrance of God, In
hell, In the grave, that is, In that hell, In that grave, he should not
confess, nor praise God at all. There was his danger, he should forget God
utterly, and God forget him eternally, if God suffered him to proceed so far in
sin, that is, Death, and so far in an obduration and remorslesnesse, in sin,
that is, Hell, The Death and the Hell of this world, to which those Fathers
refer this Text.

In this lamentable state, we will only note the force, and the emphasis of
this Tui, and Tibi, in this verse; no remembrance of Thee, no praise to Thee;
For this is not spoken of God in general, but of that God, to which David
directs the last and principal part of his Prayer, which is, To save him; It
is to God, as God is Jesus, a Savior; and the wretchedness of this state is,
that God shall not be remembered in that notion, as he is Jesus, a Savior. No
man is so swallowed up in the death of sin, nor in the grave of impenitence, No
man so dead, and buried in the custom or senselessness of sin, but that he
remembers a God, he confesses a God; If an Atheist swear the contrary, believe
him not; His inward terrors, his midnight startlings remember him of that, and
bring him to confessions of that. But here is the depth, and desperateness of
this death, and this grave, habitual sin, and impenitence in sin, that he
cannot remember, he cannot confess that God which should save him, Christ
Jesus his Redeemer; he shall come, he shall not choose but come to remember a
God that shall damn him, but not a saving God, a Jesus.

Beloved in the bowels of that Jesus, not only the riches, and honors, and
pleasures of this world, and the favor of Princes, are, as Job speaks, Onerosi
consolatores, Miserable comforters are they all, all this world, but even of
God himself (be it spoken with piety and reverence, and far from
misconstruction) we may say, Onerosa consolatio, It is but a miserable comfort
which we can have in God himself, It is but a faint remembrance which we
retain of God himself, It is but a lame confession which we make to God
himself, Si non Tui, Si non Tibi, If we remember not Thee, If we confess not
Thee, our only Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. It is not half our work to be
godly men, to confess a God in general; we must be Christians too; to
confess God so, as God has manifested himself to us. I, to whom God has
manifested himself in the Christian Church, am as much an Atheist, if I deny
Christ, as if I deny God; And I deny Christ, as much, if I deny him in the
truth of his Worship, in my Religion, as if I denied him in his Person. And
therefore, Si non Tui, Si non Tibi, If I do not remember Thee, If I do not
profess Thee in thy Truth, I am fallen into this Death, and buried in this
Grave which David deprecates in this Text, For in death there is no remembrance
of thee, etc.

SERMON. LIVE. Preached to the KING at White Hall, upon the occasion of the Fast,
April 5. 1628.
PSALM. 6.6, 7. I am weary with my groaning; All the night make I my bed to
swin, I water my couch with my tears.

Mine eye is consumed because of grief; It waxes old, because of all
mine-enemies.


THis is David's humiliation; and coming after his repentance and
reconciliation, David's penance: And yet here is no Fast; It is true; No Fast
named; David had had experience, that as the wisest actions of Kings, (of Kings
as Kings over Subjects) so the devoutest actions of Kings, (of Kings, as humble
Subjects to the King of Kings, the God of Heaven) had been misinterpreted. Of
sighing, and groaning, and weeping, and languishing, (as in this Text) David
speaks often, very, very often in the Psalms; and they let him sigh, and
groan, and weep, and languish; they neglect his Passion, and are not affected
with that; but that is all; they afflict him no farther: But when he comes to
fasting, they deride him, they reproach him; Cares God whether you eat, or
fast? But thrice in all the Psalms does David speak of his fasting, and in
all three places, it was mis-interpreted, and reproachfully mis-interpreted; I
humbled my soul with fasting, Psalm. 35.13.
and my prayer returned into mine own bosom; He did this (as he says there)
for others, that needed it, and they would not thank him for it, but
reproached him. When I wept, and chastned my soul with fasting, Psalm. 69.10.
Psalm. 109.24.
that was to my reproach. So also my bones are weak through fasting, and I
became a reproach unto them. And therefore no wonder that David does not so
often mention and publish his fasting, as his other mortifications; No wonder
that in all his seven penetentiall Psalms, (which are the Churches Tropicks
for mortification and humiliation,) there is no mention of his fasting. But for
his practice, (though he speak not so much of it in the Psalms) in his history
where others, not himself, speak of him, we know that when he mourned, and
prayed for his sick child, he fasted too. And we doubt not, 2 Samuel 2.15.
but that, when he was thus wearied, (I am weary with my groaning; All the
night make I my bed to swim, I water my Couch with my tears; Mine eye is
consumed because of grief; It waxes old because of all mine enemies) he
fasted too; He fasted oftener, then he tells us of it. As S. Hierome says,
Iejunium non perfecta virtus, sed caeterarum virtutum fundamentum, Hieron.
If we must not call fasting (as fasting is but a bodily abstinence) a
religious act, an act of Gods worship, yet it is a Basis, and a foundation,
upon which other religious acts, and acts of Gods worship are the better
advanced. It is so at all times; but it is so especially when it is enjoined by
Sovereign authority, and upon manifest occasion, as now to us. Semper virtutis
Cibus Iejunium fuit, It is elegantly, and usefully said: At all times, Leo.
Religion feeds upon fasting, and feasts upon fasting, and grows the stronger
for fasting. But, Quod pium est agere non indictum, impium est negligere
praedicatum, Idem.
It is a godly thing to fast uncommanded, but to neglect it being commanded, is
an ungodly, an impious, a refractary perverseness, says the same Father. But
then another carries it to a higher expression, Desperationis genus est, tunc
manducare, cum abstinere debeas, Maximus de jejunio Ninevitarum.
Not to fast when the times require it, and when Authority enjoynes it, or not
to believe, that God will be affected and moved with that fasting, and be the
better inclined for it, is desperationis genus, a despairing of the State, a
despairing of the Church, a despairing of the grace of God to both, or of his
mercy upon both. And truly there cannot be a more disloyal affection then
that, desper are rem publicam, to forespeak great Councels, to be witch great
actions, to despair of good ends in things well intended: And in our
distresses, where can we hope, but in God? and how shall we have access to
God, but in humiliation? We doubt not therefore but that this act of
humiliation, his fasting was spread over David's other acts in this Text, and
that as a sinner in his private person, and as a King in his public and
exemplar office, he fasted also, (though he says not so) when he said he was
wearied, I am weary with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim, I
water my couch with my tears; mine eye is consumed because of grief; It
waxes old because of all mine enemies.

But though this fasting, and these other penal acts of humiliation, be the
body that carries, and declares, yet the soul that inanimates, and quickens
all, is prayer; and therefore this whole Psalm is a prayer; And the prayer is
partly Deprecatory, In some things David desires that God would forbear him,
as v. 1. Correct me not, for if thou correct me, others will trample upon me;
Rebuke me not, for if thou rebuke me, others will calumniate me; And partly
Postulatory, that some things God would give him, as Health, and Deliverance,
and that which is all, Salvation, in the other verses. Both parts of the prayer
are (as all prayer must be) grounded upon reasons; and the reasons are from
diverse roots; some from the consideration of himself, and they argue his
humiliation; some from the contemplation of God, and they testify his
devotion, and present recourse to him; some from both together, God, and
himself jointly, which is an acknowledgement, that God works not alone in
heaven, nor man lives not alone upon earth, but there is a Conversation, and a
Correspondence, and a Commerce between God and Man, and Conditions, and
Contracts, and Covenants, and Stipulations between them, and so a mutual
interest in one another. From God himself alone, David raises a reason, v. 4.
Propter misericordiam, O save me for thy mercies sake; for of the mercy of God,
there is no precedent, there is no concurrent reason, there is no reason of the
mercy of God, but the mercy of God: from God, and himself together, he raises a
reason, v. 5. Quia non in morte, For in death there is no remembrance of thee;
Destroy me not, for if I die, Quid facies magno nomini tuo? (as Ioshuah speaks)
what will become of thy glory? of that glory which thou should receive from
my service in this world, if thou take me out of this world? But then, as he
begun in reasons arising from himself, and out of the sense of his own
humiliation under the hand of God, (for so he does) v. 2. Quia infirmus, Have
mercy upon me, because I am weak, and cannot subsist without that mercy. And
Quiaturbata ossa, his bones were vexed; Habet anima ossa sua, says S. Basil,
The soul has bones as well as the body; The bones of the soul are the
strongest faculties, and best operations of the soul, and his best, and
strongest actions, were but questionable actions, disputable, and suspicious
actions; And Turbata anima, all his faculties, even in their very root, his
very soul, was sore vexed, v. 3. As, I say, he began with reasons of that
kind, arising from himself, so he returns and ends with the same
humiliation, in the reasons arising from himself too, Quia laboravi in gemitu,
I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim, etc.

As our Savior Christ entered into the house to his Disciples, John 20.28.
Ianuis clausis, when the doors were shut: so God enters into us too, Ianuis
clausis, when our eyes have not opened their doors, in any real penitent
tears, when our mouths have not opened their doors, in any verbal prayers;
God sees, and he hears the inclinations of the heart. S. Bernard notes well
upon those words of Christ, John 11.
at the raising of Lazarus, Father I thank thee, that thou have heard me, That
at that time, when Christ gave thanks to God, for having heard him, he had said
nothing to his Father; but God had heard his heart. Since God does so even to
us, he will much more hear us, as David, when we make outward declarations
too, because that outward declaration conduces more to his glory, in the
edification of his servants, therefore David comes to that declaratory
protestation, Quia labor avi in gemitu, I am weary with my groaning, etc.

In which words, Divisio.
we shall consider, Quid factum, and Quid faciendum, What David did, and what
we are to do: for David, after he had thrown himself upon the mercy of God,
after he had confessed, and prayed, and done the spiritual parts of
repentance, he afflicts his body besides; And so ought we likewise to do, if
we will be partakers of David's example. And therefore we may do well to
consider Quid faciendum, How this Example of David binds us, how these
groanings and waterings of his bed with tears, and other Mortifications
assumed after repentance, and reconciliation to God, lay an obligation upon us.

But this is our part, Quid faciendum, what is to be done by us; First, Quid
factum, what David did; and truly he did much: first gemuit, he came to greane,
to sigh, to outward declarations of inward heaviness. And Laberauit in gemits,
He labored, he traveled in that passion, and (as the word imports, and as our
later Translation has it) he was wearied, tired with it; so far, that (as it
is in the first Translation) he faimed, he languished with it. First he sighed,
and sighed so; and groaned, and groaned so; passionately, vehemently, and then
openly, exemplarily; and he was not ashamed of it, for he came to weeping,
though he knew it would be thought childish: And that in that abundance, Natare
feci, and Liqueseci lectum, He watered his bed, dissolved his bed, made his bed
to swim, surrounded his bed with tears; And more, he macerated his bed with
that brine: And then he continued this affliction; It was not a sudden passion,
a flash of remorse; but he continued it, till his eye was consumed by reason of
that anguish, and despite, and indignation; as our diverse Translations vary
the expressing thereof; so long, as night and day lasted, so long, as that he
was waxen old under it; and when this great affliction should have brought him
safely into harbor, that he might have rested securely at last, his enemies
that triumphed over him, gave him new occasions of misery, his eyes were
consumed, and waxed old because of his enemies; that is, because he was still
amongst enemies that triumphed over him.

Be pleased to take another Edition, another Impression of these particulars; A
natural man's Moral constancy will hold out against outward declarations of
grief; yet David came to that, he groaned: A groan, a sigh may break out,
and the heart be at the more ease for that; But Laboravit, they grew upon him,
and the more he groaned, and the more he sighed, the more he had an
inclination, and not only that, but cause to do so, for he found that his
sorrow was to be sorrowed for, and his repentance to be repented, there were
such imperfections in all. Therefore he suffered thus till he was wearied, till
he fainted with groaning, and sighing. And then this wind does not blow over
the rain, he weeps; and weeps the more violently, and the more continually;
extremes that seldom meet, violence, and lasting, but in his case they did.
All this, all night, and all this, all this while, not amongst friends to pity
him, and condole with him, but amongst enemies to affront him, and deride him:
So that here are all the ingredients, all the elements of misery; Sorrow of
heart, that admits no disguise, but flows into outward declarations; and such
declarations as create no compassion, but triumph in the enemy. I am weary with
my groaning, etc.

To proceed then to the particulars in our first Part, Quid factum, What David
did, 1 Part. Gemit.
first Gemit, He comes to sigh, to groan, to an outward declaration of a sense
of Gods indignation upon him, till he had perfected his repentance. She sighed,
Lament.
and turned backward, was Jerusalems misery. To sigh, and turn backward, to
repent, and relapse, is a woeful Condition: But to sigh, and turn forward, to
turn upon God, and to pursue this sorrow for our sins, then, in such sighs,
The Spirit of man returns to God that gave it; Eccles. 12.7.
As God breathed into man, so man breathes unto the nostrils of God a savor of
rest, as it is said of Noah, an acceptable sacrifice, when he sighs for his
sins. This fighing, this groaning, expressed in this word, Anach, Gemitus, is
Vox Turturis. Turtur gemit; It is that voice, that sound which the Turtle
gives; Plin. li. 18. c. 28.
And we learn by Authors of Natural Story, and by experience, Turturis
gemitus indicium veris, The voice of the Turtle is an evidence of the Spring;
When a sinner comes to this voice, to this sighing, there is a Spring of grace
begun in him; Then Vox Turturis audita in terra nostra, says Christ to his
Spouse, The voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; And so he says to thy
soul, Began. 2.12.
This voice of the Turtle, these sighs of thy penitent soul, are heard interra
nostra, in our Land, in the Kingdom of heaven.

And when he hears this voice of this Turtle, these sighs of thy soul, then
he puts thy name also into that List, which he gave to his Messenger, (in which
Commission this very word of our Text, Ezekiel. 9.4.
Anach, is used) Signabis signum super frontibus virorum suspirantium and
gementium, Upon all their fore heads, that sigh and groan, imprint my mark;
Which is ordinarily conceived by the Ancients to have been the letter Tau; of
which though Calvin assign a useful, and a convenient reason, that they were
marked with this letter Tau, which is the last letter of the Hebrew Alphabet,
in sign, that though they were in estimation of the world, the most abject,
and the outcasts thereof, yet God set his mark upon them, with a purpose to
raise them; yet S. Hierome, Hieron.
and the Ancients for the most part assign that for the reason, why they were
marked with that letter, because that letter had the form of the Cross; Not
for any such use, or power, as the Roman Church has ascribed to that sign, but
as in the Persecutions of the Primitive Church, the Martyrs at the stake, when
a cry was raised, that they dyed for Treason, for Rebellion, for Sedition, and
could not be heard, for the clamor, to clear themselves, used then in the
sight of all, who, though they could not hear them, could see them, to sign
themselves with the Cross, not to drive away devils, or to strengthen
themselves against tentations by that sign, but by that sign to declare the
cause of their death to be the profession of the Christian Religion, and not
Treason, nor Sedition. And as we in our Baptism have that Cross imprinted
upon us, not as a part of the Sacrament, or any piece of that armor, which we
put on of spiritual strength, but as a protestation, whose Soldiers we
became: so God imprinted upon them, that sighed, and mourned, that Tau, that
letter, which had the form of the Cross, that it might be an evidence, that
all their crosses shall be swallowed in his Cross, their sighs in his sighs,
and their agonies in his. And therefore, Beloved, these sighs are too
spiritual a substance, to be bestowed upon worldly matters; All the love, all
the ambitions, all the losses of this world, are not worth a sigh; If they
were, yet thou have none to spare, for all thy sighs are due to thy sins;
bestow them there.

Gemit, Laboravit.
he sighs, he groans; And then, Laboravit in gemitu, he labored, he
travailed, he grew weary, he fainted with sighing. Not to be curious, we meet
with a threefold Labor in Scriptures. First there is Labor communis, the
Labor which no man may avoid; Job 5.7.
Man is borne unto travailt, as the sparks fly upward; Where we may note in
the Comparison, that it is not a dejection, a diminution, a depressing
downward, but a flying upward, the true exaltation of a Man, that he labors
duly in a lawful calling; and this is Labor communis; Secondly there is Labor
impii, The labor of the wicked, for, They have taught their tongues to speak
lies, says David, and take great pains to deal wickedly; Job 15.20.
As it is also in Job, The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, And
(as our former Translation had it) he is continually as one travailing with
Child; Indeed the labor is greater, to do ill, then well; to get hell, then
Heaven; Heaven might be had with less pains, then men do bestow upon hell;
and this is Labor impiorum. And lastly, there is Labor justorum, The labor of
the Righteous, which is, To rise early, to lie down late, and to eat the
bread of sorrow; for, though in that place, this seems to be said to be done
in vain, Psalm. 127.2.
It is in vain to rise early, in vain to lie down late, in vain to eat the
bread of sorrow, yet it is with the same exception, which is there specified,
that is, Except the Lord build, it is in vain to labor, Except the Lord keep
the City, it is in vain to watch; So except the Lord give rest to his beloved,
it is in vain torise early: In vain to travail, except God give a blessing.
But when the Lord has given thee rest, in the remission of thy sins, then
comes this Labor justorum, the labor that a righteous man is bound to, that as
God has given him a good nights rest, so he gives God a good days work, as
God has given him rest and peace of conscience, for that which is past, so he
take some pains for that which is to come, for such was David's case, and
David's care, and David's labor.

Ephrem, an ancient Deacon, and Expositor in the Christian Church, takes this
labor of David, Laboravi in gemitu, to have been in gemitu, but in
comprimendo gemitu, that he labored to conceal his penance and mortification,
from the sight and knowledge of others; Beloved, this concealing of those
things, which we put our selves to in the ways of godliness, has always a
good use, when it is done, to avoid ostentation, and vain glory, and praise of
men; And it has otherwise, sometimes a good use, to conceal our tribulations
and miseries from others, because the wicked often take occasion, from the
calamities and pressures of the godly, to insult and triumph over them, and to
dishonor and blaspheme their God, and to say, Where is now your God? and
therefore it may sometimes concern us to labor to hide our miseries, to
swallow our own spittle, as Job speaks, and to sponge up our tears in our
brains, and to eat, and smother our sighs in our own bosoms. But this was
not David's case now; But as he had opened himself to God, he opened himself
to the world too; and as he says in another place, Come and I will tell you,
what God has done for my soul, So here he says, Come, and I will tell you,
what I have done against my God. So he sighed, and so he groaned; he labored,
he was affected bitterly with it himself; And he declated it, he made it
exemplar, and catechisticall, that his dejection in himself, might be an
exaltation to others; And then he was not ashamed of it, but as he said of his
dancing before the Arc, If this be to be vile, I will be more vile, So here,
if this passion be weakness, I will yet be more weak; for this wind brought
rain, These sighs brought tears, All the night make I my bed to swim, etc.

The concupiscencies of man, are naturally dry powder, combustible easily,
Lacrymae.
easily apt to take fire; but tears dampe them, and give them a little more
leisure, and us intermission and consideration. David had labored hard; first
Ad ruborem, as Physicians advise, to a redness, to a blushing, to a shame of
his sin; And now Ad sudorem, Hilar.
he had labored to a sweat: for Lacrymae sudor animae moerentis, Tears are
the sweat of a laboring soul, and that soul that labors as David did, will
sweat, as David did, in the tears of contrition; Till then, till tears break
out, and find a vent in outward declaration, we pant and struggle in miserable
convulsions, and distortions, and distractions, and earthquakes, and
irresolutions of the soul; I can believe, that God will have mercy upon me, if
I repent, but I cannot believe that is repentance, if I cannot weep, or come
to outward declarations. This is the laborious irresolution of the soul; But
Lacrymae diluvium, Nazian.
and evehunt animam, These tears carry up our soul, as the flood carried up
the Arc, higher then any hills; whether hills of power, and so above the
oppression of potent adversaries, or hills of our own pride, and ambition; True
holy tears carry us above all. And therefore, when the Angel rebuked the
people, for not destroying Idolatry, They wept, Judge. 2.5.
says the text, there was their present remedy; and they called the name of
the place Bochim, Tears, that there might be a permanent testimony of that
expressing of their repentance; that that way they went to God, and in that way
God received them; and that their Children might say to one another, Where did
God show that great mercy to our Fathers? Here; here, in Bochim, that is, Here
in tears. And so when at Samuels motions, and increpation, the people would
testify their repentance, They drew water, 1 Samuel 7.6.
says the story, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted, and said, We
have sinned against the Lord. They poured water, Vt esset symbolum lacrymarum,
That that might be a type, and figure, Nab. Oziel.
in what proportion of tears, they desired to express their repentance. For,
such an effusion of tears, David may be well thought to intend, when he says,
Effundite coram Deo animam vestram, Pour out your souls before God, pour
them out in such an effusion, in a continual, and a contrite weeping. Still
the Prophets cry out upon Idols and Idolaters, Vlulate Sculptilia; Howl ye
Idols, and Howl ye Idolaters; He has no hope of their weeping. And so the
devil, and the damned are said to howl, but not to weep; or when they are
said to weep, it is with a gnashing of teeth, which is a voice of Indignation,
even toward God, and not of humiliation under his hand: So also says the
Propher of an impenitent sinner, Induratae super petram facies, They have made
their faces harder then stone; Ier. 5.3.
wherein? Thou have stricken them, but they have not wept; not sorrowed. Out of
a stone water cannot be drawn, but by miracle, though it be twice stricken;
Numb. 20.11.
as Moses stroke the Rock twice, yet the water came by the miraculous power of
God, and not by Moses second stroke. Though God strike this sinner twice,
thrice, he will not weep: though inward terrors strike his conscience, and
outward diseases strike his body, and calamities and ruin strike his estate,
yet he will not confess by one tear, that these are judgments of God, but
natural accidents; or if judgments, that they proceeded not from his sin, but
from some decree in God, or some purpose in God, to glorify himself, by thus
afflicting him, and that if he had been better, he should have fared never the
better, for Gods purpose must stand. Therefore says God of such in that place,
Surely they are poor, that was plain enough, and they are foolish too, says
God there: And God gives the reason of it, for they know not the judgments of
God; They know not his judgments to be judgments; They ascribe all calamities
to other causes, and so they turn upon other ways, and other plots, and other
miserable comforters. But attribute all to the Lord; never say of any thing,
This false upon me, but of all, This is laid upon me by the hand of God, and
thou will come to him in tears. Rain water is better then River water; The
water of Heaven, tears for offending thy God, are better then tears for
worldly losses; But yet come to tears of any kind, and whatsoever occasion
thy tears, Esaias 25.8.
Deus absterget omnem lacrymam, there is the largeness of his bounty, He will
wipe all tears from thine eyes; But thou must have tears first: first thou
must come to this weeping, or else God cannot come to this wiping; God has not
that errand to thee, to wipe tears from thine eyes, if there be none there; If
thou do nothing for thy self, God finds nothing to do for thee.

David wept thus, Nocte.
thus vehemently, and he wept thus, thus continually; In the Night, says our
Text; Psalm. 42.3.
Not that he wept not in the day: He says of himself, My tears have been my
meat, both day and night, where though he name no fast, you see his diet, how
that was attenuated. Lament. 1.2.
And so when it is said of Jerusalem, She weepeth continually in the night, it
is not that she put off her weeping till night, but that she continued her
days weeping to the night, and in the night: Plorando plorabit, says the
Original in the place; she does weep already, and she will weep still;
she puts it not off dilatorily, (I will weep, but not yet) nor she puts it
not over easily, suddenly, (I have wept, and I need no more) but as God
promises to his children, Joel 1.23.
the first and later rain, so must his children give to him again both
raines, tears of the day, and tears of the night, by washing the sins of
the day in the evening, and the sins of the night in the morning. But this
was an addition to David's affliction in this night weeping, that whereas the
night was made for man to rest in, David could not make that use of the night.
When he had proposed so great a part of his happiness to consist in this,
Psalm. 4. ult.
That he would lay him down and sleep in peace; we see in the next Psalm but
one, he that thought to sleep out the night, come to weep out the night. When
the Saints of God have that security, which S. Hierome speaks of, Vt sanctis
ipse somnus sit oration, They sleep securely, for their very sleep is a
glorifying of God, who gives his beloved sleep, yet David could have none of
this. Eusebius.
But why not he? Noctem letiferam nocte compensat; First, for the place, the
sin came in at those windows, at his eyes, and came in, in fire, in lust,
And it must go out at those windows too, and go out in water, in the water
of repentant tears; And then, for the time, as the night defiled his soul, so
the sin must be expiated, and the soul washed in the night too.

And this may be some Emblem, some useful intimation, how hastily Repentance
follows sin; David's sin is placed, but in the beginning of the night, in
the Evening, (In the evening he rose, and walked upon the Terase, and saw
Bathsheba) and in the next part of time, in the night, he falls a weeping: no
more between the sweetness of sin, and the bitterness of repentance, then
between evening, and night; no morning to either of them, till the Sun of
grace arise, and shine out, and proceed to a Meridionall height, and make the
repentance upon circumstance, to be a repentance upon the substance, and bring
it to be a repentance for the sin it self, which at first was but a
repentance upon some calamity, that that sin induced.

He wept then, Omni nocte.
and wept in the night; in a time, when he could neither receive rest in
himself, which all men had, nor receive praise from others, which all men
affect. And he wept Omni nocte; which is not only Omnibus noctibus, sometime
every night, but it is Tota nocte, clean through the night; And he wept in
that abundance, as has put the Holy Ghost to that Hyperbole in David's pen to
express it, Liquefecit stratum, natare fecit stratum, Hieron.
it drowned his bed, surrounded his bed, it dissolved, it macerated, it melted
his bed with that brine. Well; Qui rigat stratum, he that washes his bed so
with repentant tears, Non potest in cogitationem ejus libidinum pompa
subrepere: Tentations take hold of us sometimes after our tears, after our
repentance, but seldom or never in the act of our repentance, and in the very
shedding of our tears; At least Libidinum pompa, The victory, the triumph of
lust breaks not in upon us, in a bed, so dissolved, so surrounded, so macerated
with such tears. Thy bed is a figure of thy grave; Such as thy grave receives
thee at death, it shall deliver thee up to Judgment at last; Such as thy bed
receives thee at night, it shall deliver thee in the morning: If thou sleep
without calling thy self to an account, thou will wake so, and walk so, and
proceed so, without ever calling thy self to an account, till Christ Jesus
call thee in the Clouds. It is not intended, that thou should afflict thy
self so grievously, as some over-doing Penitents, to put chips, and shells, and
splints, and flints, and nails, and rowels of spurs in thy bed, to wound and
macerate thy body so. The inventions of men, are not intended here; But here is
a precept of God, implied in this precedent and practice of David, That as long
as the sense of a former sin, or the inclination to a future oppresses thee,
thou must not close thine eyes, thou must not take thy rest, till, as God
married thy body and soul together in the Creation, and shall at last crown
thy body and soul together in the Resurrection, so they may also rest together
here, that as thy body rests in thy bed, thy soul may rest in the peace of thy
Conscience, and that thou never say to thy head, Rest upon this pillow, till
thou can say to thy soul, Rest in this repentance, in this peace.

Now as this sorrow of David's continued day and night, Oculus.
(in the day for the better edification of men, and in the night for his better
capitulation with God) so there is a farther continuation thereof without any
weariness, expressed in the next clause, Turbatus a furore oculus meus, as the
Vulgat reads it, and Mine eye is dimmed, for despite or indignation, as our
former, or as this last Translation has it, Mine eye is consumed because of
grief; and to speak nearest to the Original, Erosus est oculus, Mine eye is
eaten out with Indignation. A word or two shall be enough of each of these
words, these three Terms, What the eye, which is the subject, what this
consuming, or dimming, which is the effect, and what this Grief, or
Indignation, which is the affection, imports and offers to our application.
First, Oculus, the Eye, is ordinarily taken in the Scriptures, Pro aspectu, for
the whole face, the looks, the countenance, the air of a man; and this air,
and looks, and countenance, declares the whole habitude, and constitution of
the man; As he looks, so he is: So that the Eye here, is the whole person; and
so this grief had wrought upon the whole frame and constitution of David, and
decayed that; though he place it in the eye, yet it had grown over all the
body. Since thou wast not able to say to thy sin, The sin shall come to
mine eyes, but no farther, I will look, but not lust, I will see, but not
covet, thou must not say, My repentance shall come to mine eyes, and no
farther, I will shed a few tears, and no more; but (with this Prophet David,
and with the Apostle S. Paul) thou must beat down thy body to that particular
purpose, and in that proportion, as thou find the rebellions thereof to
require: Thou could not stop the sin at thine eyes; stop not thy repentance
there neither, but pursue it in wholesome mortification, through all those
parts, in which the sin has advanced his dominion over thee; and that is our
use of the first word, the Eye, the whole frame.

For the second word, which in our Translations, is, in one dimmed, Turbatus.
Reuchlin.
in the other consumed, and in the Vulgat troubled, a great Master in the
Original, renders it well, elegantly, and naturally out of the Original,
Verminavit, Tineavit, which is such a deformity, as worms make in wood, or in
books; If David's sorrow for his sins brought him to this deformity, what
sorrow do they owe to their sins, who being come to a deformity by their
own licentiousness, and intemperance, disguise all that by unnatural helps,
to the drawing in of others, and the continuation of their former sins? The
sin it self was the Devils act in thee; But in the deformity and debility,
though it follow upon the sin, God has a hand; And they that smother and
suppress these by paintings, and pamperings, unnatural helps to unlawful
ends, do not deliver themselves of the plague, but they hide the marks, and
infect others, and wrestle against Gods notifications of their former sins.

And then the last of these three words, which is here rendered Grief,
Indignatio.
does properly signify, Indignation, and Anger: And therefore S. Augustine
upon this place, puts himself to that question, If David's constitution be
shaken, if his complexion and countenance be decayed, and withered, Prae
indignatione, for Indignation, for Anger, from whom proceeds this Indignation,
and this Anger? says that blessed Father. If it proceed from God, says he,
it is well that he is but Turbatus, and not Extinctus, that he is but troubled,
and not distracted, but shaken, and not overthrown; but overthrown, and not
ground to powder, not trodden as flat as dirt in the streets, as the Prophet
speaks. For David himself had told us but a few Psalms before, Psalm. 2. ult.
That when the Son is angry, (and when we speak of the Son, we intend a
person more sensible, and so more compassionate of our miseries, then when we
speak of God, of God considered in the height of his Majesty) and but a little
angry, (which amounts not to this provocation of God, which David had fallen
into here) we may perish; and perish in the way; perish in a half repentance,
before we perfect our Reconciliation: In the way so, before we come to our end;
or in the way, in these outward actions of repentance, if they be
hypocritically, or occasionally, or fashionally, or perfunctorily performed,
and not with a right heart toward God. Though this be the way, we may perish
in the way.

Now Aquinas places this fury (as the Vulgat calls it, this indignation) in
Absalom, and not in David; He takes David's sorrow to rise out of his sons
rebellion, and furious prosecution thereof; That David was thus vehemently
affected for the fault of another: And truly it is a holy tenderness, and an
exemplar disposition to be so sensible, and compassionate for the sins of other
men; Though Absalom could not have hurt David, David would have grieved for his
unnatural attempt to do it. So in Aquinas sense, it is Excandescentia pro
inimicis, a sorrow for his enemies; Not for his own danger from them, but for
their sin in themselves; But Gregory Nyssen takes it, de excandescentia in
inimicos, for an indignation against his enemies: And that David speaks this by
way of confession, and accusation of himself, as of a fault, that he was too
soon transported to an impatience, and indignation against them, though
enemies; And taking that sense, we see, how quickly even the Saints of God put
themselves beyond the hability of making that Petition sincerely, Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; How hard it is
even for a good man to forgive an enemy; Heg.
And how hard it is, Nihil in peccatore odisse nisi peccatum, to sever the sin
from the sinner, and to hate the fault, and not the man.

But leaving Thomas and Gregory, Aquinas and Nyssen to that Exposition, in
which (I think) they are singularly singular, either that this sorrow in David
was a charitable and compassionate sense of others faults, which is Aquinas
way, or that it was a confession of uncharitableness in himself toward
others, which is Gregory's way, the whole stream (for the most part) of ancient
Expositors divide themselves into these two channels; Either that this
indignation conceived by David, which withered and decayed him, was a holy
scorn and indignation against his own sins, that such wretched things as those
should separate him from his God, and from his inheritance, according to that
chain of Affections which the Apostle makes, 2 Cor. 7.
That godly sorrow brings a sinner to a care; He is no longer careless,
negligent of his ways; and that care to a clearing of himself, not to clear
himself by way of excuse, or disguise, but to clear himself by way of
physic, by humble confession; and then that clearing brings him to an
indignation, to a kind of holy scorn, and wonder, how that tentation could
work so; Such an affection as we conceive to have been in the Spouse, when she
said, Lavi pedes, I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I have
emptied my soul by Confession, is it possible I should charge it with new
transgressions? Or else they place this affection, this indignation in God; And
then they say, it was an apprehension of the anger of God, to be expressed upon
him in the day of Judgment; And against this Vermination, (as the Original
denotes) against this gnawing of the worm, that may bore through, and sink the
strongest vessel that sails in the seas of this world, there is no other
varnish, no other liniment, no other medicament, no other pitch nor rosin
against this worm, but the blood of Christ Jesus: And therefore whenever
this worm, this apprehension of Gods future indignation, reserved for the
Judgment, bites upon thee, be sure to present to it the blood of thy Savior:
Never consider the judgment of God for sin alone, but in the company of the
mercies of Christ. It is but the hissing of the Serpent, and the whispering of
Satan, when he surprises thee in a melancholy midnight of dejection of spirit,
and lays thy sins before thee then; Look not upon thy sins so inseparably,
that thou can not see Christ too: Come not to a confession to God, without
consideration of the promises of his Gospel; Even the sense and remorse of sin
is a dangerous consideration, but when the cup of salvation stands by me, to
keep me from fainting. David himself could not get off when he would; but (as
he complains there, which is the last act of his sorrow to be considered in
this, which is all his part, and all our first part) Inveteravit, He waxed old
because of all his enemies.

The difference is not of much importance, Inveteravit.
whether it be Inveteravi, or Inveteravit; in the first, or in the third
person. Whether David's eyes, or David himself be thus decayed, and waxen old,
imports little. But yet that which Bellarmine collects, upon this difference,
imports much. For, because the Vulgat Edition, and the Septuagint, (such a
Septuagint as we have now) read this in the first person of David himself,
Inveteravi, and the Hebrew has it in the third, Inveteravit, Bellarmine will
needs think, that the Hebrew, the Original, is falsified and corrupted; still
in advancement of that dangerous Position of theirs, That their Translation is
to be preferred before the Original; and that is an unsufferable tyranny, and
an Idolatrous servility. The Translation is a reverend Translation; A
Translation to which the Church of God owes much; but gold will make an Idol as
well as wood, and to make any Translation equal, or better then the Original,
is an Idolatrous servility. It is true, that that which is said here in the
third person, implies the first; And it is David, that after his sighing, and
fainting with that, After his weeping, and dissolving with that, After his
consuming, and withering with that, foresees no rescue, no escape, Inveteravit,
he waxes old amongst his enemies. Who were his enemies, and what was this age
that he speaks of? It is of best use to pursue the spiritual sense of this
Psalm, and so his enemies were his sins; And David found that he had not got
the victory over any one enemy, any one sin; Another blood did not extinguish
the lustful heat of his own, nor the murder of the husband, the adultery
with the wife: Change of sin is not an overcomming of sin; He that passes from
sin to sin, without repentance, (which was David's case for a time) still leaves
an enemy behind him; and though he have no present assault from his former
enemy, no tentation to any act of his former sin, yet he is still in the midst
of his enemies; under condemnation of his past, as well as of his present sins;
as unworthy a receiver of the Sacrament, for the sins of his youth done forty
years ago, if those sins were never repented, though so long discontinued, as
for his ambition, or covetousness, or indevotion of this present day. These
are his enemies; and then this is the age that grows upon him, the age that
David complains of, I am waxenold; that is, grown into habits of these sins.
There is an old age of our natural condition, We shall wax old as does a
garment; Psalm. 102.26.
David would not complain of that which all men desire; To wish to be old, and
then grudge to be old, when we are come to it, cannot consist with moral
constancy. There is an old age expressed in that phrase, The old man, which the
Apostle speaks of, which is that natural corruption and disposition to sin,
cast upon us by Adam; Romans 6.6.
But that old man was crucified in Christ, says the Apostle; and was not so
only from that time when Christ was actually crucified, one thousand six
hundred years ago, but from that time that a second Adam was promised to the
first, in Paradise; And so that Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
from the beginning delivered all them, to whom the means ordained by God, (as
Circumcision to them, Baptism to us) were afforded; and in that respect, David
was not under that old age, but was become a new creature. Nor as the Law was
called the old Law, which is another age also; for to them who understood that
Law aright, the New Law, the Gospel, was enwrapped in the Old; And so David as
well as we, might be said to serve God in the newness of spirit, and not in
the oldnesse of the Letter; Romans 7.6.
so that this was not the age that oppressed him.

The Age that oppresses the sinner, is that when he is grown old in sin, he is
grown weak in strength, and become less able to overcome that sin then, then
he was at beginning. Blindness contracted by Age, does not deliver him from
objects of tentations; He sees them, though he be blind; Deafness does not
deliver him from discourses of tentation; he hears them, though he be deaf:
Nor lamenesse does not deliver him from pursuit of tentation; for in his own
memory he sees, and hears, and pursues all his former sinful pleasures, and
every night, every hour sins over all the sins of many years that are passed.
That which waxes old, is ready to vanish, says the Apostle: Heb. 8.13.
If we would let them go, they would go; and whether we will or no, they
leave us for the ability of practice; But Thesaurizamus, we treasure them up in
our memories, Romans 2.5.
and we treasure up the wrath of God with them, against the day of wrath; And
whereas one calling of our sins to our memories by way of confession, would do
us good, and serve our turns, this often calling them in a sinful delight, in
the memory of them, exceeds the sin it self, when it was committed, because it
is more unnatural now, Ezekiel. 23.19.
then it was then, and frustrates the pardon of that sin, when it was repented.
To end this branch, and this part, So humble was this holy Prophet, and so
apprehensive of his own debility, and so far from an imaginary infallibility of
falling no more, as that after all his agonies, and exercises, and
mortifications, and prayer, and sighs, and weeping, still he finds himself in
the midst of enemies, and of his old enemies; for not only tentations to new
sins, but even the memory of old, though formerly repented, arise against us,
arise in us, and ruin us. And so we pass from these pieces which constitute
our first Part, Quid factum, what David upon the sense of his case did, to the
other, Quid faciendum, what by his example we are to do, and what is required
of us, after we have repented, and God has remitted the sin.

Out of this passage here in this Psalm, and out of that history, 2 Part.
where Nathan says to David, The Lord has put away thy sin, and yet says
after, 2. Sam. 12.13.
The child that is borne to thee shall surely dye, and out of that story, where
David repents earnestly his sin, committed in the numbering of his people, and
says; Now, now that I have repented, 2 Samuel 24.10.
Now I beseech thee O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have
done very foolishly, yet David was to endure one of those three Calamities, of
Famine, War, or Pestilence; And out of some other such places as these, some
men have imagined a Doctrine, that after our repentance, and after God has
thereupon pardoned our sin, yet he leaves the punishment belonging to that sin
unpardoned; though not all the punishment, not the eternal, yet say they,
there belongs a temporary punishment too, and that God does not pardon, but
exacts, and exacts in the nature of a punishment, and more, by way of
satisfaction to his Justice.

Now, Stipendium peccati mors est, There is the punishment for sin, The reward
of sin is death. If there remain no death, there remains no punishment: For
the reward of sin is death, And death complicated in it self, death wrapped in
death; and what is so intricate, so intangling as death? Who ever got out of a
winding sheet? It is death aggravated by it self, death waighed down by
death: And what is so heavy as death? Who ever threw off his grave stone? It is
death multiplied by it self; And what is so infinite as death? Who ever told
over the days of death? It is Morte morieris, A Double death, Eternal, and
Temporary. Temporal, and Spiritual death. Now, the Temporary, the Natural
death, God never takes away from us, he never pardons that punishment, because
he never takes away that sin that occasioned it, which is Original sin; To
what Sanctification soever a man comes, Original sin lives to his last breath.
And therefore, Heb 9.27.
Statutum est, That Decree stands, Semel mori, that every man must dye once;
but for any Bis mori, for twice dying, for eternal death upon any man, as man,
if God consider him not as an impotent sinner, there is no such invariable
Decree; for, that death being also the punishment for actual sin, if he take
away the cause, the sin, he takes away that effect, that death also; for this
death it self, eternal death, we all agree that it is taken away with the
sin; And then for other calamities in this life, which we call Morticulas,
Little deaths, the children, the issue, the offspring, the propagation of
death, if we would speak properly, no Affliction, no Judgment of God in this
life, has in it exactly the nature of a punishment; not only not the nature
of satisfaction, but not the nature of a punishment. We call not Coin, base
Coin, till the Allay be more then the pure Metal: Gods Judgments are not
punishments, except there be more anger then love, more Justice then Mercy in
them; and that is never; for Miserationes ejus super omnia opera, His mercies
are above all his works: In his first work, in the Creation, his Spirit, the
Holy Ghost, moved upon the face of the waters; and still upon the face of all
our waters, (as waters are emblemes of tribulation in all the Scriptures) his
Spirit, the Spirit of comfort, moves too; and as the waters produced the first
creatures in the Creation, so tribulations offer us the first comforts; sooner
then prosperity does. God executes no judgment upon man in this life, but in
mercy; either in mercy to that person, in his sense thereof, if he be sensible,
or at least in mercy to his Church, in the example thereof, if he be not: There
is no person to whom we can say, that Gods Corrections are Punishments, any
otherwise then Medicinal, and such, as he may receive amendment by, that
receives them; Neither does it become us in any case, to say God lays this
upon him, because he is so ill, but because he may be better.

But here our consideration is only upon the godly, and such as by repentance
stand upright in his favor; and even in them, our Adversaries say, that after
the remission of their sins, there remains a punishment, and a punishment by
way of Satisfaction, to be borne for that sin, which is remitted. But since
they themselves tell us, that in Baptism God proceeds otherwise, and pardons
there all sin, and all punishment of sin, which should be inflicted in the
next world, (for children newly baptized, do not suffer any thing in
Purgatory) And that this holds not only in Baptismo fluminis, in the Sacrament
of Baptism, but in Baptismo sanguinis, in the Baptism of blood too; (for in
Martyrdom, as S. Augustine says, Injuriam facit Martyri, He wrongs a Martyr
that prays for a Martyr, as though he were not already in Heaven; so he
suspects a Martyr, that thinks that Martyr goes to Purgatory) And since they
say, that he can do so in the other Sacrament too, and in Repentance, which
they call, and justly, Secundam post naufragium tabulam, That whereas Baptism
has once delivered us from shipwreck, in Original sin, this Repentance
delivers us after Baptism, from actual sin; Since God can pardon, without
reserving any punishment, since God does so in Baptism and Martyrdom, since
out of Baptism or Martyrdom, it appears often, that De facto, he has done
so, (for he enjoined no penance to the man sick of the Palsy, when he said,
Mat 9.
Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee, Sins, and punishments too.
He intimated no such after reckoning to her, of whom he said, Many sins are
forgiven her; Sins, and punishments too. Luke 17.
He left no such future Satisfaction in that Parable upon the Publican, Luke 18.
that departed to his house justified; Justified from sins, and punishments
too. And when he declared Zacheus to be the son of Abraham, and said, This day
is Salvation come unto thy house. Luke 19.
He did not charge this blessed inheritance with any such encumbrance, that he
should still be subject to old debts, to make satisfaction by bodily
afflictions for former sins) since God can do this, and does so in Baptism,
and Martyrdom, and has done this very often, out of Baptism, or Martyrdom,
in Repentance, we had need of clearer evidence then they have offered to
preduce yet, that God does otherwise at any time; that at any time he pardons
the sin, and retains the punishment, by way of satisfaction. If their Market
should fail, that no man would buy Indulgences (as of late years it was
brought low, when they vented ten Indulgencies in America for one in Europe; If
the fire of Purgatory were quenched, or slackned, that men would not be so
prodigal to buy out Fathers or friends souls, from thence; If commutation of
penance, were so moderated amongst them, that those penances, and
satisfactions, which they make so necessary, were not commuted to money, and
brought them in no profit, they would not be perhaps so vehement in maintenance
of this Doctrine.

To leave such imaginations with their Authors; We see David did enjoyne
himself penance, and impose upon himself heavy afflictions after he had asked,
and no doubt, received assurance of the mercy of God, in the remission of his
sins. Why did he so? S. Augustine observes out of the words of this Text, that
because some of David's afflictions are expressed in the Preter tense, as things
already past, and some in the Future, as things to come, (for it is Laboravi, I
have mourned, and it is Natare faciam, I will wash my bed with tears) so that
something David confesses he had done, and something he professes that he will
do, therefore David has a special regard to his future state, and he
proceeds with God, not only by that way of holy worship, by way of confession,
what he had done, but by another religious worship of God too, by way of vow,
what he would do. David understood his own conscience well; and was willing to
husband it, to manure, and cultivate it well; He knew what ploughing, what
harrowing, what weeding, and watring, and pruning it needed, and so perhaps
might be trusted with himself, and he his own spiritual Physician. This is
not every ones case. Those that are not so perfect in the knowledge of their
own estate, (as it is certain the most are not) the Church ever took into
her care; and therefore it is true, that in the Primitive Church, there were
heavy penitential Canons, and there were public penances enjoined to
sinners: Either Ad explorationem, when the Church had cause to be jealous, and
to suspect the hearty repentance of the party, They made this trial of their
obedience, to submit them to that heavy penance; Or else Ad aedificationem, to
satisfy the Church which was scandalized by their sins before; Or Ad
Exercitationem, to keep them in continual practice, the better to resist
future tentations, and relapses; for to them this penance was an Unction, as to
one that was to wrestle with himself, and as the buckling on of an Armor upon
one that was to fight Gods Battles, in his own bowels.

If from some of the Fathers, there have feign sometimes, some phrases which
may have seemed to some, to attribute something more to man's works, to his
after-afflictions, and post-penances, some power of satisfaction to the Justice
of God, Bellarmine himself has given us one good Caution, That we must be
very wary in understanding those phrases; for he finds it very inconvenient,
to accept all that the Fathers have said, in their manner of expressing
themselves in that point. We will add thus much more, for the better
understanding of repentance in the root, and the fruits of repentance, that
there is such an indissoluble knot, such an individual marriage between those
parts of repentance, which we call Parts constitutivas, Essential parts of
repentance, and those parts, which we call Consecutivas, which do infallibly
concur, or immediately follow upon repentance, these two are so inseparable;
There is not only such a contiguity, but such a continuity in them, not only
such a vicinity, but such an identity, between repentance, and the fruits of
repentance, that many reverend persons, in their Expositions, and Meditations
have presented, and named one for the other, and have called those subsequent,
and subsidiary things, by the name of Repentance it self. Hence it comes, that
whereas repentance is only Cogversio, a turning, and this conversion, this
turning has only Terminum a quo, Something to turn from, and that is sin,
and Terminum ad quem, Something to turn to, and that is God, Those things
which are indeed but helps to hold us in that station, and in that posture when
we are turned from sin upon God, they have called by the names of Repentance it
self, as parts of it; And so these bodily afflictions, which we speak of,
being indeed to be embraced for that use, to maintain us in that good
disposition, to which our repentance has brought us, have sometimes been
called parts of repentance, even by godly, and learned Expositors; and by
occasion of that easiness in them, in calling these things thus, in
aftertimes, salvation it self, which God gives upon repentance, has been
attributed to these post-penances, and after-afflictions, which because they
do always accompany repentance, have sometimes been called repentance.

The meaning of ancient and later men too therein, has been to impose a
necessity of taking these medicinal Physics, these after-afflictions, for
that use of holding us in that state, to which we are brought; but their
meaning has ever been too, to exclude satisfaction, Ambrose.
properly so termed. Poenitentia est, mala praeterita plaengere, This is
repentance says that Father, to lament and bewail our former sins; But, this
is not all that he requires, but he adds, Plangenda iterum non committere,
This belongs to repentance too, not to return to those sins, August.
which we have bewailed. For, Repentance is Vindicta semper puniens, quod dolet
se commisisse, says another also; a man truly penitent is a daily executioner
upon himself, and punishes after, the sins which he has committed before.
Here we see that both these blessed Fathers, S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose,
attribute these after-afflictions, and post-penances to Repentance, and call
them by that name, Repentance. But yet, not to leave these blessed Fathers,
under the danger of mis-interpretation, and ill application of words well
intended, We confider the same Fathers in other places too; Ambrose.
Lacrymas Petri lego, satisfactionem non lego, I read of Peter's tears, not of
his satisfaction. So if these post-penances had the nature of punishments, yet
these punishments had not the nature of satisfaction. August.
But Calamitates ante remissionem sunt supplicia, post remissionem
exercitationes, says the other of those Fathers: Till God be pacified by our
Repentance, his corrections have more of the nature of punishments, because
considered so, we are in the state of enemies, and he may justly punish; But
after God has remitted the sin, the after-afflictions are but from a
Physician, not from an executioner, and intended to keep us in our station,
and not to throw us lower; So that they are neither properly satisfactions,
Origin.
nor punishments. For, for satisfaction to the justice of God, Nec si te
excories, satis facere possis, If thou flea thy self with haire-cloathes, and
whips, it is nothing toward satisfaction of that infinite Majesty, which thou
have violated, and wounded by thy sin; Chrysostom.
And then for the other, that is, punishment after remission, Vbi misericordia,
poenae locus non est, They are incompatible things, If God have reserved a
disposition and purpose to punish, he has not pardoned.

So that howsoever something said by them, may seem to make these
after-afflictions to be necessary to repentance, and, in a large sense, parts
of repentance, yet neither did they put that value upon man's act, That man
should be able to satisfy God, nor that delusion upon Gods act, That God
should pretend to pardon, and yet punish. We are not disposed to wrangle about
words, and names; The School may admit that exercise, but not the Pulpit. If
upon admittance, that these after-afflictions might be called punishments, they
had not inferred a satisfaction, and thereupon super-induced a satisfaction
after this life, and so a Purgatory, and so Indulgencies, and carried their
Babel so many stories high, We to advance the doctrine of a necessity of these
disciplines, and mortifications, even after God has sealed to our consciences
the remission of our sin, would not abhor, nor decline the name, we would not
be afraid to call them Penances, nor Punishments, Chrysostom.
nor Satisfactions; for when S. Chrysostom in his time, had no occasion to be
afraid of such a mis-interpretation, he was not afraid to call them so; Non
remisit supplicium, says he; God has not forgiven the punishment; And imponit
poenam, God exacts a punishment at thy hands: But yet, though S. Chrysostom
suspected no such mis-interpretations, the Holy Ghost who foresaw that they
would come, prevents all dangerous mis-constructions, and directs S.
Chrysostomes pen, thus, God does all this, says he, Non exigens supplicium de
peccatis, sed corrigens ad futurum; whatsoever I have said of punishments; it
is not, that in that punishment, God has any relation to the former, but to
the future sin, not to our lapse, but to our relapse, not to that which he has
seen, but to that which he foresees would fall upon us, if he did not, if we
did not prevent it with these medicinal assistances: And, as long as it is but
so, call them what ye will, yet here is no foundation laid, no materials, no
stone brought to the building of the Roman Satisfaction, or Purgatory, or
Indulgencies.

Howsoever therefore you exclude dangerous names, do not upon color of that,
exclude necessary things: Howsoever you have delivered your selves to the mercy
of God, and he has delivered a seal of his mercy to you, inwardly in his
Spirit, outwardly in his Sacrament, yet there are Amarae sagittae ex dulci manu
Dei, Nazian.
(as Nazianzen calls afflictions after repentance) Sharp arrows out of the
sweet hand of God; Corrections, by which God intends to establish us in that
spiritual health, to which our repentance, by his grace, has brought us:
Remember still, that this which David did for the present, and that which he
promised be would do for the future, both together made up the reason of his
prayer to God, by which he desired God in the former verses, to return to him,
to deliver his soul, and to save him; He had had no reason, no ground of his
prayer, though he had done something already, if he had not proposed to
himself something more to be done: There is a preparation before, and there is
a preservation after required at our hands, if we study a perfect recovery,
and cure of our souls. Gregor.
And as S. Gregory notes well, there is a great deal of force in David's
Possessive, in his word of appropriation, Meus, lectus meus, and Oculus meus,
It is his bed that he washed, and they are his eyes that washed it: He bore the
affliction himself, and trusted not to that which others had suffered by way
of Supererogation. Sometimes, when the children of great persons offend at
School, another person is whipped for them, and that affects them, and works
upon a good nature; but if that person should take Physic for them in a
sickness, it would do them no good: Gods corrections upon others, may work
by way of example upon thee; but because thou art sick for physic, take it
thy self. Trust not to the treasure of the Church; neither the imaginary
treasure of the Church of Rome, which pretends an inexhaustible mine of the
works of other men, to distribute and bestow; No, nor to the true treasure of
the true Church, that is, Absolution, upon Confession, and Repentance; No,
trust not to the merits of Christ himself, in their application to thee,
without a Lectus tuus, and an Oculus tuus, except thou remember thy sins in thy
bed, and pour out thy tears from thine eyes, and fulfill the sufferings of
Christ in thy self. Nothing can be added to Christ's merits; that is true: but
something must be added to thee; a disposition in thee, for the application of
that which is his: Not, that thou can begin this disposition in thy self,
till God offer it, but that thou may resist it, now it is offered, and reject
it again, after it is received. Trust not in others, not in the Church, nor in
Christ himself, so, as to do nothing for thy self; Nor trust not in that,
which thou do for thy self, so, as at any time to think, thou have done
enough and need do no more: But when thou have past the signet, that thou
have found the signature of Gods hand and seal, in a manifestation, that the
marks of his Grace are upon thee, when thou have past his privy Seal, That his
Spirit bears witness with thy spirit, that thy repentance has been accepted
by him, When thou have past the great Seal, in the holy and blessed Sacrament
publicly administered, do not suspect the goodness of God, as though all
were not done that were necessary for thy salvation, if thou were to have thy
transmigration out of this world this hour; but yet, as long as thou
continuest in the vale of tentations, continue in the vale of tears too; and
though thou have the seal of Reconciliation, plead that seal to the Church,
(which is Gods Tribunal, and judgment seat upon earth) in a holy life, and
works of example to others, and look daily, look hourly upon the Ita quod
of that pardon, upon the Covenants and Conditions, with which it is given, That
if by neglecting those medicinal helps, those auxiliary forces, those
subsidies of the kingdom of Heaven, those after-afflictions, (choose whether
you will call them by the name of Penance, or no) you relapse into former sins,
your present repentance, and your present seal of that Repentance, the
Sacrament, shall rise up against you at the last day, and to that sentence (you
did not feed, you did not cloathe, you did not harbor me in the poor) shall
this be added, as the aggravation of all, you did Repent, and you did receive
the Seal, but you did not pursue that repentance, nor perform the conditions
required at your hands.

But we are here met, by Gods gracious goodness, in a better disposition; with
a sincere repentance of all our former sins, and with a deliberate purpose,
as those Israelites made their pouring out of water, a testimony of dissolving
themselves into holy tears, to make this fast from bodily sustenance, an
inchoation of a spiritual fast, in abstinence from all that may exasperate our
God against us; That so, though not for that, yet thereby our prayers may be
the more acceptable to our glorious God, in our gracious Savior, To him that
sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, first, that as he is the King of Kings,
he will establish, and prosper that Crown, which he has set upon the head of
his Anointed over us here, and hereafter Crown that Crown with another
Crown, a better Crown, a Crown of immarcescible glory in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and in the mean time, make him his Bulwark, and his Rampart, against
all those powers, which seek to multiply Miters, or Crowns, to the disquiet
and prejudice of Christendom: And then, That as he is the Lord of Lords, he
will inspire them, to whom he has given Lordship over others in this world,
with a due consideration, that they also have a Lord over them, even in this
world; and that he, and they, and we have one Lord over us all, in the other
world: That as he is the Bishop and high Priest over our Souls, he vouchsafe to
continue in our Bishops, a holy will, and a competent power to super-intend
faithfully over his Church, that they for their parts, when they depart from
hence, may deliver it back into his hands, in the same form, and frame, in
which his blessed Spirit delivered it into their hands, in their predecessors,
in the Primitive institution thereof: That as he is the Angel of the great
Counsel, he vouchsafe to direct the great Counsel of this Kingdom, to
consider still, that as he works in this world, by means, So it concerns his
glory, that they expedite the supply of such means as may do his work, and
may carry home the testimony of good Consciences now, and in their posterity
have the thanks of posterity, for their behavior in this Parliament: That as
he is the God of peace, he will restore peace to Christendom; That as he is
the Lord of Hosts, he will fight our battayls, who have no other end in our
wars, but his peace; and that after this fast, which in the bodily and
ghostly part too, we perform to day, and vow and promise for our whole lives,
he will bring us to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, in that Kingdom which
our Savior Christ Jesus has purchased for us, with the inestimable price of
his incorruptible blood. Amen.

SERMON. LV. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 6.8, 9, 10. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord
has heard the voice of my weeping.
The Lord has heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer.
Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be
ashamed suddenly.

THis is David's profligation and discomfiture of his enemies; this is an act of
true honor, a true victory, a true triumph, to keep the field, to make good
one station, and yet put the enemy to flight. A man may perchance be safe in a
Retrait, but the honor, the victory, the triumph lies in enforcing the enemy
to fly. To that is David come here, to such a thankful sense of a victory; in
which we shall first confider David's thankfulness, that is, his manner of
declaring Gods mercy, and his security in that mercy; which manner is, that he
durst come to an open defiance, and protestation, and hostility, without
modifications, or disguises, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. And
then, secondly, we shall see his reason, upon which he grounded this
confidence, and this spiritual exultation, which was a pregnant reason, a
reason that produced another reason; The Lord has heard my supplication, the
Lord will hear my prayer; upon no premises does any conclusion follow, so
Logically, so sincerely, so powerfully, so imperiously, so undeniably, as upon
this, The Lord has, and therefore the Lord will. But then what was this
prayer? that we may know, whether it were a prayer to be drawn into practice,
and imitation, or no. It is not argument enough, that it was so, because God
heard it then; for we are not bound, nay, we are not allowed to pray all such
prayers, as good men have prayed, and as God has heard. But here the prayer
was this, Let all mine enemies be ashamed, and sore vexed, let them return,
and be ashamed suddenly. But this is a malediction, an imprecation of mischief
upon others; and will good men pray so? or will God hear that? Because that is
an holy problem, and an useful intergatory, we shall make it a third part, or
a conclusion rather, to enquire into the nature, and into the avowablenesse,
and exemplarinesse of this, in which David seems to have been transported with
some passion.

So that our parts will be three, the building it self, David's thankesgiving
in his exultation, Divisie.
and declaration, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; and then the
foundation of this building, For God has heard, and therefore God will hear;
and lastly, the prospect of this building, David contemplates and looks over
again the prayer that he had made, and in a clear understanding, and in a
rectified Conscience, he finds that he may persist in that prayer, and he does
so: Let all mine enemies be ashamed, and sore vexed, let them return, and be
ashamed suddenly.

First then we consider David's thankfulness: But why is it so long before
David leads us to that consideration? Why has he deferred so primary a duty,
to so late a place, 1. Part.
to so low a room, to the end of the Psalm? The Psalm has a Deprecatory
part, that God would forbear him, and a Postulatory part, that God would hear
him, and grant some things to him, and a Gratulatory part, a sacrifice of
thankesgiving. Now the Deprecatory part is placed in the first place, Verse. 1.
For if it were not so, if we should not first ground that, That God should not
rebuke us in his anger, nor chasten us in his hot displeasure, but leave our
selves open to his indignation, and his judgments, we could not live to come
to a second petition; our sins, and judgments due to our sins, require our
first consideration; therefore David begins with the deprecatory prayer, That
first Gods anger may be removed: but then, that deprecatory prayer, wherein he
desired God to forbear him, spends but one verse of the Psalm; David would
not insist upon that long: When I have penitently confessed my sins, I may say
with Job, My flesh is not brass, nor my bones stones, that I can bear the
wrath of the Lord; but yet I must say with Job too, If the Lord kill me, yet
will I trust in him. God has not asked me, What shall I do for thee, but of
himself he has done more, then I could have proposed to my self in a wish,
or to him in a prayer. Nor will I ask God, Quousque, how long shall my foes
increase? how long will thou fight on their side against me? but surrender my
self entirely, in an adveniat regnum, and a fiat voluntas, thy kingdom come,
and thy will be done. David makes it his first work, to stay Gods anger in a
deprecatory prayer, but he stays not upon that long, he will not prescribe his
Physician, what he shall prescribe to him, but leaves God to his own medicines,
and to his own method. But then the Postulatory prayer, what he begs of God,
employes six verses: as well to show us, that our necessities are many; as also
that if God do not answer us, at the beginning of our prayer, our duty is
still to pursue that way, to continue in prayer. And then the third part of the
Psalm, which is the Gratulatory part, his giving of thanks, is, shall we say
deferred, or rather reserved to the end of the Psalm, and exercises only
those three verses which are our Text. Not that the duty of thankesgiving is
less then that of prayer; for if we could compare them, it is rather greater;
because it contributes more to Gods glory, to acknowledge by thanks, that God
has given, then to acknowledge by prayer, that God can give. But therefore
might David be later and shorter here, in expressing that duty of thanks,
first, because being reserved to the end, and close of the Psalm, it leaves
the best impression in the memory. And therefore it is easy to observe, that
in all Metricall compositions, of which kind the book of Psalms is, the
force of the whole piece, is for the most part left to the shutting up; the
whole frame of the Poem is a beating out of a piece of gold, but the last
clause is as the impression of the stamp, and that is it that makes it current.
And then also, because out of his abundant manner of expressing his
thankfulness to God, in every other place thereof, his whole book of Psalms
is called, Sepher tehillim, a book of praise and thankesgiving, he might
reserve his thanks here to the last place; And lastly, because natural and
moral men are better acquainted with the duty of gratitude, of thankesgiving,
before they come to the Scriptures, then they are with the other duty of
repentance, which belongs to Prayer; for in all Solomon's books, you shall not
find half so much of the duty of thankfulness, as you shall in Seneca and in
Plutarch. No book of Ethics, of moral doctrine, is come to us, wherein there
is not, almost in every leaf, some detestation, some Anathema against
ingratitude; but of repentance, not a word amongst them all. And therefore in
that duty of prayer, which presumes repentance, (for he must stand Rectus in
curia that will pray) David has insisted longest; and because he would enter,
and establish a man, upon a confidence in God, he begins with a deprecation of
his anger; for but upon that ground, no man can stand; and because he would
dismiss him with that which concerns him most, he chooses to end in a
Thanksgiving.

Therefore at last he comes to his thanks. Gratiae actae.
Now this is so poor a duty, if we proportion it to the infiniteness of Gods
love unto us, our thanks, as we may justly call it nothing at all. Bernar.
But Amor Dei affectus, non contractus, The love of God is not a contract, a
bargain, he looks for nothing again, and yet he looks for thanks, for that is
nothing, because there is nothing done in it, August.
it is but speaking; Gratias dicere, est gratias agere, To utter our thanks to
God, is all our performance of thankfulness. It is not so amongst us; Philo
Iudae.
Vix, aut nunquam apud nos purum, and merum beneficium; Every man that gives,
gives out of design, Martial.
and as it conduces to his ends: Donat in hamo, There is a hook in every
benefit, that sticks in his jaws that takes that benefit, and draws him
whither the Benefactor will. God looks for nothing, nothing to be done in the
way of exact recompense, but yet, as he that makes a Clock, bestows all that
labor upon the several wheels, that thereby the Bell might give a sound, and
that thereby the hand might give knowledge to others how the time passes; so
this is the principal part of that thankfulness, which God requires from us,
that we make open declarations of his mercies, to the winning and confirming of
others.

This David does in this noble and ingenuous publication, Discedite.
and protestation, I have strength enough, and company enough, power enough,
and pleasure enough, joy enough, and treasure enough, honor enough, and
recompense enough in my God alone, in him I shall surely have all which all you
can pretend to give, and therefore Discedite a me, Depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity; Here is then first, a valediction, a parting with his old
company, but it is a valediction, with a malediction, with an imprecation of
Gods Justice, upon their contempts and injuries. There was in the mouth of
Christ, sometimes, such a Discede, such an Abito, as that farewell was a
welcome; as when he said to the Ruler, John 4.46. Luke 7.50.
Abito, Go thy way, thy son lives; And when he said to the woman, Go in
peace, thy says has saved thee. This going was a staying with him still; Here
the Abite, and Venite was all one. He that goes about his worldly business,
and goes about them in Gods name, in the fear and favor of God, remains in
Gods presence still. When the Angels of God are sent to visit his children, in
the midst of Sodom, or where they lie, and languish in sordid and nasty
corners, and in the loathsomenesse of corrupt and infectious diseases, or where
they faint in miserable dungeons, this Commission, this Discedite, go to that
Sodom, to that Spittle, to that Dungeon, puts not those Angels out of the
presence of God. No descent into hell, of what kind soever you conceive that
descent into hell to have been, put the Son of God out of heaven, by descending
into hell; no Discede, no Leave, no Commandment that God gives us, to do the
works of our calling here, excludes us from him; but as the Saints of God shall
follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes in heaven, so the Lamb of God shall follow
his Saints, wheresoever they go upon earth, if they walk sincerely. Christ
uses not then as yet, as long as we are in this world, this Discede of David,
to bid any man, any sinner to depart from him: But there shall come a time,
when Christ shall take David's Discede, the words of this Text into his mouth,
with as much and more bitterness then David does here, Nescivi nos, I never
knew ye, and therefore Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

So have you his Protestation, Servi sui.
his Proclamation, They must avoid; but who? Who be these that David dismisses
here? Take them to be those of his own house, his Servants, and Officers in
near places, whose service he had used to ill purposes, (as David's Person, and
Rank, and History directs us upon that Consideration) and we shall find all
such persons, wrapped up in this danger, that they dare not discharge themselves,
they dare not displace, nor disgrace those men, to whom by such employments,
they have given that advantage over themselves, as that it is not safe to them,
to offend such a servant. Natura nec hostem habet, nec amicum rex, says a wise
Statesman; In nature, (that is, Polybius.
in the nature of greatness, and, as great) great persons consider no man to
be so much a friend, nor to be so much an enemy, but that they will fall out
with that friend, and be reconciled to that enemy, to serve their own turn,
says that Statesman. But yet when great Persons trust servants with such
secret actions, as may bring them into contempt at home, or danger abroad, by
those vices, if they should be published, they cannot come when they would, to
this Discedite, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

We have this evidently, and unavoidably, we cannot but see it, and say it, in
this example which is before us, even in King David. He had employed Ioab in
such services, as that he stood in fear of him, and endured at his hands that
behavior, and that language, Thou have shamed this day the faces of all thy
servants that have saved thy life, 2 Samuel 19.
and thy sons, and daughters, and wives, and concubines, thou regardest neither
thy Princes, nor servants; but come out, and speak comfortably unto them, for I
swear by the Lord, except thou do come out, there will not tarry one man with
thee this night. David endured all this, for he knew that Ioab had that letter
in his Cabbinet, which he writ to him for the murder of Vriah, and he never
came to this Discedite, to remove Ioab from him in his life, but gave it in
Commandment to his Son, 1 Kings 2.
Let not Ioabs hoary head go down to the grave in peace: Here is the misery
of David, he cannot discharge himself of that servant when he will, and here
the misery of that servant, that at one time or other he will; and he is a
short lived man, whose ruin a jealous Prince studies. Because the Text invited
us, commanded, and constrained us to do so, we put this example in a Court, but
we need not dazzle our selves with that height; every man in his own house may
find it, that to those servants, which have served him in ill actions, he
dares not say, Discedite, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

Thus then it is; if those whom David dismisses here, were his own servants,
Tentatores.
it was an expressing of his thankfulness to God, and a duty that lay upon
him, to deliver himself of such servants. But other Expositors take these men,
to be men of another sort, men that came to triumph over him in his misery,
Psalm. 69.26.
men that Persecuted him whom God had smitten, and added to the sorrow of him
whom God had wounded, as himself complains; men that pretended to visit him,
yet when they came, They spoke lies, Psalm. 41.7.
their hearts gathered iniquity to themselves, and when they went abroad they
told it; Men that said to one another, When shall he dye, and his name perish?
Ver. 6.
Here also was a Declaration of the powerfulness of Gods Spirit in him, that
he could triumph over the Triumpher, and exorcise those evil spirits, and
command them away, whose coming was to dishonor God, in his dishonor; and to
argue and conclude out of his ruin, that either his God was a weak God, or a
cruel God, that he could not, or would not deliver his servants from
destruction.

That David could command them away, whose errand was to blaspheme God, and
whose staying in a longer conversation, might have given him occasion of new
sins, either in distrusting Gods mercy toward himself, or in murmuring at
Gods patience toward them, or perchance in being uncharitably offended with
them, and expressing it with some bitterness, but that in respect of himself,
and not of Gods glory only, this Discedite, Depart from me all such men as do
sin in yourselves, and may make me sin too, was an act of an heavenly courage,
and a thankful testimony of Gods gracious visiting his soul, inabling him so
resolutely to tear himself from such persons, as might lead him into
tentation.

Neither is this separation of David, and this company, partial; Omnes.
he does not banish those that incline him to one sin, a sin that perchance he
is a weary of, or grown unable to proceed in, and retained them that concur
with him in some fresh sin, to which he has a new appetite. David does not
banish them that sucked his Subjects blood, or their money, and retained them
that solicit, and corrupt their wives, and daughters; he does not displace
them, who served the vices of his predecessor, and supply those places with
instruments of new vices of his own, but it is Discedite omnes, Depart all ye
workers of iniquity. Now beloved, when God begins so high as in Kings, he makes
this duty the easier to thee; to banish from thee, All the workers of iniquity.
It is not a Discede, that will serve to banish one, and retain the rest, Nor a
Discedite, to banish the rest, and retain one, but Discedite omnes, Depart
all, for that sin stays in state, that stays alone, and has the venom,
and the malignity of all the rest contracted in it. It is nothing for a sick
man that has lost his taste, to say, Discedat gula, Depart voluptuousness;
nothing in a consumption to say, Discedat luxuria, Depart wantonness; nothing
for a Client in Formapauperis, to say, Discedat corruption, I will not bribe;
but Discedant omnes, Depart all, and all together ye workers of iniquity.

But yet David's general discharge had, Operantes.
and ours must have, a restriction, a limitation; it is not (as S. Ierom notes
upon this place) Omnes qui operati, but Omnes operantes, not all that have
wrought iniquity, but all that continue in doing so still. David was not
inexorable toward those that had offended; what an example should he have
given God against himself, if he had been so? we must not despise, nor
defame men, because they have committed some sin. When the mercy of God has
wrought upon their sin in the remission thereof, that leprosy of Naaman
cleaves to us, their sin is but transferred to us, if we will not forgive
that which God has forgiven, for it is but Omnes operantes, all they that
continue in their evil ways. All these must depart: how far? first, Romans
16.17.
they must be avoided, Declinate, says S. Paul, I beseech you brethren, mark
them diligently which cause division and offenses, and avoid them. And this
corrects our desire in running after such men, as come with their own
inventions, Schismatic Separatists, Declinate, avoid them; if he be no
such, but amongst our selves, a brother, but yet a worker of iniquity, 1 Cor.
5.11.
If any one that is called a brother, be a Fornicator, or covetous, with such a
one eat not. If we cannot starve him out, we must thrust him out; Put away
from among you, that wicked man. No conversation at all is allowed to us, with
such a man, as is obstinate in his sin, 2 John 1.10.
and incorrigible; no not to bid him God speed, For he that bid. death him God
speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. In this divorce, both the generality,
and the distance is best expressed by Christ himself, Mat. 5.28.
If thine eye, thine hand, thy foot offend thee, amputandi and projiciendi,
with what anguish or remorse soever it be done, they must be cut off, and
being cut off, cast away; it is a divorce and no super-induction, it is a
separating, and no redintegration. Though thou could be content to go to
Heaven with both eyes, (thy self, and thy companion) yet better to go into
Heaven with one, thy self alone, then to endanger thy self to be left out for
thy companions sake.

To conclude this first part, Discedite.
David does not say, Discedam, but Discedite, he does not say, that he will
depart from them, but he commands them to depart from him. We must not think
to depart from the offices of society, and duties of a calling, and hide our
selves in Monasteries, or in retired lives, for fear of tentations; but when a
tentation attempts us, to come with that authority, and that powerful
exorcisme of Nazianzen, Fuge, recede, ne te cruce Christi, ad quam omnia
contremiscunt, feriam, Depart from me, lest the Cross of Christ, in my hand,
overthrow you. For a sober life, and a Christian mortification, and discreet
discipline, are crosses derived from the Cross of Christ Jesus, and animated
by it, and may be always in a readiness to cross such tentations. In the
former descriptions of the manner of our behavior toward workers of iniquity,
there is one Declinate, one word that implies a withdrawing of our selves; for
that must be done, not out of the world, but out of that ill air, we must not
put our selves in danger, nor in distance of a tentation; but all the other
words, are words of a more active vehemence, Amputate, and Projicite; it is
Discedite, and not Discedam, a driving away, and not a running away.

We proceed now in our second part, 2 Part.
to the reasons of David's confidence, and his opennesse, and his public
declaration; why David was content to be rid of all his company; and it was,
because he had better; he says, The Lord had heard him; and first, He had
heard, vocem fletus, the voice of his weeping. Here is an admirable readiness
in God, that hears a voice in that, which has none. They have described God
by saying he is all eye, an universal eye, that pierces into every dark
corner; but in dark corners, there is something for him to see; but he is all
ear too, and hears even the silent, and speechless man, and hears that in
that man, that makes no sound, histeares. When Hezekias wept, Esaias 38.
he was turned to the wall, (perchance, because he would not be seen) and yet
God bad the Prophet Esaias tell him, Vidi lacrymam; though the text say, Hezekias
weptsore, yet Vidit lacrymam, God saw every single tear, his first tear, and
was affected with that. But yet this is more strange; God heard his tears. And
therefore the weeping of a penitent sinner, Gregor.
is not improperly called, Legatio lacrymarum, An embassage of tears; To
Ambassadors belongs an audience, and to these Embassages God gives a gracious
audience; Abyssus abyssum invocat, One depth calls upon another; Psalm 43.7.
And so does one kind of tears call upon one another. Tears of sorrow call
upon tears of joy, and all call upon God, and bring him to that ready hearing
which is implied in the words of this text, Shamang; a word of that largeness
in the Scriptures, that sometimes in the Translation of the Septuagint, it
signifies hearing, Shamang, is audit, God gives ear to our tears; sometimes
it is believing, Shamang, is Credit, God gives faith, and credit to our tears;
sometimes it is Affecting, Shamang, is Miseretur, God has mercy upon us for
our tears; sometimes it is Effecting, Shamang, is Respondet, God answers the
petition of our tears; and sometimes it is Publication, Shamang, is Divulgat,
God declares and manifests to others, by his blessings upon us, the pleasure
that he takes in our holy and repentant tears. And therefore Lacrymae foenus,
says S. Basil, Tears are that usury, by which the joys of Heaven are
multiplied unto us; the preventing Grace, and the free mercy of God, is our
stock, and principal; but the Acts of obedience, and mortification, fasting,
and praying, and weeping, are Foenus, (says that blessed Father) the interest,
and the increase of our holy joy.

That which we intend in all this, is, that when our heart is well disposed
toward God, God sees our prayers, as they are coming in the way, before they
have any voice, in our words. When Christ came to Lazarus house, before Mary
had asked any thing at his hands, as soon as she had wept, Christ was
affected, He groaned in the spirit, John 11.
he was troubled, and he wept too; and he proceeded to the raising of Lazarus,
before she asked him; her eyes were his glass, and he saw her desire in her
tears. There is a kind of simplicity in tears, which God harkens to, and
believes. Romans 8.26.
We know not what we should pray for as we ought. Quid? nescimus orationem
dominicam? Can we not say the Lords Prayer, says S. Augustine? Yes, we can say
that; but Nescimus tribulationem prodesse, says he, we do not know the
benefit, that is to be made of tribulation, and tentation, Et petimus liberari
ab omni malo, we pray to be delivered from all evil, and we mean all
tribulation, and all tentation, as though all they were always evil; but in
that there may be much error: The sons of Zebedee prayed, but ambitionsly, and
were not heard; Mat. 20.22. 2 Cor. 12.8.
S. Paul prayed for the taking away of the provocation of the flesh, but
inconsiderately, and mist; the Apostles made a request, for fire against the
Samaritans, but uncharitably, and were reproved. But when Iehosaphat was come
to that perplexity by the Moabites, 2 Chro. 20.12.
that he knew not what to do, nor what to say, Hoc solum residui habemus,
says he, ut oculos nostros dirigamus ad te, This we can do, and we need do
no more, we can turn our eyes to thee. Now whether he directed those eyes in
looking to him, or in weeping to him, God hears the voice of our looks, God
hears the voice of our tears, sometimes better then the voice of our words,
for it is the Spirit it self that makes intercession for us, Romans 8.26.
Gemitibus inenarrabilibus, In those groans, and so in those tears, which we
cannot utter; Ineloquacibus, as Tertullian reads that place, devout, and simple
tears, which cannot speak, speak aloud in the ears of God; nay, tears which
we cannot utter; not only not utter the force of the tears, but not utter the
very tears themselves. As God sees the water in the spring in the veins of
the earth, before it bubble upon the face of the earth; so God sees tears in
the heart of a man, before they blubber his face; God hears the tears of that
sorrowful soul, which for sorrow cannot shed tears.

From this casting up of the eyes, and pouring out the sorrow of the heart at
the eyes, Supplicatio.
at least, opening God a window, through which he may see a wet heart through a
dry eye; from these overtures of repentance, which are as those unperfect
sounds of words, which Parents delight in, in their Children, before they
speak plain, a penitent sinner comes to a verbal, and a more express
prayer. To these prayers, these vocal and verbal prayers from David, God had
given ear, and from this hearing of those prayers was David come to this
thankful confidence, The Lord has heard, the Lord will hear. Now, Beloved,
this prayer which David speaks of here, which our first translation calls a
Petition, is very properly rendered in our second translation, a Supplication;
for Supplications were a Suppliciis; Supplications amongst the Gentiles were
such sacrifices, as were made to the gods, out of confiscations, out of the
goods of those men, upon whom the State had inflicted any pecuniary or capital
punishment. Supplicationes, a Suppliciis; and therefore this prayer which David
made to God, when his hand was upon him, in that heavy correction, and
calamity, which occasioned this Psalm, is truly and properly called a
Supplication, that is, a Prayer, or Petition, that proceeds from suffering.

And if God have heard his supplication, if God have regarded him then, when he
was in his displeasure, if God have turned to him, when he was turned from him,
and stroakt him with the same hand that struck him, God will much more perfect
his own work, and grant his prayer after; if God would endure to look upon
him in his deformity, he will delight to look upon him then, when he has
shed the light and the loveliness of his own countenance upon him: It is the
Apostles argument, as well as David's, If when we were enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconeiled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. When David found, that God had heard
his Supplications, the voice of his suffering, of his punishment, he was sure
he would hear his Prayer, the voice of his thankfulness too.

And this was David's second reason, Oration.
for his alacrity, and confidence, that God would never be weary of hearing, he
had heard him, and he would hear him still, he had heard the Supplication, and
he would hear his Prayer; for this word, which signifies Prayer here, is
derived from Palal, which signifies properly Separare: As his Supplication was
acceptable, which proceeded a Suppliciis, from a sense of his afflictions; so
this Prayer, which came Post separationem, after he had separated, and divorced
himself from his former company, after his Discedite, his discharging of all
the workers of iniquity, must necessarily be better accepted at Gods hand. He
that hears a Suppliant, that is, a man in misery, and does some small matter
for the present ease of that man, and proceeds no farther, Ipsum quod dedit,
perit, That which he gave is lost, it is drowned by that flood of misery that
overflows and surrounds that wretched man, he is not the better to morrow for
to days alms, Et vitam producit ad miseriam, that very alms prolongs his
miserable life still; without to days alms, he should not have had a to
morrow to be miserable in. Now, Christ only is the Samaritane which perfected
his cure upon the wounded man: He saw him, Luke 10.33.
says the text, so did the rest that passed by him; but, He had compassion on
him; so he might, and yet actually have done him no good; but, He went to him;
so he might too, and then out of a delicateness or fastidiousnesse, have gone
from him again; but (to contract) he bound up his wounds, he powered in oil
and wine, he put him upon his own beast, he brought him to an Inn, made
provision for him, gave the Host money beforehand, gave him charge to have a
care of him, and (which is the perfection of all, the greatest testimony of our
Samaritans love to us) he promised to come again, and at that coming, he does
not say, He will pay, but He will recompense, which is a more abundant
expressing of his bounty. Christ loves not but in the way of marriage; if he
begin to love thee, Hosea 2.19.
he tells thee, Sponsabo te mihi, I will marry thee unto me, and Sponsabo in
aeternum, I will marry thee for ever. For it is a marriage that prevents all
mistakings, and excludes all impediments, I will marry thee in righteousness,
and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, and in
faithfulness; many, and great assurances. And as it is added, Seminabo te
mihi, which is a strange expressing of Gods love to us, I will sow thee unto me
in the carth; when I have taken thee into my husbandry, thou shall increase,
and multiply, Seminabo te, and all that thou do produce, shall be directed
upon me, Seminabo te mihi, I will sow thee to my self: therefore thy soul
may be bold to join with David in that thankful confidence, He has heard my
supplication, and therefore He will hear my prayer; He looked upon me in the
dust of the earth, much more will he do so, having now laid me upon Carpets;
he looked upon me in my sores, sores of mine enemies malice, and sores of mine
own sins, much more will he do so now, when he has imprinted in me the
wounds of his own Son; for those that were so many wounds upon him, are so
many stars upon me; He looked upon me, may David say, when I followed the Ewes
great with young, much more will he do so now, now when by his directions, I
lead out his people, great with enterprises, and victories against his enemies.
First David comes to that holy nobleness, he dares cast off ill instruments,
and is not afraid of conspiracy; he dares divorce himself from dangerous
company, and is not afraid of melancholy; he dares love God, and is not afraid
of that jealousy, that he is too religious to be employed, too tender
conscienced to be put upon business; he dares reprehend them that are under
his charge, and is not afraid of a recrimination; he dares observe a Sabbath,
he dares startle at a blasphemy, he dares forbear countenancing a profane or
a scurrill jest with his praise, he dares be an honest man; which holy
confidence constituted our first part, Depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity; And then he grounds this confidence upon an undeceivable Rock, upon
Gods seal, God has heard me, therefore God will hear me. And when God
hears, God speaks too, and when God speaks, God does too, and therefore I may
safely proceed as I do, which was our second Consideration. And then the
third, which remains, is, that upon this, he returns to the consideration,
what that was, that he had done; he had either imprecated, or denounced, at
least, heavy judgments upon his enemies; and he finds it avowable, and
justifiable to have done so; and therefore persists in it, Let all mine enemies
be ashamed, and sore vexed; let them return, and be ashamed suddenly.

All clean beasts had both these marks, they divided the hoof, 3 Part.
and they chewed the cud: All good resolutions, which pass our prayer, must
have these two marks too, they must divide the hoof, they must make a double
impression, they must be directed upon Gods glory, and upon our good, and they
must pass a rumination, a chawing of the cud, a second examination, whether
that prayer were so conditioned or no. We pray sometimes out of sudden and
indigested apprehensions; we pray sometimes out of custom, and communion with
others; we pray sometimes out of a present sense of pain, or imminent danger;
and this prayer may divide the hoof; It may look toward Gods glory, and
toward our good; but it does not chew the cud too; that is, if I have not
considered, not examined, whether it do so or no, it is not a prayer that God
will call a sacrifice. You see Christ brought his own Prayer, Si possibile, If
it be possible etc. through such a rumination, Veruntamen, yet not my will etc.
As many a man swears, and if he be surprised, and asked, what did you say, he
does not remember his own oath, not what he swore; so many a man prays, and
does not remember his own prayer. As a Clock gives a warning before it strikes,
and then there remains a sound, and a tingling of the bell after it has
stricken: so a precedent meditation, and a subsequent rumination, make the
prayer a prayer; I must think before, what I will ask, and consider again,
what I have asked; and upon this dividing the hoof, and chewing the cud, David
avowes to his own conscience his whole action, even to this consummation
thereof, Let mine enemies be ashamed etc.

Now these words, whether we consider the natural signification of the words,
Impreeatoria
or the authority of those men, who have been Expositors upon them, may be
understood either way, either to be Imprecatoria, words of Imprecation, that
David in the Spirit of anguish wishes that these things might fall upon his
enemies, or else Praedictoria, words of Prediction, that David in the spirit of
Prophecy pronounces that these things shall fall upon them.

If they be Imprecatoria, words spoken out of his wish, and desire, then they
have in them the nature of a curse: And because Lyra takes them to be so, a
curse, he referres the words Ad Daemones, To the Devil: That herein David
seconds Gods malediction upon the Serpent, and curses the Devil, as the
occasioner and first mover of all these calamities; and says of them, Let all
our enemies be ashamed, and sore vexed etc. Others refer these words to the
first Christian times, and the persecutions then, and so to be a malediction, a
curse upon the Jews, and upon the Romans, who persecuted the Primitive Church
then, Let them be ashamed etc. And then Gregory Nyssen referres these words to
more domestical and intrinsicke enemies, to David's own concupiscences, and
the rebellions of his own lusts, Let those enemies be ashamed etc. For all
those who understand these words to be a curse, a malediction, are loath to
admit that David did curse his enemies, merely out of a respect of those
calamities which they had inflicted upon him. And that is a safe ground; no man
may curse another, in contemplation of himself only, if only himself be
concerned in the case. And when it concerns the glory of God, our
imprecations, our maledictions upon the persons, must not have their principal
relation, as to Gods enemies, but as to Gods glory; our end must be, that God
may have his glory, not that they may have their punishment. And therefore how
vehement soever David seem in this Imprecation, and though he be more vehement
in another place, Let them be confounded, and troubled for ever, yea, let them
be put to shame, Psalm. 83.17.
and perish, yet that perishing is but a perishing of their purposes, let their
plots perish, let their malignity against thy Church be frustrated; for so he
expresses himself in the verse immediately before, Fill their faces with
shame; but why? and how? That they may seek thy Name, O Lord; that was David's
end, even in the curse; David wishes them no ill, but for their good; no worse
to Gods enemies, but that they might become his friends. The rule is good,
which out of his moderation S. Augustine gives, that in all Inquisitions, and
Executions in matters of Religion, (when it is merely for Religion without
sedition) Sint qui poeniteant, Let the men remain alive, or else how can they
repent? So in all Imprecations, in all hard wishes, even upon Gods enemies,
Sint qui convertantur, Let the men remain, that they may be capable of
conversion; wish them not so ill, as that God can show no mercy to them; for so
the ill wish falls upon God himself, if it preclude his way of mercy upon that
ill man. In no case must the curse be directed upon the person; for when in the
next Psalm to this, David seems passionate, when he asks that of God there,
which he desires God to forbear in the beginning of this Psalm, when his Ne
arguas in ira, O Lord rebuke not in thine anger, is turned to a Surge Domine in
ira, Arise O Lord in thine anger; S. Augustine begins to wonder, Quid? illum,
quem perfectum dicimus, ad iram provocat Deum? Would David provoke God, who is
all sweetness, and mildness, to anger against any man? No, not against any
man; but Diaboli possessio peccator, Every sinner is a slave to his beloved
sin; and therefore, Misericors or at, adver sus cum, quitanque or at, How
bitterly soever I curse that sin, yet I pray for that sinner. David would have
God angry with the Tyran, not with the Slave that is oppressed; with the sin,
not with the soul that is inthralled to it. And so, as the words may be a
curse, a malediction in David's mouth, we may take them into our mouth too, and
say, Let those enemies be ashamed, etc.

If this then were an Imprecation, a malediction, yet it was Medicinal, and
had Rationem boni, a charitable tincture, and nature in it; he wished the men
no harm, as men. But it is rather Pradictorium, Praedictoria.
a Prophetical vehemence, that if they will take no knowledge of Gods
declaring himself in the protection of his servants, if they would not
consider that God had heard, and would hear, had rescued, and would rescue his
children, but would continue their opposition against him, heavy judgments
would certainly fall upon them; Their punishment should be certain, but the
effect should be uncertain; for God only knows, whether his correction shall
work upon his enemies, to their mollifying, or to their obduration. Those
bitter, and weighty imprecations which David has heaped together against
Judas, Psalm.109. Acts 1.16.
seem to be direct imprecations; and yet S. Peter himself calls them
Prophesies; Oportet impleri Scripturam; They were done, says he, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled; Not that David in his own heart did wish all
that upon Judas; but only so, as foreseeing in the Spirit of Prophesying, that
those things should fall upon him, he concurred with the purpose of God
therein, and so far as he saw it to be the will of God, he made it his will,
and his wish. And so have all those judgments, which we denounce upon sinners,
the nature of Prophesies in them; when we read in the Church, that
Commination, Cursed is the Idolater, This may fall upon some of our own
kindred; and Cursed is he that curses Father or Mother, This may fall upon
some of our own children; and Cursed is he that perverteth judgment, This may
fall upon some powerful Persons, that we may have a dependence upon; and upon
these we do not wish that Gods vengeance should fall; yet we Prophecy, and
denounce justly, that upon such, such vengeances will fall; and then, all
Prophesies of that kind are always conditional; they are conditional, if we
consider any Decree in God; they must be conditional in all our denunciations;
if you repent, they shall not fall upon you, if not, Oportet impleri
Scripturam, The Scripture must be fulfilled; We do not wish them, we do but
Prophecy them; no, nor we do not prophecy them; but the Scriptures have
preprophesied them before; they will fall upon you, as upon Judas, in
condemnation, and perchance, as upon Judas, in desperation too.

David's purpose then being in these words to work to their amendment, Mollior
sensus.
and not their final destruction, we may easily and usefully discern in the
particular words, a milder sense then the words seem at first to present. And
first give me leave by the way, only in passing, by occasion of those words
which are here rendered, Convertentur, and Erubescent, and which in the
Original are Iashabu, and Ieboshu, which have a musical, and harmonious
sound, and agnomination in them, let me note thus much, even in that, that the
Holy Ghost in penning the Scriptures delights himself, not only with a
propriety, but with a delicacy, and harmony, and melody of language; with
height of Metaphors, and other figures, which may work greater impressions upon
the Readers, and not with barbarous, or trivial, or market, or homely
language: It is true, that when the Grecians, and the Romans, and S. Augustine
himself, undervalued and despised the Scriptures, because of the poor and
beggarly phrase, that they seemed to be written in, the Christians could say
little against it, but turned still upon the other safer way, we consider the
matter, and not the phrase, because for the most part, they had read the
Scriptures only in Translations, which could not maintain the Majesty, nor
preserve the elegancies of the Original.

Their case was somewhat like ours, at the beginning of the Reformation; when,
because most of those men who labored in that Reformation, came out of the
Roman Church, and there had never read the body of the Fathers at large; but
only such rags and fragments of those Fathers, as were patcht together in
their Decretat's, and Decretals, and other such Common placers, for their
purpose, and to serve their turn, therefore they were loath at first to come
to that issue, to try controversies by the Fathers. But as soon as our men that
in braced the Reformation, had had time to read the Fathers, they were ready
enough to join with the Adversary in that issue: and still we protest, that we
accept that evidence, the testimony of the Fathers, and resuse nothing, which
the Fathers unanimly delivered, for matter of faith; and howsoever at the
beginning some men were a little ombrageous, and startling at the name of the
Fathers, yet since the Fathers have been well studied, for more then threescore
years, we have behaved our selves with more reverence to wards the Fathers,
and more confidence in the Fathers, then they of the Roman persuasion have
done, and been less apt to suspect or quarrel their Books, or to reprove
their Doctrines, then our Adversaries have been. So, howsoever the Christians
at first were fain to sink a little under that imputation, that their
Scriptures have no Majesty, no eloquence, because these embellishments could
not appear in Translations, nor they then read Originalls, yet now, that a
perfect knowledge of those languages has brought us to see the beauty and the
glory of those Books, we are able to reply to them, that there are not in all
the world so eloquent Books as the Scriptures; and that nothing is more
demonstrable, then that if we would take all those Figures, and Tropes, which
are collected out of secular Poets, and Orators, we may give higher, and
livelier examples, of every one of those Figures, out of the Scriptures, then
out of all the Greek and Latin Poets, and Orators; and they mistake it much,
that think, that the Holy Ghost has rather chosen a low, and barbarous, and
homely style, then an eloquent, and powerful manner of expressing himself.

To return and to cast a glance upon these words in David's prediction,
Erubescent.
upon his enemies, what hardness is in the first, Erubescent, Let them be
ashamed: for the word imports no more, our last Translation says no more,
neither did our first Translators intend any more, by their word, Confounded;
for that is, confounded with shame in themselves. This is Virga desoiplinae,
says S. Bernard; as long as we are ashamed of sin, we are not grown up, and
hardened in it; we are under correction; the correction of a remorse. As soon
as Adam came to be ashamed of his nakedness, he presently thought of some
remedy; if one should come and tell thee, that he looked through the door,
that he stood in a window over against thine, and saw thee do such or such a
sin, this would put thee to a shame, and thou would not do that sin, till
thou were fure he could not see thee. O, if thou would not sin, till thou
could think that God saw thee not, this shame had wrought well upon thee.
There are complexions that cannot blush; there grows a blackness, a
sootinesse upon the soul, by custom in sin, which overcomes all blushing, all
tend ernesse. White alone is palenesse, and God loves not a pale soul, a soul
possessed with a horror, affrighted with a diffidence, and distrusting his mercy.
Redness alone is anger, and vehemence, and distemper, and God loves not such a
red soul, a soul that sweats in sin, that quarrels for sin, that revenges in
sin. But that whiteness that preserves it self, not only from being died all
over in any foul color, from contracting the name of any habitual sin, and
so to be called such or such a sinner, but from taking any spot, from coming
within distance of a tentation, or of a suspicion, is that whiteness, which
God means, when he says, Thou art all fair my Love, Cant. 4.7.
and there is no spot in thee. Indifferent looking, equal and easy
conversation, appliablenesse to wanton discourses, and notions, and motions,
are the Devils single money, and many pieces of these make up an Adultery. As
light a thing as a Spangle is, a Spangle is silver; and Leaf gold, that is
blown away, is gold; and sand that has no strength, no coherence, yet knits
the building; so do approaches to sin, become sin, and fix sin. To avoid
these spots, is that whiteness that God loves in the soul. But there is a
redness that God loves too; which is this Erubescence that we speak of; an
aptness in the soul to blush, when any of these spots do fall upon it.

God is the universal Confessor, the general Penitentiary of all the world,
and all dye in the guilt of their sin, that go not to Confession to him. And
there are sins of such weight to the soul, and such intangling, and perplexity
to the conscience, in some circumstances of the sin, as that certainly a soul
may receive much ease in such cases, by confessing it self to man. In this
holy shamefastness, which we intend in this outward blushing of the face, the
soul goes to confession too. And it is one of the principal arguments against
Confessions by Letter, (which some went about to set up in the Roman Church)
that that took away one of the greatest evidences, and testimonies of their
repentance, which is this Erubescence, this blushing, this shame after sin; if
they should not be put to speak it face to face, but to write it, that would
remove the shame, which is a part of the repentance. But that soul that goes
not to confession to it self, that has not an internal blushing after a sin
committed, is a pale soul, even in the palenesse of death, and senslesnesse,
and a red soul, red in the defiance of God. And that whiteness, to avoid
approaches to sin, and that redness, to blush upon a sin, which does attempt
us, is the complexion of the soul, which God loves, and which the Holy Ghost
testifies, when he says, Cant. 5.12.
My Beloved is white and ruddy. And when these men that David speaks of here,
had lost that whiteness, their innocence, for David to wish that they might
come to a redness, a shame, a blushing, a remorse, a sense of sin, may have
been no such great malediction, or imprecation in the mouth of David, but that
a man may wish it to his best friend, which should be his own soul, and say,
Erubescam, not let mine enemies, but let me be ashamed with such a shame.

In the second word, Conturbentur.
Let them be sore vexed, he wishes his enemies no worse then himself had been:
For he had used the same word of himself before, Ossa turbata, My bones are
vexed, Ver. 2. and 3.
and Anima turbata, My soul is vexed; and considering, that David had found
this vexation to be his way to God, it was no malicious imprecation, to wish
that enemy the same Physic that he had taken, who was more sick of the same
disease then he was. For this is like a troubled Sea after a tempest; the
danger is past, but yet the billow is great still: The danger was in the calm,
in the security, or in the tempest, by mis-interpreting Gods corrections to our
obduration, and to a remorselesse stupefaction; but when a man is come to this
holy vexation, to be troubled, to be shaken with a sense of the indignation of
God, the storm is past, and the indignation of God is blown over. That soul
is in a fair and near way, of being restored to a calmnesse, and to reposed
security of conscience, that is come to this holy vexation.

In a flat Map, there goes no more, to make West East, though they be distant
in an extremity, but to paste that flat Map upon a round body, and then West
and East are all one. In a flat soul, in a dejected conscience, in a troubled
spirit, there goes no more to the making of that trouble, peace, then to apply
that trouble to the body of the Merits, to the body of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, and conform thee to him, and thy West is East, Zoch. 6.12.
thy Trouble of spirit is Tranquillity of spirit. The name of Christ is Oriens,
The East; Esaias 14.12.
And yet Lucifer himself is called Filius Orientis, The Son of the East. If
thou be fallen by Lucifer, fallen to Lucifer, and not fallen as Lucifer, to
a senslesnesse of thy fall, and an impenitiblenesse therein, but to a troubled
spirit, still thy Prospect is the East, still thy Climate is heaven, still thy
Haven is Jerusalem; for, in our lowest dejection of all, even in the dust of
the grave, we are so composed, so laid down, as that we look to the East; If I
could believe that Trajan, or Tecla, could look Eastward, that is, toward
Christ, in hell, I could believe with them of Rome, that Trajan and Tecla were
redeemed by prayer out of hell. God had accepted sacrifices before; but no
sacrifice is call Odor quiet is, Genesis 8.21.
It is not said, That God smelt a savor of rest, in any sacrifice, but that
which Noah offered, after he had been variously tossed and tumbled, in the
long hulling of the Arc upon the waters. A troublesome spirit, and a quiet
spirit, are far asunder; But a troubled spirit, and a quiet spirit, are near
neighbors. And therefore David means them no great harm, when he says, Let
them be troubled; For, Let the wind be as high as it will, so I sail before
the wind, Let the trouble of my soul be as great as it will, so it direct me
upon God, and I have calm enough.

And this peace, Convertantur.
this calm is employed in the next word, Convertantur, which is not, Let them
be overthrown, but Let them return, let them be forced to return; he prays,
that God would do something to cross their purposes; because as they are
against God, so they are against their own souls. In that way where they are,
he sees there is no remedy; and therefore he desires that they might be Turned
into another way; What is that way? This. Turn us O Lord, and we shall be
turned; That is, turned the right way; Toward God. And as there was a promise
from God, to hear his people, not only when they came to him in the Temple,
but when they turned toward that Temple, in what distance soever they were, so
it is always accompanied with a blessing, occasionally to turn toward God;
But this prayer, Turn us, that we may be turned, is, that we may be, that is,
remain turned, that we may continue fixed in that posture. Lots Wife turned
her self, and remained an everlasting monument of Gods anger; God so turn us
always into right ways, as that we be not able to turn our selves out of
them. For God has Viam rectam, and bonam, as himself speaks in the Prophet,
A right way, and then a good way, which yet is not the right way, that is, not
the way which God of himself would go. For his right way is, that we should
still keep in his way; His good way is, to beat us into his right way again,
by his medicinal corrections, when we put our selves out of his right way. And
that, and that only David wishes, and we wish, That you may Turn, and Be
turned; stand in that holy posture, all the year, all the years of your
lives, That your Christmas may be as holy as your Easter, even your Recreations
as innocent as your Devotions, and every room in the house as free free from
profaneness as the Sanctuary. And this he ends as he begun, with another
Erubescant, Let them be ashamed, and that Valde volociter, Suddenly: for David
saw, that if a sinner came not to a shame of sin quickly, he would quickly come
to a shamelessness, to an impudence, to a searednesse, to an obduration in it.

Now beloved, this is the worst curse that comes out of a holy man's mouth, even
toward his enemy, that God would correct him to his amendment. And this is
the worst harm that we mean to you, when we denounce the judgments of God
against sin and sinners, Vt erubescatis, that we might see blood in your faces,
the blood of your Savior working in that shame for sin. That that question of
the Prophet might not confound you, Were they ashamed when they committed
abomination? nay, they were not ashamed; Ier. 6.15.
Erubescere nescieba^t, they were never used to shame, they knew not how to be
ashamed. Therefore, says he, they shall fall amongst them that fall, they
shall do as the world does, sin as their neighbors sin, and fall as they fall,
irrepentantly here, and hereafter irrecoverably. And then, Vt conturbati sitis,
that you may be troubled in your hearts, and not cry Peace, Peace, where there
is no peace, and flatter your selves, because you are in a true Religion, and
in the right way; for a Child may drown in a Font, and a Man may be poisoned
in the Sacrament, much more perish, though in a true Church. And also Vt
revertamini, that you may return again to the Lord, return to that state of
pureness, which God gave you in Baptism, to that state, which God gave you
the last time you received his body and blood so as became you. And then
lastly, Vt erubescatis velociter, that you may come to the beginning of this,
and to all this quickly, and not to defer it, because God defers the judgment.
For to end this with S. Augustines words, upon this word Velociter,
Quandocunque venit, celerrime venit, quod desperatur esse venturum: How late
soever it come, that comes quickly, if it come at all, which we believed would
never come. How long soever it be, before that judgment come, yet it comes
quickly, if it come before thou look for it, or be ready for it. Whosoever
labors to sleep out the thought of that day, His damnation sleeps not,
says the Apostle. It is not only, that his damnation is not dead, that there
shall never be any such day, but that it is no day asleep: every midnight
shall be a day of judgment to him, and keep him awake; and when
consternation, and lassitude lend him, or conterfait to him a sleep, as S.
Basil says of the righteous, Etiam somnia justorum preces sunt, That even
their Dreams are prayers, so this incorrigible sinners Dreams shall be, not
only presages of his future, but acts of his present condemnation.

SERMON. LVI. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose trangression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered; Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guile.


THis that I have read to you, can scarce be called all the Text; I proposed
for the Text, the first and second verses, and there belongs more to the first,
then I have delivered in it; for, in all those Translators, and Expositors, who
apply themselves exactly to the Original, to the Hebrew, the Title of the
Psalm, is part of the first verse of the Psalm. S. Augustine gives somewhat a
strange reason, why the Book of Enoch, cited by S. Jude in his Epistle, and
some other such ancient Books, as that, were never received into the body of
Canonical Scriptures, Vt in Authoritate apud nos non essent, nimia fecit eorum
Antiquitas, The Church suspected them, because they were too Ancient, says S.
Augustine. But that reason alone, is so far from being enough to exclude any
thing from being part of the Scriptures, as that we make it justly an argument,
for the receiving the Titles of the Psalms into the Body of Canonical
Scriptures, that they are as ancient as the Psalms themselves. So then the
Title of this Psalm enters into our Text, as a part of the first verse. And
the Title is Davidis Erudiens; where we need not insert (as our Translators in
all languages and Editions have conceived a necessity to do) any word, for the
clearing of the Text, more then is in the Text it self, (And therefore
Tremellius has inserted that word, An Ode of David, we, A Psalm of David,
others, others) for the words themselves yield a perfect sense in themselves,
Le David Maschil, is Davidis Erudiens, that is, Davidis Eruditio, David's
Institution, David's Catechism; And so our Text, which is the first and second
verse, taking in all the first verse, in all accounts, is now David's
Catechism; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven etc.

In these words, Divisio.
our parts shall be these; first, That so great a Master as David, proceeded by
way of Catechism, of instruction in fundamental things, and Doctrines of
edification. Secondly, That the foundation of this Building, the first lesson
in this Art, the first letter in this Alphabet, is Blessedness; for, Primus
actus voluntatis est Amor; Man is not man, till he have produced some acts of
the faculties of that soul, that makes him man; till he understand something,
and will something, Till he know, and till he would have something, he is no
man; Now, The first Act of the will is love; and no man can love any thing, but
in the likeness, and in the notion of Happiness, of Blessedness, or of some
degree thereof; and therefore David proposes that for the foundation of his
Catechism, Blessedness; The Catechism of David, Blessed is the Man. But
then, in a third Consideration, we lay hold upon S. Augustins Aphorism, Amare
nisi nota non possumus, We cannot truly love any thing, but that we know; And
therefore David being to proceed Catechistically, and for Instruction,
proposes this Blessedness, which as it is in Heaven, and reserved for our
possession there, is in-intelligible, (as Tertullian speaks) unconceivable, he
purposes it in such notions, and by such lights, as may enable us to see it,
and know it in this life. And those lights are in this Text, Three; for, The
forgiveness of Transgressions, And then, The Covering of sins, And lastly,
The not imputing of Iniquity, which three David proposes here, are not a
threefold repeating of one and the same thing; But this Blessedness consisting
in our Reconciliation to God, (for we were created in a state of friendship
with God, our rebellion put us into a state of hostility, and now we need a
Reconciliation, because we are not able to maintain a war against God, no, nor
against any other enemy of man, without God) this Blessedness David does not
deliver us all at once, in three expressings of the same thing, but he gives us
one light thereof, in the knowledge that there is a Forgiving of
Transgressions, another, in the Covering of sins, and a third, in the not
Imputing of Iniquity. But then, (that which will constitute a fourth
Consideration) when God has presented himself, and offered his peace, in all
these, there is also something to be done on our part; for though the Forgiving
of Transgression, The Covering of sin, The not Imputing of Iniquity, proceed
only from God, yet God affords these to none but him, In whose spirit there is
no guile. And so you have all that belongs to the Master, and his manner of
teaching, David Catechizing; And all that belongs to the Doctrine and the
Catechism, Blessedness, That is Reconciliation to God, notified in those
three acts of his mercy; And all that belongs to the Disciple, that is to be
Catechized, A docile, an humble, a sincere heart, In whose spirit there is no
guile; And to these particulars, in their order thus proposed, we shall now
pass.

That then which constitutes our first part, is this, That David, 1. Part.
Catechismus
then whom this world never had a greater Master for the next, amongst the
sons of men, delivers himself, by way of Catechizing, of fundamental and
easy teaching. As we say justly, and confidently, That of all Rhetorical and
Poetical figures, that fall into any Art, we are able to produce higher
strains, and livelier examples, out of the Scriptures, then out of all the
Orators, and Poets in the world, yet we read not, we preach not the Scriptures
for that use, to magnify their Eloquence; So in David's Psalms we find
abundant impressions, and testimonies of his knowledge in all arts, and all
kinds of learning, but that is not it which he proposes to us. David's last
words are, and in that David's holy glory was placed, That he was not only the
sweet Psalmist, That he had an harmonious, a melodious, 2 Samuel 23.1.
a charming, a powerful way of entering into the soul, and working upon the
affections of men, but he was the sweet Psalmist of Israel, He employed his
faculties for the conveying of the God of Israel, into the Israel of God; Ver.
2.
The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue; Not the
spirit of Rhetorique, nor the spirit of Poetry, Ver. 3.
nor the spirit of Mathematiques, and Demonstration, But, The spirit of the
Lord, the Rock of Israel spoke by me, says he; He boasts not that he had
delivered himself in strong, or deep, or mysterious Arts, that was not his
Rock; but his Rock was the Rock of Israel, His way was to establish the Church
of God upon fundamental Doctrines. Moses was learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, says Stephen. Likely to be so, Act. 7.22.
because being adopted by the Kings daughter, he had an extraordinary
education; Exodus 2.10.
And likely also, because he brought so good natural faculties, for his
Masters to work upon, Vt Reminisci potius videretur, quam discere, Philo.
That whatsoever any Master proposed unto him, he rather seemed to remember it
then, then to learn it but then; And yet in Moses books, we meet no great
testimonies, or deep impressions of these learnings in Moses: He had (as S.
Ambrose notes well) more occasions to speak of Natural philosophy, in the
Creation of the world, and of the more secret, and reserved, and remote corners
of Nature, in those counterfeitings of Miracles in Pharaohs Court, then he has
laid hold of. So Nebuchadnezzar appointed his Officers, that they should
furnish his Court, Dan. 1.4.
with some young Gentlemen, of good blood and families of the Jews; And (as it
is added there) well favored youths, in whom there was no blemish, skillful in
all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science; And then
farther, To be taught the tongue, and the learning of the Chaldeans. And Daniel
was one of these, and, no doubt, a great Proficient in all these; and yet
Daniel seems not to make any great show of these learnings in his writings. S.
Paul was in a higher Pedagogy, and another manner of University then all this;
Caught up into the third heavens, into Paradise, as he says; 2 Cor. 12.2.
and there he learnt much; but (as he says too) such things as it was not
lawful to utter; That is, It fell not within the laws of preaching to publish
them. So that not only some learning in humanity, (as in Moses and Daniels
case) but some points of Divinity, (as in S. Paul's case) may be unfit to be
preached. Not that a Divine should be ignorant of either; either ornaments of
humane, or mysteries of divine knowledge. For, says S. Augustine, Every man
that comes from Egypt, must bring some of the Egyptians goods with him. Quanto
auro exivit suffarcinatus Cyprianus, says he, How much of the Egyptian gold
and goods brought Cyprian, and Lactantius, and Optatus, and Hilary out of
Egypt? That is, what a treasure of learning, gathered when they were of the
Gentiles, brought they from thence, to the advancing of Christianity, when they
applied themselves to it? S. Augustine confesses, that the reading of Cicero's
Hortensius, Mutavit affectum meum, L. 3. c. 4.
began in him a Conversion from the world, Et ad teipsum, Domine, mutavit
preces meas, That book, says he, converted me to more fervent prayers to
thee, my God; Et surgere jam coeperam ut ad te redirem, By that help I rose,
and came toward thee. And so Justin Martyr had his Initiation, and beginning
of his Conversion, from reading some passages in Plato. S. Basil expresses it
well; They that will dye a perfect color, dip it in some less perfect color
before. To be a good Divine, requires humane knowledge; and so does it of all
the Mysteries of Divinity too; because, as there are Devils that will not be
cast out but by Fasting and Prayer, so there are humors that undervalue men,
that lack these helps. But our Congregations are not made of such persons; not
of mere natural men, that must be converted out of Aristotle, and by Cicero's
words, nor of Arians that require new proofs for the Trinity, nor Pelagians
that must be pressed with new discoveries of Gods Predestination; but persons
embracing, with a thankful acquiescence therein, Doctrines necessary for the
salvation of their souls in the world to come, and the exaltation of their
Devotion in this. This way David calls his, a Catechism. And let not the
greatest Doctor think it unworthy of him to Catechize thus, nor the learnedest
hearer to be thus catechized; Christ enwraps the greatest Doctors in his
Person, and in his practice, when he says, Sinite parvulos, Suffer little
children to come unto me; and we do not suffer them to come unto us, if when
they come, we do not speak to their understanding, and to their edification,
for that is but an absent presence, when they hear, and profit not; And Christ
enwraps the learnedest hearers, in the persons of his own Disciples, when he
says, Except ye become as these little children, ye cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; Except you nourish your selves with Catechisticall, and
Fundamental Doctrines, you are not in a wholesome diet. Now in this
Catechism, the first stone that David lays, (and that that supports all) the
first object that David presents, (and that that directs to all) is
Blessedness; David's Catechism; Blessed is the man.

Philosophers could never bring us to the knowledge, 2 Part. Beatitudo.
what this Summum bonum, this Happiness, this Blessedness was. For they
considered only some particular fruits thereof; and it is much easier, how high
soever a tree be, to come to a taste of some of the fruits, then to dig to
the root of that tree: They satisfied themselves with a little taste of Health,
and Pleasure, and Riches, and Honor, and never considered that all these must
have their root in heaven, and must have a relation to Christ Jesus, who is the
root of all. And as these Philosophers could never tell us, what this
blessedness was, so Divines themselves, and those who are best exercised in
the language of the Holy Ghost, the Original tongue of this Text, cannot give
us a clear Grammatical understanding, of this first word, in which David
expresses this Blessedness, Ashrei, which is here Translated Blessed. They
cannot tell, whether it be an Adverb, (And then it is Been viro, Well is it for
that man, A pathetique, a vehement acclamation, Happily, Blessedly is that man
provided for) Or whether it be a Plural Noune, (and then it is Beatitudines,
such a Blessedness as includes many, all blessednesses in it) And one of these
two it must necessarily be in the Rules of their Construction; That either
David enters with an Admiration, O how happily is that man provided for! Or
with a Protestation, That there is no particular Blessedness, which that man
wants, that has this, This Reconciliation to God.

Eusebius observes out of Plato, that he enjoined the Poets, and the Writers in
his State, to describe no man to be happy, but the good men; none to be
miserable, but the wicked. And his Scholar Aristotle enters into his Book of
Ethiques, and Moral Doctrine, with that Contemplation first of all, That every
man has naturally a disposition to affect, and desire happiness. David who is
elder then they, begins his Book of Psalms so; The first word of the first
Psalm, is the first word of this Text, Blessed is the man. He comprehends all
that belongs to man's knowledge, and all that belongs to man's practice, in those
two, first in understanding true Blessedness, and then, in praising God for
it: David's Alpha is Beatus vir, O the Blessedness of righteous men! And David's
Omega is Laudate Dominum, O that men would therefore bless the Lord! And
therefore, as he begins this Book with Gods blessing of man, so he ends it with
man's praising of God: For, where the last stroke upon this Psaltery, the last
verse of the last Psalm, is, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord,
Yet he adds one note more to us in particular, Praise ye the Lord; and there
is the end of all. And so also our Savior Christ himself, in his own
preaching, observed that Method; Mat. 5.3.
He begun his great Sermon in the Mount with that, Blessed are the poor
inspirit, Blessed are they that mourn, Blessed are the pure in heart;
Blessedness alone was an abundant recompense for all. And so the subject of
John Baptists Commission before, and of his Disciples Commission after, Mat.
3.2.
was still the same, to preach this Blessedness, That the Kingdom of God,
that is, Mat. 10.7.
Reconciliation to God in his Visible Church, was at hand, was forthwith to be
established amongst them.

Though then the Consummation of this Blessedness be that Visio Dei, That
sight of God, which in our glorified state we shall have in heaven, yet,
because there is an inchoation thereof in this world, which is that which we
call Reconciliation, it behooves us to consider the disposition requisite for
that. It is a lamentable perverseness in us, that we are so contentiously
busy, in inquiring into the Nature, and Essence, and Attributes of God, things
which are reserved to our end, when we shall know at once, and without study,
all that, of which all our lives study can teach us nothing; And that here,
where we are upon the way, we are so negligent and lazy, in inquiring of
things, which belong to the way. Those things we learn in no School so well
as in adversity. As the body of man, and consequently health, is best
understood, and best advanced by Dissections, and Anatomies, when the hand and
knife of the Surgeon has passed upon every part of the body, and laid it open:
so when the hand and sword of God has pierced our soul, we are brought to a
better knowledge of our selves, then any degree of prosperity would have raised
us to.

All creatures were brought to Adam, and, because he understood the natures of
all those creatures, he gave them names accordingly. In that he gave no name to
himself, it may be by some perhaps argued, that he understood himself less
then he did other creatures. If Adam be our example, in the time and School of
nature, how hard a thing the knowledge of our selves is, till we feel the
direction of adversity, David is also another example in the time of the Law,
who first said in his prosperity, Psalm. 30.6.
He should never be moved; But, When, says he, Thou hidest thy face from me,
I was troubled, and then I cried unto thee O Lord, and I prayed unto my God;
Then; but not till then. The same Art, the same Grammar lasts still; and Peter
is an example of the same Rule, in the time of grace, who was at first so
confident, as to come to that, Si omnes scandalizati, if all forsook him, Si
mori oportuit, If he must die with him, or dye for him, he was ready, and yet
without any terror from an armed Magistrate, without any surprizall of a
subtle Examiner, upon the question of a poor Maid he denied his Master: But
then, the bitterness of his soul taught him another temper, and moderation;
when Christ asked him after, Amas me? Love thou me? not to pronounce upon an
infallible confidence, I have loved, and I do, and I will do till death, but,
Domine tu scis, Lord thou know that I love thee; My love to thee is but the
effect of thy love to me, and therefore Lord continue thine, that mine may
continue. No study is so necessary as to know our selves; no Schoolmasters is
so diligent, so vigilant, so assiduous, as Adversity: And the end of knowing
our selves, is to know how we are disposed for that which is our end, that is
this Blessedness; which, though it be well collected and summed by S.
Augustine, Beatus qui habet quicquid vult, and nihil mali vult, He only is
blessed, that desires nothing but that which is good for him, and has all
that, we must pursue, in those particulars, which here, in David's Catechism,
constitute this Blessedness, and constitute our third Part, and are delivered
in three Branches, first, The forgiving of our transgressions, And then, The
covering of our sins, And thirdly, The not imputing of our iniquities.

First then, that in this third Part, we may see in the first Branch, 3 Part.
Transgression.
the first notification of this Blessedness, we consider the two terms, in
which it is expressed, what this is, which is translated Transgression, and
then what this Forgiving imports. The Original word is Pashang, and that
signifies sin in all extensions, The highest, the deepest, the waightiest sin;
It is a malicious, and a forcible opposition to God: It is when this Herod, and
this Pilat (this Body, and this soul of ours) are made friends and agreed,
that they may concur to the Crucifying of Christ. When not only the members
of our bodies, but the faculties of our soul, our will and understanding are
bent upon sin: when we do not only sin strongly, and hungerly, and thirstily,
(which appertain to the body) but we sin rationally, we find reasons, (and
those reasons, even in Gods long patience) why we should sin: We sin wittily,
we invent new sins, and we think it an ignorant, a dull, and an unsociable
thing, not to sin; yea we sin wisely, and make our sin, our way to preferment.
Then is this word used by the Holy Ghost, when he expresses both the vehemence,
and the weight, and the largeness, and the continuance, all extensions, all
dimensions of the sins of Damascus; Amos 1.3.
Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I
will not turn to it, because they have threshed Gilead with threshing
instruments of Iron; So then, we consider sin here, not as a stain, such as
Original sin may be, nor as a wound, such as every actual sin may be, but as
a burden, a complication, a packing up of many sins, in an habitual practice
thereof. This is that weight that sunk the whole world under water, in the
first flood, and shall press down the fire it self, to consume it a second
time. It is a weight that stupifies and benums him that bears it, August.
so, as that the sinner feels not the oppression of his own sins; Et quid
miserius miscro non miserante seipsum? What misery can be greater, then when a
miserable man has not sense to commiserate his own misery? Our first errors
are out of Levity, and S. Augustine has taught us a proper ballast and weight
for that, Amor Dei pondus animae, The love of God would carry us evenly, and
steadily, if we would embarke that: But as in great tradings, they come to
ballast with Merchandise, ballast and freight is al one, so in this habitual
sinner, all is sin, plots and preparations before the act, gladness and glory
in the act, sometimes disguises, sometimes justifications after the act, make
up one body, one freight of sin. So then Transgression in this place, in the
natural signification of the word, is a weight, a burden, and carrying it, as
the word requires, to the greatest extension, it is the sin of the whole World;
And that sin is forgiven; which is the second Term.

The Prophet does not say here, Forgiven.
Blessed is that man that has no transgression, for that were to say, Blessed
is that man that is no man. All people, all Nations, did ever in Nature
acknowledge not only a guiltiness of sin, but some means of reconciliation
to their Gods in the Remission of sins: for they had all some formal, and
Ceremonial Sacrifices, and Expiations, and Lustrations, by which they thought
their sins to be purged, and washed away. Whosoever acknowledges a God,
acknowledges a Remission of sins, and whosoever acknowledges a Remission of
sins, acknowledges a God. And therefore in this first place, David does not
mention God at all; he does not say, Blessed is he whose transgression the Lord
has forgiven; for he presumes it to be an impossible tentation to take hold of
any man, that there can be any Remission of sin, from any other person, or by
any other means, then from and by God himself; and therefore Remission of
sins includes an Act of God; But what kind of Act, is more particularly
designed in the Original word, which is Nasa, then our word, forgiving,
reaches to; for the word does not only signify Auferre, but far; not only
to take away sin, by way of pardon, but to take the sin upon himself, and so
to bear the sin, and the punishment of the sin, in his own person. And so
Christ is the Lamb of God, Qui tollit, not only that takes away, Esaias 53.4.
but that takes upon himself, the sins of the world. Tulit, portavit, Surely
he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; Those griefs, those
sorrows which we should, he has borne, and carried in his own person. So
that, as it is all one, never to have come in debt, and to have discharged the
debt; So the whole world, all mankind, considered in Christ, is as innocent as
if Adam had never sinned. And so this is the first beam of Blessedness that
shines upon my soul, That I believe that the justice of God is fully satisfied
in the death of Christ, and that there is enough given, and accepted in the
treasure of his blood, for the Remission of all Transgressions. And then the
second beam of this Blessedness, is in The covering of sins.

Now to benefit our selves by this part of David's Catechism, Sin.
we must (as we did before) consider the two terms, of which this part of this
Blessedness consists, sin, and covering. Sin in this place is not so heavy a
word, as Transgression was in the former; for that was sin in all extensions,
sin in all forms, all sin of all men, of all times, of all places, the sin
of all the world upon the shoulders of the Savior of the world. In this place,
(the word is Catah, and by the derivation thereof from Nata, which is to
Decline, to step aside, or to be withdrawn, and Kut, which is filum, a thread,
or a line) that which we call sin here, signifies Transilire lineam, To depart,
or by any tentation to be withdrawn from the direct duties, and the exact
straightness which is required of us in this world, for the attaining of the
next: So that the word imports sins of infirmity, such sins as do fall upon
Gods best servants, such sins as rather induce a cofession of our weakness,
and an acknowledgement of our continual need of pardon for some thing passed,
and strength against future invasions, then that induce any devastation, or
obduration of the conscience, which, Transgression, in the former branch
implied. For so this word, Catah, has that signification (as in many other
places) there, where it is said, Judge ^^.16.
That there were seven hundred left handed Benjamits, which would sling stones
at a hairs breadth, and not fail; that is, not miss the mark a hairs
breadth. And therefore when this word Catah, sin, is used in Scripture, to
express any weighty, heinous, enormous sin, it has an addition, Peccatum
magnum peccaverunt, says Moses, Exodus 32.31.
when the people were become Idolaters, These people have sinned a great sin;
otherwise it signifies such sin, as destroys not the foundation, such as in
the nature thereof, does not wholly extinguish Grace, nor grieve the Spirit of
God in us. And such sins God covers, says David here. Now what is his way of
covering these sins?

As Sin in this notion, is not so deep a wound upon God, as Transgression in
the other, Covering.
so Covering here extends not so far, as Forgiving did there. There forgiving
was a taking away of sin, by taking that way, That Christ should bear all our
sins, it was a suffering, a dying, it was a penal part, and a part of Gods
justice, executed upon his one and only Son; here it is a part of Gods mercy,
in spreading, and applying the merits and satisfaction of Christ, upon all
them, whom God by the Holy Ghost has gathered in the profession of Christ, and
so called to the apprehending and embracing of this mantle, this garment, this
covering, the righteousness of Christ in the Christian Christ; In which
Church, and by his visible Ordinances therein, the Word, and Sacraments, God
covers, hides, conceales, even from the inquisition of his own justice, those
smaller sins, which his servants commit, and does not turn them out of his
service, for those sins. So the word (the word is Casah, which we translate
Covering) is used, Prove. 12.23.
A wise man concealeth knowledge; that is, Does not pretend to know so much as
indeed he does: So, our merciful God, when he sees us under this mantle, this
covering, Christ spread upon his Church, conceales his knowledge of our sins,
and suffers them not to reflect upon our consciences, in a consternation
thereof. So then, as the Forgiving was Auferre ferendo, a taking away of sin,
by taking all sin upon his own person, So this Covering is Tegere attingendo,
To cover sin, by coming to it, by applying himself to our sinful
consciences, in the means instituted by him in his Church: for they have in
that language another word, Sacac, which signifies Tegere obumbrando, To cover
by overshadowing, by refreshing. This is Tegere obumbrando, To cover by
shadowing, when I defend mine eye from the offense of the Sun, by interposing
my hand between the Sun and mine eye, at this distance, a far off: But Tegere
attingendo, is when thus I lay my hand upon mine eye, and cover it close, by
that touching. In the knowledge that Christ has taken all the sins of all the
world upon himself, that there is enough done for the salvation of all
mankind, I have a shadowing, a refreshing; But because I can have no
testimony, that this general redemption belongs to me, who am still a sinner,
except there pass some act between God and me, some seal, some investiture,
some acquittance of my debts, my sins, therefore this second beam of David's
Blessedness, in this his Catechism, shines upon me in this, That God has not
only sowed and planted herbs, and Simples in the world, medicinal for all
diseases of the world, but God has gathered, and prepared those Simples, and
presented them, so prepared, to me, for my recovery from my disease: God has
not only received a full satisfaction for all sin in Christ, but Christ, in
his Ordinances in his Church, offers me an application of all that for my
self, and covers my sin, from the eye of his Father, not only obumbrando, as
he has spread himself as a Cloud refreshing the whole World, in the value of
the satisfaction, but Attingendo, by coming to me, by spreading himself upon
me, as the Prophet did upon the dead Child, Mouth to mouth, Hand to hand; In
the mouth of his Minister, he speaks to me; In the hand of the Minister, he
delivers himself to me; and so by these visible acts, and seals of my
Reconciliation, Tegit attingendo, He covers me by touching me; He touches my
conscience, with a sense and remorse of my sins, in his Word; and he touches my
soul, with a faith of having received him, and all the benefit of his Death,
in the Sacrament. And so he covers sin; that is, keeps our sins of infirmity,
and all such sins, as do not in their nature quench the light of his grace,
from coming into his Fathers presence, or calling for vengeance there.
Forgiving of transgressions is the general satisfaction for all the world, and
restoring the world to a possibility of salvation in the Death of Christ;
Covering of sin, is the benefit of discharging and easing the conscience, by
those blessed helps which God has afforded to those, whom he has gathered in
the bosom, and quickened in the womb of the Christian Church. And this is the
second beam of Blessedness, cast out by David here; and then the third is, The
not imputing of iniquity, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity.

In this also, Impute.
(as in the two former we did) we consider this Imputing, and then this
Iniquity, in the root and Original signification of the two words. When in
this place the Lord is said, not to impute sin, it is meant, That the Lord
shall not suffer me to impute sin to my self. The word is Cashab, and Cashab
imports such a thinking, such a surmising, as may be subject to error, and
mistaking. To that purpose we find the word, where Hannah was praying, 1 Samuel
1.12.
and Eli the Priest, who saw her lips move, and heard no prayer come from her,
thought she had been drunk, Imputed drunkenness unto her, and said, How long
will thou be drunk? put away thy wine: So that this Imputing, is such an
Imputing of ours as may be erroneous, that is, an Imputing from our selves, in
a diffidence, and jealousy, and suspicion of Gods goodness toward us. To
which purpose, we consider also, that this word, which we translate here
Iniquity, Gnavah, is oftentimes in the Scripture used for punishment, as well
as for sin: and so indifferently for both, as that if we will compare
Translation with Translation, and Exposition with Exposition, it will be hard
for us to say, Genesis 4.13.
whether Cain said, Mine iniquity is greater then can be pardoned, or, My
punishment is greater then I can bear; and our last Translation, which seems
to have been most careful of the Original, takes it rather so, My punishment,
in the Text, and lays the other, My sin, aside in the Margin. So then, this
Imputing, being an Imputing which arises from our selves, and so may be
accompanied with error, and mistaking, that we Impute that to our selves, which
God does not impute, And this mis-imputing of Gods anger to our selves, arising
out of his punishments, and his corrections inflicted upon us, That because we
have crosses in the world, we cannot believe, that we stand well in the sight
of God, or that the forgiving of Transgressions, or Covering of sins
appertains unto us, we justly conceive, that this not Imputing of Iniquity, is
that Serenitas Conscientiae, That brightness, that clearness, that peace, and
tranquillity, that calm and serenity, that acquiescence, and security of the
Conscience, in which I am delivered from all scruples, and all timorousness,
that my Transgressions are not forgiven, or my sins not covered. In the first
Act, we consider God the Father to have wrought; He proposed, he decreed, he
accepted too a sacrifice for all mankind in the death of Christ. In the second,
The Covering of sins, we consider God the Son to work, Incubare Ecclesiae,
He sits upon his Church, as a Hen upon her Eggs, He covers all our sins, whom
he has gathered into that body, with spreading himself and his merits upon us
all there. In this third, The not Imputing of Iniquity, we consider God the
Holy Ghost to work, and, as the Spirit of Consolation, to blow away all
scruples, all diffidences, and to establish an assurance in the Conscience. The
Lord imputes not, that is, the Spirit of the Lord, The Lord the Spirit, The
Holy Ghost, suffers not me to impute to my self those sins, which I have
truly repented. The over-tendernesse of a bruised and a faint conscience may
impute sin to it self, when it is discharged; And a seared and obdurate
Conscience may impute none, when it abounds; If the Holy Ghost work, he
rectifies both; and, if God do inflict punishments, (according to the
signification of this word Gnavah) after our Repentance, and the seals of our
Reconciliation, yet he suffers us not to impute those sins to our selves, or
to repute those corrections, punishments, as though he had not forgiven them,
or, as though he came to an execution after a pardon, but that they are laid
upon us medicinally, and by way of prevention, and precaution against his
future displeasure. This is that Pax Conscientiae, The peace of Conscience,
when there is not one sword drawn: This is that Serenitas Conscientiae, The
Meridionall brightness of the Conscience, when there is not one Cloud in our
sky. I shall not hope, that Original sin shall not be imputed, but fear, that
Actual sin may: not hope that my dumb sins shall not, but my crying sins may;
not hope that my apparent sins, which have therefore induced in me a particular
sense of them, shall not, but my secret sins, sins that I am not able to
return and represent to mine own memory, may: for this Non Imputabit, has no
limitation; God shall suffer the Conscience thus rectified, to terrify it
self with nothing; which is also farther extended in the Original, where it
is not Non Imputat, but Non Imputabit; Though after all this we do fall into
the same, or other sins, yet we shall know our way, and evermore have our
Consolation in this, That as God has forgiven our transgression, in taking the
sins of all mankind upon himself, for he has redeemed us, and left out
Angels, And as he has covered our sin, that is, provided us the Word, and
Sacraments, and cast off the Jews, and left out the Heathen, So he will never
Impute mine Iniquity, never suffer it to terrify my Conscience; Not now, when
his Judgments, denounced by his Minister, call me to him here; Nor hereafter,
when the last bell shall call me to him, into the grave; Nor at last, when the
Angels Trumpets shall call me to him, from the dust, in the Resurrection. But
that, as all mankind has a Blessedness, in Christ's taking our sins, (which
was the first Article in this Catechism) And all the Christian Church a
Blessedness, in covering our sins, (which was the second) So I may find this
Blessedness, in this work of the Holy Ghost, not to Impute, that is, not to
suspect, that God imputes any repented sin unto me, or reserves any thing to
lay to my charge at the last day, which I have prayed may be, and therefore
hoped has been forgiven before. But then, after these three parts, which we
have now, in our Order proposed at first, passed through, That David applies
himself to us, in the most convenient way, by the way of Catechism, and
instruction in fundamental things; And then, that he lays for his foundation
of all Beatitude, Blessedness, Happiness, which cannot be had, in the
consummation, and perfection thereof, but in the next world; But yet, in the
third place, gives us an inchoation, an earnest, an evidence of this future and
consummate Blessedness, in bringing us faithfully to believe, That Christ dyed
sufficiently for all the world, That Christ offers the application of all this,
to all the Christian Church, That the Holy Ghost seals an assurance thereof, to
every particular Conscience well rectified; After all this done thus largely on
Gods part, there remains something to be done on ours, that may make all this
effectual upon us, Vt non sit dolus in spiritu, That there be no guile in our
spirit, which is our fourth part, and Conclusion of all.

Of all these fruits of this Blessedness, there is no other root but the
goodness of God himself; but yet they grow in no other ground, then in that
man, 4. Part. Dolus.
In cujus spiritu non est dolus. The Comment and interpretation of S. Paul,
Romans 4.5.
has made the sense and meaning of this place clear: To him that works, the
reward is of debt, but to him that believes, and works not, his faith is
counted for righteousness, Even as David describes the blessedness of Man,
says the Apostle there, and so proceeds with the very words of this Text. Does
the Apostle then, in this Text, exclude the Cooperation of Man? Differs this
proposition, That the man in whom God imprints these beams of Blessedness,
must be without guile in his spirit, from those other propositions, Si vis
ingredi, Mat. 19.17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments; And, Maledictus qui
non, Cursed is he that performs not all? Grows not the Blessedness of this
Text, from the same root, as the Blessedness in the 119. Psalm. ver. 1.
Blessed are they, who walk in the way of the Lord? Or does Saint Paul take
David to speak of any other Blessedness in our Text, then himself speaks of,
If through the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live? Romans
8.13.
Does S. Paul require nothing, nothing out of this Text, to be done by man?
Surely he does; And these propositions are truly all one, Tantum credideris,
Only believe, and you shall be saved; And, Fac hoc and vives, Do this, and
you shall be saved; As it is truly all one purpose, to say, If you live you may
walk, and to say, If you stretch out your legs, you may walk. To say, Eat
of this Tree, and you shall recover, and to say, Eat of this fruit, and you
shall recover, is all one; To attribute an action to the next Cause, or to the
Cause of that Cause, is, to this purpose, all one. And therefore, as God gave a
Reformation to his Church, in prospering that Doctrine, That Justification was
by faith only: so God give an unity to his Church, in this Doctrine, That no
man is justified, that works not; for, without works, how much soever he
magnify his faith, there is Dolus in spiritu, Guile in his spirit.

As then the Prophet David's principal purpose in this Text, is, according to
the Interpretation of S. Paul, to derive all the Blessedness of man from God:
so is it also to put some conditions in man, comprehended in this, That there
be no guile in his spirit. For, in this repentant sinner, that shall be
partaker of these degrees of Blessedness, of this Forgiving, of this Covering,
of this Not Imputing, there is required Integrapoenitentia, A perfect, and
entire repentance; And to the making up of that, howsoever the words and terms
may have been mis-used, and defamed, we acknowledge, that there belongs a
Contrition, a Confession, and a Satisfaction; And all these (howsoever our
Adversaries slander us, with a Doctrine of ease, and a Religion of liberty) we
require with more exactness, and severity, then they do. For, for Contrition,
we do not, we dare not say, as some of them, That Attrition is sufficient;
that it is sufficient to have such a sorrow for sin, as a natural sense, and
fear of torment does imprint in us, without any motion of the fear of God: We
know no measure of sorrow great enough for the violating of the infinite
Majesty of God, by our transgression. And then for Confession, we deny not a
necessity to confess to man; There may be many cases of scruple, of
perplexity, where it were an exposing our selves to farther occasions of sin,
not to confess to man; And in Confession, we require a particular detestation
of that sin which we confess, which they require not. And lastly, for
Satisfaction, we embrace that Rule, Condigna satisfactio male facta corrigere,
Our best Satisfaction is, to be better in the amendment of our lives: And
dispositions to particular sins, we correct in our bodies by Discipline, and
Mortifications; And we teach, that no man has done truly that part of
Repentance, which he is bound to do, if he have not given Satisfaction, that
is, Restitution, to every person damnified by him. If that which we teach, for
this entireness of Repentance, be practiced, in Contrition, and Confession,
and Satisfaction, they cannot calumniate our Doctrine, nor our practice herein;
And if it be not practiced, there is Dolus in spiritu, Guile in their spirit,
that pretend to any part of this Blessedness, Forgiving, or Covering, or Not
imputing, without this. For, he that is sorry for sin, only in Contemplation
of hell, and not of the joys of heaven, that would not give over his sin,
though there were no hell, rather then he would lose heaven, (which is that
which some of them call Attrition) He that confesses his sin, but has no
purpose to leave it, He that does leave the sin, but being grown rich by that
sin, retains, and enjoyes those riches, this man is not entire in his
Repentanne, but there is guile in his spirit.

He that is slothful in his work, Prove. 18.9.
is brother to him that is a great waster; He that makes half-repentances,
makes none. Men run out of their estates, as well by a negligence, and a not
taking account of their Officers, as by their own prodigality: Our salvation is
as much endangered, if we call not our conscience to an examination, as if we
repent not those sins, which offer themselves to our knowledge, and memory. And
therefore David places the consummation of his victory in that, Psalm. 18.37.
I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them, neither did I turn again,
till they were consumed: We require a pursuing of the enemy, a search for the
sin, and not to stay till an Officer, that is, a sickness, or any other
calamity light upon that sin, and so bring it before us; We require an
overtaking of the enemy, That we be not weary, in the search of our
consciences; And we require a consuming of the enemy, not a weakening only; a
dislodging, a dispossessing of the sin, and the profit of the sin; All the
profit, and all the pleasure of all the body of sin; for he that is sorry with
a godly sorrow, he that confesses with a deliberate detestation, he that
satisfies with a full restitution for all his sins but one, Dolus in spiritu,
There is guile in his spirit, and he is in no better case, Berna^
then if at Sea he should stop all leaks but one, and perish by that. Si vis
solvi, solve omnes catenas; If thou will be discharged, cancel all thy Bonds;
one chain till that be broke, holds as fast as ten. And therefore suffer your
consideration to turn back a little upon this object, that there may be Dolus
in spiritu, Guile in the spirit, in our pretense to all those parts of
Blessedness, which David recommends to us in this Catechism, In the
Forgiveness of transgrestions, In the Covering of sin, In the Not imputing of
iniquity.

First then, Forgiving.
in this Forgiving of transgressions, which is our Savior Christ's taking away
the sins of the world, by taking them, in the punishment due to them, upon
himself, there is Dolus in spiritu, Guile in that man's spirit, that will so
far abridge the great Volumes of the mercy of God, so far contract his
general propositions, as to restrain this salvation, not only in the effect,
but in Gods own purpose, to a few, a very few souls. When Subjects complain
of any Prince, that he is too merciful, there is Dolus in spiritu, Guile and
deceit in this complaint; They do but think him too merciful to other men's
faults; for, where they need his mercy for their own, they never think him too
merciful. And which of us do not need God for all sins? If we did not in our
selves, yet it were a new sin in us, not to desire that God should be as
merciful to every other sinner, as to our selves. As in heaven, the joy of
every soul shall be my joy, so the mercy of God to every soul here, is a
mercy to my soul; By the extension of his mercies to others, I argue the
application of his mercy to my self. This contracting, and abridging of the
mercy of God, will end in despair of our selves, that that mercy reaches not
to us, or if we become confident, perchance presumptuous of our selves, we
shall despair in the behalf of other men, and think they can receive no
mercy: And when men come to allow an impossibility of salvation in any, they
will come to assign that impossibility, nay to assign those men, and
pronounce, for this, and this sin, This man cannot be saved. There is a sin
against the Holy Ghost; and to make us afraid of all approaches toward that
sin, Christ has told us, that that sin is irremissible, unpardonable; But
since that sin includes impenitiblenesse in the way, and actual impenitence in
the end, we can never pronounce, This is that sin, or This is that sinner. God
is his Father that can say, Our Father which art in heaven, And his God that
can say, I believe in God; And there is Dolus in spiritu, Guile in his spirit,
the craft of the Serpent, (either the poison of the Serpent, in a
self-despaire, or the sting of the Serpent, in an uncharitable prejudging, and
precondemning of others) when a man comes to suspect Gods good purposes, or
contract Gods general propositions; for, this forgiving of transgressions, is
Christ's taking away the sins of all the world, by taking all the sins of all
men upon himself. And this Guile, this Deceit may also be in the second, in
the Covering of sins, which is the particular application of this general
mercy, by his Ordinances in his Church.

He then that without Guile will have benefit by this Covering, must Discover.
Covering.
Qui tegi vult peccata, detegat, is S. Augustines way: He that will have his
sins covered, let him uncover them; He that would not have them known, let him
confess them; He that would have them forgotten, let him remember them; He
that would bury them, let him rake them up. There is nothing covered, that
shall not be revealed, and hid, Mat. 10.26.
that shall not be known. It is not thy sending away a servant, thy locking a
door, thy blowing out a candle, no not though thou blow out, and extinguish
the spirit, as much as thou can, that hides a sin from God; but since thou
think that thou have hid it, by the secret carriage thereof, thou must
reveal it by Confession. If thou will not, God will show thee that he needed
not thy Confession; He will take knowledge of it, to thy condemnation, and he
will publish it to the knowledge of all the world, to thy confusion. Tufecisti
abscondite. says God to David, by Nathan, Thou did it secretly, 2 Samuel 12.12.
but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. Certainly it
affects, and stings many men more, that God has brought to light their
particular sins and offenses, for which he does punish them, then all the
punishments that he inflicts upon them; for then, they cannot lay their ruin
upon fortune, upon vicissitudes, and revolutions, and changes of Court, upon
disaffections of Princes, upon supplantations of Rivalls and Concurrents; but
God cleares all the world beside; Perditio tua ex te, God declares that the
punishment is his Act, and the Cause, my sin. This is Gods way; and this he
expresses vehemently against Jerusalem, Behold, I will gather all thy Lovers,
with whom thou have taken pleasure, Ezch. 16.37.
and all them that thou have loved, with all them that thou have hated, and I
will discover thy nakedness to all them. Those who loved us for pretended
virtues, shall see how much they were deceived in us; Those that hated us,
because they were able to look into us, and to discern our actions, shall
then say Triumphantly, and publicly to all, Did not we tell you what would
become of this man? It was never likely to be better with him. I will strip her
naked, and set her as in the day that she was borne; Hos. 2.3.
Howsoever thou were covered with the Covenant, and taken into the Visible
Church, howsoever thou were clothed, by having put on Christ in Baptism, yet,
If thou sin against me, (says God) and hide it from me, I am against thee, and
I will show the Nations thy nakedness, and the Kingdoms thy shame. Nahum 3.5.


To come to the covering of thy sins without guile, first cover them not from
thy self, so, as that thou can not see yester-daies sin, for to days sin;
nor the sins of thy youth, for thy present sins: Cover not thy extortions with
magnifique buildings, and sumptuous furniture; Dung not the fields that thou
have purchased with the bodies of those miserable wretches, whom thou have
oppressed, neither straw thine alleys and walks with the dust of Gods Saints,
whom thy hard dealing has ground to powder. There is but one good way of
covering sins from our selves, Si bona factamalis superponamus, Gregor.
If we come to a habit of good actions, contrary to those evils, which we had
accustomed our selves to, and cover our sins so; not that we forget the old,
but that we see no new.

There is a good covering of sins from our selves, by such new habits, and
there is a good covering of them from other men; for, he that sins publicly,
scandalously, avowedly, that teaches and encourages others to sin; Esaias 3.9.
That declares his sin as Sodom, and hides it not, As in a mirror, in a looking
glass, that is compassed and set about with a hundred lesser glasses, a man
shall see his deformities in a hundred places at once, so he that has sinned
thus shall feel his torments in himself, and in all those, whom the not
covering of his sins has occasioned to commit the same sins. Cover thy sins
then from thy self, so it be not by obduration; cover them from others, so it
be not by hypocrisy; But from God cover them not at all; Prove. 28.13.
He that covers his sin, shall not prosper; but who so confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy; Even in confessing, without forsaking, there
is Dolus in spiritus, Guile and deceit in that spirit. Noluit agnoscere, maluit
ignoscere, S. Augustine makes the case of a customary sinner; He was ready to
pardon himself always without any confession; But God shall invert it to his
subversion, Maluit agnoscere, noluit ignoscere, God shall manifest his sin, and
not pardon it.

Sin has that pride, that it is not content with one garment; Adam covered
first with fig leaves, then with whole trees, He hid himself amongst the
trees: Then he covered his sin, with the woman; she provoked him: And then
with Gods action, Quam tu dedisti, The Woman whom thou gave me; And this was
Adams wardrobe. David covers his first sin of uncleanness with soft stuff,
with deceit, with falsehood, with soft persuasions to Vriah, to go in to his
Wife; Then he covers it with rich stuff, with scarlet, with the blood of
Vriah, and of the army of the Lord of Hosts; And then he covers it with strong
and durable stuff, with an impenitence, and with an insensiblenesse, a year
together; too long for a King, too long for any man, to wear such a garment:
And this was David's wardrobe. But beloved, sin is a serpent, and he that covers
sin, does but keep it warm, that it may sting the more fiercely, and disperse
the venom and malignity thereof the more effectually. Adam had patched up an
apron to cover him; God took none of those leaves; God wrought not upon his
beginnings, but he covered him all over with durable skins. God saw that David's
several coverings did rather load him, then cover the sin, and therefore
Transtulit, He took all away, sin, and covering: for the coverings were as
great sins, as the radical sin, that was to be covered, was; yea greater; as
the arms and boughs of a tree, are greater then the root. Now to this
extension, and growth, and largeness of sin, no lesser covering serves then
God in his Church. It was the prayer against them, Nehem. 4.5. August.
who hindered the building of the Temple, Cover not their iniquity, neither let
their sin be put out in thy presence. Our prayer is, Peccata nostra non videat,
ut nos videat, Lord look not upon our sins, that thou may look upon us. And
since amongst our selves, 1 Pet. 4.8. Prove. 10.12.
it is the effect of Love, to cover Multitudinem peccatorum, The multitude of
sins, yea to cover Vniversa delicta, Love covers all sins, much more shall
God, who is Love it self, cover our sins so, as he covered the Egyptians, in a
red Sea, in the application of his blood, by visible means in his Church. That
therefore thou may be capable of this covering, Psalm. 37.6.
Commit thy ways unto the Lord; that is, show unto him, by way of confession,
what wrong ways thou have gone, and inquire of him by prayer, what ways thou
art to go, and (as it is in the same Psalm) He shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day; And so there
shall be no guile found in thy spirit, which might hinder this covering of thy
sin, which is, the application of Christ's merits, in the Ordinances of his
Church, nor the Not imputing of thine iniquity, which is our last
consideration, and the conclusion of all.

This not imputing, Imputing.
is that serenity and acquiescence, which a rectified conscience enjoyes, when
the Spirit of God bears witness with my spirit, that, thus reconciled to my
God, I am now guilty of nothing. S. Bernard defines the Conscience thus,
Inseparabilis gloria, vel confusio uniuscujusque, pro qualitate depositi: It is
that inseparable glory, or that inseparable confusion which every soul has,
according to that which is deposited, and laid up in it. Now what is deposited,
and laid up in it? Naturally, hereditarily, patrimonially, Con-reatus, says
that Father, from our first Parents, a fellow-guiltinesse of their sin; and
they have left us sons and heirs of the wrath and indignation of God, and that
is the treasure they have laid up for us. Against this, God has provided
Baptism; and Baptism washes away that sin; for as we do nothing to our
selves in Baptism, but are therein merely passive, so neither did we any
thing our selves in Original sin, but therein are merely passive too; and so
the remedy, Baptism, is proportioned to the disease, Original sin. But
original sin being thus washed away, we make a new stock, we take in a new
depositum, a new treasure, Actual and habitual sins, and therein much being
done by our selves, against God, into the remedy, there must enter something to
be done by our selves, and something by God; And therefore we bring water to
his wine, true tears of repentance to his true blood in the Sacrament, and so
receive the seals of our reconciliation, and having done that, we may boldly
say unto God, Do not condemn me: Job 10.2.
show me wherefore thou contendest with me. When we have said as he does, I
have sinned, Job 7.20.
what shall I do to thee? And have done that that he has ordained, we may say
also as he does, O thou preserver of men, why do thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away mine iniquity? Why do thou suffer me to faint
and pant under this sad apprehension, that all is not yet well between my
soul and thee? We are far from encouraging any man to antidate his pardon; to
presume his pardon to be passed before it is: But when it is truly passed the
seals of Reconciliation, there is Dolus in spiritu, Guile and deceit in that
spirit, nay it is the spirit of falsehood and deceit it self, that will not
suffer us to enjoy that pardon, which God has sealed to us, but still
maintain jealousies, and suspicion, between God and us. My heart is not opener
to God, then the bowels of his mercy are to me; And to accuse my self of sin,
after God has pardoned me, were as great a contempt of God, as to presume of
that pardon, before he had granted it; and so much a greater, as it is directed
against his greatest attribute, his Mercy. Si apud Deum deponas injuriam,
Tertul.
ipse ultor erit, Lay all the injuries that thou suffer, at Gods feet, and
he will revenge them; Si damnum, ipse restituet; Lay all thy losses there, and
he will repair them; Si dolorem, ipse medicus; Lay down all thy diseases
there, and he shall heal thee; Si mortem, ipse resuscitator, Dye in his arms,
and he shall breath a new life into thee; Add we to Tertullian: Si peccata,
ipse sepeliet, lay thy sins in his wounds, and he shall bury them so deep,
that only they shall never have resurrection: The Sun shall set, and have a to
morrows resurrection; Herbs shall have a winter death, and a springs
resurrection; Thy body shall have a long winters night, and then a
resurrection; Only thy sins buried in the wounds of thy Savior, shall never
have resurrection; And therefore take heed of that deceit in the spirit, of
that spirit of deceit, that makes thee impute sins to thy self, when God
imputes them not; But rejoice in Gods general forgiving of Transgressions,
That Christ has dyed for all, multiply thy joy in the covering of thy sin,
That Christ has instituted a Church, in which that general pardon is made
thine in particular, And exalt thy joy, in the not imputing of iniquity, in
that serenity, that tranquillity, that God shall receive thee, at thy last
hour, in thy last Bath, the sweat of death, as lovingly, as acceptably, as
innocently, as he received thee, from thy first Bath, the laver of
Regeneration, the font in Baptism. Amen.

SERMON. LVII. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.3, 4. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all
the day long.
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the
drought of Summer. Selah.

ALL ways of teaching, are Rule and Example: And though ordinarily the Rule be
first placed, yet the Rule it self is made of Examples: And when a Rule would
be of hard digestion to weak understandinge, Example concocts it, and makes it
easy: for, Example in matter of Doctrine, is as Assimilation in matter of
Nourishment; The Example makes that that is proposed for our learning and
farther instruction, like something which we knew before, as Assimilation makes
that meat, which we have received, and digested, like those parts, which are in
our bodies before. David was the sweet singer of Israel; shall we say, Gods
Precentor? His son Solomon was the powerful Preacher of Israel; shall we
say, Gods Chaplain? Both of them, excellent, abundantly, super-abundantly
excellent in both those ways of Teaching; Poet, and Preacher, proceed in these
ways in both, Rule, and Example, the body and soul of Instruction. So this
Psalm is qualified in the Title thereof, A Psalm of David giving Instruction.
And having given his Instruction the first way, by Rule, in the two former
verses, That Blessedness consisted in the Remission of sins, but that this
Remission of sins was imparted to none, Cui dolus in spiritu, In whose spirit
there was any deceit, he proceeds in this Text, to the other fundamental, and
constitutive element of Instruction, Example; And by Example he shows, how far
they are from that Blessedness, that consists in the Remission of sins, that
proceed with any deceit in their spirit. And that way of Instruction, by
Example, shall be our first Consideration; And our second, That he proposes
himself for the Example, I kept silence, says he, and so My Bones waxed old,
etc. And then, in a third part, we shall see, how far this holy Ingenuity goes,
what he confesses of himself: And that third part will subdivide it self, and
flow out into many branches. First, That it was he himself that was In doloso
spiritu, In whose spirit there was deceit, Quia tacuit, because he held his
tongue, because he disguised his sins, because he did not confess them. And
yet, in the midst of this silence of his, God brought him Ad rugitum, to voices
of Roaring, of Exclamation, to a sense of pain, and a sense of shame; so far
he had a voice, but still he was in silence, for any matter of repentance.
Secondly, he confesses the effect of this his silence, and this his Roaring,
Inveteraverunt Ossa, My Bones waxed old, and, my moisture is turned into the
drought of Summer. And then thirdly, he confesses the reason from whence this
inveteration in his bones, and this incineration in his body proceeded, Quia
aggravata manus, because the hand of God lay heavy upon him, heavy in the
present weight, and heavy in the long continuation thereof, day and night. And
lastly, all this he seals with that Selah, which you find at the end of the
verse, which is a kind of Affidavit, of earnest asseveration, and re-affirming
the same thing, a kind of Amen, and ratification to that which was said;
Selah, truly, verily, thus it was with me, when I kept silence, and deceitfully
smothered my sins, the hand of God lay heavy upon me, and as truly, as verily
it will be no better with any man, that suffers himself to continue in that
case.

First then, 1 Part. Exemplum.
for the assistance, and the power, that example has in Instruction, we see
Christ's Method, Quid ab initio, how was it from the beginning; Do as has been
done before. We see Gods method to Moses, for the Tabernacle, Look that thou
make every thing, Exodus 24.40.
after thy pattern, which was showed thee in the Mount; And for the Creation
it self, we know Gods method too; for though there were no world, that was
elder brother to this world before, yet God in his own mind and purpose had
produced, and lodged certain Idea's, and forms, and patterns of every piece
of this world, and made them according to those pre-conceived forms, and
Idea's. When we consider the ways of Instruction, as they are best pursued in
the Scriptures, so are there no Books in the world, that do so abound with
this comparative and exemplary way of teaching, as the Scriptures do; No
Books, in which that word of Reference to other things, that Sicut is so often
repeated, Do this, and do that, Sicut, so, as you see such and such things in
Nature do; And Sicut, so as you find such and such men, in story, to have
done. So David deals with God himself, he proposes him an Example; I ask no
more favor at thy hands, for thy Church now, then thou have afforded them
heretofore, Do but unto these men now, Psalm. 83.3.
Sicut Midianitis, as unto the Midianites, Sicut Siserae, as unto Sisera, as
unto Iabin: Make their Nobles Sicut Oreb, like Oreb and like Zeb, and all their
Princes Sicut Zeba, as Zeba and as Zalmana. For, these had been Examples of
Gods justice: And to be made Examples of Gods anger, Number. 5.26.
is the same thing, as to be a Malediction, a Curse. For, in that law of
Jealousy, that bitter potion which the suspected woman was to take, was
accompanied with this imprecation, The Lord make thee a Curse among the people;
So we read it; But S. Hierome, In Exemplum, The Lord make thee an Example
among the people; that is, deal with thee so, as posterity may be afraid, when
it shall be said of any of them, Lord deal with this woman so, as thou did
with that Adulteress. And so the prayer of the people is upon Booz, Ruth 4.11.
Vt sit in Exemplum, (as S. Hierom also reads that place) The Lord make thee an
Example of virtue in Ephrata, and in Bethlem; that is, that Gods people might
propose him to themselves, conform themselves to him, and walk as he did. As
on the other side, the anger of God is threatened so, Ezekiel. 5.15. Jer. 48.39.
God shall make thee Exemplum and stuporem, An Example and a Consternation; And
Exemplum and derisum, An example and a scorn; That posterity, whenever they
should be threatened with Gods Judgments, they might presently return to such
Examples, and conclude, if our sins be to their Example, our Judgments will
follow their Example too, a judgment accompanied with a consternation, a
consternation aggravated with a scorn, we shall be a prey to our enemies, an
astonishment to our selves, a contempt to all the world; We do according to
their Example, and according to their Example we shall suffer, is not a
Conclusion of any Sorbon, nor a decision of any Rota, but the Logique of the
universal Universitie, Heaven it self. Zech. 13.5.
And so when the Prophet would be excused from undertaking the office of a
Prophet, he says, Adam exemplum meum ab adolescentia, Adam has been the
example, that I have proposed to my self from my youth; As Adam did, so in the
sweat of my brows, I also have eat my bread; I have kept Cattle; I have
followed a Country life, and not made my self fit for the office and function
of a Prophet, Adam has been my Example from my youth. And when Solomon did not
propose a Man, he proposed something else for his Example, an example he would
have; Pro. 24.32.
He looked upon the ill husbands land, and he saw it over-growne, Et exemplo
didici disciplinam, By that example I learnt to be wiser. Enter into the
Armory, search the body and bowels of Story, for an answer to the question in
Job, Quis periit, Who ever perished being Innocent, Job 4.7.
or where were the righteous cut off? There is not one example; no where;
never. Answer but that out of Records, Quis restitit, Job 9.4. Job 11.10.
Who has hardened himself against the Lord, and prospered? Or that, Quis
contradicet, If he cut off, who can hinder him? There is no Example; No man, by
no means. So, if thou be tempted with over-valuing thine own purity, find an
Example to answer that, Job 14.27. Pro. 20.9.
Quis mundum, Who can bring a clean thing out of uncleanness? Or that, Who
can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from sin? There is no
Example; No man ever did it; No man can say it. If thou be tempted to worship
God in an Image, be able to answer God something to that, To whom will ye
liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Esaias 40.18.
There can be no example, no pattern to make God by: for, that were to make
God a Copy, and the other, by which he were made, the Original. If thou have a
tentation to withdraw thy self from the Discipline of that Church, in which
God has given thee thy Baptism, find an Example, to satisfy thy Conscience,
and Gods people, in what age, in what place, there was any such Church
instituted, or any such Discipline practiced, as thou have fancied to thy
self. Believe nothing for which thou have not a Rule; Do nothing for which
thou have not an Example; for there is not a more dangerous distemper in either
Belief or Practice, then singularity; for there only may we justly call for
Miracles, if men will present to us, and bind us to things that were never
believed, never done before. David therefore, in this Psalm, his Psalm of
Instruction, (as himself calls it) does both; He lays down the Rule, he
establishes it by Example, and that was our first Consideration, and we have
done with that.

Our second is, That he goes not far for his Example; 2 Part. Exemplum ipse.
He labors not to show his reading, but his feeling; not his learning, but his
compunction; his Conscience is his Library, and his Example is himself, and he
does not unclaspe great Volumes, but unbutton his own breast, and from thence
he takes it. Men that give Rules of Civil wisdom, and wise Conversation
amongst men, use to say, that a wise man must never speak much of himself; It
will argue, say they, a narrow understanding, that he knows little besides his
own actions, or else that he overvalues his own actions, if he bring them much
into Discourse. But the wise men that seek Christ, (for there were such wise
men in the world once) Statesmen in the kingdom of heaven, they go upon other
grounds, and, wheresoever they may find them, they seek such Examples, as may
conduce most to the glory of God: And when they make themselves Examples, they
do not rather choose themselves then others, but yet they do not spare, nor
forbear themselves more then other men. David proposes his own Example, to
his own shame, but to Gods glory. For, David was one of those persons, Qui non
potuit solus perire, Bernar.
He could not sin alone, his sin authorized sin in others: Princes and
Prelates, are Doctrinall men, in this sense and acceptance, that the subject
makes the Princes life his Doctrine; he learns his Catechism by the eye, he
does what he sees done, and frames to himself Rules out of his Superiors
Example. Therefore, for their Doctrine, David proposes truly his own Example,
and without disguising, tells that of himself, which no man else could have
told. Christ who could do nothing but well, proposes himself for an example
of humility, John 3.15. Titus 2.7.
I have given you an example; Whom? what? That you should do as I have done.
So S. Paul instructs Titus, In all things show a pattern of good works; But
whom? for Titus might have showed them many patterns; but Show thy self a
pattern, says the Apostle; and not only of assiduous, and laborious
preaching, but of good works. 1 Cor. 16.10.
And this is that, for which he recommends Timothy to the Church, He works the
work of the Lord, And, not without a pattern, nor without that pattern, which
S. Paul had given him in himself, He works so, as I also do. S. Paul, who had
proposed Christ to himself to follow, might propose himself to others, and
wish as he does, I would all men were even as my self. 1 Cor. 7.7.
For, though that Apostle, by denying it in his own practice, 2 Cor. 4.5.
seem to condemn it in all others, To preach our selves, (We preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord) yet to preach out of our own history, so
far, as to declare to the Congregation, to what manifold sins we had formerly
abandoned our selves, how powerfully the Lord was pleased to reclaim us, how
vigilantly he has vouchsafed to preserve us from relapsing, to preach our
selves thus, to call up the Congregation, to hear what God has done for my
soul, is a blessed preaching of my self. And therefore Solomon does not speak
of himself so much, nor so much propose and exhibit himself to the Church, in
any Book, as in that which he calls the Preacher, Ecclesiastes: In that Book,
he hides none of his own sins; none of those practices, which he had formerly
used to hide his sins: He confesses things there, which none knew but himself,
nor durst, nor should have published them of him, the King, if they had known
them. So Solomon preaches himself to good purpose, and poures out his own
soul in that Book. Which is one of the reasons which our Interpreters assign,
why Solomon calls himself by this name, Lorin. Proleg. C. 5.
Ecclesiastes, Coheleth, which is a word of the Foeminine gender, and not
Concionator, but Concionatrix, a Shee-preacher, because it is Anima
Concionatrix, It is his soul that preaches, he poures out his own soul to
the Congregation, in letting them know, how long the Lord let him run on in
vanities, and vexation of spirit, and how powerfully and effectually he
reclaimed him at last: For, from this Book, the Preacher, the she-Preacher, the
soule-Preacher, Solomon preaching himself, rather her self, the Church raises
convenient arguments (and the best that are raised) for the proof of the
salvation of Solomon, of which diverse doubted. And though Solomon in this Book
speak diverse things, not as his own opinion, but in the sense of worldly men,
yet, as we have a note upon Plato's Dialogues, that though he do so too, yet
whatsoever Plato says in the name and person of Socrates, that Plato always
means for his own opinion, so whatsoever Solomon says in the name of the
Preacher, (the Preacher says this, or says that) that is evermore Solomon's
own saying. When the Preacher preaches himself, his own sins, and his own
sense of Gods Mercies, or Judgments upon him, as that is intended most for the
glory of God, so it should be applied most by the hearer, for his own
edification; for, he were a very ill natured man, that should think the worse
of a Preacher, because he confesses himself to be worse then he knew him to
be, before he confessed it. Therefore David thought it not enough, to have said
to his Confessor, to Nathan in private, Peccavi, I have sinned; but here,
before the face of the whole Church of God, even to the end of the world, (for
so long these Records are to last) he proposes himself, for an Exemplary
sinner, for a sinful Example, and for a subject of Gods Indignation, whilst he
remained so, When I kept silence, and yet roared, Thy hand lay heavy upon me,
and my moisture was turned into the drought of Summer. And so we are come to
our third Part, He teaches by Example; He proposes himself for the Example;
and of himself he confesses those particulars, which constitute our Text.

Three things he confesses in this Example. 3 Part.
First, that it was he himself that was in doloso spiritu, that had deceit in
his spirit, Quia tacuit, because he held his tongue, he disguised his sins, he
did not confess them; And yet, in the midst of this silence of his, God
brought him Ad Rugitum, to voices of Roaring, of Exclamation, To a sense of
pain, or shame, or loss; so far he had a voice; But still he was in
silence, for any matter of repentance. Secondly, he confesses a lamentable
effect of this silence, and this roaring, Inveteraverunt ossa, His bones were
consumed, waxen old, and his moisture dried up; and then he takes knowledge of
the cause of all this calamity, the weight of Gods heavy hand upon him. And to
this Confession he sets to that seal, which is intended in the last word,
Selah.

First then, David confesses his silence; therefore it was a fault: And he
confesses it, Silentium.
as an instance, as an example of his being In doloso spiritu, That there was
deceit in his spirit; as long as he was silent, he thought to delude God, to
deceive God; and this was the greatest fault. If I be afraid of Gods power,
because I consider that he can destroy a sinner, yet I have his will for my
Buckler; I remember, that he would not the death of a sinner. If I be afraid
that his will may be otherwise bent, (for what can I tell, whether it may not
be his will to glorify himself in surprising me in my sins?) I have his Word
for my Buckler, Miserationes ejus super omnia opera ejus, God does nothing, but
that his Mercy is supereminent in that work, whatsoever; But if I think to
escape his knowledge, by hiding my sins from him, by my silence, I am In doloso
spiritu, if I think to deceive God, I deceive my self, and there is no truth
in me.

When we are to deal with fools, we must, or we must not answer, Christi.
Prove. 26.4.5.
as they may receive profit, or inconvenience by our answer, or our silence.
Answer not a fool, according to his foolishness, lest thou be like him: But
yet, in the next verse, Answer a fool according to his foolishness, lest he
be wise in his own conceit. But answer God always. Though he speak in the
foolishness of preaching, as himself calls it, yet he speaks wisdom, that
is, Peace to thy soul. We are sure that there is a good silence; for we have a
Rule for it from Christ, whose Actions are more then Examples, for his Actions
are Rules. His patience wrought so that he would not speak, his afflictions
wrought so that he could not. He was brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and
he was dumb; Esaias 59. Psalm. 22.15.
There he would not speak; My strength is dried up like a potsheard, and my
tongue cleaves to my jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death,
says David in the Person of Christ, and here he could not speak.

Here is a good silence in our Rule: So is there also in Examples derived from
that Rule. Reverentiae. Hab. 2. ult.
There is Silentium reverentiae, A silence of reverence, for respect of the
presence; The Lord is in his holy Temple, let all the world keep silence before
him. When the Lord is working in his Temple, in his Ordinances, and
Institutions, let not the wisdom of all the world dispute why God instituted
those Ordinances, the foolishness of preaching, or the simplicity of
Sacraments in his Church. Let not the wisdom of private men dispute, why
those whom God has accepted as the representation of the Church, those of whom
Christ says, Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the Church, have ordained these, or these
Ceremonies for Decency, and Uniformity, and advancing of Gods glory, and men's
Devotion in the Church; Let all the earth be silent, In Sacramentis, The whole
Church may change no Sacraments, nor Articles of faith, and let particular men
be silent In Sacramentalibus, in those things which the Church has ordained,
for the better conveying, and imprinting, and advancing of those fundamental
mysteries; for this silence of reverence which is an acquiescence in those
things which God has ordained, immediately, as Sacraments, or Ministerially,
as other Rituall things in the Church, David would not have complained of, nor
repented.

And to this may well be referred Silentium subjectionis, Subjectionis. 1 Cor.
14.34. 1 Timothy 2.11.
That silence which is a recognition, a testimony of subjection. Let the women
keep silence in the Church, for they ought to be subject: And, Let the women
learn in silence, with all subjection. As far as any just Commandment,
either expressly, or tacitly reaches, in injoyning silence, we are bound to be
silent: In Moral seals of secrets, not to discover those things which others
upon confidence, or for our counsel, have trusted us withal; In charitable
seals, not to discover those sins of others, which are come to our particular
knowledge, but not by a judicial way; In religious seals, not to discover
those things which are delivered us in Confession, except in cases excepted in
that Canon; In secrets delivered under these seals, of Nature, of Law, of
Ecclesiastical Canons, we are bound to be silent, for this is Silentium
subjectionis, An evidence of our subjection to Superiors. But since God has
made man with that distinctive property, that he can speak, and no other
creature; since God made the first man able to speak, as soon as he was in the
world; since in the order of the Nazarites instituted in the old Testament,
though they forbore wine, and outward care of their comeliness, in cutting
their hair, and otherwise, yet they bound not themselves to any silence; since
in the other sects, which grew up amongst the Jews, Pharisees, and Sadduces,
and Esseans, amongst all their superfluous, and superstitious austerities,
there was no inhibition of speaking, and Communication; since in the twilight
between the Old and New Testament, Luke 1.20.
that dumbness which was cast upon Zacharic, was inflicted for a punishment
upon him, because he believed not that, that the Angel had said unto him, we
may be bold to say, That if not that silence, which is enjoined in the Roman
Church, yet that silence which is practiced amongst them, for the concealing of
Treasons, and those silences which are imposed upon some of their Orders, That
the Carthusians may never speak but upon Thursdays, others upon other times,
they are not silentia subjectionis, silences imposed by a justauthority, but
they are in Doloso spiritu, there is Deceit in their spirit; if not in every
one of them, who execute the commandment, not in every poor Carthusian, yet
in them who imposed it, who by such an obedience in impertinent things,
infatuate them, and accustom them to a blind and implicit obedience in
matters of more dangerous consequence. Silence of reverence, silence of
subjection meet in this, and in this they determine, That we hold our tongues
from questioning any thing ordained by God, and from defaming any thing done by
that power, which is established by his Ordinance. And this silence falls not
under David's complaint, nor confession.

We have not long to stay upon this silence, Bonum.
which we call the Good silence, because it is not the silence of our Text;
This only we say, That there is a silence which is absolutely good, always
good, and there is another occasionally good, sometimes good, and sometimes not
so; and that is silentium Boni, or a Bono, An abstinence from speaking, or from
doing some things, which of themselves, if no circumstance changed their
nature, were good and requisite. Silentium bonum, that silence that is
absolutely, and always good, Bernaed.
is a quiet contentment in all that God sends, Ne, unde debueras esse dives,
fias pauper, lest when God meant to make thee rich, and have indeed made thee
rich, thou makethy self poor, by thinking thy self poor, and
misinterpreting Gods doing: That thou have not praecordia fatui, as the same
Father speaks, The bowels of an empty man, whining, and crying bowels; Sicut
rota currus, foenum portans and murmur ans, As a Cart that has a full and
plentiful load, and squeaks and whines the more for that abundance. Neither
murmr that thou have minus de Bonis, not Goods enough, nor nimis de Malis,
Afflictions too many, but reckon how much more good God has showed thee, then
thou have deserved, Lament. 3.28.
and how much less ill. Sit alone, and keep silence, because thou have borne
it, because the Lord has laid affliction upon thee; Thine ease is within two
verses, August.
For the Lord will not for sake thee for ever. If thou murmr, and say, Quid
feci, Lord what have I done to thee, that thou should deal thus with me?
thou shall hear the justice of God answer thee, Verumdicis, nihil fecisti,
Thou have done nothing, and that is fault enough; Nothing for me, nothing for
my sake, but all for respect of thy self, in thine own ways, and to thine
own ends.

The other good silence is not always Good, A Bone.
but occasionally, and circumstantially so; It is a forbearing to speak Truth,
which may be good then, when our speaking of Truth can do no good, Psalm. 39.1.
and may do harm. I will keep my mouth bridled whilst the wicked is in my
sight; I was dumb, and spoke nothing, I kept silence even from good, and my
sorrow was more stirred. Though it were a vexation to him, though he had a
sense, and a remorse, that this was some degree of prevarication, to abandon
the defense of Gods honor at any time, yet his religious discretion made it
appear to him, that this present abstinence would, in the end, conduce more to
Gods glory. It was the Wise man's rule, Ecclus. 8.10.
Kindle not the coals of sinners, when thou rebukest them, lest thou be
burnt in the fiery flames of their sins. Poison works apace upon cholerike
complexions; And Physicians may catch the plague by going about to cure it. An
over-vehement, and unseasonable reprehender of a sin may contract that, or a
greater sin himself. I may reprehend a Blasphemer, in such a manner, and at
such a time, as I could not choose but suspect, that he would multiply
blasphemies upon my reprehension; and, though that take off none of his fault,
yet it adds to mine, and now God has two in the Bond; He shall answer, and I
too, for these later blasphemies. The Wise man gave us the Rule, Kindle not
coals, and a good King gave us the example, when Rabshakeh had blasphemed
against God and the King; Let not Hezekias deceive you, saying, The Lord will
deliver us, Then they kept silence, and answered him not a word, says that
Text; for, (as it is added) The Kings commandment was, saying, Answer him not
a word. There is a religious abstinence, in not answering our Adversaries,
though their libels, and increpations, and contumelies tend to the dishonor of
God. S. Ambrose observed good degrees in this Discretion. Ambrese.
He notes in David, that, siluit a bonis, Though it troubled him, he could
hold his peace, when hisreply might exasperate others: He notes in Job, Job
19.7.
(as he reads that place, according to the Septuagint) Ecce, rideo opprobrium,
Behold, I laugh at their reproaches; That he could take pleasure in the goodness
of his conscience, for all their calumnies. He notes in S. Paul a higher degree
then that; Maledicimur, and Benedicimus, 1 Cor. 4.12.
That he when he was rev^ed could bless them that reviled him. Religious
discretion allows us to disguise our Anger, and smother our sorrow, when
either our anger would exasperate, or our sorrow encourage the Adversary, to a
more vehement opposing of God, and his Church, and his Children.

But all this is rather true, in private persons, Ministri. Ezekiel. 3.18.
then in those whom God has sent to do his Messages to his people. When I
shall say to the wicked, (says God to the Prophet) Thou shall surely die, and
thou, The Prophet, give him not warning, nor speak to admonish that he may
live, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I
require at thy hands. And, if every single sinful act, and word, and thought
of mine, need the whole blood of Christ Jesus to expiate that, what blood, and
what seas of that blood shall I need, when the blood of a whole Parish shall be
required at my hand, because I forbore to speak plainly of their sins, and
Gods judgment? It is true, which S. Bernard says, Bernat.
Discretio matter, and consummatrix virtutum, Discretion is the mother, and
discretion is the nurse of every virtue, but yet, in this commandment which is
laid upon us, for the reproof of sin, Haec omnis sit nostra Discretie, says
he, ut in hoc nulla sit nobis Discretio; Let this be all our Discretion, as
Discretion is wisdom, that we use no Discretion, as Discretion is Acceptance
of persons. Haec omnis sapientia, ut in hac part nulla nobis sit, Let this be
all our wisdom, to proceed in this way, this foolishness of Preaching, in
season, and out of season. In Gods name, let us fall within that danger, if we
must needs, that if the poor man speak, they say, What fellow is this? We are
fellows in this service, Ecclus. 13.23.
to Gods Angels, to the Son of God Christ Jesus, who is your High Priest, and
we fellow-workmen with him, in your salvation: And, as long as we can escape
that Imputation, Some man holds his tongue, because he has not to answer,
That either we know not what to say to a doubtful conscience, for our
ignorance, Ecclus. 20.6.]
or are afraid to reprehend a sin, because we are guilty of that sin our
selves; how far States, and Commonwealths may be silent in connivencies, and
forbearances, is not our business now; but for us, the ministers of God,
Vaenobis, si non evangelizemus, Woe be unto us, if we do not preach the
Gospel, and we have no Gospel put into our hands, nor into our mouths, but a
conditional Gospel, and therefore we do not preach the Gospel, except we
preach the Judgments belonging to the breach of those conditions: A silence in
that, in us, would fall under this complaint, and confession, Because I was
silent, these calamities fell upon me.

It becomes not us, to think the worst of David, Silentium malum.
that he was fallen into the deepest degree of this silence, and negligence of
his duty to God: But it becomes us well to consider, that if David, a man
according to Gods heart, had some degrees of this ill silence, it is easy for
us, to have many. For, for the first degree, we have it, and scarce discern
that we have it: for our first silence is but an Omission, a not doing of our
religious duties, or an unthankfulnes for Gods particular benefits. Exodus 14.14.
When Moses says to his people, The Lord shall fight for you, and vos tacebit
is, And you shall hold your peace, there Moses means, you shall not need to
speak, the Lord will do it for his own glory, you may be silent. There it
was a future thing; But the Lord has fought many battles for us: He has
fought for our Church against Superstition, for our land against Invasion, for
this City against Infection, for every soul here against Presumption, or else
against Desperation, Dominus pugnavit, and nos silemus; The Lord has fought
for us, and we never thank him. A silence before, a not praying, has not
always a fault in it, because we are often ignorant of our own necessities,
and ignorant of the dangers that hang over us; but a silence after a benefit
evidently received, a dumb Ingratitude is inexcusable.

There is another ill silence, and an unnatural one, for it is a loud silence;
Pharisai.
It is a bragging of our good works; It is the Pharisees silence, when by
boasting of his fastings, and of his alms, he forgot, he silenced his sins.
This is the devils best Merchant: By this Man, the devil gets all; for, his
ill deeds were his before; and now, by this boasting of them, his good works
become his too. To contract this, If we have overcome this inconsideration, if
we have undertaken some examination of our conscience, yet one survey is not
enough; Psalm. 19.12.
Delicta quis intelligit? Who can understand his error? How many circumstances
in sin vary the very nature of the sin? And then, of how many coats, and shells,
and super-edifications does that sin, which we think a single sin, consist?
When we have passed many scrutinies, many inquisitions of the conscience, yet
there is never room for a silence; we can never get beyond the necessity of
that Petition, Ab eccultis, Lord cleanse me from my secret sins; we shall ever
be guilty of sins, which we shall forget, not only because they are so little,
but because they are so great; That which should be compunction, will be
consternation; and the anguish, which, out of a natural tenderness of
conscience, we shall have at the first entering into those sins, will make us
dispute on the sins side, and, for some present ease, and to give our heavy
soul breath, we will find excuses for them; and at last slide and wear into
a customary practice of them: and though we cannot be ignorant that we do
them, yet we shall be ignorant that they are sins; but rather make them things
indifferent, or recreations necessary to maintain a cheerfulness, and so to
sin on, for fear of dispairing in our sins, and we shall never be able to shut
our mouths against that Petition, Aboccultis; for, though the sin be manifest,
the various circumstances that aggravate the sin, will be secret.

And properly this was David's silence: Silentium Davidis.
He confesses his silence to have been Ex dolese spiritu, Out of a spirit, in
which was deceit; And David did not hope, directly, and determinately to
deceive God; But by endeavoring to hide his sin from other men, and from his
own conscience, he buried it deeper and deeper, but still under more and more
sins. He silences his Adultery, but he smothers it, he buries it under a turfe
of hypocrisy, of dissimulation with Vriah, that he might have gone home, and
covered his sin. He silences this hypocrisy; but that must have a larger turfe
to cover it; he buries it under the whole body of Vriah, treacherously
murdered; He silences that murder, but no turfe was large enough to cover that,
but the defeat of the whole army, and after all, the blaspheming of the name
and power of the Lord of Hosts, in the ruin of the army. That sin, which, if
he would have carried it upward toward God, in Confession, would have vanished
away, and evaporated, by silencing, by suppressing, by burying multiplied, as
Corn buried in the earth, multiplies into many Ears. And, though he might
(perchance for his farther punishment) overcome the remembrance of the first
sin, he might have forgot the Adultery, and feel no pain of that, yet still
being put to a new, and new sin, still the last sin that he did to cover the
rest, could not choose but appear to his conscience, and call upon him for
another sin to cover that; Howsoever he might forget last years sins, yet
yesterdayes sin, or last nights sin will hardly be forgotten yet. And
therefore, Hos. 14.2.
Tollite vobiscum verba, says the Prophet, O Israel return unto the Lord; But
how? Take unto you words, and turn unto the Lord. Take unto you your words,
words of Confession; Take unto you his word, the words of his gracious
promises; break your silence when God breaks his, in the motions of his
Spirit, and God shall break off his purpose of inflicting calamities upon you.

In the mean time, Rugitus.
when David was not come so far, but continued silent, silent from Confession,
God suffers not David to enjoy the benefit of his silence; though he continue
his silence toward. God, yet God mingles Rugitum cum silentio, for all his
filence, he comes to a voice of roaring and howling, when I was silent, my
roaring consumed me; Theodor.
so that here was a great noise, but no music. Now Theodoret calls this
Rugitum compunctionis; That it was the inchoation of his repentance, which
began diffidently, and with fearful vociferations; Bellarm.
And so some of our later men understand it; That because David had continued
long in his sin, when the Ice brake, it brake with the greater noise; when he
returned to speak to God, he spoke with the more vehemence. And truly the word
Shaag, Rugiit, though it signify properly the voice of a Lion, yet David uses
this word Roaring, not only of himself, but of himself as he was a type of
Christ: for this very word is in the beginning of that Psalm, which Christ
repeated upon the Cross, Psalm. 22.1.
or, at least begun it, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me, and why art
thou so far from the voice of my Roaring? So that, Roaring, may admit a good
sense, and does not always imply a distemper, and inordinatenesse; for, in
Christ it could not; But does it not in our Text? In our former Translation it
might stand in a good sense, where the two actions are distinguished in time,
thus, When I held my tongue, or when I roared, whether I kept or broke silence,
all was one, no more ease in one, then the other. But with the Original, and
with our later Translation, it cannot be so, which is, When I held my tongue,
through my roaring, this and this fell upon me: They were concomitant actions,
actions intermixed, and at the same time when he was silent, he roared too; and
therefore that that he calls Roaring, is not a voice of Repentance; for if he
had been come to that, then he had broke his former silence, for that Silence
was a not Confessing, a not Repenting.

This is then that miserable condition which is expressed in David's case,
(though God delivered David from any deadly effect of it) that he had occasion
of Roaring, of howling, (as the Scripture speaks often) though he kept silence:
That he was at never the more ease, for all his sins: The eases that he laid
hold on, were new sins in themselves, and yet they did not ease him of his
other sins; he kept silence, and yet was put to exclamations. And how many
examples can we present to our selves, in our own memory, where persons which
have given themselves all liberty to forge writings, to suborne witnesses, to
forswear themselves, to oppress, to murder others, to make their ways easier
to their ends, and yet have, for all this, though the hand of Justice have not
fallen upon them, seen their whole estates consume and moulder away? When men
out of their ill-grounded plots, and perverse wisdom, think themselves safe
in the silence and secrecy of their sins, God overtakes them, and confounds
them, with those two fearful blows, those two Thunderbolts, He brings them
to Exclamations, to Vociferations, upon Fortune, upon Friends, upon Servants,
upon Rivals, and Competitors, he brings them to a Roaring for their ruin,
Never man was thus dealt withal as I am, never such a conspiracy as against me.

And this they do, All day, says David here, Through my roaring all day.
Totadie.
It was long so with David; A day as long as two of their days, that have
days of six months; almost a year was David in this dark, dead silence,
before he saw day, or returned to speaking. With those that continue their
silence all day, the roaring continues all day too; All their lives, they have
new occasions of lamentations, and yet all this reduces them not, but they are
benighted, they end their life with fearful voices of desperation, in a
Roaring, but still in a silence of their sins, and transgressions. And this is
that that falls first under his Confession, Roaring with Silence, pain, and
shame, and loss, but all without Confession, or sense of sin. And then, that
which falls next under his acknowledgement, is the vehement working, the
lamentable effect of this Silence and Roaring, Inveteration of Bones,
incineration of his whole substance, My Bones are waxen old, and my moisture is
turned into the drought of Summer.

Both these phrases, in which David expresses his own, Humidum literale.
and prophecies of other such sinners misery, have a literal, and a
spiritual, a natural, and a moral sense. For first, this affliction of this
silenced and impenitent finner though it proceed not from the sense of his
sin, though it brought him not yet to a confession, but to a roaring, that
is, an impatient repining and murmuring, yet it had so wrought upon his body,
and whole constitution, as that it drunk up his natural, and vital moisture;
Prove. 17.22. Psalm. 102.3.63.9.
Spiritus tristis exsiccarat, as Solomon speaks, A broken spirit had dried him
up; His days were consumed like smoke, and his bones were burnt like a
hearth; and that Marrow and fatness, in which, he says, he had such sat is
faction, at other times, was exhausted. This is the misery of this impenitent
sinner, he is beggered, but in the Devils service, he is lamed, but in the
Devils wars; his moisture, his blood is dried up, but with licentiousness,
with his overwatchings, either to deceive, or to oppress others; for, as the
proverb is true, Plures gulae quam gladius, The Throat cuts more throats
then the sword does, and eating starves more men then fasting does, because
wastfulnesse induces penury at last, so if all our Hospitals were well
surveyed, it would be found, that the Devil sends more to Hospitals then God
does, and the Stews more then the wars.

Thus his bodily moisture was wasted, literally the sinner is sooner infirmed,
Humidum morale.
sooner deformed, then another man; But there is an Humidum radicale of the
soulle too: A tenderness, and a disposition to bewail his sins, with
remorsefull tears. When Peter had denied his Master, and heard the Cock crow,
he did not stay to make recantations, he did not stay to satisfy them, to whom
he had denied Christ, but he looked into himself first, Flevit amare, says
the Holy Ghost, He wept bitterly; His soul was not withered, his moisture was
not dried up like summer, as long as he could weep. Horace.
The learned Poet has given some character, some expression of the desperate
and irremediable state of the reprobate, when he calls Plutonem illacrymabilem;
There is the mark of his incorrigiblenesse, and so of his irrecoverablenesse,
That he cannot weep. A sinful man, an obdurate man, a stony heart may weep:
Marble, and the hardest sorts of stones weep most, they have the most
moisture, the most drops upon them: But this comes not out of them, not from
within them; Extrinsecall occasions, pain, and shame, and want, may bring a
sinner to sorrow enough, but it is not a sorrow for his sins; All this while
the miserable sinner weeps not, but the miserable man, All this while, though
he have winter in his eyes, his soul is turned into the drought of summer. God
destroyed the first world, and all flesh with water: Tears for the want, or
for the loss of friends, or of remporall blessings, do but destroy us. But
God begun the new world, the Christian Church, with water too, with the
Sacrament of Baptism. Pursue his Example; begin thy Regeneration with tears;
If thou have frozen eyes, thou have a frozen heart too; If the fires of the
Holy Ghost cannot thaw thee, in his promises, the fire of hell will do it much
less, which is a fire of obduration, not of liquefaction, and does not melt a
soul, to pour it out into a new and better form, but hardens it, nails it,
confirms it in the old. Christ bids you take heed, Mat. 24.20.
that your flight be not in winter; That your transgmigration out of this world
be not in cold days of Indevotion, nor in short days of a late repentance.
Take heed too, that your flight be not in such a summer as this; That your
transmigration out of this world be not in such a drought of summer, as David
speaks of here, that the soul have lost her Humidum radicale, all her
tenderness, or all expressing of that tenderness in the sense of her
transgressions. So did David see himself, so did he more foresee in others,
that should farther incur Gods displeasure, then he (by Gods good nesse) had
done, this exsiccatian, this incineration of body and soul; sin burns and
turns body and soul to a Cinder, but not such a Cinder, but that they can,
and shall both burn again, and again, and for ever.

And the dangerous effect of this silence and roaring, Ossa Naturalia. Drut.
29.5.
David expresses in another phrase too, Inveter averunt ossa, That his bones
were waxen old, and consumed; for so that word Balah signifies, Your Clothes
are not waxed old upon you, nor your shoes waxed old upon your feet. In the
Consuming of these Bones, (as our former Translation has it) the vehemence of
the Affliction is presented, and in the waxing old, the continuance. Here the
Rule fayls, Si longa levis, sigravis brevis, Calamities that last long, are
light, and if they be heavy, they are short; both ways there is some
intimation of some ease. But God suffers not this sinner to enjoy that ease;
God will lay enough upon his body, to kill another in a week, and yet he shall
pant many years under it. As the way of his Blessing is, Apprehendet tritura
vindemiam, L^vit. 26.
Your vintage shall reach to your threshing, and your threshing to your sowing;
So in an impenitent sinner, his fever shall reach to a frenzy, his frenzy to a
consumption, his consumption to a penury, and his penury to a wearying and
tyring out of all that are about him, and all the sins of his youth shall meet
in the anguish of his body.

But that is not all; Ossa Spiricualia.
Etiam animae membra sunt, says S. Basil, The soul has her Bones too; And
those are our best actions; Those, which if they had been well done, might have
been called Good works, and might have met us in heaven; But when a man
continues his beloved sin, when he is in doloso spiritu, and deals with God
in false measures, and false waights, makes deceitful Confessions to God, his
good works shall do him no good, his Bones are consumed, not able to bear him
upright in the sight of God. This David sees in himself, and foresees in
others, and he sees the true reason of all this, Quia aggravata manus, Because
the hand of God lies heavy upon him, which is another branch of his Confession.

It was the safety of the Spouse, Aggravata manus. C^at. 2.6. Gregor.
That his left hand was under her head, and that his right hand embraced her:
And it might well be her safety; for, Per laevam vita pr aesens, per dextram
aeterna designatur, says S. Gregory, His left hand denotes this, and his right
the other life: Our happiness in this, our assurance of the next, consists in
this, that we are in the hands of God. But here in our Text, Gods hand was
heavy upon him; and that is an action of pushing away, and keeping down. And
then when we see the great power, and the great indignation of God upon the
Egyptians, Exed. 8.19.
is expressed but so, Digitus Dei, the finger of God is in it, how heavy an
affliction must this of David be esteemed, Quando aggravata manus, when his
whole hand was, and was heavy upon him? Here then is one lesson for all men,
and another peculiar to the children of God. This appertains to all, That when
they are in silentio, in a seared and stupid forgetting of their sins, or in
Doloso spiritu, in half-Confessions, half-abjurations, half-detestations of
their sins; The hand of God will grow heavy upon them. Tell you your children
of it, (says the Prophet) and let your children tell their children, and let
their children tell another generation, (for this belongs to all) That which is
left of the Palmer worm, the Grasshopper shall eat, and that that he leaves,
the Canker worm shall eat, and the residue of the Canker worm, the
Caterpiller. The hand of God shall grow heavy upon a silent sinner, in his
body, in his health; and if he conceive a comfort, that for all his sickness,
he is rich, and therefore cannot fail of help and attendance, there comes
another worm, and devours that, faithlesnesse in persons trusted by him,
oppressions in persons that have trusted him, facility in undertaking for
others, corrupt Judges, heavy adversaries, tempests and Pirates at Sea,
unseasonable or ill Markets at land, costly and expensive ambitions at Court,
one worm or other shall devour his riches, that he eased himself upon. If he
take up another Comfort, that though health and wealth decay, though he be
poor and weak, yet he has learning, and philosophy, and moral constancy,
and he can content himself with himself, he can make his study a Court, and a
few Books shall supply to him the society and the conversation of many friends,
there is another worm to devour this too, the hand of divine Justice shall
grow heavy upon him, in a sense of an unprofitable retiredness, in a
disconsolate melancholy, and at last, in a stupidity, tending to desperation.

This belongs to all, to all Non-confitents, That think not of confessing
their sins at all, To all Semi-confitents, that confess them to halfs,
without purpose of amendment, Aggravabitur manus, The hand of God will grow
heavy upon them every way, and stop every issue, every posterne, every saly,
every means of escape. But that which is peculiar to the Children of God, is,
That when the hand of God is upon them, they shall know it to be the hand of
God, and take hold even of that oppressing hand, and not let it go, till they
have received a Blessing from it, that is, raised themselves even by that heavy
and oppressing hand of his, even in that affliction. Psalm. 82. Psalm. 77. Habak.
3.16.
That when God shall fill their faces with shame, yet they shall seek his
face; yea, when God shall kill him, yet he will trust in God, and seek him;
And (as the Prophet carries it farther) Cum ingreditur putredo, when
Rottenness enters into their Bones, yet they shall rest even in that day of
trouble, of dissolution, of putrefaction. God shall call upon them, as he did
upon Judah, Tritura mea, and filius are ae, O my threshing place, and the son
of my floor, Esaias 21.10.
Thou whom I have beaten and bruised with my flayls, when I have threshed, and
winnowed, and sifted thee by these afflictions, and by this heavy hand, still
thou shall fix thy faithful eyes in heaven, and see a room reserved there for
thee, amongst those, Apoc. 7, 14.17.
which come out of great tribulations, and have made their long robes white in
the blood of the Lamb; who shall therefore dwell in the midst of them, and
govern them, and lead them to the lively fountains of waters, and wipe away
all tears from their eyes. Even upon his own Children, his hand shall grow
heavy, but that heaviness, that weight shall awake them, and that hand shall
guide them, to, and in the ways of peace and reconciliation.

And this both day and night, as our Text says, That is, Die ac nocte.
both in the day of their prosperity, and the night of their adversity. Even
in prosperity, the child of God shall feel the hand of God grow heavy upon
him: He shall find a guiltiness of not having employed those temporal
benefits to their right use; He shall find the Pluit laqueos, Psalm. 11.6.
a shower of snares to have been powered down upon him; occasions of sin;
occasions of falling into sins himself; occasions of drawing others, and of
buying those souls with his money, which Christ Jesus had a pre-emption of,
and had bought them before with his blood: He shall find the hand of God in
adversity, and love it, because it shall deliver him; He shall find his hand
in prosperity, and be afraid of it, because that prosperity has before, and
may again lead him into tentations.

To end all; all this, the Holy Ghost by the pen of David, Selah.
seals with the last word of this Text, Selah. A word of uncertain sense, and
signification; for the Jews themselves do not know exactly, and certainly what
it signifies; but deriving this Selah, from Selal, which signifies Attollere,
To lift up, they think it to be but a Musical note, for the raising of the
voice, at that part of the Psalm, where that word is used; as, indeed the word
is never used in the Bible, but in the Psalms, and twice in one Chapter, in
the Prophet Habakkuk, which is a Musical, a Metricall Chapter. In the Latin
Translation, Hab. 3.3. and 9.
and in the Arabique Translation of the Psalms it is clean left out, because
they were not sure how to translate it aright. But, to speak upon the best
grounds in the Grammar of that language, and upon best Authority too, the word
signifies a Vehement, a Patheticall, a Hyperbolicall asseveration, and
attestation, and ratification of something said before. Such, in a proportion,
as our Saviors Amen, Amen is, Verily, verily I say unto you; Such, as S. Paul's
fidelis Sermo, with which he seals so many truths, is, This is a faithful
saying; Such, as that Apostles Coram Domino is, with which he ratifies many
things, Before the Lord I speak it; and such, as Moses his Vivo ego, and Vivit
Dominus, As I live says the Lord, and As the Lord lives. And therefore,
though God be in all his words, Yea, and Amen, no word of his can perish in it
self, nor should perish in us, that is, pass without observation, yet, in
setting this seal of Selah to this Doctrine, he has testified his will that
he would have all these things the better understood, and the deeplier
imprinted, That if a man conceal and smother his sins, Selah, Assuredly, God
will open that man's mouth, and it shall not show forth his praise, but God will
bring him, Ad rugitum, to fearful exclamations out of the sense of the
affliction, if not of the sin; Selah, Assuredly, God will shiver his bones,
shake his best actions, and discover their impurity; Selah, assuredly, God will
suffer to be dried up all his moisture, all possibility of repentant tears,
and all interest in the blood of Christ Jesus; Selah, Assuredly, Gods hand
shall be heavy upon him, and he shall not discern it to be his hand, but shall
attribute all to false causes, and so place all his comfort in false remedies;
He shall leave out God all day, and God shall leave out him all night, all his
everlasting night, in which he shall never see day more. Selah, Assuredly,
Verily, Amen, Fidelis Sermo, This is a faithful, an infallible Truth, Coram
Domino, Before the Lotd, Vivit Dominus, as the Lord lives, as Moses, as
Christ, as S. Paul testify their, David testifies his Doctrine, All between
God and man is conditional, and where man will not be bound, God will not be
bound neither; If man invest a habit and purpose of sinning, God will study a
judgment against that man, 1. Sam 3.11.
and do that, even in Israel, which shall make all our ears to tingle, and
all our hearts to ache; Till that man repent, God will not, and when he does,
God will repent too; For, though God be not Man, that he can repent, yet that
God, who for Man's sake became Man, for our sakes, and his own glory, will so
far become Man again, as upon Man's true repentance, to repent the Judgments
intended against that Man.

SERMON. LVIII. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unte thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid.
I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin.


THis is the Sacrament of Confession; So we may call it in a safe meaning; That
is, The mystery of Confession: for true Confession is a mysterious Art. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. Mat. 22.1.
As there is a Mystery of iniquity, so there is a Mystery of the Kingdom of
heaven. And the mystery of the Kingdom of heaven is this, That no man comes
thither, but in a sort as he is a notorious sinner. One mystery of iniquity is,
that in this world, though I multiply sins, yet the Judge cannot punish me, if
I can hide them from other men, though he know them; but if I confess them, he
can, he will, he must. The mystery ofthe Kingdom of heaven, is, That only the
Declaring, the Publishing, the Notifying, and Confessing of my sins, possesses
me of the Kingdom of heaven; There is a case, in which the notoriety of my
sins does harm; when my open sinning, or my publishing of my sin, by way of
glory in that sin, casts a scandal upon others, and leads them into tentation;
for so, my sin becomes theirs, because they sin my sin by example, And their
sin becomes mine, because I gave the example, and we aggravate one another
sin, and both sin both. But there is a publication of sin, that both
alleviates, nay annihilates my sin, and makes him that hates sin, Almighty God,
love me the better, for knowing me to be such a sinner, then if I had not told
him of it. Therefore do we speak of the mystery of Confession; for it is not
delivered in one Rule, nor practiced in one Act.

In this Confession of David's, Divisie.
( I acknowledged my sin unto thee, etc.) We shall see more then so; for,
though our two Parts be but the two Acts, David's Act, and Gods Act, Confession
and Absolution, yet is there more then one single action to be considered in
each of them. For first, in the first, there is a reflected Act, that David
does upon himself, before he come to his Confession to God; Something David
had done, before he came to say, I will confess, As he did confess, before
God forgave the iniquity of his sin. Now that which he did in himself, and
which preceded his Confession to God, was the Notum feci, I acknowledged my
sin; which was not his bringing it to the knowledge of God by way of
Confession, for, (as you see by the Method of the Holy Ghost, in the frame of
the Text) it preceded his purpose of confessing, but it was the taking
knowledge of his sin in himself, It was his first quickening, and inanimation,
that grace gave his soul, as the soul gives the child in the Mothers womb. And
then in David's act upon himself, follows the Non operui, I have not hid mine
iniquity, none of mine iniquities from mine own sight: I have displayed to my
self, anatomized mine own conscience, left no corner unsearched, I am come to
a perfect understanding of mine own case, Non operui, This is David's act upon
himself, the recalling, and recollecting of his sins, in his own memory. And
then finding the number, the weight, and so, the oppression of those sins
there, he considers where he may discharge himself of them; And Dixi, says
David, which is a word that implies both Deliberation, and Resolution, and
Execution too; I thought what was best to do, and I resolved upon this, and I
did it; Dixi Confitebor, That I would make a true, a full, a hearty Confession
to God of all those sins; for such we see the Elements and the Extent of his
Confession to be; He will confess Peccata, Transgressions, Sins; Neither by an
over-tendernesse, and diffidence, and scrupulosity, to call things sins, that
are not so, nor by indulgent flattering, and sparing of himself, to forbear
those things which are truly so; He will confess Peccata, Sins, and Peccata
sua, His sins; First, Sua, that is, A se perpetrata, He will acknowledge them
to have proceeded, and to have been committed by himself, he will not impute
them to any other cause, least of all to God; And then, Sua, non aliena, he
will confess sins that are his own sins, and not meddle with the sins of other
men, that appertain not to him. This is the subject of his Confession, Sins,
and His sins, and then, Peccata sua Domino, His sins unto the Lord, both in
that consideration, That all sins are committed against the Lord, and in that
also, That Confession of all sins is to be made unto the Lord; And lastly, all
this, (as S. Hierome reads this text, and so also did our former Translation)
Adversum se, Against himself, that is, without any hope of relief, or
reparation in himself. He begins to think of his own sinful state, and he
proceeds to a particular inquisition upon his conscience, There is his
preparation, Then he considers, and thereupon resolves, and thereupon proceeds
to confess things that are truly sins, And then all them as his own, without
imputing them to others, If they be his own, without meddling with others, And
these to the Lord, against whom all sin is committed, and to whom all
Confession is to be directed; And all this still against himself, without any
hope from himself. All this is in David's action, preparatorily in himself, and
then declaratorily toward God, and do but make up our first Part.

In the other, which is Gods Act toward David, the Absolution, the Remission,
the Forgiveness, we shall consider first the fullness; for, it is both of the
sin, and the punishment of the sin, for the word imports both, and our two
Translations have expressed it between them, for that which one Translation
calls the Iniquity of the sin, the other calls The punishment; And then we
shall consider the seasonablenesse, the speed, the acceleration of Gods mercy,
in the Absolution, for in David it is but Actus inchoatus, and Actus consummat
as in God, David did but say, I will confess, and God forgave the iniquity,
and the punishment of his sin. Now as this Distribution is Paraphrase enough
upon the text, so a little larger Paraphrase upon every piece of the
Paraphrase, will be as much as will fall into this exercise. For, as you see,
he branches are many, and full of fruit, and I can but shake them, and leave
every one to gather his own portion, to apply those notes, which may most
advance his edification.

First then in this mystery of Confession, 1 Part. Notum seci.
we consider David's reflected act, his preparatory act, preceding his
confession to God, and transacted in himself, of which the first motion is,
the Notum feci, I acknowledged in my self, I came to a feeling in my self,
what my sinful condition was. This is our quickening in our regeneration, and
second birth; and til this come, a sinner lies as the Chaos in the beginning of
the Creation, before the Spirit of God had moved upon the face of the waters,
Dark, and void, and without form; He lies, as we may conceive, out of the
Authors of Natural Story, the slime and mud of the River Nilus to lie, before
the Sunbeams strike upon it; which after, by the heat of those beams,
produces several shapes, and forms of creatures. So till this first beam of
grace, which we consider here, strike upon the soul of a sinner, he lies in
the mud and slime, in the dregs and lees, and tartar of his sin. He cannot
so much as wish, that that Sun would shine upon him, he does not so much as
know, that there is such a Sun, that has that influence, and impression; But
if this first beam of Grace enlighten him to himself, reflect him upon
himself, notum facit, (as the Text says) if it acquaint him with himself,
then, as the creatures in the Creation, then, as the new creatures at Nilus,
his sins begin to take their forms, and their specifications, and they appear
to him in their particular true shapes, and that which he has in a general
name, called Pleasure or Wantonness, now calls it self in his conscience, a
direct Adultery, a direct Incest; and that which he has called Frugality, and
providence for family and posterity, tells him plainly, My name is Oppression,
and I am the spirit of covetousness. Many times men fall into company, and
accompany others to houses of riot and uncleanness, and do not so much as
know their sinful companions names; nay they do not so much as know the names
of the sins that they commit, nor those circumstances in those sins, which
vary the very name and nature of the sin.

But then, Gregor.
Oculos, quos culpa claudit, poena aperit, Those eyes, which sin shut, this
first beam of Grace opens, when it comes, and works effectually upon us; Till
this season of grace, Ier. 2.29.
this sinner is blind to the Sun, and deaf to Thunder. A wild Ass, that is
used to the wilderness, and snuffeth up wind at her pleasure, in her occasion
who can turn her away? An habitual sinner, that does not stumble, but tumble,
as a mighty stone down a hill, in the ways of his sin, in his occasion, who
can turn him? in his rage of sin, what law can withhold him? But says the
Prophet there, of that wild Ass, All they that seek her, will not weary
themselves; Friends, Magistrates, Preachers, do but weary themselves, and lose
their labor, in endeavoring to reclaim that sinner; But in her Month they
shall find her, says the Prophet; That is, say our Expositors, when she is
great and unweildy. Some such Month, God of his goodness brings upon this
sinner; Some sickness, some judgment stops him, and then we find him; God by
his Ordinance, executed by us, brings him to this Notum feci, into company with
himself, into an acquaintance and conversation with himself, and he sees his
sins look with other faces, and he hears his sins speak with other voices,
and he finds then to call one another by other names: And when he is thus
come to that consideration, Lord! how have I mistaken my self, Am I, that
thought my self, and passed with others, for a sociable, a pleasurable man,
and good company; am I a leprous Adulterer, is that my name? Am I, that thought
my self a frugall man, and a good husband; I, whom fathers would recommend to
their children, and say, Mark how he spares, how he grows up, how he
gathers, am I an oppressing Extortioner, is that my name? Blessed be thy name,
O Lord, that have brought me to this notum feci, to know mine own name, mine
own miserable condition; he will also say, may that blessing of thine enlarge
it self farther, that as I am come to this notum feci, to know that I mistook
my self all this while, so I may proceed to the non operui, to a perfect
sifting of my conscience, in all corners: which is David's second motion in his
act of preparation, and our next consideration, I acknowledged my sin, and I
hid none, disguised none, non operui.

Sometimes the Magistrate is informed of an abuse, Non operni.
and yet proceeds to no farther search, nor inquisition. This word implies a
sifting of the conscience. He does not only take knowledge of his sins, then
when they discover themselves; of his riot and voluptuousness, then when he
burns in a fever occasioned by his surfets; nor of his licentiousness, then
when he is under the anguish and smart of corrosives; nor of his wastfulnesse
and pride, then when he is laid in prison for debt: He does not seek his
sins in his Belly, nor in his Bones, nor in his Purse, but in his Conscience,
and he unfolds that, rips up that, and enters into the privatest, and most
remote corners thereof. And there is much more in this negative circumstance,
non operui, I hid nothing, then in the former acknowledgement, notum feci, I
took knowledge of my sins. When they sent to sift John Baptist, whether he
were The Christ, because he was willing to give them all satisfaction, Ioh.
1.20.
he expressed himself so, He confessed, and denied not, and said, I am not
the Christ. So when Ioshuah pressed Achan, to confess his trespass, Josh.
7.19.
he presses him with this negative addition, Show me what thou have done, and
hide it not; that is, disguise nothing that belongs to it. For, the better to
imprint a confidence, and to remove all suspicion, Men to to their Masters,
Wives to their Husbands, will confess something, but yet operiunt, they hide
more. Those words, In multitudine virtutis tuae, Psalm. 66.3.
Through the greatness of thy power, thine enemies shall submit, S. Jerome,
and the Septuagint before, and Tremellius after, and all that bind themselves
to the Hebrew letter, read it thus, Mentientur tibi inimici tui, when thy
power is showed upon them, when thy hand lies upon them, thine enemies will lie
unto thee, They will counterfeit a confession, they will acknowledge some sins,
but yet operiunt, they hide, they cover others. 1 Samuel 15.
Saul in the defeat of the Amalekites reserved some of the fattest of the
spoil, and being deprehended, and reprehended, he said he intended it for
sacrifice: Many times, men in great place, abuse their own souls with that
imagination, or palliation, That they do God good service in some sin, and
that they should more hurt the cause of God, if they should proceed earnestly
to the punishment of those that oppose it, then if they let them alone, and so
leave laws unexecuted, and Gods truth endangered. But David's issue was, non
iniquitas, non operui, I left none iniquity unsearched, I hid none.

But any thing serves us for a cover of sin, even from a Net, that every man
sees through, to such a cloud of darkness, as none but the prince of
darkness, that cast that cloud upon us, can see us in it, nor we see our
selves. That we should hide lesser sins with greater, is not so strange;
That in an Adultery, we should forget the circumstances in it, and the
practices to come to it. But we hide greater sins with lesser, with a manifold,
and multiplied throng and cloud of lesser sins, all comes to an indifferency,
and so we see not great sins. Easines of conversation in a woman, seems no
great harm; Adorning themselves to please those with whom they converse, is
not much more; To hear them, whom they are thus willing to please, praise
them, and magnify their perfections, is little more then that; To allow them
to sue, and solicit for the possession of that which they have so much praised,
is not much more neither; Nor will it seem much at last, to give them
possession of that they sue for; nay it will seem a kind of injustice to deny
it them. We hide lesser sins with greater, greater with lesser; Nay we hide
the devil with God, we hide all the weeks sins with a Sabbaths solemnity: And
as in the Roman Church, they poisoned God, (when they had made their
Bread-god, they poisoned the Emperor with that bread) so this is a Possessing
of God, a making the devil to enter into God, when we hide our sins with an
outward sanctity, and call God to witness and testify to the Congregation,
that we are saints, when we are devils; for this is a suborning of God, and a
drawing of God himself into a perjury. We hide our sins in his house, by
hypocrisy, all our lives, and we hide them at our deaths, perchance with an
Hospital. And truly we had need do so, when we have impoverished God, in
his children, by our extorsions, and wounded him, and lamed him, in them, by
our oppressions, we had need provide God an Hospital. As men that rob houses
thrust in a child at the window, and he opens greater doors for them, so
lesser sins make way for greater. De minimis non curat Lex, The law is feign to
pass over small faults; but De minimis cur at lux, That light of grace, by
which a sinner disposes himself to confession, must discover every sin, and
hide none, suffer none to hide it self, nor lie hidden under others. When God
speaks so much of Behemoth, and Leviathan, Job 40. and 41.
the great land and seaoppressors, he calls us to the consideration of the
insupportablenesse of great sins; but in the plains of Egypt by hail, and
locusts, and lice, little and contemptible things, he calls us to the
consideration of these vermin of the soul, lesser and unconsidered sins.
David had not accomplished his work upon himself, his reflected, his
preparatory Act, till he had made both those steps, notum feci, non operui,
first I took knowledge of my sinful condition, and then I proceeded to a
particular inquisition of my Conscience, I took knowledge of my sin, and
mine iniquity I have not hid, and then he was fit to think of an access to
God, by confession, Dixi confiteber, etc.

This word, Dixi meditando.
Dixi, Amar, I said, is a word that implies first meditation, deliberation,
considering, and then upon such meditation, a resolution too, and execution
after all. When it is said of God, dixit, and dixit, God said this, and said
that, in the first Creation, Cave ne cogites strepitum, Basil.
Do not think that God uttered any sound; His speaking was inward, his
speaking was thinking. So David uses this word in the person of another, Dixit
insipiens, Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said, that is, In cord, said in his heart, that is, thought
that there is no God. There speaking is thinking; and speaking is resolving
too. So David's son Solomon uses the word, 1 King. 5.5.
Behold I purpose to build a house unto the Lord, where the word is, I say, I
will do it, Speaking is determining; and speaking is executing too, Dixi
custodiam, I said I will take heed to my ways, Psalm. 39.1.
that is, I will proceed and go forward in the paths of God. And such a
premeditation, such a preconsideration, do all our approaches, and accesses to
God, and all our acts in his service require. God is the Rock of our
salvation; God is no Occasional God, no Accidental God; neither will God be
served by Occasion, nor by Accident, but by a constant Devotion. Our
communication with God must not be in Interjections; that come in by chance;
nor our Devotions made up of Parentheses, that might be left out. They err
equally, that make a God of Necessity, and that make a God of Contingency: They
that with the Manichees, make an ill God, a God that forces men to do all the
ill that they do, And they that with the Epicures, make an idle God, an
indifferent God, that cares not what is done; God is not Destiny; Then there
could be no reward, nor punishment: but God is not Fortune neither, for then
there were no Providence. If God have given reason only to Man, it were
strange that Man should exercise that reason, in all his Moral and Civil
actions, and only do the acts of Gods worship casually; To go to Court, to
Westminster, to the Exchange, for ends, and to come to Church, by chance, or
for company, or for some collateral respects, that have no relation to God,
Not to think of our Confession, till the Priest have called upon us, to say
after him, We have erred and straied from thy ways like lost sheep, To come
for Absolution, Dan. 2.3.
as Nebuchadnezzar came to Daniel, for the interpretation of his Dream, who
did not only not understand his Dream, but not remember it, Somnium ejus
fugit ab eo, He did not only not know what his Dream meant, but he did not
know what his Dream was, Not to consider the nature of Confession, and
Absolution, not to consider the nature of the sins we should confess, and be
absolved of, is a stupidity against David's practice here; Dixit, He said, he
meditated, he considered, Gods service is no extemporall thing. But then Dixit,
He resolved too, for so the word signifies, Consideration, but Resolution upon
it; And then, that he Resolved, he Executed.

This is not only David's dixit in cord, Dixi statuendo. Luke 15.12.
where speaking is thinking, nor only Solomon's dixi adificabo, I resolved how I
might build, but it is also the Prodigals Dixi revertar, I said I will go to my
Father, A resolving and executing of that Resolution for that, that execution
crowns all. How many think to come hither, when they wake, and are not ready
when the hour comes? And even this mornings omission is an abridgement, or an
essay of their whole lives, They think to repent every day, and are not ready
when the bell tolls. Cajetan.
It is well said of Gods speaking, in the Creation, It was Dictio practica,
diffinitiva, Imperativa, Ambrose.
It was an Actual speaking, a Definitive, an Imperative speaking; And, Dicto
absolvit negotium, His saying he would do it, that is, his meaning to do it,
was the very doing of it. Our Religious duties require meditations, for God is
no extemporall God; Those produce determinations, for God must not be held in
suspense; And they flow into executions, for God is not an illusible God, to be
carried with promises, or purposes only; And all those linkes of this
religious Chain, Consideration, Resolution, Execution, Thought, Word, and
Practice, are made out of this golden word, Amar, Dixi, I said I will do it.
And then, Dixi confitebor, I considered, that my best way was to confess, and
I resolved to do so, and I did it; Dixi confitebor.

It is but a homely Metaphor, Confitebor. Origin.
but it is a wholesome, and a useful one, Confessio vomitus, Confession works
as a vomit; It shakes the frame, and it breaks the bed of sin; and it is an
ease to the spiritual stomach, to the conscience, to be thereby disburdened.
It is an ease to the sinner, to the patient; but that that makes it absolutely
necessary, is that it is a glory to God; for in all my spiritual actions,
Apprecations, or Deprecations, whether I pray for benefits, or against
calamities, still my Alpha, and Omega, my first and last motive, Josh. 7.19.
must be the glory of God. Therefore Ioshuah says to Achan, My Son, give I
pray thee, glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto him.
Now, the glory of God arises not out of the Confessing; but because every true
Confessing is accompanied with a detestation of the sin, as it has separated
me from God, and a sense of my reunion, and redintegration with God, in the
abjuration of my former sins, (for, to tell my sin by way of a good tale, or by
boasting in it, though it be a revealing, a manifesting, is not a Confession)
in every true confession God has glory, because he has a straid soul,
reunited to his Kingdom. And to advance this Glory, David confesses Peccata,
sins; which is our next Consideration, I said, I will confess my sins unto the
Lord.

First he resents his state, All is not well; Then he examines himself,
Peccata vera.
Thus and thus it stands with me; Then he considers, then he resolves, then he
executes, He confesses, (so far we are gone) and now he confesses sins. For,
the Pharisees, (though he pretended a Confession) was rather an exprobration,
how much God had been beholden to him, for his Sabbaths, for his Alms, for
his Tithes, for his Fasting. David confesses sins; first, such things as were
truly sins. For, as the element of Air, that lies between the Water, and the
Fire, is sometimes condensed into water, sometimes rarefied into fire: So lies
the conscience of man between two operations of the Devil; sometimes he
rarifies it, evaporates it, that it apprehends nothing, feels nothing to be
sin, sometimes he condenses it, that every thing falls and sticks upon it, in
the nature, and takes the weight of sin, and he mis-interprets the indifferent
actions of others, and of his own, and destroys all use of Christian liberty,
all conversation, all recreation, and out of a false fear, of being undutifull
to God, is unjust to all the world, and to his own soul, and consequently to
God himself, who, of all notions, would not be received in the notion of a
Cruel, or Tyrannical God. In an obdurate conscience that feels no sin, the
Devil glories most, but in the over-tender conscience he practices most; That
is his triumphant, but this is his militant Church; That is his Sabbath, but
this is his six days labor; In the obdurate he has induced a security, in
the scriptures, which the Holy Ghost has expressed in so many names, as Sin;
Sin, Wickedness, Iniquity, Transgressions, Offenses, Many, many more; And all
this, that thereby we might reflect upon our selves often, and see if our
particular actions fell not under some of those names; But then, lest this
should over-intimidate us, there are as many names given by the Holy Ghost, to
the Law of God; Law, Statutes, Ordinances, Covenants, Testimony, Precept, and
all the rest, of which there is some one at least, repeated in every verse of
the hundred and nineteenth Psalm; that thereby we might still have a Rule to
measure, and try our actions by, whether they be sins or no. For, as the
Apostle says, He had not known sin, if he had not known the Law; So there
had been no sin, if there had been no Law. And therefore that soul that
feels it self oppressed under the burden of a Vow, must have recourse to the
Law of God, and see whether that Vow fall under the Rule of that Law; For as an
over-tender conscience may call things sins, that are not, and so be afraid of
things that never were, so may it also of things that were, but are not now; of
such sins as were truly sins, and fearful sins, but are now dead, dead by a
true repentance, and buried in the Sea of the blood of Christ Jesus, and sealed
up in that Monument, under the seal of Reconciliation, the blessed Sacrament,
and yet rise sometimes in this tender conscience, in a suspicion and jealousy,
that God has not truly, not fully forgiven them. And as a Ghost, which we
think we see, afrights us more then an army that we do see: So these
apparitions of sins, of things that are not against any Law of God, and so are
not sins, or sins that are dead in a true repentance, and so have no being at
all, by the Devils practice work dangerously upon a distempered conscience;
for, as God has given the Soul an Imagination, and a Fancy, as well as an
Understanding, So the Devil imprints in the conscience, a false Imagination,
as well as a fearful sense of true sin. David confesses sins, sins that were
truly sins.

But the more ordinary danger is, Omniae.
in our not calling those things which are truly sins, by that name. For, as
sometimes when the Baptism of a Child is deferred for State, the Child dies
unbaptized: So the sinner defers the Baptism of his sin, in his tears, and in
the blood of his Savior, offered in the blessed Sacrament, till he dye
namelesse, namelesse in the book of Life. It is a Character, that one of the
ancientest Poets gives of a well-bred, and well-governed Gentleman, That he
would not tell such lies as were like truths, not probable lies; nor such
truths as were like lies, not wonderful, not incredible truths; It is the
constancy of a rectified Christian, not to call his indifferent actions sins,
for that is to slander God, as a cruel God; nor to call sins indifferent
actions, for that is to undervalue God, as a negligent God. God does not keep
the Conscience of man upon the wrack, in a continual torture and stretching;
But God does not stupifie the conscience with an Opiate, in an insensiblenesse
of any sin. The law of God is the balance, and the Criterium; By that try thine
actions, and then confess. David did so; Peccata, he confessed sins;
nothing, that was not so, as such; neither omitted he any thing, that was so.
And then they were Peccata sua, His sins, I said, I will confess my sins unto
the Lord.

First, Sua.
Sua, His sins, that is, a se perpetrata, sins which he confesses to have
been of his voluntary committing; He might, and did not avoid them. When Adam
said, by way of alienation, and transferring his fault, The woman whom thou
gave me; And the woman said, Genesis 3.12.
The Serpent deceived me; God took this, by way of Information to find out
the Principal, but not by way of extenuation, or alleviation of their faults;
Every Adam eats with as much sweat of his brows, and every Eve brings forth
her Children with as much pain in her travail, as if there had been no
Serpent in the case. If a man sin against God, who shall plead for him? If a
man lay his sins upon the Serpent, upon the Devil, it is no plea, but if he
lay them upon God, it is blasphemy. Job finds some ground of a pious
Expostulation with God, in that, My flesh is not brass, nor my strength
stones; And such as I am, thou have made me; why then do thou set me up as a
mark to shoot at? But Job never hopes for ease, in any such allegation; Thou
have made my soul a Cisterne, and then powered tentations into it; Thou have
enfeebled it with denying it thy Grace, and then put a giant, a necessity of
sinning upon it. My sins are mine own; The Sun is no cause of the shadow my
body casts, nor God of the sins I commit. David confesses his sins, that is,
he confesses them to be His; And then he confesses His, He meddles not with
those that are other men's.

The Magistrate and the Minister are bound to consider the sins of others; Non
alienae.
for, their sins become Qaodammodo nostra, in some sort ours, if we do not
reprove, if the Magistrate do not correct those sins. All men are bound to
confess, and lament the sins of the people. It was then when Daniel was in
that exercise of his Devotion, Confessing his sin, Dan. 9.12.
and the sin of his people, that he received that comfort from the Angel
Gabriel; And yet, even then, the first thing that fell under his Confession,
was his own sin, My sin, And then, The sin of my people. When Joseph's
brethren came to a sense of that sin, in having sold him, none of them
transfers the sin from himself, neither does any of them discharge any of the
rest of that sin: Genesis 42.21.
They all take all; They said to one another, says that Text, we, all we, are
verily guilty, and therefore is this distress come upon us, upon us all;
National calamities are induced by general sins, and where they fall, we
cannot so charge the Laity, as to free the Clergy, nor so charge the people, as
to free the Magistrate. But as great sums are raised by little personal
Contributions; so a little true sorrow from every soul, would make a great
sacrifice to God, and a few tears from every eye, a deeper and a safer Sea,
about this Island, then that that does wall it. Let us therefore never say, that
it is Aliena ambitio, The immoderate ambition of a pretending Monarch, that
endangers us, That it is Aliena perfidia, The falsehood of perfidious neighbors
that has disappointed us, That it is Aliena fortuna, The growth of others who
have shot up under our shelter, that may overtop us; They are Peccata nostra,
our own pride, our own wantonness, our own drunkenness, that makes God shut
and close his hand toward us, withdraw his former blessings from us, and then
strike us with that shut, and closed, and heavy hand, and multiply calamities
upon us. What a Parliament meets at this hour in this Kingdom? How many such
Committees as this? how many such Congregations stand, as we do here, in the
presence of God, at this hour? And what a Subsidy should this State receive,
and what a sacrifice should God receive, if every particular man would but
depart with his own beloved sin? We dispute what is our own, as though we would
but know what to give. Alas, our sins are our own, let us give them. Our sins
are our own; that we confess; And we confess them, according to David's
Method, Domino, to the Lord; I will confess my sins to the Lord.

After he had deliberated, Domino peecavi.
and resolved upon his course, what he would do, he never stayed upon the
person, to whom; His way being Confession, he stayed not long in seeking his
ghostly Father, his Confessor, Confitebor Domino. And first, Peccata Domino,
That his sins were sins against the Lord. For, as every sin is a violation of a
Law, so every violation of a Law reflects upon the Lawmakers. It is the same
offense to coin a penny, and a piece; The same to counterfeit the seal of a
Subpoena, as of a Pardon. The second Table was writ by the hand of God, as well
as the first; And the Majesty of God, as he is the Lawgiver, is wounded in an
adultery, and a theft, as well as in an Idolatry, or a blasphemy. It is not
enough to consider the deformity and the foulness of an Action so, as that an
honest man would not have done it; but so as it violates a law of God, and his
Majesty in that law. The shame of men, is one bridle, that is cast upon us. It
is a moral obduration, and in the suburbs, next door to a spiritual
obduration, to be Voyce-proofe, Censure-proofe, not to be afraid, nor ashamed,
what the world says. He that relyes upon his Plaudo domi, Though the world
hiss, I give my self a Plaudite at home, I have him at my Table, and her in
my bed, whom I would have, and I care not for rumor; he that rests in such a
Plaudite, prepares for a Tragedy, a Tragedy in the Amphitheater, the double
Theater, this world, and the next too. Even the shame of the world should be
one one bridle, but the strongest is the other, Peccata Domino, To consider
that every sin is a violation of the Majesty of God.

And then Confitebor Domino, says David, I will confess my sins to the
Lord; Domino confitebor.
sins are not confessed, if they be not confessed to him; and if they be
confessed to him, in case of necessity it will suffice, though they be
confessed to no other. Indeed, a confession is directed upon God, though it be
made to his Minister: If God had appointed his Angels, or his Saints to absolve
me, as he has his Ministers, I would confess to them. Ioshuah took not the
jurisdiction out of Gods hands, when he said to Achan, Josh. 7.19.
Give glory unto the God of Israel, in making thy confession to him; And tell
me now, what thou have done, and hide it not from me. Levit. 14.2.
The law of the Leper, is, That he shall be brought unto the Priest; Men come
not willingly to this manifestation of themselves; nor are they to be brought
in chains, as they do in the Roman Church, by a necessity of an exact
enumeration of all their sins: But to be led with that sweetness, with which
our Church proceeds, in appointing sick persons, if they seele their
consciences troubled with any weighty matter, to make a special confession,
and to receive absolution at the hands of the Priest; And then to be remembered,
that every coming to the Communion, is as serious a thing as our
transmigration out of this world, and we should do as much here, for the
settling of our Conscience, as upon our deathbed; And to be remembered also,
that none of all the Reformed Churches have forbidden Confession, though some
practice it less then others. If I submit a cause to the Arbitrament of any
man, to end it, secundum voluntatem, says the Law, How he will, yet still
Arbitrium est arbitrium boni viri, his will must be regulated by the rules of
common honesty, and general equity. So when we lead men to this holy ease of
discharging their heavy spirits, by such private Confessions, yet this is still
limited by the law of God, so far as God has instituted this power by his
Gospel, in his Church, and far from inducing amongst us, that torture of the
Conscience, that usurpation of Gods power, that spying into the counsails of
Princes, and supplanting of their purposes, with which the Church of Rome has
been deeply charged.

And this useful and un-mis-interpretable Confession, which we speak of,
Adversum me.
is the more recommended to us, in that with which David shuts up his Act, (as
out of S. Hierome, and out of our former translation, we intimated unto you)
that he does all this Adversum se, I will confess my sins unto the Lord,
against my self; The more I find Confession, or any religious practice, to be
against my self, and repugnant to mine own nature, the farther I will go in
it. For, still the Adversum me, is Cum Deo; The more I say against my self,
the more I vilify my self, the more I glorify my God. As S. Chry sostome
says, every man is Spontaneus Satan, a Satan to himself, as Satan is a
Tempter, every man can tempt himself; so I will be Spontaneus Satan, as Satan
is an Accuser, an Adversary, I will accuse my self. I consider often that
passionate humiliation of S. Peter, Exi a me Domine, He fell at Jesus knees,
saying, Depart from me for I am a sinful man, O Lord; Luke 5.8.
And I am often ready to say so, and more; Depart from me, O Lord, for I am
sinful enough to infect thee; As I may persecute thee in thy Children, so I
may infect thee in thine Ordinances; Depart, in withdrawing thy word from me,
for I am corrupt enough to make even thy saving Gospel, the savor of death unto
death; Depart, in withholding thy Sacrament, for I am leprous enough to taint
thy flesh, and to make the balm of thy blood, poison to my soul; Depart, in
withdrawing the protection of thine Angels from me, for I am vicious enough to
imprint corruption and rebellion into their nature. And if I be too foul for
God himself to come near me, for his Ordinances to work upon me, I am no
companion for my self, I must not be alone with my self; for I am as apt to
take, as to give infection; I am a reciprocal plague; passively and actively
contagious; I breath corruption, and breath it upon my self; and I am the
Babylon that I must go out of, Genesis 32.10. Mat. 8.8.
or I perish. I am not only under Jacobs Non dignus, Not worthy the least of
all thy mercies; nor only under the Centurions Non dignus, I am not worthy
that thou should come under my roof, That thy Spirit should ever speak to
my spirit, (which was the form of words, in which every Communicant received
the Sacrament, in the Primitive Church, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof;) Nor only under the Prodigals Non dignus, Luke
15.21.
Not worthy to be called thy son; neither in the filiation of Adoption, for I
have deserved to be dis-inherited; nor in the filiation of Creation, for I have
deserved to be annihilated; Mark 1.7.
But Non dignus procumbere, I am not worthy to stoop down, to fall down, to
kneel before thee, in thy Minister, the Almoner of thy Mercy, the Treasurer of
thine Absolutions. So far do I confess Adversum me, against my self, as
that I confess, I am not worthy to confess, nor to be admitted to any
access, any approach to thee, much less to an act, so near Reconciliation to
thee, as an accusation of my self, or so near thy acquitting, as a
self-condemning. Be this the issue in all Controversies, whenever any new
opinions distract us, Be that still thought best, that is most Adversum nos,
most against our selves, That that most lays flat the nature of man, so it
take it not quite away, and blast all virtuous endeavors; That that most
exalts the Grace and Glory of God, be that the Truth; And so have you the whole
mystery of David's Confession, in both his Acts; preparatory, in resenting his
sinful condition in general, and survaying his conscience in particular; And
then his Deliberation, his Resolution, his Execution, his Confession;
Confession of true sins, and of them only, and of all them, of his sins, and
all this to the Lord, and all that against himself. That which was proposed
for the second Part, must fall into the compass of a Conclusion, and a short
one, that is Gods Act, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

This is a wide door, 2 Part.
and would let out Armies of Instructions to you; but we will shut up this
door, with these two leaves thereof, The fullness of Gods Mercy, He forgives
the sin and the punishment; And the seasonablenesse, the acceleration of his
mercy, in this expression in our text, that David's is but Actus inchoatus, He
says he will confess, And Gods is Actus consummatus, Thou forgavest, Thou
had already forgiven the iniquity, and punishment of my sin. These will be
the two leaves of this door; and let the hand that shuts them be this And,
this Particle of Connection which we have in the text, I said, And thou did.
For though this Remission of sin be not presented here as an effect upon that
cause of David's Confession, (It is not delivered in a Quia, and an Ergo,
Because David did this, God did that; for man's will leads not the will of God,
as a cause, who does all his acts of mercy for his mercies sake) yet though it
be not an effect, as from a cause, yet it is at least as a consequent from an
occasion, so assured, so infallible, as let any man confess as David did, and
he shall be sure to be forgiven as David was. For though this forgiveness be a
flower of mercy, yet the root grows in the Justice of God; If we acknowledge
our sin, 1 John 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sin; It grows out of his
faithfulness, as he has vouchsafed to bind himself by a promise, And out of
his Justice, as he has received a full satisfaction for all our sins. So that
this Hand, this And, in our Text, is as a ligament, as a sinew, to connect and
knit together that glorious body of Gods preventing grace, and his subsequent
grace; if our Confession come between and tie the knot, God, that moved us to
that act, will perfect all.

Here enters the fullness of his mercy, Plenitudo. Rev. 3 20.
at one leaf of this door; well expressed at our door, in that Ecce sto, and
pulso, Behold, I stand at the door and knock; for, first he comes; here is no
mention of our calling of him before; He comes of himself; And then he suffers
not us to be ignorant of his coming, he comes so, as that he manifests
himself, Ecce, Behold; And then he expects not that we should wake with that
light, and look out of our selves, but he knocks, solicits us, at least, with
some noise at our doors, some calamities upon our neighbors; And again he
appears not, like a lightning that passes away as soon as it is seen, that no
man can read by it, nor work by it, nor light a candle, nor kindle a coal by
it, but he stands at the door, and expects us; all day; not only with a
patience, but with a hunger to effect his purpose upon us, he would come in,
and sup with us, Accept our diet, our poor endeavors; And then, would have us
sup with him, (as it is there added) would feast us with his abundant Graces,
which he brings even home to our doors; But those he does not give us at the
door; not till we have let him in, by the good use of his former grace; And as
he offers this fullness of his mercy, by these means before, so by way of
Pardon, and Remission, if we have been defective in opening the door upon his
standing and knocking, this fullness is fully expressed in this word of this
Text, as our two Translations, (neither departing from the natural
signification of the word) have rendered it.

The word is the same here, in David's sweetness, as in Cains bitterness,
Gnavon; Poena. Gen 4.13.
and we cannot tell, whether Cain speak there of a punishment too great to be
borne, or of a sin too great to be pardoned; Nor which David means here; It
fills up the measure of Gods mercy, if we take him to mean both. God, upon
Confession, forgives the punishment of the sin; So that the just terror of
Hell, and the imaginary terror of Purgatory, for the next World, is taken away;
and for this World, what calamities and tribulations soever fall upon us, after
these Confessions, and Remissions, they have not the nature of punishments, but
they are Fatherly Corrections, and Medicinal assistances, against relapses,
and have their maine relation and prospect upon the future.

For not only the sin it self, but the iniquity of the sin, is said to be
forgiven; Iniquitas.
God keeps nothing in his mind against the last day; But whatsoever is worst
in the sin, the venom, The malignity of the sin, The violation of his Law, The
affrontings of his Majesty residing in that Law, though it have been a winking
at his light, a resisting of his light, the ill nature, the malignity, the
iniquity of the sin is forgiven. Only this remains, That God extinguishes not
the right of a third Person, nor pardons a Murder so, as that he bars another
from his Appeal: Not that his pardon is not full, upon a full Confession, but
that the Confession is no more full, if it be not accompanied with
Satisfaction, that is, Restitution of all unjustly gotten, then if the
Confession lacked Contrition, and true sorrow. Otherwise the iniquity of the
sin, and the punishment of the sin, are both fully pardoned. And so we have
shut one leaf of this door, The fullness; The other is the speed, and
acceleration of his mercy, and that leaf we will clap to, in a word.

This is expressed in this, David is but at his Dixit, and God at his Remisit;
Promptitudo
David was but Saying, nay, but Thinking, and God was Doing, nay Perfecting his
work. To the Lepers that cried out for mercy, Christ said, Go, show your selves
to the Priest; Luke 17.11.
So he put them into the way; and they went, says the text; and as they went,
they were healed upon the way. No man comes into the way, but by the
illumination, and direction of God, Christ put them into the way. The way is
the Church; no man is cured out of the way; no man that separates himself from
the Church; nor in the way neither, except he go; If he live negligently, and
trust only upon the outward profession; nor though he go, except he go
according to Christ bidding; except he conform himself to that worship of God,
and to those means of sanctification, which God has instituted in his Church,
without singularities of his own, or Traditions of other men's inventing, and
imposing. This, this submitting, and conforming our selves to God, so as God
has commanded us, the purposing of this, and the endeavoring of this, is our
Dixit in the Text, our saying that we will do it, and upon this Dixit, this
purposing, this endeavoring, instantly, immediately, infallibly follows the
Remisit, God will, God does, God has forgiven, the iniquity, and the
punishment of the sin.

Therefore to end all, Pour out thy heart like water before the face of the
Lord. Lament. 2.19.
No liquor comes so clearly, so absolutely from the vessel, not oil, not milk,
not wine, not honey, as that it leaves no taste behind; so may sweet sins; and
therefore pour out, says the Prophet, not the liquor, but the heart it self,
and take a new heart of Gods making; for thy former heart was never so of Gods
making, as that Adam had not a hand in it; and his Image was in it, in
Original sin, as well as Gods in the Creation. As liquors poured out leave a
taste and a smell behind them, unperfected Confessions (And who perfects his
Confession?) leave ill gottten goods sticking upon thine heir, and they leave
a taste, and a delight to think, and speak of former sins, sticking upon thy
self; But pour out thy heart like water; All ill impressions in the very
root. And for the accomplishment of this great Mystery of Godliness by
Confession, fix thy Meditations upon those words, and in the strength of them,
come now, (or when thou shall be better strengthened by the Meditation of
them) to the Table of the Lord, The Lord looks upon men, And, if any say, I
have sinned, Job 33.27.
and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, he will deliver
his soul from going down into the pit, and his life shall see light; and it is
added, Lo all these things works God twice and thrice. Here is a fullness of
consolation, first plenary, and here is a present forgiveness; If man, if any
man say, I have sinned, God does, God forgives; and here is more then that, an
iteration, if thou fall upon infirmity again, God will on penitence more
carefully performed, forgive again. This he will do twice, or thrice says
the Hebrew, our Translation might boldly say, as it does, This God will do
often. But yet if God find dolum in spiritu, an over-confidence in this, God
cannot be mocked; And therefore take heed of trusting upon it too often, but
especially of trusting upon it too late. And whatsoever the Holy Ghost may
mean by the twice or thrice, be sure to do it once, do it now, and receive
thy Savior there, and so as he offers himself unto thee in these his
Ordinances this day, once, and twice, and thrice, that is, in prayer, in
preaching, in the Sacrament. For this is thy trinity upon earth, that must
bring thee to the Trinity in heaven: To which Trinity, etc.

SERMON. LIX. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found; surely in the floods of great waters they shall not
come nigh unto him.


YOu would not be weary of reading a long conveiance, Divisio.
in which the land were given to your selves; nor of a long Will, in which the
body of the state were bequeathed to you. Be not weary, if at any time your
patience be exercised some minutes beyond the threescore, sometime beyond the
hour in these exercises, for we exhibit the conveiance, in which the land, the
land of Promise is made yours, and the Testament, in which even the Testator
himself is bequeathed to you. But Legacies must be demanded, and oftentimes
sued for; and in this text you are directed how to come by it, by prayer, (For
this shall every one, etc.) And you are encouraged in the suit by the value of
that you are to recover, by the effect of prayer, Surely in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh to him: and these two, the way and the end, the
manner and the matter, prayer and the benefit thereof, will be our two parts.
And in the first of these, The duty of prayer, though we be elsewhere
commanded To pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
yet for all that continual disposition, we have here certain limitations, or
rather indeed preparations, lest that which we call Prayer should not be so,
and these are four: For first, it is but omnis sanctus, every godly man shall
pray, for the prayer of the wicked turns to sin; And then the object of
prayer, to whom it must be directed, is limited, it is but ad te, unto thee he
shall pray, beyond him we cannot go, and he that prays short of him, to any
on this side of God, falls short in his prayer; And in a third consideration,
the subject, the matter of his prayer is limited too, It is but propter hoc,
for this shall he pray, that is, for that which has been formerly expressed,
not whatsoever our desires, or our anguish, and vexation, and impatience
presents or suggests to us; And lastly, the time is limited too, In tempore
opportuno, In a time when thou may be found. In these four, we shall
determine that first part, the duty; and in the second the reward, the benefit,
which is deliverance, (Surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come
nigh him) we shall see first, that the world is diluvium aquarum, a deluge of
water floods that threaten all; But yet though worldly calamities be of that
spreading, and diffusive, and overflowing nature, non approximabit, there are
places that it cannot come to, rocks that it cannot shake, hills that it cannot
overflow; God has so erected the godly man, that he is a non ultra, a bank
to this sea; It shall not come near him; and this David establishes with that
seal of infallibility, Surely, Surely in the floods of great waters they shall
not come nigh him. And these be the steps by which we shall lead you to the
greatest happiness, that is, deliverance from all afflictions, and that by the
noblest means, and the fairest way, that is, familiar conversation with God by
prayer.

Into our first part, 1 Part.
The duty of prayer, we shall make our entry with this consideration, That our
religious Duties, in their precepts, are for the most part accompanied with
reasons to induce us to the performance thereof: Hoc fac and vives; Do this,
says God; do it, because I command it, at least do it, because if thou do
it, thou shall live for ever. And so, Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers, Heb. 13.2.
for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares; Here the reason of the
precept is example; others have prospered that way, therefore walk thou in it.
God illustrates his precepts, comments upon his own Text much by examples.
First, to raise us to the best height, God makes himself our example, Sicut
Pater, Be holy as your Father in heaven is holy: Then, because we cannot reach
to that, he makes men like our selves (at least, such as we should be) our
example, Sicut Elias, Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, Iam.
5.27.
and he prayed that it might not rain, and it rained not, and that it might,
and it did. If we be not able to conform our selves to the singularity of one
particular and transcendent man, he sends as to the whole body of good men,
his servants, Sicut Prophetae, Take, my brethren, the Prophets, ver. 10.
for an example of long patience. And because he knows our inclination, to be
a declination, and that we cast those looks, which he made upward toward
him, downward toward the creature, he sends us to creatures of an ignobler
nature, Vade ad formicam, Go to the Ant, do as she does, be as industrious
in thy business, as she is in hers. And then, as in inclining us to good, so
also for avoiding of sinful courses, he leads us by example too, Non sicut
quidam eorum, Be not idolaters as some of them, nor fornicators, 1 Cor. 10.
nor tempters of Christ, nor murmurers, as some of them. And as that Apostle
begins that catalogue there, so, These are examples to us, so he ends it thus
also, ver. 6. ver. 11.
These things came unto them for examples: God suffers the wicked to proceed in
their sin, and he powers down his judgments upon them for their sins, not
only for their punishment, but therefore, that they might be examples to us.
Now if God raise a glory to himself in the destruction of the wicked, if he
make the wicked in their ruin, even Ministers in his Church, that is,
edifiers, and instructers of others, by their own ruin, if their ruin be a
sensible Catechism, and a visible Sermon for the edifying of others, how much
more does it conduce to his glory, that the righteousness, and holy
conversation of his Ministers, and Prophets should be a lantern to the feet
of his people? This is all that David promises in thankfulness for that mercy
which he asks of God, This is that that he asks; Psalm. 51.2.
Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, Et confirma me spiritu principali,
Establish me with thy free spirit, Spiritu munisico, says S. Hierom, with thy
liberal, thy bountiful Spirit; This is much that David asks; and what will
David do for God? This; I will teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners
shall be converted unto thee. And this is that which S. Paul apprehended to
have moved God, to use his service in the Church; 1 Timothy 1.16.
For this cause was I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should first show
unto me all long suffering; but that was not all; But as it follows there,
Unto the example of them, which shall in time to come believe in him unto
eternal life. It is an unexpressible comfort to have been Gods instrument,
for the conversion of others, by the power of Preaching, or by a holy and
exemplar life in any calling. And with this comfort David proceeds in the
recommendation of this duty of Prayer, Day and night I have felt thy hand upon
me, ver. 4.
I have acknowledged my sin unto thee, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin; thus it stood with me, and by my example, ver. 5.
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou
may be found.

First then, the person that has any access allowed him, any title to pray,
Omnis sanctus.
is he that is Godly, holy. Now, Omnis Sanctus, est omnis Baptismate
sanctificatus: Those are the holy ones whom God will hear, who are of the
household of the faithful, of the Communion of Saints, matriculated, engraffed,
enrolled in the Church, Hierom.
by that initiatory Sacrament of Baptism; for, the house of God, into which we
enter by Baptism, is the house of Prayer; And, as out of the Arc, whosoever
swam best, was not saved by his swimming, no more is any moral man, out of the
Church, by his praying: He that swomme in the flood, swomme but into more and
more water; he that prays out of the Church, prays but into more and more
sin, because he does not establish his prayer in that, Grant this for our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus sake. It is true then, that these holy ones, whose
prayer is acceptable, are those of the Christian Church; Only they; but is it
all they? are all their prayers acceptable? There is a second concoction
necessary too: Not only to have been sanctified by the Church in Baptism,
but a sanctification in a worthy receiving of the other Sacrament too; A life
that pleads the first seal, Baptism, and claims the other seal, The body
and blood of Christ Jesus: We know the Wise man's counsel, Ecclus. 5.5.
concerning propitiation, Be not without fear. Though thou have received the
propitiatory Sacrament of Baptism, be afraid that thou have not all. Will the
milk that thou suckedst from a wholesome Nurse, keep thee alive now? Or can
thou dine upon last years meat to day? He that has that first holiness, The
holiness of the Covenant, the holiness of Baptism, let him pray for more.
For Omnis Sanctus, is Quantumcumque Sanctus, How holy soever he be, that
holiness will not defray him all the way, but that holiness is a fair letter
of credit, and a bill of exchange for more. When can thou think thy self
holy enough? when thou have washed thy self in snow water? In penitent tears?
Job 9.30.
(as the best purity of this life is expressed) why, even then, Abominabuntur
te vestimenta tua, Thine own clothes shall make thee abominable. Is all well,
when thou think all well? Prove. 16.2.
why, All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs
the spirit. If thine own spirit, thine own conscience accuse thee of nothing,
1 Cor. 3.4. Job 4.18.
nothing unrepented, is all well? why, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified. It is God only that is Surveyor of thy holiness, And,
Behold, he found no steadfastness in his Servants, and laid folly upon his
Angels; how much more in them, that dwell in houses of clay, Gregor.
whose foundation is in the dust? Sordet in conspectu aeterni Iudieis, When
that eternal Judge comes to value our transitory, or imaginary, our hollow,
and rusty, and rotten holiness, Sordet quod in intention fulget operantis,
Even that which had a good luster, a good speciousnesse, not only in the eyes
of men that saw it, who might be deceived by my hypocrisy, but in the purpose
of him that did it, becomes base, more allay then pure metal, more corruption
then devotion.

Though Jacob, Genesis 31.31.
when he fled from his Father in law, Laban, were free enough himself, from
the theft of Labans Idols, yet it was dangerously pronounced of him, With
whomsoever thou find thy gods, let him not live: For, his own Wife, Rachel
had stolen them: August.
And Caro conjux; Thy Wife, thy flesh, thy weaker part, may insinuate much sin
into thine actions, even when thy spirit is at strongest, and thou in thy best
confidence. Only thus these two cases may differ; Rachel was able to cover
those stolen Idols from her Fathers finding, with that excuse, The custom of
Women is come upon me; But thou shall not be able to cover thy stolen sins,
with saying, The infirmity of man is come upon me, I do but as other men do;
Though thou have that degree toward sanctification, that thou sin not out of
presumption, but out of infirmity, though thou may in a modified sense fall
within David's word, Omnis sanctus, A holy man, yet every holy and godly man
must pray, that even those infirmities may be removed too. Qui sanctificatur,
sanctificetur adhuc: Apo^ 22.11.
He that is holy, let him be holy still; not only so holy still, but still
more and more holy. For, beloved, As in the firmament, of those stars which are
reduced into Constellations, and into a certainty of shapes, of figures, and
images, we observe some to be of one greatness, some of another, we observe
diverse magnitudes in all them, but to all those other Stars, which are not
reduced into those forms, and figures, we allow no magnitude at all, no
proportion at all, no name, no consideration: So for those blessed souls which
are collected into their eternal dwelling in Heaven, which have their
immovable possession, position at the right hand of God, as one Star differs
from another in glory, so do these Saints which are in Heaven; But whilst men
are upon this earth, though they be stars, (Saints of God) though they be in
the firmament, established in the true Church of God, yet they have no
magnitude, no proportion, no certainty, no holiness in themselves, nor in any
thing formerly done by God in their behalf, and declared to us; but their
present degrees of godliness give them but that qualification, that they may
pray acceptably for more; He must be so godly before he pray, and his prayer
must be for more godliness; and all directed to the right object of prayer, To
God, Unto Thee shall every one that is godly pray, which is our next, the
second of our four Considerations in this first part.

Ad Te, Ad Te.
To God, because he can hear; And then Ad te, to God, because he can give.
Certainly it were a strange distemper, a strange singularity, a strange
circularity, in a man that dwelt at Windsor, to fetch all his water at London
Bridge: So is it in him, that lives in Gods presence, (as he does, that lives
religiously in his Church) to go for all his necessities, by Invocation to
Saints. David was willing be our example for Prayer, but he gives no example
of scattering our prayers upon any other then God. Christ Jesus was willing to
give us a Rule for Prayer: but if he had intended that his Rule should have
been deflected and declined to Saints, he would have taught us to say, Frater
noster qui es in Coelis, and not only Pater noster; to pray to our Brethren
which are there too, and not only to our Father which is in Heaven. If any man
have tasted at Court, what it is to be ever welcome to the King himself, and
what it is to speak to another to speak for him, he will bless that
happiness, of having an immediate access to God himself in his prayers. They
that come so low down the stream, as we said before, to London Bridge, they
will go lower, and lower, to Gravesend too; They that come to Saints, they will
come to the Images, and Relics of Saints too; They come to a brackish water,
between salt and fresh, and they come at last, to be swallowed up in that sea
which has no limit, no bottom, that is, to direct all their devotions to such
Saints, as have no certainty, not only not in their ability, we know not what
those Saints can do, but not in their history, we know not that such as they
pray to, are Saints; nay, we know not whether they ever were at all. So that
this may be Idolatry, in the strictest acceptance of the word, Idol; Idolum
nihil est; let that be true, which they say, and in their sense, Our Images are
not Idols, for an Idol is nothing, represents nothing, but our Images are the
Images of Men that once were upon the earth. But that is not throughout true;
for they worship Images of those who never were; Christophers, and other
symbolicall, and emblematicall Saints, which never lived here, but were, and
are yet nothing. But let them be true Saints, how will they make it appear to
us, that those Saints can hear us? What surety can we have of it? Let us
rather pray to him, who we are sure can hear, that is first, and then sure he
can give that we pray for, that is next.

The prayer here, is forgiveness of sins; And can Saints give that? The
Hosannaes, Qui dant.
and the Allelujahs, and the Gloria in Excelsis, Glory in heaven, peace upon
earth, good will amongst men, these are good and cheerful Notes, in which the
Quire of heaven are exercised; Cherubims and Seraphims, Prophets and Apostles,
Saints and Angels, bless God and benefit men by these: But the Remittuntur
peccata, Thy sins are forgiven thee, is too high a note for any creature in
earth or heaven, to reach to, except where it is set by Gods own hand, as it is
by his Commission to his Minister, in his Church, and there only, in the
absolution given by his Ordinance to every penitent sinner. We see that phrase,
Dimittuntur peccata, Thy sins are forgiven thee, was a suspicious word, even
in the mouth of Christ himself, amongst the Scribes that would not believe his
Divinity; when Christ said to him that had the Palsy, My son be of good
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; the Scribes cried out, he blasphemed: It
strikes any man, to hear of forgiveness of sins, from any but God. It was not
a harder thing to say, Fiat lux, then to say, Dimittuntur peccata: Not harder
to bring light out of darkness by Creation, then to bring a clean thing out
of uncleanness by Conversion; for, who can do that? Job 14.
And therefore when the King of Aram sent Naaman to the King of Israel, to take
order for the curing of his bodily Leprosy, the King of Israel rent his
Clothes, and said, Am I a God, 2 King. 5.7.
to kill and to give life? The power even of temporal life and death, is
proper to God; for, as Witches think sometimes that they kill, when they do
not, and are therefore as culpable, as if they did; So a tyrannous persecutor,
so a passionate Judge, so a perjured witness, so a revengefull quarreller,
thinks he takes away the life of his enemy, and is guilty of that murder in the
eye of God, though the blow be truly from God, whose judgments are ever just,
though not ever declared. Let them never say, that they ask not these things,
temporal or spiritual, at the hands of those Saints; for, expressly,
literally, as the words stand, and sound, they do ask even those very things;
and if the Church have any other meaning in those prayers, the mischief is,
that they never teach the people, by Preaching, what that their reserved
meaning is, but leave them to the very letter of the prayer, to ask those
things, which, if they could hear, yet the Saints could not give. And when the
prayer is made aright, directed to God himself, yet here in our Text it is
limited, Propter hoc, For this, this that was spoken of before, every one that
is godly shall pray unto thee. Now what is this This? for that is our third
Consideration.

Si a quo petenda, sed non quae petenda petis, If thou come to the right
Market, Propter boc. August.
but buy unwholesome herbs there, If thou come to the Apothecaries shop, and
ask for nothing but poisons, If thou come to God in thy prayer, and ask only
temporal blessings, which are blessings only in their use, and may be, and
are ordinarily snares and encumbrances, then is this direction of David's,
Propter hoc, for this shall he pray, transgressed. For, This, as appears in
the words immediately before the Text, is, The forgiveness of the punishment,
and of the iniquity of our sin; which is so inexpressible a comfort, to that
soul that has wrastled with the indignation of God, and is now refreshed and
released, as whosoever should go about to describe it, should diminish it; He
has it not that thinks he can utter it. It is a blessed comfort to find my
soul in that state, as when I last received the Sacrament with a good
conscience: If I enjoy that peace now, that is, the peace of a religious, and
of a wise conscience; for there is a wisdom of the conscience, not to run
into infinite scruples and doubts, but Imponere finem litibus, to levy a fine
in bar of all scruples, and diffidences, and to rest in the peace and
assuredness of remission of sins, after due means for the obtaining thereof;
and therefore if. I be as well now, as when I received, this is a blessed
degree of blessedness. But yet there is one cloud in this case, Ab occultis,
my secret sins, which even mine own narrowest inquisition extends not to. If I
consider my self to be as well as I was at my Baptism, when I brought no
actual sin, and had the hand of Christ to wash away the foulness of Original
sin, can I pray for a better state then that? Even in that there was a cloud
too, and a cloud that has thunder and lightning in it, that Fomes peccati,
that fuel and those embers of sin, that are but raked up, and not trod out,
and do break forth upon every tentation that is presented, and if they be not
effectually opposed, shall aggravate my condemnation, more then if I had never
been baptized. But David conceives such a forgiveness here, as carries up the
soul to the contemplation of that state, which it had before the fall of Adam.
It is not this present sin of a cold delivering, and a drowsy hearing of the
messages of God; It is not my yesterdayes sin, nor my sins since my last
repentance, that are forgiven me, but my sin committed six thousand years
before I was borne, my sin in Adam, before any promise, nay, before any
apprehension of any need of a Messiah; I am so restored, that now by the
application of the merits of my Redeemer, I am as well as I should have been,
though there had never been any use of a Redeemer, no occasion given by me in
Adam, of the incarnation and passion of Christ Jesus. The comfort of being
presented to God as innocent as Adam, then when God breathed a soul into him,
yea as innocent as Christ Jesus himself, when he breathed out his soul to
God; oh how blessed is that soul that enjoyes it, and how bold that tongue
that goes about to express it! This is the blessedness which the godly
attain to by prayer, but not by every sudden Lord, Lord, or every occasional
holy interjection, but by serious prayer, invested, as with the former, so with
that other circumstance that remains, In tempore opportuno, In a time when thou
may be found.

This time is not those Horae stativae, Horae canonicae, In tempore.
those sixed hours in the Roman Church, where men are bound to certain
prayers at certain hours. Not that it is inconvenient for men to bind
themselves to certain fixed times of prayer in their private Exercises; and
though not by such a vow, as that it shall be an impiety, yet by so solemn a
purpose, as that it shall be a levity to break it. I have known the greatest
Christian Prince, (in Style and Title) even at the Audience of an Ambassador,
at the sound of a Bell, kneel down in our presence and pray; and God forbid,
he should be blamed for doing so; But to place a merit in observing those
times, as they do, is not a right understanding of this time of finding. Nor
is it those transitory and interlocutory prayers, which out of custom and
fashion we make, and still proceed in our sin; when we pretend to speak to
God, but like Comedians upon a stage, turn over our shoulder, and whisper to
the Devil. Esaias. 1.15.
When you stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes; when you make many
prayers, I will not hear; for your hands are full of blood. And if they be
full of blood, they can take in no more; If they be full of the blood of
oppression, they can lay no hold upon the blood of propitiation. Is^^^.
Irrisor est, non poenitens, qui adhuc agit quod poeniter, He mocks God, that
repents and sins over those sins every night, that every day he repents. The
Apostle says so too, He makes a mock of the Son of God, and crucifies him
again. This only is true Repentance, Ambro.
He makes a mock of the Son of God, and crucifies him again. This only is
true Repentance, Plangere and plangenda non committere, To bewail our sins,
and forbear the sins we have bewailed. Neither alone will serve; which deludes
many. Many think they do enough if they repent, and yet proceed in their sin;
and many think they do enough, if they forbear their sin now, though they
never repent that which is past; August.
both are illusory, both deceitful distempers. Laoessit Iudicem, qui
post-posita satisfactione quaerit praemiis honorari, He does but provoke and
exasperate the Judge, that solicites him for heaven, before he has appeased
his anger by repentance for former sins; for this is to call for costs before
he be discharged.

These then are not the times of finding God; but what are? Gospel. August.
Generally it is Manifestatio Euangelii, The time of the Gospel is the time of
finding God; now when God has vouchsafed Induere hominem, to put on us in his
Incarnation, and enabled us Induere Deum, to put on him in the Sacraments; to
stay with us here upon Earth, and to carry us up with him in his Ascension to
Heaven; when he is made one body with us, and has made us one Spirit with him,
how can we doubt of a fit time to find him? Christ's time was always; for even
under the law, God says, Esaias 49.8.
I have heard thee in an accepted time, and in the day of Salvation have I
succored thee; But this does the Holy Ghost apply to the time of the Gospel,
Behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation. 2 Cor. 2.6.
Calamity. Psalm. 116.4.


The time then of the Gospel is the time of finding; But now, all times are not
alike. Calamities are a good time. When I found trouble, and sorrow, then I
called upon the name of the Lord, saying, I beseech thee O Lord, deliver my
soul. This is a good time, but it is somewhat a dark time; the withdrawing of
Gods countenance from us; Exodus 14.25.
The Egyptians when they deprehended their danger, said, We will fly from the
face of Israel; But whither? The Seareturned, and the Egyptians fled against
it, and perished. We may be benighted, benumbed by calamities, and they may as
well deject us as raise us. Ioab pursued Abner hotly, vehemently; Abner asks,
What, Vsque ad internecionem, 2 Samuel 2.25.
Shall the sword devour for ever? Ioab answered, (as the Vulgat reads those
words) Vivit dominus, si locutus fuisses mane, As the Lord lives, if thou
had spoken in the morning, in the morning every man had departed. If we turn
to the Lord in the morning, in the beginning of an affliction, the Lord turns
his fierce wrath from us; but if we stand out long, and bend not under his
corrections, he pursues Ad internecionem, even to destruction by obduration.

So then the manifestation of the Gospel, that is, the helps which God offers
us, Prosperitus.
more then Jews, or Gentiles, in the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Ordinances
of his Church, is the time of finding God; And woe unto us, if we seek him not
whilst he affords us these helps; And then the time of affliction, when God
threatens to hide his face, but has not yet hidden it, but awakens us by a
calamity, is a time of finding God. But the best and the clearest time is in
the Sunshine, then when he appears to us in the warm and cheerful splendour
of temporal blessings upon us; Then when thou have a good estate, and good
children to let it descend upon; Then when thou have good health, and a good
profession to exercise thy strength, and thy labors in; Then when the dishes
upon thy table are doubled, and thy cup overflows, and the hungry and thirsty
souls of the poor do not only feed upon the crumbs under thy table, and lick
up the overflowings of thy cup, but divide dishes with thee, and enter into the
midst of thy Bolls; Then when thou have temporal blessings, (that is Gods
silver) and his grace to use those blessings well, (that is Gods gold) then is
the best time of finding the Lord, for then he looks upon thee in the
Sunshine, and then thy thankful acknowledgement of former blessings is the
most effectual prayer thou can make, for the continuance, and enlargement of
them.

In a word, then is a fit time of finding God, Nunc.
whenever thy conscience tells thee he calls to thee; for, a rectified
conscience is the word of God; If that speak to thee now this minute, now is
thy time of finding God. That Now, that I named then, that minute is past; but
God affords thee another Now; he speaks again, he speaks still, and if thy
conscience tell thee that he speaks to thee, now is that time. This word of
God, thy conscience will present unto thee, but that one condition, which Moses
presented to Gods people, and that is, That thou seek the Lordwith all thy
heart, and all thy soul. It is a kind of denying the Infiniteness of God, to
serve him by pieces, and rags; God is not Infinite to me, if I think a
discontinued service will serve him. It is a kind of denying the Unity of God,
to join other gods, Pleasure, or Profit with him; He is not One God to me, if
I join other Associates, and Assistants to him, Saints or Angels. It is a
kind of diffidence in Christ, as though I were not sure that he would stand in
the favor of God still, as though I were afraid that there might rise a new
favorite in heaven, to whom it might concern me to apply me self, If I make
the balance so eaven, as to serve God and Mammon; if I make a complementall
visit of God at his house upon Sunday, and then plot with the other faction,
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, all the week after. Jor. 9.13.
The Lord promised a power of seeking, and an infallibility of finding; but
still with this total condition, Ye shall seek me, and ye shall find me,
because ye shall seek me with all your heart. This he promised for the future,
that he would do; This he testified for the house of Judah, 2 Chro. 15.15.
that he had done, Judah sought him with a whole desire, and he was found of
them, and the Lord gave them rest round about: And the Lord shall give you rest
round about; rest in your bodies, and rest in your estates; rest in your good
name with others, and rest in your consciences in your selves; rest in your
getting, and rest in your enjoying that you have got, if you seek him with a
whole heart; and to seek him with a whole heart, is not by honest industry to
seek nothing else, (for God wears good clothes, silk, and soft raiment, in
his religious servants in Courts, as well as Cammels hair, in John Baptist in
the Wilderness; and God manifests himself to man, as well in the splendour of
Princes in Courts, as in the austerity of John Baptist in the Wilderness) but
to seek God with the whole heart, is to seek nothing with that Primary, and
Radical, and Fundamental affection, as God; To seek nothing for it self, but
God: not to seek world things in excess, because I hope, if I had them, I
should glorify God in them; but first to find established in my self a
zealous desire to glorify God, and then a modest desire of means to be able
to do it. And for this, every one that is holy shall pray unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found.

And so we have done with our first Part, and the four pieces that constitute
that, The Person, Omnis sanctus, Every godly man; that is, Sanctificatus, and
Sanctificandus, He that is godly enough to pray, and prays that he may be
more godly: And the Object of prayer, Ad te, God alone, for God alone can
hear, and God alone can give; And then the Subject of prayer, Hoc, This, this
which David expresses, forgiveness of the punishment, and of the iniquity of
fin, In which respect, (that David proposes and specificates the subject of
prayer) we are fairly directed rather to accustom our selves to those
prayers, which are recommended to us by the Church, then to extemporall prayers
of others, or of our own effusion; And lastly, the Time of finding God, that
is, Then when we seek him with a whole heart, seek him as Principal, and then
receive temporal things, as accessory, and conducible to his glory. Thus much
has fallen into the first Part, the duty of Prayer; A little remains to be
said of the benefit here assured, Surely, in the floods of great waters they
shall not come nigh unto him.

Taking these waters, 2. Part. H^^r. Aquae.
either Distributively, to every one that is godly, or Collectively, as S.
Hierome does to the whole Church, the use will be all one. The Holy Ghost who
is a direct worker upon the soul and conscience of man, but a Metaphorical,
and Figurative expresser on himself, to the reason, and understanding of man,
abounds in no Metophor more, then in calling Tribulations, Waters:
particularly, He would bring in waters upon Tyrus, E^^k. 26.3. Hos^^ 5.
And, He would pour out his wrath upon his enemies, like waters. Neither does
he only intimate temporal, but spiritual afflictions too, in the name of
Waters. And as S. Hierome understands this whole place of the Church, Hieron.
August.
collectively, so S. Augustine understands these waters, to be Varia Doctrinae,
those diverse opinions, that disquiet and trouble the Church. And though the
Church of God were built upon a hill, and compassed, and environed, and fenced
with the blood of him that built it, and defended and guarded by the vigilance
of the Apostles; yet into this Jerusalem did these waters break, even in the
Apostles time, as we see by those several, those manifold, those contradictory
Heresies, that sprung up them. Christ and his Apostles had carried two Waters
about his Church: The water of Baptism, that is Limen Ecclesiae, and Ianua
Sacramentorum, Argust.
The first Ferry, by which we pass into the Church; and by this Water came
three thousand, and five thousand at once to the Church, upon particular
Sermons of S. Peter. And then Christ gave another Water, by which, they came to
another Ablution, to Absolution from actual fins, the water of contrite
tears, and repentance, which he had promised before, E^^k. 24.35.
I will pour clean water upon you, and you shall be clean, And by this water
came Peter himself, when his faith had failed, And by this water came Mary
Magdalen, when her life had been defiled. But yet for all these Waters, other
Waters soaked in, and corrupted them early; for, for Baptism, the Disciples
of Simon Magus annulled Christ's Baptism, and baptized in Simons name; and his
Disciple Menander annulled the Baptism of Christ, and Simon, and baptized in
his own name. And then, for the other Water, Repentance, the Heretics
drained up that shrewdly, when they took away all benefit of repentance for
sins committed after Baptism. David denies not, nay David assures us, that
collectively, the whole Church shall be beaten upon with waters.

Water multiplied; Aquae multae, Many waters; so the vulgat reads this, Multae.
that we Translate here, Great waters. So multiplied Heresies. The excellency
of the Christian Religion is, that it is Verbum abbreviatum, A contracted
Religion; All the Credenda, all that is to be believed, reduced to twelve
Articles of the Creed; All the Speranda, all that is to be hoped for, prayed
for, expressed in seven Petitions, in the Lords Prayer; All the Agenda, all
that is to be done in it, comprised in ten Commandments, in the Decalogue. And
then our blessed Savior, though he would take away none of the burden, (for it
is an easy yoke, and a light burden) yet he was pleased to bind it in a less
room, and a more portable form, when he re-abridged that Abridgement, and
recontracts this contracted Doctrine, in those two, Love God, and Love thy
Neighbor. And then the Devil has opposed this Abridgement by Multiplication,
by many waters, many heresies: for, it is easy to observe, that in every
Article of the Creed, there have been at least a dozen Heresies. And in those
Articles, which were most credible, most evident, most sensible, most of all;
Many more Heresies upon the Humanity of Christ, then about his Divinity: And
then, as in matters of Faith, so for matter of Manners, there was scarce any
thing so foul and so obscene, which was not taught by some Heretics, to be
religious and necessary; Things which cannot be excused, things which may not
be named, made by the Gnostiques, essential and necessary in the Consecration
of the Sacrament. And then, when these waters of death were in a good part
dried up, these gross errors in Faith and Manners were reasonably well
overcome, Then came in those waters of Traditional Doctrines in the Roman
Church, which are so many, as that they overflow even the water of life, the
Scriptures themselves, and suppress, and surround them.

Therefore does David, in this text, call these many waters, Diluvium, Diluvium.
A flood of great waters; many and violent. For this word Shatach, Inundans,
signifies Vehemence, Eagerness, and is elegantly applied to the fierceness of
a horse in Battle, Equus inundans in Bellum, A horse that overflowes the
Battle, that rushes into the Battle. Jer. 8.6. Esaias 15.9.
Therefore speaks the Prophet of waters full of blood; What Seas of blood did
the old Persecutions, what Seas have later times poured out, when in the Roman
Church, their own Authors will boast of sixty thousand slain in a day, of
them that attempted a Reformation in the times of the Waldenses!

Surely, says our Prophet, These waters shall be, Heresies there shall be.
Omnis sanctus.
And no man may look for such a Church, as shall have no water; Evermore there
will be some things raw, and unconcocted in every Church; Evermore some waters
of trouble and dissension, and a man is not to forsake a Church, in which he
has received his Baptism for that. But waiving this general, and collective
application of these waters to the Church, and to take it as the letter of the
Text invites us, Omnis sanctus, surely every godly man shall find these
waters, many waters, floods of many waters; for affliction is our daily bread;
for, we cannot live in this world a spiritual life, without some kind of
affliction: for, as with long fasting we lose our stomachs, so by being long
unexercised in tribulation, we come to lose our patience, and to a murmuring
when it falls upon us. For that last Petition of the Lords Prayer, Liberanos a
malo, Deliver us from evil, may as some interpret it, suppose that this Evil,
that is Malum poenae, Affliction, will certainly fall upon us; and then we do
not so much pray to be delivered from it, as to be delivered in it, not that
afflictions may not come, but that they may not overcome, when they come, that
they may not be ineffectuall upon us. For, it was Durus sermo, A harder and an
angryer speech then it seems, when God said to his people, Esaias 1.4.
Why should ye be smitten any more? Why should I keep you at School any
longer? Why should I prepare Physic, or study your recovery by corrections any
farther? When God was wearied with their afflictions, and they were not, this
was a heavy case; He afflicted them forty years together in the Wilderness,
and yet he says, Forty years long was I grieved with this generation: He
never says, They were grieved, but he was with their stupidity; They murmured,
but they sorrowed not to any amendment. So they perverted this word, Non
approximabunt, They shall not come nigh thee, they shall not affect thee; That
they must do; we must be sensible of Gods corrections; but yet there is a good
sense, and a plentiful comfort, in this word of our Text. To the godly man,
non approximabunt, the floods of great waters, though waters, though floods,
though great floods, they shall not come nigh him; and that is our last word,
and final conclusion.

Consider the Church of God collectively, Non approximabunt.
and the Saints of God distributively, in which Babylon you will, in the
Chaldean Babylon, or in the Italian Babylon, and these waters do come nigh us,
touch, and touch to the quick, to the heart. But yet as David intends here, 2
Cor. 4.7.
they touch not us, they come not nigh us; for we have treasures in earth-then
vessels; They may touch the vessels, but not the Treasure. And this is
literally expressed in the Text it self, non approximabunt, eum; not that they
shall not come near his house, or his lands, or his children, or his friends,
or his body, but non eum, they shall not come nigh him. For, for the Church,
the peace of the Church, the plenty of the Church, the ceremonies of the
Church, they are sua, but not illa, they are hers, but they are not she. And
these things, riches and ceremonies, they may be washed off with onetide, and
cast on with another, discontinued in one Age, and reassumed in another,
divested in one Church, and invested in another, and yet the Churches, she in
her fundamental Doctrines never touched. And so for us, a wave may wash away
as much as Job lost, and yet not come nigh us; for if a Heathen could say, Vix
ea nostra voco, That outward things were scarce worthy to be called Ours,
shall a Christian call them not only His, but Himself, so as if they be lost,
he is lost? How long will a Medall, a piece of Coin lie in the water, before
the stamp be washed off? and yet how soon is the Image of God, of his
patience, his longanimity defaced in us by every billow, every affliction? But
for the Saints of God it shall not be so; Surely it shall not. They shall stand
against the waters, Psalm. 11 43.
And the Sea shall see it, and fly, and Jordan shall be turned back: And the
world shall say, What ayled thee O Sea, that thou fleddest, O Jordan that thou
turnedst back? For they that know not the power of the Almighty, though they
envy, yet shall wonder, and stand amazed at the deliverance of the righteous.
Sto, and pulso, says God of himself, I stand at the door and knock; Rev.
3.22.
God will not break open doors to give thee a blessing, as well as he loves
thee, and as well as he loves it, but will have thee open to him: much more
will he keep Tentations at the door; They shall not break in upon thee,
except thou open. This then was that, which David elsewhere apprehended with
fear, The sorrows of the grave compassed me about, Psalm. 1^ 5.
and the snares of death overtooke me; Here they were near him, but no worse.
Psalm. 69 15.
This is that that he prays deliverance from, Let not the water flood drown
me, neither let the deep swallow me up. And this is that God assures us all
that are his, Is^y 43.2.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the
floods that they do not overflow thee. Maintain therefore a holy patience in
all Gods visitations: Accept your waters, though they come in tears; for he
that sends them, Christ Jesus, had his flood, his inundation in Blood; and
whatsoever thou suffer from him, thou suffer for him, and glorifiest him
in that constancy. Upon those words, Tres sunt, There are three that bear
witness, That Spirit, and water, and blood, Bernard.
S. Bernard taking water there, (by way of allusion) for affliction, says,
Though the Spirit were witness enough, without water, or blood, yet Vix aut
nunquam inveniri arbitror Spiritum sine aqua, and sanguine; we lack one of the
seals of the Spirit, if we lack Gods corrections. We consider three waters in
our blessed Savior; He wept over Jerusalem; Do thou so over thy finfull
soul. He sweat in the garden; Do thou so too, in eating thy bread in the
sweat of thy brows, in laboring fincerely in thy Calling. And then he sent
water and blood out of his side, Argust.
being dead, which was, fons utriusque Sacramenti, the spring head of both
Sacraments; Do thou also refresh in thy soul, the dignity which thou
receivedst in the first Sacrament of Baptism, and thereby come worthily to the
participation of the second, and therein the holy Ghost shall give thee, the
seal of that security, which he tenders to thee in this Text, Non
approximabunt, How great water floods soever come, they shall not come nigh
thee, not nigh that, which is Thou, that is, thy faith, thy soul, and though
it may swallow that, by which thou art a man, thy life, it shall not shake
that, by which thou art a Christian, thy Religion. Amen.

SERMON. LX. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.7. Thou art my hiding place; Thou shall preserve me from trouble;
Thou shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.


AS Rhetorique is said to be a fist extended and displayed into an open Hand,
And Logique a Hand recollected, and contracted into a fist; So the Church of
God may be said to be a soul dilated and diffused into many Congregations, and
a soul may be said to be the Church contracted and condensed into one bosom.
So not only the Canticle of Solomon is taken indifferently by the ancient and
later Expositors, by some for an Epithalamion, and marriage Song between
Christ and his Church, by others, for the celebration of the same union between
every Christian soul and him, but also many other places of Scripture have
received such an indifferent interpretation, and are left in suspense, whether
they be to be understood of the Church in general, or of particular souls;
And of this nature and number is this Text, Thou art my hiding place, etc. For
S. Hierom takes these words (and the whole Psalm) to be spoken collectively,
others distributively; He in the person of the Church, Hieron.
They of every, or at least of some particular souls. To examine their reasons
is unnecessary, and would be tedious; It will ask less time, and afford more
profit to consider the words both ways. In them therefore, considered twice
over, we shall see a threefold state of the Christian Church, and a threefold
mercy exhibited by God to every Christian soul. First, we shall see the Church
under the clouds, in her low estate, in her obscurity, in her inglorious state
of contempt and persecution, and yet then supported by an assurance that God
overshadowed her, Tu absconsio, Tu latibulum, Thou art my hiding place; And in
that first part we shall consider the state of a timorous soul, a soul that
for fear of tentations dares scarce look into the world, or embrace a
profession. Secondly, we shall see the Church emancipated, enfranchised,
unfettered, unmanacled, delivered from her obscure and inglorious state, and
brought to splendour, and beauty, and peace, blessing God in that
acknowledgement, Thou shall preserveme from trouble. And in that part, we
shall consider the state of that soul exalted to a holy confidence and
assurance, that though she come into the world, and partake of the dangers
thereof, in opening herself to such tentations, as do necessarily and
inseparably accompany every calling, yet the Lord will preserve her from
trouble. And thirdly and lastly, we shall see a kind of Triumphant state in
the Church in this world, a holy exultation, God shall compass her with songs
of deliverance. In which part, we shall also see the blessed state of that
soul which is come, not to a presumptuous security, but to modest certainty of
continuing in the same state still. And these will be our three parts in these
words, as they receive a public accommodation to the Church, and a more
particular application to our selves.

We enter into these considerations, with this observation, 1 Part.
That as God himself is eternal and cannot be considered in the distinction
of times, so has that language in which God has spoken in his written word,
the Hebrew, the least consideration of Time of any other language. Evermore in
expressing the mercies of God to man, it is an indifferent thing to the holy
Ghost whether he speak in the present, or in the future, or in the time that is
past: what mercies soever he has given us, he will give us over again; And
whatsoever he has done, and will do, he is always ready to do at the
present. This verse is especially an exultation for mercies past, and yet the
two last clauses are delivered in the future, Thou shall preserve me, Thou
shall compass me, And the first is delivered without any limitation at all;
The present word, Thou art, is but inserted by our Translators; In the
Original it is only, Tu refugium, Thou my hiding place, There is no fuisti,
nor es, nor eris, That he was, or is, or will be so, but it is an expressing of
a perpetual and everlasting mercy, for his mercy endures for ever.

First then, Ecclesia.
this is an acknowledgement of the Church, contemplating her self in her low
estate; for the word Sether implies, Tu absconsio, Though I were in the dark,
it was thou that did overshadow me, Though I were in danger, it was thou that
did hide mo from them. This the Church has had occasion to say more then
once; Once in the Primitive plantation thereof, and again in her Reformation:
At both times God showed mercy to her that way, in hiding her.

First then God hid the Primitive Church from the eye of envy, Primitiva.
by keeping her poor; and from the eye of jealousy and suspicion, by keeping
her in an humble devotion toward him. But yet even her poverty, and her
humility hid her not so, but that persecution found her out, and raged so
against her, as that those Emperors which raised the ten Persecutions against
the Church, seem to have labored to have gone beyond God in the ten Plagues
of Egypt, and to have done more at Rome then he did there. All the power of the
Roman world was bent against Christians; more home-Christians slain then
foreign enemies. All the criminal justice of the world bent upon them; All
other men's crimes, even Neroes burning of Rome, imputed to the Christians. All
the wit of the world bent against them; All their Epigrammatists, and
Satyrists, having their wits exalted, with rage, with wine, with rewards, to
multiply libels, and calumnies, and defamations upon the Christians. All the
Mechaniques of that world bent against them; All the Enginiers employed to
invent racks and tortures for the Christians. Truly, if I were to work upon
Heathen men, Western Americans, or Eastern Chinese, for their conversion to
Christ, I should scarce adventure to propose to them the histories of the
Martyrs of the Primitive Church, because to men that had no taste of Religion
before, they would rather seem fables then truths; and I should as soon be
believed, That a Virgin had a Son, or in any maine Article of our Religion, as
that man could inflict, or that man could bear such things, as we are sure the
Martyrs in the Primitive Church did. Then God hid the Church; He hid her, in a
great part in the Wilderness, in Ermitages, and such retirings, singlely one
by one; and after in penurious and obscure Monasteries, many of these single
Ermits gathering themselves together into one house; when those Monasteries
were both Schools of learning, and shops of Manufactures; they taught and
wrought in them; August.
Nemo cuiquam onerosus, No man was a burden to any others, no man fed upon
another labors, nor drunk the sweat of another brow: But, Operabantur
manibus ea, quibus and corpus pasci possit, and a Deo men's impediri non possit,
They labored in such manufactures, as might sustain their bodies, and not
withdraw their minds from the service of God. So God hid the Church, not that
the persecution did not find and lop off many a great, and top bough, but he
hid the root, and prevented the extirpation of that Tree, which his own right
hand had planted.

Tu absconsio, Reformata.
Thou art my hiding place, says the Primitive Church, and so may the Reformed
Church say too. For when the Roman Church had made this Latibulum, this hiding
place, this refuge from Persecution, Ermitages and Monasteries, to be the most
conspicuous, the most glorious, the most eminent, the richest and most abundant
places of the World; when they had drawn these, at first remote corners in the
Wilderness, first into the skirts, and suburbs, then into the body and heart
of every great City; when for revenew and possession, they will confess, that
some one Monastery of the Benedictan had ten thousand of our pounds of yearly
rent; when they were come for their huge opulency to that height, that they
were formidable to those States that harbored them, and for their numbers,
(other Orders holding proportion with that one) to reckon out of one Order,
fifty two Popes, two hundred Cardinals, seven thousand Archbishops and Bishops,
and almost three hundred Emperors and Kings, and their children, and fifty
thousand declared and approved Saints; when they were come to that
over-valuation of their Religious Orders, as to say, That a Monk, a Friar
merited more in his very sleep, or meals, then any secular man, (though a
Churchman too) did in his best works, That to enter into any Order of Religion
was a second Baptism, and wrought as much as the first; Their revenew, their
number, their dignity being come to this, And then their viciousness, their
sensuality, their bestiality, to as great a height and exaltation, as that; yet
in the midst of all these, Tu absconsio mea, may the Reformed Church say, The
Lord was their hiding place, that mourned for this, when they could not help,
and at all times, and by all means that God afforded them, endeavored to
advancea Reformation. And though God exposed them as a wood to be felled, to a
slaughter of twenty, of forty, of sixty thousand in a day, yet Ille absconsio,
He has been our hiding place, He has kept the root alive all the way; And
though it has been with a cloud, yet he has covered us.

God came unto Moses, though he came In caligine Nubis, In a thick Cloud; Exodus
19.9.
when the glory of the Lord is said to have filled the Tabernacle, even that
glory was a Cloud; Exodus 40.34.
And so it was in the second place of his worship too, in Solomon's Temple, 2
Chro. 5.13.
that was filled with a Cloud. S. Chrysostom when he considered that Christ
ascended in a Cloud, Acts 1.
Chrysostom.
And that he shall return again in a Cloud, Mat. 24.
Paternum Currum deligere voluit, The Son would make use of his Fathers
Chariot, and show mercy, nay show glory in a Cloud, as his Father had done
often. The Primitive Church, the Reformed Church, must not complain of having
been kept under Clouds; for Ille absconsio, God has made those Clouds their
hiding place, and wrapped up the seed, and the root safe in that Cloud. Though
the Church were trodden upon like a worm of the earth, yet still she might
hear God in that Cloud, Noli timere vermis Jacob, Be not afraid thou worm of
Jacob, for I will keep thee, Esaias 41.14.
says the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy One of Israel. God hid her then, and
has manifested now, that there was never any time, when he had not some of his
to oppose her tyranny and her Idolatry. They can name no time, when we cannot
name some such; And it would be much harder for them, to name men in every age,
that have professed all the doctrines of the present Roman Church, then for us
to find men that have opposed those points that we oppose. Will they say, that
these were too few, to constitute or establish, or give name to a Church? They
were never so few, 1 King. 19.14.
as Elias thought there had been in his time, when he said, I only am left;
no nor so few, as God, for Elias comfort, named to him, seven thousand; they
were more then so, else they could not have found so many to kill, as they did.
Howsoever, since so great Schoolmen amongst them as Alexander Ales, and so
great Canonists amongst them, as Cardinal Turrecremata, Brondus in Apoc. c. 1.
q. 11.
with many others, (as they themselves call them) Gravissimi Theologi, of the
gravest Divines, asseveranter affirmant, do dogmatically affirm, that during
the time that Christ lay in the Grave, there was no faith, and consequently no
Church, but only in One, in the person of the Virgin Mary; in relation to
which it is, that in the Ceremonies of the Church, they put out all their
Candles but one, in the Church, at that time, to denote that all the Apostles
lost their faith, and one She alone retained one; If the Church were then in
one person, they may well afford a Church to have consisted of such numbers, as
the Lord did hide under his wings, all the stormy time of their Persecutions.

Tu absconsio, may the Primitive Church, and the Reformed Church say, Anima.
Thou have been our hiding place, And so must every timorous soul too, (for
you may remember, that these words are by our Expositors ascribed to particular
souls in the Church, as well as to the Church in general) every such soul,
that for fear of tentations in the world, is loath to come abroad from its
retiredness, and venture on the public view, must rely upon that, Tu
absconsio, The Lord is able to hide them, able to cover them.

Iovinian the Heretic whom S. Hierom opposed, would needs think, or at least
say, That after Baptism no man was tempted of the Devil: not only not
overcome, but not tempted. But our Baptism does not drown the Devil.
Chrysostom.
Pauci inter Athletas in expugnabiles, Few wrastlers that never took fall;
none that may not, since we are all at best, but wrastlers. Vita hominis
piraterium, says S. Ambrose, what Copy soever he followed. Ser. 42. Job. 7.1.
Ambrose.
Others read it, Man's life is a warfare; And that is labor enough, and danger
enough. But to be still upon so unconstant an element as the water, and still
pursued by Pirates, or consorted with Pirates, is more; and Vita Piraterium,
says he, Man's life, every man's life is spent amongst Pirates, pursued by them,
or consorted with them. The Devil has not a more subtle tentation to ensnare
me with, then to bring me to think my self tentation-proofe; above tentation.
Nemo diu fortis est, Idem.
is excellently said by the same Father: No man continues strong against
tentations long. For when he sees, that some tentations have done him no harm,
he grows negligent and slack toward others. Infoelix ego! victonem me puto,
dum capior, Miserable mistaking man that I am! Hieron.
I think my self able to overcome any tentation, and I am overcome even by
that tentation of thinking so. I think my self conqueror, when I am captive,
and am chained to the Chariot, when I think I sit in it. Tranquillitas ista
tempestas est, This calm is a storm, this security is a defeat; For, it is
one of David's heavy imprecations, Veniat illi laqueus quem ignorant, Psalm. 35.8.
Ecclus. 34.9.
Let him be catchedin a snare, that he suspected not: Destruction come upon him
unawares, so we read it. We are tempted, and it is well that we are so. Qui non
est tentatus, quid scit? He is an ignorant soul, and knows nothing, that has
passed no tentations; Nothing at all; August.
not himself; Nescit se homo, nisi tentatione discat se, Except he be taught
in that School, The School of tentations, no man ever comes to know himself.
So then, Leo.
Laqueus est in securitate; If I be secure, and negligent, that is a snare; But
Laqueus in timore too, says he; It is a snare cast by the Devils own hand, If
I be over-timerous, If upon pretense of hiding my self from tentations, I
withdraw my self from the offices of mutual society. Tu absconsio, The Lord
will be my hiding place from tentations that attempt me in my calling, Eccl.
9.20.
but not to hide me from a calling. Scito quod in medio laqueorum ingrederis,
Know that thou walk in the midst of snares, but yet thou must walk,
Chrysostom.
walk in a calling. So S. Chrysostom reads that; and adds, He does not say,
Vide, but Scito; He does not say, see them, for they are invisible; but know
that there are snares, and be wary. August.
And then, as S. Augustine says of the whole Church, (which was our first
Consideration) Ecclesia Catholica inter tentationes vivit, inter tentationes
crescit, The whole Church is in the midst of tentations, but lives and grows
up in the midst of them: So, hear thy God say to thy soul, (which is the
Consideration that we are now upon) Son of man, Ezekiel. 2.6.
though briars and thorns be with thee, though thou dwell among Scorpions, be
not afraid of their words, nor dismayed with their looks. Proceed in a lawful
calling, and God shall hide thee though with his Clouds: And though he cover
thee with a cloud of poverty, with sickness, with disgrace, and if he see no
other cover safe, cover thee with the cloud of death, and the grave, all is to
cover thee from the Tempter, and thereby to preserve thee for himself, which
is our second part, Thou art my hiding place, Thou shall preserve me from
trouble.

If we content our selves with that word which our Translators have chosen
here, Trouble, 2 Part. Trouble.
(Thou shall preserve me from Trouble) we must rest in one of these two senses;
Either that God shall arm, and indue those that are his, with such a
constancy, as those things that trouble others, 2 Cor. 1.5.
shall not trouble them, but, As the sufferings of Christ abound in them, 2
Cor. 6.9.
so their consolation also abounds by Christ, As unknown, and yet well
known, as dying, and behold we live, as sorrowful yet always rejoicing, as
poor yet making many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things;
For, God uses both these ways in the behalf of his servants; sometimes to
suspend the working of that that should work their torment, as he suspended
the rage of the Lions for Daniel, and the heat of the fire in the furnace, for
the others; Sometimes by imprinting a holy stupefaction, and unsensiblenesse in
the person that suffers, So S. Laurence was not only patient, but merry and
facetious when he lay broyling upon the fire, and so we read of many other
Martyrs, that they have been less moved, less affected with their torments,
then their Executioners, or their Persecutors have been, That which troubled
others never troubled them; Or else the phrase must have this sense, That though
they be troubled with their troubles, though God submit them so far, to the
common condition of men, that they be sensible of them, yet he shall preserve
them from that trouble so, as that it shall never overthrow them, never sink
them into a dejection of spirit, or diffidence in his mercy; They shall find
storms, but a stout and strong ship under foot; They shall feel Thunder and
lightning, but garlands of triumphant bays shall preserve them; They shall be
trodden into the earth with scorns and contempts, but yet as seed is buried,
to multiply to more. So far this word of our Translators assist our devotion,
Thou shall preserve me from trouble, Thou shall make me unsensible of it, or
thou shall make me victorious in it.

But the Original word Tzur has a more peculiar sense; Perplexity.
It signifies a strait, a narrowness, a difficulty, 2 Samuel 1.26.
a distress; I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan, says David, in
this word, when he lamented his irremediable, his irrecoverable death. So is it
also, Esa. 21.3.
Pangs have taken hold of me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth. And so
the word grows to signify, Psalm. 89.43.
Aciem gladii, Thou have turned the edge of the sword, and to signify the top
and precipice of a rock; Psalm. 78.15.
He clave the rocks in the wilderness. So that the word expresses Angustiam,
narrowness, pressure, precipitation, inextricablenesse, in a word, (that will
best fit us) Perplexity; and, The Lord shall preserve me from perplexity; And
this may the Church, and this may every good soul comfort it self in, Thou
shall preserve me from perplexity.

Consider it first in the Church, and then in our selves; and first in the
Primitive, Ecclesia Primitiva.
and then in the reformed Church. When God had brought his Church, ex
abscondito, from his hiding place, from poverty, and contempt, and
solitariness, and glorified it in the eyes of the world, by many royal
endowments and possessions, with which Princes (then become Christians) and
other great persons, piously and graciously invested her, though these were
tentations to aspire to greater, yet God preserved her from perplexities of all
kinds; from perplexing of Princes with her claims, that they might not marry,
nor make leagues, nor levy Armies, but by her permission. The Church called
nothing her own, but that which God had called His, and given her, that is,
Tithes: All the rest, she acknowledged to have received from the bounty of
pious benefactors. This was her plea, The Lord is my rock, and my fortress,
and my deliverer, my strength, my buckler, Psalm. 18.2.
and my high tower. In all this Inventory, in all this Armory, and furniture of
the Church, there is never a sword; Rocks, and fortresses, and bucklers, and
Towers, but no sword, no material sword in the Churches hand; Arma nostra
preces and fletus; Ambrose.
The Church fought with nothing but prayers and tears. And as God delivered
her from these perplexities, from perplexing the affairs of Princes with her
interest in their government; so he delivered her from any perplexities in her
own government. No usurpation, no offer of any Prince that attempted to invade
or violate the true right of the Church, no practice of any Heretics, how
subtle, how potent soever, though they equalled, though they exceeded the
Church in number, and in power, (as at some times the Arians did) ever brought
the Church to a perplexity, or to an apprehension of any necessity, of
yielding to sacrilegious Princes, or to irreligious Heretics in any point, to
procure their peace, or to enjoy their rest, but still they kept the dignity
of Priesthood entire, and still they kept the truth of the Christian Religion
entire; no perplexity how they should subsist if they were so stiff, ever
brought them to go less to any prevarications, or modifications, either in
matter of Religion toward Heretics, or in the execution of their religious
function toward facrilegious usurpers. So God preserved the Primitive Church
from perplexity; she was ever thankful and submisse toward her benefactors;
she was ever erect and constant against usurpers. And this preservation from
perplexity, we consider in the reformed Church also.

When the fullness of time was come, Ecclesia Reformata.
and that Church which lay in the bowels of the putative Church, the specious
Church, the Roman Church, that is, those souls which groaned and panted after
a Reformation, were enabled by God to effect it; when the Iniquity of Babylon
was come to that height, That whereas at first they took of Alms, afterward
Monachi emunt and Nobiles vendunt, Monks bought, and Lords sold, Hieron. Ep.
ad Demetr.
nay Monasteries bought, and the Crown sold; when they went so far, as to
forgea Donation of Constantin, by which they laid hold upon a great temporal
state, and after that so much farther, as to renounce the Donation of
Constantin, by which, for a long time, the Roman Church claimed all their
temporal state, S. Peter's patrimony, and so, at last came to say, That all the
states of all Christian Princes are held of the Church, and really may be, and
actually are forfeited to her, and may, at her pleasure, be reassumed by her;
when for the art and science of Divinity it self, they had buried it in the
darkness of the School, and wrapped up that that should save our souls, in
those perplexed and inextricable clouds of Schoole-divinitie, and their
Schoole-divinitie subject to such changes, as that a Jesuit professes, that in
the compass but of thirty years, Tanner. in Aquin. p. 1. ad Lector.
since Gregory de Valentia writ, Vere dici possit, novam quodammodo Theologiam
prognatam esse, We may truly say, that we have a new art of Divinity risen
amongst us; The Divinity of these times, says he, is not in our Church the
same that it was thirty years since; since all parts of the Christian Church
were so incensed, both with their heresy, and their tyranny, as that the
Greek Church, which generally they would make the world believe, is absolutely
as they are, is by some of their own Authors confessed to be more averse from
them, Stenartius Ep. Dedic. ante Calecam.
and more bitter against them, then Luther or Calvin; since upon all these
provocations, God was pleased to bring this Church, the Reformed Church, not
only to light, but to splendour, He has preserved this Church from
perplexities. If they say, we are perplexed with differences of opinions
amongst our selves, let this satisfy them, that we do agree all, in all
fundamental things: And that in things much nearer the foundation, then those
in which our differences lie, they differ amongst themselves, with more
acrimony and bitterness, then we do. If they think to perplex us with the
Fathers, we are ready to join that issue with them; where the Fathers speak
unanimously, dogmatically, in matters of faith, we are content to be tried by
the Fathers. If they think to perplex us with Councels, we will go as far
as they in the old ones, and as far as they for meeting in new Councels, if
they may be fully, that is, Royally, Imperially called, and equally proceeded
in, and the Resolutions grow and gathered there upon debatements, upon the
place, and not brought thither upon commandment from Rome. If there be no way
but Force and Arms, if they will admit no trial but that, God be blessed
that keeps us from the necessity, but God be blessed also that he preserves
us from perplexity, or not being able to defend his cause, if he call us to
that trial. And therefore let them never call it a Perplexity in us, let them
never say that we know not what to do, when we acknowledge the Church of Rome
to be truly a Church: for the Pesthouse is a house, and theirs is such a
Church; But the Pesthouse is not the best air to live in, nor the Roman
Church the best Church to die in. Thou have preserved me from perplexities, may
the Primitive Church say, and so may the Reformed too, and so also may every
particular soul say, which is a Consideration, that from the beginning we
proposed for every Part, and are now come to it in this.

When we were upon this consideration in our former Part, Anima.
we showed you, that no over-tender or timorous soul, might hide it self in a
retired life, from the offices of society, but though every particular age
bring a new sin with it, every complexion a new sin, every occupation a new
sin, every friend a new sin, that must be loved for his sake, yet Para te foro,
Thou art bound to come abroad, and trust upon Gods hiding thee there from
tentations, and so assure thy self that he will preserve thee from
perplexities. Now, we consider in the School, Perplexities, which are such
only by misunderstanding; and Perplexities, which are such in the true nature
of the thing. Those of the first kind, perplexities in a misunderstanding,
should fall upon no man; perplexities of the second kind, in the nature of the
thing it self, can fall upon no man. Of the first kind, this is an example, A
man swears to conceal all his friends secrets, and he tells him of a
treasonable purpose against the State; Either way he must offend; Against his
oath if he reaveale it, or against his Allegiance, if he do not. This is no
perplexity; for in a right understanding he must know, that such an Oath binds
not. Of the second kind there was an example in Origin, who must, by the
commandment of the Persecutor, either offer sacrifice to an Idol, or
prostitute his body to an adominable abuse with another man. Which should he
do? Neither. God gives a man an issue in such cases, by death; August.
Et vitam potius finire debet quam maculare, He is bound to give his life,
rather then to stain his life. This timorous soul then fears where no fear
is. He would hide himself, he is loath to come into the world, because he
thinks he must needs sin. He needs not. Is there a necessity laid upon him,
that he must die as rich as the richest of his profession, and that he cannot
do without sin? That he must leave his wife such a Jointure, and his children
such Portions, and all that he cannot do without sin? First, all that he may
do without sin: We have seen in all Professions honest men die as rich, Mark
10.29.
as dishonest. If thou do not, he that has said, There is no man that has
left wife or children for my sake, but shall have a hundred fold here, and
everlasting life, (which is a blessed Codicil to a Will that was abundant
before) will also say, There is no man that has left wife and children poor
for my sake, but I will enlarge my providence upon them even in this life, and
my glory in the next: And this was our second Part, considered in the Church
and in our selves, Thou shall preserve, etc.

There remains yet a third Part, 3. Part.
that as God hides us from tentations, that they reach us not; or preserves us
from intricacies, and perplexities, so that they hurt us not; so if they do,
yet he compasses us with a joyful Deliverance, (as our former) or with songs
of Deliverance, as this Translation has it, that is, imprints in us a holy
certitude, a fair assurance, that he will never forsake us; And this voice we
may hear from the Church first, and then from every particular soul; for, to
both, (as we have told you all the way) do all the parts of this Psalm
appertain.

As it is an exaltation of Gods indignation, Compass. Lament. 3.5.
when he is said to Compass by way of siege, (so Jerusalem complains, He has
builded against me, he has compassed me with gall and travel, he has hedged
me about, that I cannot get out; So God threatens, I will camp against thee
round about, Esaias 39.3.
and I will lay siege against thee) for this intimates such a displeasure of
God, as that he does not only leave us succourlesse, joylesse, comfortless in
our selves, but cuts off those supplies which might relieve us; He compasses
us, he besieges us, he camps round about us, that no relief can enter; so
when his love and mercy is expressed in this phrase, that he compasses us, it
signifies both an entire mercy, that no enemy shall break in in any part,
whilst he does compass us, and a permanent and durable mercy, that as no force
of the enemy, so no weariness in himself, shall make him discontinue his
watches, or his guard over us, but that he will compass us still.

Thy faithfulness is round about thee, says David to God; that is our first
comfort, Psalm. 89.8.
that God compasses himself with his own faithfulness, that is, is never
unmindfull of his own promises, and purposes; And then, He is round about our
habitations; Psalm. 78.28.
God compasses himself with his own faithfulness, and then, he compasses us
with himself: That as Satan told God one day after another, Circuivi terram,
and perambulavieam, Job 1.8.
I have compassed the earth, and walked it round, Job 2.2.
but could never say that he had broke into Jobs quarter, for he found the
impossibility in that, The Lord had made a hedge about him, Where note that
Gods first care is of the man; and the soul is the man; first a hedge about
him, and then, about his house, and about all that he had, on every side; Job
1.10.
So day after day we shall find arguments to establish our hearts in hope,
that the Lord has compassed us, and nothing shall break in so, as to take us
from him; but God shall say to us, as to his former people, Leva in circuitu
oculos tuos, Lift up thine eyes round about, Esaias 49.18.
and behold, (which is one great comfort, that he enables us to see and to know
our enemies, to discern a tentation to be a tentation) Omnes isti congregati
sunt, All these gather themselves together, and come to thee, (which is another
assistance, that when we see our enemies multiply, and that there is none that
fights for us, but only thou O God, we make a more present recourse to him)
But, Vivo ego dicit Dominus, As I live says the Lord, Velut ornamento
vestieris, thou shall surely cloathe thee with them all as with an ornament,
and bind them on thee as a Bride does; (which is the fullness of the mercy,
That as in another place, he promises his children, Panis vester sunt, your
enemies shall be your Bread, Numb. 14.9.
you shall feed upon your enemies; So here he makes our enemies, even our
spiritual enemies; our Clothes, and more then that, our Jewels, our
Ornaments, we shall be the stronger, the warmer, the richer, by tribulations,
and tentations, having overcome them, as we shall, if the Lord compass us, if
he continue his watchfulness over us) And that David says here, first in the
Churches behalf.

God from the beginning carried a wall about his Church, in that assurance,
Primitiva. Mat. 16.18.
Portae inferi, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The Gentiles,
the Philosophers that were without the Church, found a party, Traitors,
Conspirators within, The Heretics; and all these led and maintained by potent
Princes that persecuted the Church; The gates of hell were all opened, and
issued all her forces, but Non praevaluerunt, they never prevailed. The Arians
were sometimes more then the true Christians in all the world: The Martyrians,
a sect that affected the name of Martyrdom, could name more Martyrs then the
true Church could, but Evanuerunt, yet they vanished: The Emperors of Rome
persecuted the Bishops of Rome to death, yet when we look upon the reckoning,
the Emperors died faster then Bishops. Thou have compassed me, says the
Primitive Church, and so says the Reformed too.

Princes that hated one another have joined in leagues against the Religion,
Reformata.
Princes that needed their Subjects, have spent their Subjects by thousands, in
Massacres, to extinguish the Religion; Personal Assasinates, Clandestine plots
by poison, by fire, by water have been multiplied against Princes that favor
the Religion; Inquisitions, Confiscations, Banishments, Dishonours have
overflowne them that profess the true Religion; and yet the Lord compassing
his Church, she enjoyes a holy certainty, arising out of these testimonies of
his care, that she shall never be forsaken. And this may every good soul have
too.

God comes to us without any purpose of departing from us again; Anima.
For the Spirit of life that God breated into man, that departs from man in
death; but when God had assumed the nature of man, the Godhead never parted
from that nature; no, not in death; When Christ lay dead in the grave, the
Godhead remained united to that body and that soul, which were dis-united in
themselves; God was so united to man, as that he was with man, when man was not
man, in the state of death. So when the Spirit of God has invested, compassed
thy soul, and made it his by those testimonies, that Spirit establishes it in
a kind of assurance that he will never leave it. Old Rome had (as every City
amongst the Heathen had) certain gods which they called their Tutelar gods,
gods that were affected to the preservation of that place; But they durst never
call upon those gods, by their proper names, for fear of losing them; lest if
their names should be known by their enemies, their enemies should win away
their gods from them, by bestowing more cost, or more devotion toward them
then they themselves used. So also is it said of them, that when they had
brought to Rome a foreign god, which they had taken in a conquered place,
Victory, they cut the wings of their new god Victory, lest he should fly from
them again. This was a misery, that they were not sure of their gods when they
had them. We are; If he once come to us, he never goes from us, out of any
variableness in himself, but in us only; That promise reaches to the whole
Church, Esaias 30.20.
and to every particular soul, Thy Teachers shall not be removed into a
corner any more, but thine eye shall see thy Teachers, which in the Original
(as is appliably to our present purpose, noted by Rabbi Moses) is, Non erunt
Doctores tui alati, Thy Teachers shall have no wings, They shall never fly
from thee, and so the great Translation reads it, Non avolabunt. As their great
god, Victory, could not fly from Rome, so after this victory which God has
given his Church in the Reformation, none of her Teachers should fly to, or
toward Rome. Every way that God comes to us, he comes with a purpose to stay,
and would imprint in us an assurance that he does so, and that Impression is
this Compassing of thy soul, with songs of deliverance, in the signification
and use of which word, we shall in one word conclude all.

God has given us this certitude, Songs.
this fair assurance of his perpetual residence with us, in a word of a
double signification; The word is Ranan, which signifies Joy, exultation,
singing; Lament. 2.14. Psalm. 17.1.
But it has another sense too. Arise, Cry out in the night. And, Attend unto
my cry, which are voices far from singing. This God means therein, That though
he give us that comfort to sit and sing of our Deliverance, yet he would not
have us fall asleep with that music, but as when we contemplate his
everlasting goodness, we celebrate that with a constant Joy, so when we look
upon our own weakness and unworthiness, we cry out, Wretched men that we
are, who shall deliver us from this body of death? For though we have the
Spirit of life in us, we have a body of death upon us. How loving soever my
soul be, it will not stay in a diseased body; How loving soever the Spirit of
life be, it will not stay in a diseased soul. My soul is loath to go from my
body, but sickness and pain will drive it out; so will sin, the Spirit of
life from my soul. God compasses us with Songs of Deliverance, we are sure he
would not leave us; But he compasses us with Cries too, we are afraid, we are
sure, that we may drive him from us. Pray we therefore our Lord of everlasting
goodness, That he will be our Hiding Place, That he will protect us from
tentations incident to our several Callings, That he will preserve us from
troubles, preserve us from them, or preserve us in them, preserve us that they
come not, or preserve us that they overcome not; And that he will compass us,
so as no enemy find overture unto us, and compass us with songs, with a
joyful sense of our perseverance, but yet with cries too, with a solicitous
fear, that that multiplicity and heinousness of our sins may weary even the
incessant and indefatigable Spirit of comfort himself, and chase him from us.

SERMON. LXI. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.8. I will Instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall
go, I will guide thee with mine eye.


THis verse, more then any other in the Psalm, answers the Title of the
Psalm. The title is, David's Instruction; and here in the Text it is said, I
will instruct thee, and teach thee, in the way thou shall go. There are eleven
Psalms that have that Title, Psalms of Instruction; The whole book is Sepher
Tehillim, The book of praises; and it is a good way of praising God, to
receive Instruction, Instruction how to praise him. Therefore does the holy
Ghost return so often to this Catechisticall way, Instruction, Institution, as
to propose so many Psalms, expressly under that Title purposely to that use. In
one of those, The manner how Instruction should be given, is expressed also;
Psalm. 45. Bernard.
It must be in a loving manner, for the Title is Canticum Amorum, A song of love
for Instruction. For Absque prudentia, and benevolentia, non sunt perfecta
consilia: True Instruction is a making love to the Congregation, and to every
soul in it; but it is but to the soul. And so when S. Paul said, He was mad
for their sakes, Insanivit Amatoriam insaniam, says Theophylact, S. Paul was
mad for love of them, to whom he writ his holy love letters, his Epistles. And
thereupon do the Rabbis call this Psalm, Leb David, Cor Davidis, The opening
and pouring out of David's heart to them, whom he instructs. We have no way
into your hearts, but by sending our hearts. The Poets counsel is, Vt ameris,
ama, If thou would be truly loved, do thou love truly; The holy Ghosts
precept upon us is, Vt credaris, creed, That if we would have you believe, we
believe our selves. It is not to our Eloquence that God promises a blessing,
but to our sincerity, not to our tongue, but to our heart: All our hope of
bringing you to love God, is in a loving and hearty manner to propose Gods love
to you. The height of the Spouses love to Christ, came but to that, Cant. 2.5.
I am sick of love: The love of Christ went farther, To die for love. Love is
as strong as death; Cant. 8.6.
but nothing else is as strong as either; and both, Love and Death, met in
Christ. How strong and powerful upon you then should that Instruction be, that
comes to you from both these, The Love and Death of Christ Jesus? and such an
Instruction does this text exhibit, I will instruct thee, and teach thee in
the way in which thou shall go, I will guide thee with mine eye. God so loved
the world, as that he sent his Son to die: The Son being dead so loved the
world, as that he returned to that world again; and being ascended; sent the
holy Ghost to establish a Church, and in that Church, Vsque ad consummationem,
till the end of the world, shall that holy Spirit execute this Catechisticall
Office, He shall instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go,
He shall guide thee with his eye.

Though then some later Expositors have doubted of the person, who does this
Office, Divisio.
To Instruct, who this I in our Text is, because the Hebrew word Le David, is
as well Davidis, as Davidi, An Instruction from David, as an Instruction to
David, and so the Catechist may seem to be David, and no more; yet since this
Criticisme upon the word, Le David, argues but a possibility that it may, and
not a necessity that it must be so, we accompany S. Hierome, and indeed the
whole body of the Fathers, in accepting this Instruction from God himself, it
is no other then God himself that says, I will instruct thee, etc. No other
then God himself can undertake so much as is promised in this text. For here
is first, a rectifying of the understanding, I will instruct thee, and in the
Original there is somewhat more then our Translation reaches to; It is there,
Intelligere faciam te, I will moke thee understand. Man can instruct, God only
can make us understand. And then it is Faciam te, I will make Thee, Thee
understand; The work is the Lords, The understanding is the man's: for God does
not work in man, as the Devil did in Idols, and In Pythonissis, and In
Ventriloquis, in possessed persons, who had no voluntary concurrence with the
action of the Devil, but were merely Passive; God works so in man, as that he
makes man work too, Faciam Te, I will make Thee understand; That that shall be
done shall be done by me, but in Thee; the Power that rectifies the act is
Gods, the Act is man's; Faciam te, says God, I will make thee, thee, every
particular person, (for that arises out of this singular and distributive word,
Thee, which threatens no exception, no exclusion) I will make every person, to
whom I present Instruction, capable of that Instruction, and if he receive it
not, it is only his, and not my fault. And so this first part is an
Instruction De credendis, of such things, as by Gods rectifying of our
understanding, we are bound to believe. And then in a second part, there
follows a more particular Instructing, Docebo, I will teach thee, And that In
via, In the way; It is not only De via, To teach thee, which is the way, that
thou may find it, but In via, How to keep the way, when thou art in it; He
will teach thee, not only Vt gradiaris, That thou may walk in it, and not
sleep, but Quo modo gradieris, How thou may walk in it, and not stray; And
so this second part is an Institution De agendis, of those things, which, thine
understanding being formerly rectified, and deduced into a belief, thou art
bound to do. And then in the last words of the text, I will guide thee with
mine eye, there is a third part, an establishment, a confirmation, by an
incessant watchfulness in God; He will consider, consult upon us, (for so much
the Original word imports) He will not leave us to Contingencies, to Fortune,
no nor to his own general Providence, by which all Creatures are universally
in his protection, and administration, but he will ponder us, consider us,
study us; And that with his eye, which is the sharpest, and most sensible organ
and instrument, soonest feels, if any thing be amiss, and so inclines him
quickly to rectify us; And so this third part is an Instruction De sperandis,
it has evermore a relation to the future, to the constancy and perseverance of
Gods goodness toward us; to the end, and in the end, he will guide us with
his eye: Except the eye of God can be put out, we cannot be put out of his
sight, and his care. So that, both our freight which we are to take in, that
is, what we are to believe concerning God; And the voyage which we are to make,
how we are to steer and govern our course, that is, our behavior and
conversation in the household of the faithful; And then the Haven to which we
must go, that is, our assurance of arriving at the heavenly Jerusalem, are
expressed in this Chart, in this Map, in this Instruction, in this Text, I will
Instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, I will guide
thee with mine eye. And when you have done all this, Believed aright, and lived
according to that belief, and died according to that life, in the last voice
Surgite, you shall find a Venite, as soon as you are called from the dust of
the grave, you shall Enter into your Masters joy, and be no more called
servants, but friends, no more friends, but sons, no more sons but heirs, no
more heirs, but coheires with the only Son of God, no more coheires, but Idem
Spiritus, The same Spirit with the Lord.

First then, 1. Part. Instruit.
the office which God by his blessed Spirit, through us, in his Church,
undertakes, is to Instruct. And this being done so by God himself, God sending
his Spirit, his Spirit working in his Ministers, his Ministers laboring in his
Church, it is strange that S. Paul speaking so, in the name of God, and his
Spirit, and his Ministers, and his Church, should be put to entreat his
hearers, To suffer a word of exhortation. Yet he is; Heb. 13.22.
I beseech ye, brethren, suffer a word of Exhortation. And the strangeness of
the case is exalted in this, that the word there is (...), Solatii, and so the
Vulgat reads it, and justly, Vt sufferatis verbum solatii, I bescech ye to
suffer a word of Comfort. What will ye hear willingly, if ye do not
willingly hear words of Comfort? With what shall we exercise your holy joy and
cheerfulness, if even words of Comfort must exercise your patience? And yet we
must beseech you to suffer, even our words of comfort; for, we can propose no
true comfort unto you, but such as carries some irkesomenesse, some bitterness
with it; we can create no true joy, no true acquiescence in you, without some
exercise of your patience too. We cannot promise you peace with God, without a
war in your selves, nor reconciliation to him, without falling out with your
selves, nor eternal joy in the next world, without a solemn remorse for the
sinful abuses of this. We cannot promise you a good to morrow, without sending
ye back to the consideration of an ill yesterday; for your hearing to day, is
not enough, except ye repent yesterday. But yet, though with S. Paul we be put
to beseech you, Vt sufferatis, That ye would suffer Instruction, though we must
sometimes exercise your patience, yet it is but verbum instructionis, a word of
Instruction; and though Instruction be Increpation, (for as the word is
Solatium, Comfort, (so we have told you it is) it is Increpation too, for all
true comfort has Increpation in it) yet it may easily be suffered, because it
is but verbum, but a word, a word and away. We would not dwell upon
increpations, and chidings, and bitternesses; we would pierce but so deep as
might make you search your wounds, when you come home to your Chamber, to bring
you to a tenderness there, not to a palenesse or blushing here. We never stay
so long upon denouncing the judgments of God, but that we would, as feign as
you, be at an end of that Paragraph, of that period, of that point, that we
might come into a calm, and into a Lee-shore, and tell you of the mercies of
God in Christ Jesus. You may suffer Instruction, though Instruction be
increpation, for it is but a word of instruction, we have soon done; and you
may suffer, them, because they are but Verba, not Verbera, They are but words,
and not blows. It is not Traditio Satanae, a delivering you up to Satan, it is
not the confusion of face, nor consternation of spirit, nor a jealousy and
suspicion of Gods good purpose upon you, that we would induce by our
Instruction, though it be Increpation, but only a sense of your sins, and of
the Majesty of God violated by them, and so to a better capacity of this
Instruction, which the Holy Ghost here presents, In credendis, in those things
which you are bound to believe; of which his first degree is, Intelligere te
faciam, He will make ye understand, he will work upon your understanding, for,
so much (as we noted to you at first) does that word, which we Translate here,
I will Instruct thee, comprehend.

Oportet accedentem credere; The Apostle seems to make that our first step, In
intellectu. Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God, must believe. So it is our first step to God, To
believe, but there is a step toward God, before it come to faith, which is, to
understand; God works first upon the understanding. God proceeds in our
conversion, and regeneration, as he did in our first Creation. There man was
nothing; but God breathed not a soul into that nothing; but of a clod of earth
he made a body, and into that body infused a soul. Man in his Conversion, is
nothing, does nothing. His body is not verier dust in the grave, till a
Resurrection, then his soul is dust in his body, till a resuscitation by
grace. But then this grace does not work upon this nothingnesse that is in
man, upon this mere privation; but Grace finds out man's natural faculties,
and exalts them to a capacity, and a susciptiblenesse of the working thereof,
and so by the understanding infuses faith. Therefore God begins his Instruction
here at the understanding; and he does not say at first, Faciam te credere, I
will make thee to believe, but Faciam te intelligere, I will make thee
understand.

That then being Gods Method, To make us understand, certainly those things
which belong to our Salvation, are not In-intelligibilia, not In-intelligible,
un-understandable, Tertul.
un-conceiveavable things, but the Articles of faith are discernible by Reason.
For though Reason cannot apprehend that a Virgin should have a Son, or that God
should be made Man and dye, if we put our Reason primarily and immediately upon
the Article single, (for so it is the object of faith only) yet if we pursue
Gods Method, and see what our understanding can do, we shall see, that out of
ratiocination and discourse, and probabilities, and very similitudes, at last
will arise evident and necessary conclusions; such as these, That as there is a
God, that God must be worshipped according to his will, That therefore that will
of God must be declared and manifested somewhere, That this is done in some
permanent way, in some Scripture, which is the Word of God, That this book,
which we call the Bible, is, by better reasons then any others can pretend,
that Scripture; And when our Reason has carried us so far, as to accept these
Scriptures for the Word of God, then all the particular Articles, A Virgins
Son, and a mortal God, will follow evidently enough. And then those two
Propositions, Mysteria credenda ut intelligantur, Mysteries of Religion must be
believed before they be understood, and Mysteria intelligenda ut credantur,
Mysteries of Religion must be understood before they can be believed, will be
all one; For God exalts our natural faculty of understanding by Grace to
apprehend them, and then to that submission and assent, which he by grace
produces out of our understanding, by a succeeding and more powerful Grace he
sets to the Seal of faith. Wait thou therefore upon God, his way; present
unto him an humble and a diligent understanding; conclude not too desperately
against thy self, if thou have not yet attained to all degrees of faith, but
admit that preparation, which God offers to thine understanding, by an
assiduous and a sedulous hearing; for a narrower faith that proceeds out of a
true understanding, shall carry thee farther then a faith that seems larger,
but is wrapped up in an implicit ignorance; no man believes profitably, that
knows not why he believes. The subject then, that this work is wrought in, is
that faculty, man's understanding; There God begins in the Instruction of this
text, Thou shall understand, Thou shall; The act shall be thine, but yet, the
power is mine, faciam te, I will make thee understand, which is another
Consideration in this part.

God does not determine his promise here, Faciam.
in a Faciam ut intelligas, I will cast an understanding upon thee, I will
cause an understanding to fall upon thee, but it is faciam te intelligere, I
will make thee to understand, Thou shall be an Agent in thine own salvation.
When God made the Ass speak under Balaam, God went not so far as this first
step, (not to the faciam ut intelligas) he imprinted, infused no understanding
in that Beast. When God suffers the hypocrite to praise him, he imprints no
understanding; Here is a Frustra colunt, It is a worship that is no worship,
when it is with the lips only, and the heart far off. So when a Papist cries
Templum domini, Templum domini, Visibility of a Church, Infallibility in a
Church, here is no understanding; He pretends to believe as the Church
believes, but he knows not what the Church believes; no, nor he neither upon
whom he relies for his Instruction, his Priest, his Confessor. They are
deceived that think every Priest or Jesuit, that comes hither, knows the
Tenets of that Church; it is a more reserved, a more perplexed, a more involved
matter then so. To contract this Consideration, when a Preacher speaks well,
and destroys as fast by his ill life, as he builds by his good doctrine, Psalm.
111.10.
here is no understanding neither. A good understanding have all they that
keep the Commandments; not all they that preach them, but that keep them: It
is all they, 1 John 2.3.
and only they. There is no other assurance but that; Hereby we are sure that
we know him, if we keep his Commandments. This is our Criterium, and only
this; hereby we know it, Pro. 18.9.
and by nothing else. So that as he that is slothful in his work, is even the
brother of him that is a great waster; So he that builds not with both hands,
life and doctrine, Chrysostom.
is slothful in his work. He that preaches against sin, and does it, Instruit
dominum quomodo eum condemnet, He does not so much teach his Auditory, how to
escape condemnation, as teach God how to condemn him. In these cases there is
no understanding at all; In the case of the Ass, and the hypocrite, and the
blind Romanist, and the vicious Preacher. In some other cases, there is
understanding given, but without any concurrence, any cooperation of man, as in
those often visions, and dreams, and manifestations of God, to the Prophets,
and his other servants; There was a faciam ut intelligas, God would make his
pleasure known unto them, but yet not as in this Text, where God makes use of
the man himself for his own salvation. But yet it is God, and God alone that
does all this, that rectifies our understanding, as well as that establishes
our faith. It is my soul that says to mine eye, faciam te videre, I will make
thee see, and my soul that says to mine ear, faciam te audire, I will make
thee hear, and without that soul, that eye and ear could no more see nor
hear, then the eyes and ears of an Idol; so it is my God that says to my
soul, faciam te intelligere, I will make thee understand. And therefore as
thou art bound to infinite thankesgivings to God, when he has brought thee to
faith, to forget not thy tribute by the way, to bless and magnify him, if he
have enlarged thy desire of understanding, and thy capacity of understanding,
and thy means of understanding; for, as howsoever a man may forget the order
of the letters, after he is come to read perfectly, and forget the rules of
his Grammar, after he is come to speak perfectly, yet by those letters, and by
that Grammar he came to that perfection; so, though faith be of an infinite
exaltation above understanding, yet, as though our understanding be above our
senses, yet by our senses we come to understand, so by our understanding we
come to believe. And though the Holy Ghost repeat that more then once, Domine
quis credidit? Lord who believes our report? And that, Shall the son of Man
find faith upon earth when he comes? though he complain of want of faith, yet
he multiplies infinitely that complaint for want of understanding, and there
are ten Non intelligunts for one Non credunt, ten increpations, that his people
did not understand, for one that they did not believe; because, though faith be
a nobler operation, God takes it always worst in us, to neglect those things
which are nearest us, as he does to neglect the ordinary and necessary duties
of Religion, and search curiously into the unrevealed purposes of his secret
counsails. And this Instruction to the understanding, he seems in this text to
extend to all, for this singular word, Te, I will make Thee, Thee to
understand, includes no exclusion, but is an offer, a promise to all, which is
our other and last Consideration in this first part.

In this consideration, let us stop a little upon this question, Te.
why the Scriptures of God more then any other book, do still speak in this
singular person, and in this familiar person? still Tu, and Tibi, and Te; Thou
must love God, God speaks to thee, God has care of thee. Certainly in those
passages, which are from lower persons to Princes, no Author is of a more
humble, and reverentiall, and ceremonial phrase, then the phrase of the
Scripture is. Who could go lower then David to Saul, that calls himself a
flea, 1 Samuel 24.15. 2 Samuel 9.8. Dan. 2.37.
and a dead dog? Who could go higher, then Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, O King,
thou art King of Kings; In all places, the children of men, the beasts of the
field, the fouls of the air are given into thy hand; Thy greatness reaches
to heaven, Dan. 4.19.
and thy dominions to the ends of the earth. So is it also in persons nearer in
nature, and nearer in rank; Jacob bows seven times to the ground, in the
presence of his brother Esau, and My Lord, and My Lord, Genesis 33.3.
at every word. The Scripture phrase is as ceremonial and as observant of
distances, as any, and yet still full of this familiar word too, Tu and Tuus,
Thou and Thine. And we also, we who deal most with the Scriptures, are more
accustomed to the same phrase then any other kind of speakers are. In a
Parliament, who is ever heard to say, Thou must needs grant this, Thou may
be bold to yield to this? Or who ever speaks so to a Judge in any Court? Nay,
the King himself will not speak to the people in that phrase. And yet in the
presence of the greatest, we say ordinarily, Amend thy life, and God be
merciful to thee, and I absolve thee of all thy sins. Beloved, in the
Scripture. God speaks either to the Church, his Spouse, and to his children,
and so he may be bo^d, and would be familiar with them; Or else he speaks so, as
that he would be thought (...) thee to speak singularly to thy soul in
particular. Know then, that Christ Jesus ha^ done enough for the salvation of
all; but know too, that if there had been no other name written in the book of
life but thine, he would have dyed for Thee. Of those which were given him, he
lost none; but if there had been none given him, but Thou, rather then have
lost Thee, he would have given the same price for Thee, that he gave for the
whole world. And therefore when thou hear his mercies distributed in that
particular, and that familiar phrase, Faciam Te, I will make Thee understand,
thou know not whether he speak to any other in the Congregation or no; Be
sure that he speak to Thee; which he does, if thou hearken to him, and answer
him. If thou can not find that he means Thee yet, that he speaks to thee now,
if thou think he speak rather to some other, whose faith and good life thou
preferrest before thine own, do but begin to think now of the blessedness of
that man, to whom thou think he speaks, and say to God, with thy Savior,
Eli, Eli, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou gone to the
other side, or why to the next on my right, or on my left hand, and left out
me? Why speak thou not comfortably to my soul? and he will leave the ninety
nine for thee, and thou shall find Onus amoris, such a weight, and burden, and
load of his love upon thee, as thou shall be feign almost to say with S. Peter,
Exi a me Domine, O Lord go farther from me, that is, thou shall see such an
obligation of mercy laid upon thee, as puts thee beyond all possibility of
comprehension, much more of retribution, or of due and competent thankesgiving.
Miserere animae tuae, Be but merciful to thine own soul, and God will be
merciful to it too; If God had never meant to be merciful to thee, he would
learn of thee; If thou could love thy self before God love thee, God would
love thee for loving thy self; how much more for thy loving his love in thee?
Love understanding, and, faciet te intelligere, he will make thee understand
enough for thy pilgrimage, enough for thy transmigration, enough for thy
eternal habitation. As we count them wisest, who are most provident, and
foresee most, he will make thee see farther then all they, through all
generations, beyond children, and childrens children, (which is the prospect of
the world) to all eternity, that has no termination, and he will allow thee an
understanding for this world too; He will bid thee Lift up thine eyes to
heaven, Esaias 51.6.
and bid thee Look down to the earth too; He will make thy considerations of
this world acceptable to him, as well as those of the next; He will remember
thee, that Angels descended as well as ascended, that to a religious soul,
Genesis 28.
this world is not out of the way to heaven; Faciet te intelligere, He will
make thee understand enough for both. And so we have done with that first Part,
De credendis, Things which we are bound to believe, That even for those, God
works upon the understanding, That though God work all in all, yet it is the
man that understands; and lastly, that in the Holy Ghosts choosing this word of
singularity, Te, I will make thee understand, there is pregnant intimation of
Gods large and diffusive goodness to all, This word, Thee, excludes none. And
so we pass to our second Part, Instruction, De agendis, what we are to do, I
will teach thee in the way thou shall go.

If any man lack wisdom, 2 Part. Docebo.
let him ask it of God; and Faciet intelligere, God shall make him understand:
God shall; I may study, and then, you may hear me, but God only makes us all
understand; for the understanding is the door of faith, and that door he
opens, and he shuts: So by understanding he brings us to believe. But then, he
that truly believes, finds that he has something to do too; And he says to
himself, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways? And he cannot tell
himself; He asks them whom God has sent to tell him, his Ministers, Viri,
fratres, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? And by their leading,
he goes to the Spirit of God, to God himself, and says, Mat. 19.16.
Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? And
that good Master will teach him what to do, which is the promise of this part
of Instruction in our Text, Gregor.
I will teach thee in the way thou shall go. And Plus est docere, quam
instruere, God promises more in this, that he will Teach thee in the way, then
in the former, that he would make thee understand. Not that the matter or
subject in this Part, is the greater, (for the former had relation to faith,
and this but to good works) but that it intimates a more frequent recourse to
us, and a more studious care of us, and a more provident vigilance over us, and
a more familiar conversation with us, that God accompanies us in all our way,
and directs us in all our particular actions, then that by understanding he
has brought us to believe. He that horses a man well for a journey, or he that
rewards a man well for a journey, does a greater work, then he that goes along
with him as a guide; but yet there is aliquid magis in the guide, there is a
more continual, a more incessant courtesy in him. We see in the Roman
Church, they are not in their Beads, without Credoes, they believe enough; and
lest that should not be enough, they have made a new Creed of more Articles
then that, in the Council of Trent, and to testify a strong faith therein,
they must swear they believe it: And then they have to every Creed, more Pater
nosters, they petition enough, ask enough at Gods hands; They have Credoes
enough, Pater nosters enough, and Ave Mary's more then enough; But when we consider
them in the Commandments, what we are to do, (as great Workers as they
pretend to be) though they enlarge their Credoes, and multiply their Pater
nosters, they contract the Commandments, and put two into one, for fear of
meeting one against Images.

This then expresses Gods daily care of us, that he teaches us the way. But
then, even that implies, that we are all out of our way; still all bends, all
conduces to that, An humble acknowledgement of our own weakness, a present
recourse to the love and power of God; The first thing I look for in the
Exposition of any Scripture, and the nearest way to the literal sense thereof,
is, what may most deject and vilify man, what may most exalt, and glorify
God. We are all, all out of our way; but God deals not alike with all; Psalm.
35.6. Esaias 26.7.
for, for the wicked, Their way is dark and slippery, And then, The Angel of
the Lord persecutes them; But for those whom he loves, He will weigh the paths
of the just, (says our later Translation) And, He will make the paths of the
righteous equal and eaven, says our former; It shall be a path often beaten
by him, for it is not righteousness, to be righteous once a year, at Easter,
nor once a week, upon Sunday. An Anniversary righteousness, an Hebdomadary
righteousness, a Sabbatarian righteousness is no righteousness. But it is a
path; and so made eaven, without occasions of stumbling; that is, he shall be
able to walk in any profession, and to make good any station, and not be
diverted by the power of any tentations incident to that calling. The Angel of
the Lord, The evil Angel, distrust and diffidence, shall persecute the wicked,
in his dark and slippery way; this is no teaching; but because the godly have
a teaching, even their direction has a correction too; God beats his Scholars
into their way too. The difference is expressed in the Prophet, Esaias 30.21.
When the Lord has given you the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction, (for in Gods School that is Scholars fare) yet, says God, Thy
Teachers shall not be removed from thee into a corner; Still in thine
affliction thou shall have a Teacher, or even the affliction it self shall be
Gods Usher; and thou shall have evidence of it, Thy Teacher shall not be
removed into a corner; thou shall see it; and (as it follows there) Thine ears
shall hear a voice behind thee; (that is, a voice arising even from that
affliction that thou have suffered) and that voice shall say, This is the way,
walk ye in it; As dark as affliction is, it shall show thee the way, Haec est
via, This is the way, as much as affliction enfeebles thee, yet it shall enable
thee to walk in it, Ambulate in ea. God is a Schoolmasters; not as the Law
was, to teach with a sword in his hand; but yet he teaches with a rod in his
hand, though not with a sword.

Now in teaching us the way, he instructs us De via, and In via; which is the
way, De via. Psalm. 119.168.
and what is to be done in it. He sees all our ways; All my ways are before
thee, says David. And he sees them not so as though they belonged not to him,
for he considers them, Does not he behold all my ways, and tell all my steps?
He sees them, Job 31.4. Esaias 24.17.
and sees our irremediable danger in them; Formido, and fovea, and laqueus,
Fear, and a pit, and snares are upon thee; Upon whom? There we see the
generality of this single word, Thee, that it is all; for so, it follows
there, Upon thee, O Inhabitant of the earth. The danger then is general, and
the Lord knows it; Who then can teach us a better way, but he? But how does he
teach us this way? When God had promised Moses to send an Angel to show the
people their way, (I will send an Angel before thee) Moses says to God, See,
Exodus 33.2, 12.
thou say, Lead this people forth, and thou have not showed me whom thou will send with me; (so those Translators thought good to render it) God had
told him of an Angel, but that satisfied not Moses; He must have something
showed to him, he must see his guide. Ver. 15.
If thy presence go not with me, carry me not from hence, says he to God.
For, wherein shall it be known, that I, and thy people have found favor in thy
sight? shall it not be when thou go up with us? And therefore God satisfies
him, My presence shall go with thee. Go? but how? says Moses; Will thou be
pleased to show me thy glory? Ver. 18.
Shall we see any thing? They did see that Pillar in which God was, and that
presence, that Pillar showed the way. To us, the Church is that Pillar; in
that, God shows us our way. For strength it is a Pillar, and a Pillar for
firmness and fixation: But yet the Church is neither an equal Pillar, always
fire, but sometimes cloud too; The Church is more and less visible, sometimes
in splendour, sometimes in an eclipse; neither is it so a fixed Pillar, as that
it is not in diverse places. The Church is not so fixed to Rome, as that it is
not communicated to other Nations, nor so limited in it self, as that it may
not admit changes, in those things that appertain to Order, and Discipline. Our
way, that God teaches us, is the Church; That is a Pillar; Fixed, for
Fundamental things, but yet a moveable Pillar, for things indifferent, and
arbitrary.

Thus he teaches, Quid via, which is the way, It is the Church, the Pillar of
Truth. In via.
He teaches next, Quid in via, What is to be done in the way; for, that
counsel of the Apostle, See that ye walk circumspectly, presumes a man to be
in the way; Ephesians. 5.15.
else he would have cried to have stopped him, or to have turned him, and not
bid him go on, how circumspectly soever. But, In my path, says David, Psalm.
140.5.
(not making any doubt but that he was in a right path) in my path, the proud
have laid a snare for me, and spread a net with cords; Ad manum orbitae, (says
the Original) even at the hand of the path; That path which should (as it
were) reach out a hand to lead me, has a snare in it. And therefore, says
David, with so much vehemence in the entrance of that Psalm, Deliver me, O
Lord, from the evil man, who purposes to overthrow my goings; Though I go in
the right way, the true Church, yet purposes to overthrow me there. This Evil
man works upon us: The man of sin; in those instruments that still cast that
snare in our way, in our Church, There is a minority, an invisibility, and a
fallibility in your Church; you begun but yesterday in Luther, and you are
fallen out already in Calvin. So also works this Evil man amongst us, in those
Scismatiques, who cast that snare in our way, Your way (though it be in part
mended) has yet impressions of the steps of the Beast, and it is a circular,
and giddy way, that will bring us back again to Rome. And therefore, beloved,
though you be in the way, see ye walk circumspectly, for the snares that both
these have cast in the way, the reproaches, and defamations that both these
have cast upon our Church. But when thou have escaped both these snares, of
Papist, and Scismatique, pray still to be delivered from that Evil man, that
is within thee. Non tantum potest hominem decipere, Hieron.
quam per Organum hominis, The Devil has not so powerful an instrument, nor
so subtle an engine upon thee as thy self. August.
Quis in hoc seculo non patitur hominem malum? Who in this world (or if he go
so far out of this world, as never to see man but himself) is not troubled
with this evil man? When thou prayest with David, to be delivered from this
evil man, if God ask thee whom thou meanest, must thou not say, thy self?
Can thou show God a worse? Chrysostom.
Qui non est malus, nihil a malo mali patitur; If a man were not evil in
himself, the worst thing in the world could not hurt him; the Devil would not
offer to give fire, if there were no powder in thy heart. What that evil man
is, that is in another, I cannot know: I cannot always discern another
snare; for, What man knows the things of a man, 1 Cor. 2.11.
save the spirit of a man which is in him? Thy spirit knows what the evil man
that is in thee, is. Deliver thy self of that evil man that ensnares thee in
thy way; though thou come to Church; yea even when thou art there. David
repeats this word A viro malo, from the evil man, twice in that Psalm. In one
place, A viro malo, is in that name, Meish, which is a name of man proper only
to the stronger sex, and intimates snares and tentations of stronger power, As
when fear, or favor tempts a man to come to a superstitious, and idolatrous
service. In the other it is but Meadam, and that is a name common to men, and
women, and children, and intimates, that omissions, negligences, infirmities,
may encumber us, ensnare us, though we be in the way, even in the true place of
Gods service; and the eye may be ensnared as dangerously, and as damnably in
this place, as the ear, or the tongue in the Chamber. As S. Hierome says,
Nugae in ore Sacerdotis sunt sacrilegium, An idle word in a Church-mans mouth
is sacrilege; so a wanton look in the Church, is an Adultery. Now when God
has thus taught us the way, what it is, that is, brought us to the true
Church, (for till then, all is diversion, all banishment) and taught us In via,
what to do in that way, To resist tentations to superstition from other
imaginary Churches, tentations to particular sins from the evil men of the
world, and from the worst man in the world, our self, the Instruction in our
Text is carried a step farther, that is, to proceed and go forward in that
way, Qua gradieris, I will teach thee to walk in that way.

When S. Augustine says upon this place, Qua gradieris.
It is via qua gradieris, and non cui haerebis, A way to walk in, not to
stick upon, he does not mean, That we should ever change this way, or depart
from it, (that any cross in this, should make us hearken after another
religion) It is not that we should not stick to it, but that we should not
stick in it, nor loyter in the way. Thou have been in this way (in the true
Church) ever since thy Baptism: and yet, if a man that has lived morally well
all his life, and no more then so, find by Gods grace a door opened into the
Christian Church, and a short turning into this right way, at the end of his
life, he by the benefit of those good Moral actions, shall be before thee,
who have lived lazily, though in the right way, at his first step; For though
those good Moral actions were not good works, when he did them, yet then,
that grace which he lays hold upon at last, shall reflect a tincture upon
them, and make them good in the eyes of God, ab initio. If thou have not been
lazy in thy way, in thy Christian profession hitherto, yet except thou proceed
still, except thou go from hence now, better then thou came, (better in thy
purpose) and come hither next day better then thou wentest, (better in thy
practice) thou have not learned this lesson in this Instruction, I will teach
thee to walk in this way. A Christian has no Solstice, no highest point,
where he may stand still, and go no farther; much less has he any Equator,
where days and nights are equal, that is, a liberty to spend as much time
ill, as well, as many hours in sinful pleasures, August.
as in religious exercises. Quicquid citra Deum est, via est, nec immorandum in
ea; He does not say, praeter Deum, much less contra Deum; For whatsoever is
against God, nay, whatsoever is besides God, is altogether out of the way; But
citra Deum, on this side of God: Till we come to God in heaven, all our best is
but our way to him. All the zeal of gathering knowledge, all the growth of
faith, all the practice of sanctification, is but via, the way; and non
immorandum in ea; since we have here a promise of Gods assistance in it, in
the way, we are sure there is an obligation upon it, as upon a duty, in this
way, humbly, and patiently, and laboriously to walk toward him, without
stopping upon any thing in this world, either preferments on the right, or
disgraces on the left hand, (for a Cart may stop us, as well as a Coach, low
things as well as high, with as much trouble, and more anoyance) Which is more
especially intended in the last words of the Text, Firmabo super te oculos
meos, I will settle my providence, fix mine eye upon thee, I will guide thee
with mine eye.

Thus far has our blessed Lord assured us, That he will make us understand,
3 Part.
which is his Instruction de credendis, what to Believe; And that he will teach
us to walk in his way, which is his Instruction de agendis, what to Do, how
to avoid tentations; This last is, That he will guide us with his eye, which
is his Instruction de sperandis, what we are to Hope for at his hand, if in
this way we do stumble, or fall into some sins of infirmities. But it is but
de sperandis, not de praesumendis; when by infirmity thou art fallen, thy Hope
must begin then; but if the Hope begun before, so as thou fellest upon hope
that God would raise thee, then it was presumption, and there the Lords eye
shuts in, and guides thee no longer. Otherwise he directs thee with his eye,
(that is, with his gracious and powerful looking upon thee) to the means of
thy recovery. We hear of no blows, we hear of no chiding from him toward
Peter, but all that is said, is, Luke 22.65.
The Lord turned back and looked upon Peter, and then he remembered his case;
The eye of the Lord lightened his darkness; The eye of the Lord thawed those
three crusts of Ice, which were grown over his heart, in his three denials of
his Master. A Candle wakes some men, as well as a noise; The eye of the Lord
works upon a good soul, as much as his hand, and he is as much affected with
this consideration, The Lord sees me, as with this, The Lord strikes me.

We read in Natural story of some creatures, Qui solo oculorum aspectu
fovent ova, Plin. l. 10. c. 9.
which hatch their eggs only by looking upon them; What cannot the eye of God
produce and hatch in us? Plus est quod probatur aspectu, quam quod sermon.
Ambrose.
A man may seem to commend in words, and yet his countenance shall dispraise.
His word infuses good purposes into us, but if God continue his eye upon us, it
is a farther approbation, for He is a God of pure eyes, and will not look upon
the wicked. Deuteronomy. 11.12.
This land does the Lord thy God care for, and the eyes of the Lord are always
upon it from the beginning of the year, even to the end thereof. What a
cheerful spring, what a fruitful Autumn has that soul, that has the eye
of the Lord always upon her? The eye of the Lord upon me, makes midnight
noone, and S. Lucies day S. Barnabies; It makes Capricorn Cancer, and the
Winters the Summers Solstice; The eye of the Lord sanctifies, nay more then
sanctifies, glorifies all the Eclipses of dishonor, makes Melancholy
cheerfulness, diffidence assurance, and turns the jealousy of the sad soul
into infallibility. Upon his people his eye shined in the wilderness; his eye
singled them in Egypt, and in Babylon they were sustained by his eye. They
were, and we are; Ezra 5.5. Psalm. 33.18.
The eye of their God was upon the Elders of Israel, And, Behold, the eye of
the Lord is upon all them that fear him. The Proverb is not only as old as
Aristotle, Oculus domini, and Pes domini, The eye of the Master fattens the
horse, and the foot of the Master marles the ground, but it is as old as the
Creation, God saw all that he had made, and so, it was very good; It was visio
approbationis, Hieron.
and his approbation was the exaltation thereof.

This guiding then with the eye, we consider to be his particular care, and his
personal providence upon us, in his Church; For, a man may be in the Kings
presence, and yet not in his eye; and so he may in Gods. Gods whole Ordinance
in his Church, is Gods face; For, that is the face of God, by which God is
manifested to us; But then, August.
that eye in that face, by which he promises to guide us, in this Text, is that
blessed Spirit of his, by whose operation he makes that grace, which does
evermore accompany his Ordinances, effectual upon us; The whole Congregation
sees God face to face, in the Service, in the Sermon, in the Sacrament; but
there is an eye in that face, an eye in that Service, an eye in that Sermon, an
eye in that Sacrament, a piercing and an operating Spirit, that looks upon
that soul, and foments and cherishes that soul, who by a good use of Gods
former grace, is become fitter for his present.

And this guiding us with his eye, manifests it self in these two great
effects; Convertit.
conversion to him, and union with him. First, his eye works upon ours; His eye
turns ours to look upon him. Still it is so expressed with an Ecce; Behold,
Psalm. 33.18.
the eye of the Lord is upon all them that fear him; His eye calls ours to
behold that; And then our eye calls upon his, to observe our cheerful
readiness, Behold, Psalm. 123.2.
as the eye of a servant looks to the hand of his Master, so our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God, till he have mercy upon us. Where the Donec, Until, is
an everlasting Donec, as the blessed Virgins was; A Virgin Donec, till she
brought forth her first Son, and a Virgin ever after; So our eyes wait upon
God, till he have mercy, that is, while he has it, and that he may continue
his mercy; for it was his merciful eye that turned ours to him, and it is the
same mercy, that we wait upon him. And then, when, as a well made Picture does
always look upon him, that looks upon it, this Image of God in our soul, is
turned to him, by his turning to it, it is impossible we should do any foul,
any uncomely thing in his presence. Will any man solicit a Wife or a Daughter,
and call the Father or Husband to look on? Will any man break open thy house
in the night, and first wake thee, and call thee up? Can any man give his body
to uncleanness, his tongue to profaneness, his heart to covetousness, and
at the same time consider, that his pure, and his holy, and his bountiful God
has his eye upon him? Can he look upon God in that line, in that Angle, (upon
God looking upon him) and dishonor him? Psalm. 25.15. August.
Upon those words of David, Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, Quasi
diceretur, quid agitur depedibus? as though it were objected, Is all thy care
of thine eyes? What becomes of thy feet? Non attendis ad eos? Do thou look
to thy steps, To thy life, as well as to thy faith, To please God, as well as
to know God? And he answers in the words which follow, Ipse evellet, As for my
feet, God shall order, that is, assist me in ordering them; If his eye be upon
me, and mine upon him, (O blessed reflection! O happy reciprocation! O powerful
correspondence!) Ipse evellet, He will pluck my feet out of the net, though I
be almost ensnared, almost entangled, he will snatch me out of the fire,
deliver me from the tentation.

The other great effect of his guiding us with his eye, Unit. Psalm. 17.8.
is, That it unites us to himself; when he fixes his his eye upon us, and
accepts the return of ours to him, then he keeps us as the Apple of his eye,
Quasi pupillam filiam oculi, (as S. Hierom reads it) as the Daughter, the
issue, Zech. 2.8.
the offspring of his own eye. For then, He that touches you, touches the
Apple of his eye. And these are the two great effects of his guiding us by his
eye, that first, his eye turns us to himself, and then turns us into
himself; first, his eye turns ours to him, and then, that makes us all one
with himself, so, as that our afflictions shall be put upon his patience, and
our dishonours shall be injuries to him; we cannot be safer then by being his;
but thus, we are not only His, but He; To every Persecutor, in every one of
our behalf, he shall say, Cur me? Why persecutest thou me? And as he is all
Power, and can defend us, so here he makes himself all eye, which is the most
tender part, and most sensible of our pressures.

So have you then this Instruction perfected unto you. First, Decredendis,
facit te intelligere, God will make you understand, you, for he will work upon
your natural faculties supernaturally, and by them, convey faith. And then, De
agendis, docebo in via, He will teach you which is the way, and what to do
when you are in it. And after that, De sperandis, firmabo oculos, he will guide
you with his eye, watch, if in that way you stumble, and restore you. That you
may constantly hope for; and when you have but thus much more, you have all,
That there is In omni sperando, timendum; In every hope, there is something to
be feared. Romans 5.5.
Hope makes us not ashamed, But yet hope, (as long as it is but hope) may make
us afraid; though not with a suspicious fear, reflected upon God, yet with a
solicitous fear, Romans 5.2. Heb. 3.6. Phil. 2.12.
arising from, and returning upon our selves. There is a Hope of glory, and
there is a Glory in hope; but no such Glory, as exterminates all fear: for we
are bid To work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; It must be such a
fear, as may still relate to my Salvation; For fear that excludes me from
Salvation, is a fearful fear; but yet a fear it must be; for as there is a
promise of guiding by his eye, there is also a possibility of taking his eye
from thee. God is not in this, like the Sun, that makes no more haste over a
dunghill, then over a Garden; over Babylon, then over Jerusalem. The eye of God
is not infected with thy bleare-eye; but yet he will not stay and look upon
it. And when he takes his eye from thee, Psalm. 34.13. Gregor.
he sets his face against thee; The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. And thus, Ab ejus
visione, quem conspicis, abes; Thou art out of Gods sight, when thou see him
only in his judgments. Nay, Deuteronomy. 32.20.
thou shall not see him in them; I will hide my face from them, says God,
(though it were an angry face, yet he would hide it) and I will see what their
end will be. God shall look upon thy fearful end from the beginning, but thou
thy self shall not see the horror that appertains to it, till it be too late;
for that is it, in which God does especially reproach that people, Verse. 28.
O that they were so wise, as to consider their latter end! To that purpose
has God continued his Instruction to us, in this text, That we might know from
him, what to believe, and what to do, and how to return to God, when we have
gone astray, I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall
go, and I will guide thee with mine eye.

SERMON. LXII. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.9. Be not as the Horse, or the Mule, who have no understanding; whose
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.


AS God, above whom there is nothing, looks downwards to us; So except we,
below whom there is nothing that belongs to us, look upward toward him, we
shall never meet. And therefore God foreseeing such a descent in man, as might
make him incapable, and put him out of distance of the rich promises of this
Psalm, in this Text he forewarnes him, of such a Descent, such a dejection,
such a diminution of himself. Divisio.
And first he forbids a Descent generally into a lower nature; Nolite fieri,
Be not made at all, not made any other, then God has made you. God would have
man, who was his Medal at first, (when God stamped and imprinted his Image in
him) And was Gods Robe, and garment at last, (when Christ Jesus invested and
put on our Nature) God would have this man preserve this Dignity, Nolite fieri,
Be not made any new thing. Secondly, he forbids him a Descent, into certain
particular depravations, and deteriorations of our Nature, in those qualities,
which are intimated and specified, in the nature and disposition of those two
beasts, The Horse, and the Mule, Nolite fieri siout Equus and Mulus, Be not as
the Horse, or the Mule. But principally, for that which is in the third place,
Quia non intellectus, Not because they have no faith, but because they have no
understanding, for then, it is impossible that ever they should have faith; And
so it is a reason proportioned to our Reason; Do not so, for it will vitiate,
it will annihilate your understanding, your reason, and then what are you, for
supernatural, or for natural knowledge? But then there is another reason
proportioned to the sense, that this Declination of ours, into these inferior
natures, brings God to a necessity to bit, and bridle, and curb us, that is,
to inflict afflictions upon us; And then that reason is aggravated by the
greatest weight that can be laid upon it, That God will inflict all these
punishments upon these perverse men, metamorphosed into these Beasts, not only
Ne approximent, That they may not come near Gods Servants, to do them harm,
(which seems indeed to be the most literal sense of the word) But, (as some
of our Expositors have found reason to interpret them) Ne approximent, That
they shall not come near him; not near God in the service of his Church, to
do themselves any good; his Corrections shall harden them, and remove them
farther from him, and from all benefit by his Ordinances.

First then God arms him with a pre-increpation upon Descent, Nolite fieri,
Descensus.
Go no less, be not made lower. The first sin that ever was, was an
ascending, a climing too high; when the purest Understandings of all, The
Angels, fell by their ascending; when Lucifer was tumbled down, by his Similis
ero Altissimo, I will be like the most High, Esaias 14.14.
then he tried upon them, who were next to him in Dignity, upon Man, how that
clambring would work upon him. He presents to man, the same ladder; He infuses
into man the same Ambition, and as he fell with a Similis ero Altissimo, I will
be like the most High, So he overthrew man, with an Eritis sicut Dii, Ye shall
be as Gods. It seems this fall has broake the neck of Man's ambition, and now
we dare not be so like God, as we should be. Ever since this fall, man is so
far from affecting higher places, then his nature is capable of, that he is
still grovelling upon the ground, and participates, and imitates, and expresses
more of the nature of the Beast then of his own. There is no creature but man
that degenerates willingly from his natural Dignity; Those degrees of
goodness, which God imprinted in them at first, they preserve still; As God
saw they were good then, so he may see they are good still; They have kept
their Talent; They have not bought nor sold; They have not gained nor lost;
They are not departed from their native and natural dignity, by any thing that
they have done. But of Man, it seems, God was distrustful from the beginning;
He did not pronounce upon Man's Creation, (as he did upon the other Creatures)
that He was good; because his goodness was a contingent thing, and consisted
in the future use of his free will. For that faculty and power of the will,
Dionys.
is Virtus transformativa; by it we change our selves into that we love most,
and we are come to love those things most, which are below us. As God said to
the Earth, (and it was enough to say so) Germinet terra juxta genus suum, Genesis
1.
Let the Earth bring forth according to her kind; Ambro.
So, Vive juxta genus tuum, says S. Ambrose to Man, Live according to thy
kind; Non adulteres genus tuum, do not abase, do not allay, do not betray,
do not abastardise that noble kind, that noble nature, which God has imparted
to thee, imprinted in thee.

Mundi moles liber est, Basil.
This whole world is one Book; And is it not a barbarous thing, when all the
whole book besides remains entire, to deface that leaf in which the Authors
picture, the Image of God is expressed, as it is in man? God brought man into
the world, as the King goes in state, Lords, and Earls, and persons of other
ranks before him. So God sent out light, and Firmament, and Earth, and Sea, and
Sun, and Moon, to give a dignity to man's procession; and only Man himself
disorders all, and that by displacing himself, by losing his place. The
Heavens and Earth were finished, Et omnis exercitus eorum, Genesis 2.1.
says Moses, All the Host thereof; and all this whole Army preserves that
Discipline, only the General that should govern them, mis-governs himself.
And whereas we see that Tigers and Wolves, Beasts of annoyance, do still keep
their places and natures in the world; and so do Herbs and Plants, even those
which are in their nature offensive and deadly, Ambrose.
(for Alia esui, alia usui, Some herbs are made to eat, some to adorn, some to
supply in Physic) whilst we dispute in Schools, whether if it were possible
for Man to do so, it were lawful for him to destroy any one species of Gods
Creatures, though it were but the species of Toads and Spiders, (because this
were a taking away one link of Gods chain, one Note of his harmony) we have
taken away that which is the Jewel at the chain, that which is the burden of
the Song, Man himself. Partus sequitur ventrem; We verify the Law
treacherously, mischievously; we all follow our Mother, we grovell upon the
earth, whose children we are, and being made like our Father, Psalm. 8.4.
in his Image, we neglect him. What is Man that thou art mindful of him, and
the son of Man, that thou visitest him? David admires not so much man's
littleness in that place, as his greatness; He is a little lower then Angels;
A little lower then God, says our former Translation; agreeably enough to the
word, and in a good sense too; Gods Lieutenant, his Vicegerent over all
Creatures; Thou have made him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands;
(and Dominion is a great, it is a supreme estate) And thou have put all things
under his feet; (as it follows there) And yet we have forfeited this
Jurisdiction, this Dominion, and more, our own Essence; we are not only
inferior to the Beasts, and under their annoyance, but we are our selves become
Beasts. Consider the dignity of thy soul, which only, of all other Creatures
is capable, susciptible of Grace; If God would bestow grace any where else, no
creature could receive it but thou. Thou art so necessary to God, as that God
had no utterance, no exercise, no employment for his grace and mercy, but for
thee. And if thou make thy self incapable of this mercy and this grace, of
which nothing but thou is capable, then thou destroyest thy nature. And
remember then, that as in the Kingdom of Heaven, in those orders which we
conceive to be in those glorious Spirits, there is no falling from a higher to
a lower order, a Cherubim or Seraphim does not fall, and so become an
Archangel, or an Angel, but those of that place that fell, fell into the
bottomless pit; So, if thou depart from thy nature, from that
susciptiblenesse, that capacity of receiving Grace, if thou degenerate so from
a Man to a Beast, thou shall not rest there in the state and nature of a Beast,
whose soul breaths out to nothing, and vanishes with the life, thou shall not
be so happy, but thy better nature will remain, in despite of thee, thine
everlasting soul must suffer everlasting torment.

Now as many men when they see a greater piece of coin then ordinary, 2 Part.
they do not presently know the value of it, though they know it to be silver,
but those lesser coyns which are in current use, and come to their hands every
day, they know at first sight; so because this stamp, this impression of the
image of God in Man, is not well and clearly understood by every Man, neither
this descent and departing from the dignity thereof, being delivered but in
general, ( Nolite fieri, Be ye made like nothing else) Therefore the Holy
Ghost brings us here to the consideration of some lesser pieces, things which
are always within distance and apprehension, always in our eye, ( Nolite
fieri sicut, Descend not to the qualities of the Horse and the Mule. Though (as
God summed up his temporal blessings to the Jews, in that total, Et
profecisti in regnum, Ezekiel. 16.13.
Thou did prosper into a Kingdom) He may also sum up his spiritual
blessings to us in this, Et profecisti in Ecclesiam, and in Ecclesiam
credentium, (for there is Ecclesia malignantium, Odivi Ecclesiam malignantium,
says David, Psalm. 26.5.
I have hated the Congregation of evil doers) I have brought thee first from
the Nations, from the Common, into a visible Church, And then from Babylon,
from that Church of confusion, that makes the word of God and the word of Man
equal, into an Orthodox and sincere Church, yet our sins have cast us Infra
Gentes, and Infra Babylonem, Below all these again. For, for the Gentiles, Romans
2.14.
The Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the
law; we that have the help of the Law and Gospel too, do not. And for Rome,
the example of our Reformation, and their own shame, contracted thereby, has
wrought upon the Church of Rome it self; They are the better for the
Reformation, (in frequent Catechizing and preaching) and we are not. Compare us
with the Gentiles, and we shall fall under that increpation of the Apostle,
There is such fornication amongst you, 1 Cor. 5.1.
as is not once named amongst the Gentiles: We commit those things which they
forbear to speak of. Compare us with Rome, and I fear that will belong to
us, which God says and swears in the Prophet, As I live, says the Lord,
Sodom thy sister has not done as thou have done. Ezekiel. 16.48.


Where, by the way, be pleased to note, that God calls eyes Samaria, and
Sodom, sisters of Jerusalem; there is a fraternity grounded in charity, which
nothing must divest; If Sodom and Jerusalem were Sisters, Babylon and we may
be so^^; uterin sisters of one womb, (for there is but one Baptism) though
fornication it self, (and fornication, in the spiritual sense of the
Scriptures, has a heavy signification, and reaches even to Idolatry) have made
that Church, as some think, scarce capable of the name of a Church, yet Sodom
is a sister.

But be she as far degenerate as she can, our sin has made a descent below
them that are below us. It has cast us below the Inhabitants of the Earth,
Beasts, and below the Earth it self, even to Hell; for we make this life,
which is the place of repentance, the place of obstinacy and obduration; and
obduration is Hell. Yea, it has cast us below the Devil himself; our state
is, in this, worse then theirs; They sinned before God had given them any
express law; and before God had made any examples, or taken any revenge upon
any sinners; But we sin after a manifest law, and after they, and many others
have been made our examples. They were never restored, we have been restored
often; They proceed in their obstinacy, when God casts them from him, we
proceed even when God calls us to him; They against God which turns from them,
and is glorified in their destruction, we against him that comes to us, and
emptied and humbled himself to the shame, to the scorn, to the pain, to the
death of the Cross for us. These be the lamentable descents of sin: But the
particular descent to which this text does purposely bend it self, is, That as
God said at beginning, in contempt, and in derision, Ecce Adam, quasi unus ex
nobis, Behold, Man is become as one of us; So now, Genesis 3.22. Bernard.
(as S. Bernard makes the note) the Horse and Mule may say, Quasi unus ex
nobis, Behold, Man is become as one of us; and, Nolite fieri, says God in our
text, Be not as the Horse or the Mule.

According to the several natures of these two Beasts, Equus and Mulus.
the Fathers, and other Expositors have made several interpretations; at
least, several Allusions. They consider the Horse and the Mule, to admit any
Rider, any burden, without discretion or difference, without debatement or
consideration; They never ask whether their rider be noble or base, nor
whether their load be gold for the treasure, or roots for the market. And those
Expositors find the same indifferency in an habitual sinner, to any kind of
sin: whether he sin for pleasure, or sin for profit, or sin but for company,
still he sins. They consider the Mule to be engendered of two kinds, two
species, and yet to beget, to produce neither, but to be always barren; And
they find us to be composed of a double, a heavenly, and earthly nature, and
thereby bound to duties of both kinds, toward God, and toward men, but to be
defective and barren in both. They consider in the Mule, that one of his
Parents being more ignoble then the other, he is likest the worst, He has more
of the Ass then of the Horse in him; And they find in us, that all our
actions, and thoughts, taste more of the ignobler part of earth then of heaven.
S. Hierome thinks fierceness and rashness to be presented in the Horse, and
sloth in the Mule. And S. Augustine carries these two qualities far; He
thinks that in this fierceness of the Horse, the Gentiles are represented,
which ran far from the knowledge of Christianity; And by the laziness of the
Mule, the Jews, who came nothing so fast, as they were invited by their former
helps, to the embracing thereof. They have gone far in these allusions, and
applications; and they might have gone as far farther as it had pleased them;
They have Sea-roome enough, that will compare a Beast, and a Sinner together;
and they shall find many times, in the way, the Beast the better Man.

Here we may contract it best, Gregor.
if we understand Pride by the Horse, and Lust by the Mule; for, though both
these, pride and lust, might have been represented in the horse, which is, (as
the Philosopher notes) Animal, post hominem, salacissimum, The most
intemperate, and lustful of all creatures, but man, (still man, for this
infamous prerogative, must be excepted) and though the Scriptures present that
sin, Jer. 5.8.
Lust, by the horse, (They rose in the morning like fed horses, and every man
neighed after his neighbors wife) (and therefore S. Hierome delights himself
with that curious note, In Hos. 3. Numb. 5.12.
That when a man brings his wife to that trial and conviction of jealousy,
the offering that the man brings is Barley, Horseprovender in those parts,
says S. Hierome) though both sins, pride and lust, might be taxed in the
horse, yet pride is proper to him, and lust to the mule, both because the mule
is Carne virgo, Hieron.
but Mente impudicus, which is one high degree of lust, to have a lustful
desire in an impotent body, And then, he is engendered by unnatural mixture,
which is another high degree of the same sin. And these two vices we take to be
presented here, as the two principal enemies, the two chief corrupters of
mankind; pride to be the principal spiritual sin, and lust, the principal
that works upon the body. To avoid both, consider we both in both these beasts.

It is not much controverted in the Schools, Superbia.
but that the first sin of the Angels was Pride. But because (as we said
before) the danger of man is more in sinking down, then in climbing up, in
dejecting, then in raising himself, we must therefore remember, that it is not
pride, August.
to desire to be better. Angeli quaesiverunt id, ad quod pervenissent, si
stetissent. The Angels sin was pride; but their pride consisted not in aspiring
to the best degrees that their nature was capable of: but in this, that they
would come to that state, by other means then were ordained for it. It could
not possibly fall within so pure, and clear understandings, as the Angels
were, to think that they could be God; that God could be multiplied; That they
who knew themselves to be but new made, could think, not only that they were
not made, but that they made all things else; To think that they were God, is
impossible, this could not fall into them, though they would be Similes
Altissimo, Like the most High. But this was their pride, and in this they would
be like the most High, That whereas God subsisted in his Essence of himself,
for those degrees of perfection, which appertained to them, they would have
them of themselves; They would stand in their perfection, without any turning
toward God, without any farther assistance from him; by themselves, and not by
means ordained for them. This is the pride that is forbidden man; not that he
think well of himself, In genere suo, That he value aright the dignity of his
nature, in the Creation thereof according to the Image of God, and the infinite
improvement that that nature received, in being assumed by the Son of God; This
is not pride, but not to acknowledge that all this dignity in nature, and all
that it conduces to, that is, grace here, and glory hereafter, is not only
infused by God at first, but sustained by God still, and that nothing in the
beginning, or way, or end, is of our selves, this is pride.

Man may, and must think that God has given him the Subjicite, and Dominamini,
A Majesticall Character even in his person, to subdue and govern all the
creatures in the world; That he has given him a nature, already above all
other creatures, and a nature capable of a better then his own is yet; 2 Pet.
1.4. 1 John 3.9. Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 6.17. Dan. 3.17.
(for, By his precious promises we are made partakers of the Divine nature) We
are made Semen Dei, The seed of God, borne of God; Genus Dei, The offspring of
God; Idem Spiritus cum Domino, The same Spirit with the Lord; He the same flesh
with us, and we the same spirit with him. In Gods servants, to have said to
Nebuchadnezzar, Our God is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us; but, if
he do not, yet we will not serve thy Gods: In the Martyrs of the Primitive
Church, to have contemned torments, and tormentors with personal scorns and
affronts: In all calamities and adversities of this life, to rely upon that
assurance, I have a better substance in me then any man can hurt, I have a
better inheritance prepared for me, then any man can take from me, I am called
to Triumph, and I go to receive a Crown of Immortality, these high
contemplations of Kingdoms, and Triumphs, and Crowns, are not pride; To know a
better state, and desire it, is not pride; for pride is only in taking wrong
ways to it. So that, to think we can come to this by our own strength, without
Gods inward working a belief, or to think that we can believe out of Plato,
where we may find a God, but without a Christ, or come to be good men out of
Plutarch or Seneca, without a Church and Sacraments, to pursue the truth it
self by any other way then he has laid open to us, this is pride, and the
pride of the Angels.

Now there is also a pride, which is the Horses pride, conversant upon earthly
things; To desire Riches, and Honor, and Preferment in this world, is not
pride; for they have all good uses in Gods service; but to desire these by
corrupt means, or to ill ends, to get them by supplantation of others, or for
oppression of others, this is pride, and a Bestiall pride. And this proud man
is elegantly expressed in the Horse; Job 39.19.
The horse rejoices in his strength, he goes forth to meet the armed man, he
mocks at fear, he turns upon the sword, and he swallows the ground. The
River is mine, says Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 29.3.
and I have made it for my sefl: They take all, and they mistake all; That
which is but lent them for use, they think theirs; (The River is mine) That
which God gave them, they think of their own getting; (I made it) And that
which God placed upon them, as his Stewards for the good of others, they
appropriate to themselves; (I have made it for my self) But when time is, Job
39.21. Zech. 12.4. Job 39.27.
God mounteth on high, and he mocks the horse and the rider. In that day, I
will smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness. The
horse believes not that it is the sound of the Trumpet; When the Trumpet
sounds to us in our last Bell, (for the last Bell that carries us out of this
world, and the Trumpet that calls us to the next, is all one voice to us, for we
hear nothing between) the worldly man shall not believe that it is the sound
of the Trumpet, he shall not know it, not take knowledge of it, but pass away
unsensible of his own condition.

So then is Pride well represented in the Horse; and so is the other, Lust,
Mulus.
licentiousness in the Mule. For, besides that reason of assimilation, that it
desires, and cannot, and that reason, that it presents unnatural and
promiscuous lust, for this reason is that vice well represented in that Beast,
because it is so apt to bear any burdens. For, certainly, no man is so
inclinable to submit himself to any burden of labor, of danger, of cost, of
dishonor, of law, of sickness, as the licentious man is; He refuses none, to
come to his ends. Neither is there any tree so loaded with boughs, any one sin
that has so many branches, so many species as this. Shedding of blood we can
limit in murder, and manslaughter, and a few more; and other sins in as few
names. In this sin of lust, the sex, the quality, the distance, the manner,
and a great many other circumstances, create new names to the sin, and make it
a sin of another kind. And as the sin is a Mule, to bear all these loads, so
the sinner in this kind is so too, and (as we find an example in the Nephew of
a Pope) delights to take as many loads of this sin upon him, as he could; to
vary, and to multiply the kinds of this sin in one act, He would not satisfy
his lust by a fornication, or adultery, or incest, (these were vulgar) but upon
his own sex; and that not upon an ordinary person, but in their account, upon a
Prince; And he, a spiritual Prince, A Cardinal; And all this, not by
solicitation, but by force: for thus he compiled his sins, He ravished a
Cardinal. This is the sin, in which men pack up as much sin as they can, and
as though it were a shame to have too little, they belie their own pack, they
brag of sins in this kind, which they never did, as S. Augustine with a holy
and penitent ingenuity confesses of himself.

This sin then, (though one great mischief in it be, that for the most part,
it destroys two together, (the Devil will have his creatures come to his Arc
by couples too, two and two together) yet this sin we are able to commit
without a companion, upon our own bodies, yea without bodies; (in the weakness
of our bodies our minds can sin this sin) This which the Wiseman calls a pit,
The mouth of a strange woman is as a deep pit, Prove. 22.14.
he with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall therein. And therefore he that
pursues that sin, is called to a double sad consideration, both that he angers
the Lord in committing that sin then; And that the Lord was angry with him
before for some other sin, and for a punishment of that former sin, God
suffered him to fall into this. And it is truly a fearful condition, when
God punishes sin by sin; other corrections bring us to a peace with God; He
will not be angry for ever, he will not punish twice, when he has punished a
sin, he has done: But when he punishes sin by sin, we are not thereby the
nearer to a peace or reconciliation by that punishment, for still there is a
new sin that continues us in his displeasure. Punish me O Lord, with all thy
scourges, with poverty, with sickness, with dishonor, with loss of parents,
and children, but with that rod of wyre, with that scorpion, to punish sin with
sin, Lord scourge me not, for then how shall I enter into thy rest?

And this is the condition of this sin; for, He with whom the Lord is angry,
shall fall into it. 2 Samuel 12.
And when he is fallen, he shall not understand his state, but think himself
well; For Nathan presents David's sin to him, in a parable of a feast, of an
entertainment of a stranger: He tastes no sowrnesse, no bitterness in it; not
because there is none, but because a carcass, a man already slain cannot feel
a new wound; A man dead in the habit of a sin, has no sense of it: This
sin of which S. Augustine, who had been overcome by it, and was afraid that
his case was a common case, says in the person of all, Continua pugna,
victoria rara; In a defensive war, where we are put to a continual
resistance, it is hard coming to a victory; what hope then where there is no
resistance, no defense, but a spontaneous and voluntary opening our selves to
all provocations, yea provoking of provocations by high diet, a tempting of
tentations by exposing our selves to dangerous company, Genesis 19.10.
when as the Angels who were safe enough in themselves, yet withdrew themselves
from the uncleanness of the Sodomits. This sin will not be overcome but by a
league, Job 31.1.
Jobs league, Pepigi foedus, I have made a covenant with mine eyes, why then
should I think upon a maid? Since I have bound my senses, why should my mind be
at liberty to sin? This league should bind both; I have taken a promise of
mine eyes, that they will not betray me by wanton glaunces, by carrying me to
dangerous objects, why should not I keep covenant with them? why should my
thoughts be scattered upon such tentations? The league must be kept on both
parts, the mind and the senses; we must not entertain tentations from without,
we must not create them within. Eloquia Domini casta, The words of the Lord are
chaste words, Psalm. 12.7.
pure words, and so must all the talk, and conversation of him, that loves
God, be. And then, Castificate animas vestras, you must see that you keep your
minds pure and chaste. 1 Pet. 1.22.
If we have not both chaste minds, and chaste bodies, we shall have neither; And
then follows the excommunication: S. Augustine says, That according to most
probability, there were no Mules in the Arc; but undisputably there are no
Mules in the Church, in the triumphant Church, none of our metaphorical Mules
there: 1 Cor. 6.8.
The Apostle has put it beyond a Problem, Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate persons shall inherit the Kingdom
of heaven, there is the fearful excommunication: And therefore Nolite fieri
sicut, Be not made like the Horse or the Mule, in pride, or wantonness
especially, Quia non Intellectus, because then you lose your understanding, and
so become absolutely irrecoverable, and leave God nothing to work upon: For
the understanding of man is the field which God sowes, and the tree in which he
engraffes faith it self; and therefore take heed of such a descent, as induces
the loss of the understanding, and that is the case here, (and our next
consideration) Non Intellectus, They have no understanding.

This faculty of the understanding in man is not always well understood by
men. Intellectus.
The whole Psalm is a Psalm to rectify the understanding; It is in the title
thereof, David's Instruction: ver. 8.
And that office God undertakes in the verse before our Text, I will instruct
thee, which is in some Latin Copies, Faciam te intelligere, I will make thee
understand, and in others, (the vulgat) Intellectum tibi dabo, I will give thee
understanding; Now though this Instruction, and this Understanding, which is
intended in the Title, and specified in the former verse, be not the same
Understanding as this in our Text, (for this is but of that natural faculty of
man, Ioh. 1.9.
wherewith God enlightneth every man that comes into the world, till he make
himself like the horse or the mule) the other is God superedification upon
this, those other super-naturall Graces, which God produces out of the
understanding, or infuses into the understanding; yet this Understanding in our
Text, though it be but the natural faculty, is a considerable thing, and has,
in part, the nature of materials for God to work upon. That Instruction which
is the subject of the whole Psalem, is that saving Doctrine, That there is no
blessedness but in the remission of sins. That David establishes for his
foundation in the first verse, and would say nothing till he had said that. But
then, though this remission of sins (which only constitutes Blessedness)
proceed merely from the goodness of God, yet that goodness of God, as it
excites primarily, so it works still upon that act of man, penitent confession,
Notum feci, I acknowledged my sin, and Dixi confitebor, I prepared my self
to confess my sin, ver. 5.
and thou forgavest all.

This then S. Hierome delivers to be the Instruction of the Psalm, Hominem,
Hieron.
non propriis meritis, sed Dei gratia, posse salvari, si confiteatur admissa;
That man of himself is irrecoverable, But yet there is a way opened to
salvation in Christ Jesus: But this way is only open to them, who enter by
Confession. And though S. Hierome, and S. Augustine differ often in the
exposition of the Psalms, yet here they speak almost the same words. The
Instruction of this Psalm is, Intelligentia, qua intelligitur, non meritis
operum, August.
sed gratia Dei hominem liberari, confitentem sua peccata, That no man is saved
by his own merits, That any man may be saved by the mercy of God in the
merits of Christ, That no man attaines this mercy, but by confession of his
sins: And that that rule, In ore duorum aut trium, may have the largest
fullness, add we a third witness, Intellectus est, Gregor.
This is the Instruction that David promises, Nemo ante fidem, Let no man
presume of merits, before faith; But in all this they all three agree, Every
man must know, that he may be saved, And that by his own merits he cannot,
And lastly, that the merits of Christ are applied to no man, that does nothing
for himself. Quid est Intellectus? August.
says he again, What is this understanding? It is, says he, no more but
this, Vt non jactes opera ante fidem, Never to take confidence in works,
otherwise then as they are rooted in faith: For (as he enlarges this
Meditation) if thou should see a man pull at an Oar, till his eye-strings,
and sinews, and muscles broke, and thou should ask him, whither he rowed; If
thou should see a man run himself out of breath, and should ask him
whither he ran; If thou should see him dig till his back broke, and
should ask him, what he sought, And any of these should answer thee, they
could not tell, would not thou think them mad? So are all Disciplines, all
Mortifications, all whippings, all starvings, all works of Piety, and of
Charity madness, if they have any other root then faith, any other title or
dignity, then effects and fruits of a preceding reconciliation to God. Multi
pagani, says he, Idem.
There are many Infidels that refuse to be made Christians, because they are
so good already; Sibi sufficient de sua bona vita; They are the worse for being
so good, and they think they need no faith, but are rich enough in their
moral honesty. And there are Christians, that are the worse for thinking and
believing that it is enough to Believe. It is not faith to believe in gross,
that I shall be saved, but I must believe, that I shall be saved by him that
died for me. If I consider that, I cannot choose but love him too; And if I love
him, I shall do his will; Ama and operaberis, Idem.
whomsoever thou love, thou will do what thou can to please him. Da mihi
vacantem amorem; I would be glad to see an idle love, that that man, that
loved any thing in this world, should not labor to compass that that he
loved: But purga amorem, says he, I do not forbid thee loving, (it is a
noble affection) but purge and purify thy love; Aquam fluentem in cloacam
converte in hortum; Turn that water which has served thy stables, and sewers
before, into thy gardens: Turn those tears which thou have spent upon thy
love, or thy losses, upon thy sins, and the displeasure of thy God, and
Quales impetus habebas ad mundum, habebis ad Creatorem mundi, Those passions
which transported thee upon the creature, will establish thee upon the Creator.

The Instruction then of the whole Psalm, is peace with God, in the merits of
Christ, declared in a holy life; which being the sum of all our Christian
profession, is far beyond this Understanding in our Text, (They have no
understanding) but yet upon this Understanding God raises that great building,
and therefore we take this faculty, The Understanding, into a more particular
consideration. Here is the danger, He that at ripe years has no
understanding, has no grace, A little understanding may have much grace; but
he that has none of the former, can have none of this. God therefore brings us
to the consideration, not of the greatest, but of the first thing; not of his
superedifications, but of his foundations, our understanding, our reason. For,
though Animalis homo, The natural man perceives not the things that be of the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
yet let him be what man he will, Natural or Supernatural, he must be a
man, that must probare spiritum, prove and discern the spirit; let him have as
much more as you will, it is requisite he have so much reason, and
understanding, as to perceive the maine points of Religion; not that he must
necessarily have a natural explicit reason for every Article of faith, but it
were fit he had reason to prove, that those Articles need not reason to prove
them. If I believe upon the Authority of my Teacher, or of the Church, or of
the Scripture, very expedient it were to have reason to prove to my self that
these Authorities are certain, and irrefragable. And therefore, Caeteris
animalibus, se ignorare, natura est, homini vitium, If a Horse or a Mule
understand not it self, it is never the worse Horse nor Mule, for it is borne
with that ignorance; But if man, having opportunities, both in respect of his
parts and calling, to be better instructed, either by a negligent and lazy and
implicit relying upon the opinion of others, do but lay himself down as a
leaf upon the water, to be carried along with the tide, or by a wilful
drowsinesse, and security in his sins, have given over the debatement, the
discussing, the understanding of the maine of his belief, and of his life, if
either he keep not his understanding awake, or over-watch it, if he do
nothing with it, or employ it too busily, too fervently, too eagerly upon the
world, I would it were true of them, Facti sicut, you are like the Horse, and
the Mule; but Vtinam essetis, I would you were so well, as the Horse, and the
Mule, who, though they have no understanding, have no forfeiture, no loss, no
abuse of understanding to answer for.

First then the Horse, Superbus.
The proud man, has no understanding; He has forgot his letters, his
Alphabet; how he was spelled and put together, and made of body and soul. You
may as well call him an Anatomist, that knows how to pare a nail, or cut a
corn, or him a Surgeon, that knows how to cut, and curle hair, as allow him
understanding, that knows how to gather riches, or how to buy an Office, or
how to hurt, and oppress others, when he has those means. That absurdity,
that height of strange ignorance, that the Prophet observes in an Idolatrous
Image-maker, Esaias 44.16.
is in this proud man; He burns half in the fire, and the residue he makes a
god. He has seen as great estates as his, burn to ashes, as great persons as
himself ruined and destroyed, burn out, and vanish into sparks, and stinking
smoke; He has seen half his own time burnt out and wasted, and yet he
dreams of an eternity in himself; He says, I am, and none else; he will not
say so to me in express words, but does he not say so to the whole world, in
his manifest actions?

The Horse then, Mulus.
The proud man, has no understanding, and the Mule, the licentious man, as
little. The Ancients had a purpose to express that, when they placed by their
Goddess of Licentiousness, Venus, A Tortoyse, A Creature that had no heart;
capable of no understanding. Genesis 19.
And it is better expressed in those licentious persons, who pursued Lots
guests. Their blindness brought them to an impossibility of finding the door,
(They were weary in seeking the door) And if they had found it, they had sound
it shut. A man that has wallowed long in that sin, when he seeks a door to
repentance, he will quickly be weary, for there lie hard conditions upon him;
and he is in danger of finding the door so shut, as his understanding (and
that is all his key) cannot open; He will make shift for reasons, why he
should continue in that sin, and he will call it ill nature, or falsehood, or
breach of promise, and inconstancy, to depart from the Conversation that
nourishes that sin. The door will be shut, and his Reason cannot, nay his
Reason would not open it, but rather plead in the sins behalf.

Thus far our first reason has carried us, Do it not, least you loose your
understanding, The field of that blessed seed, The tree of that fruitful
graft, The materials for that glorious building, Faith; For, the understanding
is the receptacle of Faith: But do it not, the rather, because if ye do it,
God will be brought to a necessity, In chamo and fraeno maxillas constringere,
to hold in your mouths with bit and bridle, to come to hard usage, when as he
would feign have you reduced by fair and gentle means. But to this way God is
often brought; and, by this way of affliction, the cure is sometimes wrought
upon us. S. Augustine proposes to himself a wonder, why the first woman was
called at first, Genesis 2.23.
and in her best state, but Isha, Virago, which was a name of diminution, as
she was taken from the man, (for Isha is but a shee-man) And then in her worse
state, when she had sinned, Genesis 3.20.
she was called Eva, Matter viventium, The Mother of all living; she had a
better name in her worst estate. But this was not in respect of her sin, says
that Father, but in respect of her punishment. Now that she was become mortal
by a sentence of death pronounced upon her, and knew that she must dye, and
resolve to dust, now, says he, there was no danger in her, of growing proud by
any glorious title; affliction had tamed her, and rectified her now; and to
that purpose sometimes does God bit and bridle us with afflictions, that our
corrupt affections might not transport us. 2 Samuel 14.
We find that Absalom sent for Ioab; The Kings Son for the Kings servant;
There was coldness, some dryness between Absalom, and his Father, Absalom
was under a cloud at Court, and so Ioab neglected him, he would not come;
Absalom sent again, and again Ioab refused; But then Absalom sent his
servants to burn Ioabs Corn fields, and then Ioab came apace. Affliction and
calamity are the bit and the bridle, that God puts into our mouth sometimes to
turn us to him. Behold, we put bits into the horses mouths, that they should
obey us, Iam. 3.3.
and we turn all the body about. And to this belongs that, A whip for the
Horse, a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the fools back; When we are become
fools, made like the Horse and Mule, that we have no understanding, then God
bits and bridles us, he whips and scourges us, sometimes lest our desires
should mislead us a wrong way, sometimes, if they have, to turn us into the
right way again; But here in our text, it is, Ne approximent te, Their mouths
must be held with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.

When God, by their incorrigibility, have given over all care of them, Ne
approximent.
yet he takes care of us, of his Servants, of his Church, and he bits and
bridles his and our enemies, so, as that they shall not come near us, they
shall not hurt us. So God said to Senacherib, Because thou ragest against me,
(God was far enough out of Senacheribs reach, 2 King. 19.28.
but God accounts his Jerusalem as Heaven, and his Hezekias as himself)
Because thy rage is against me, I will put my hook into thy nose, and my
bridle in thy lips, and will turn thee back, by the way by which thou came.
When man is become as the Horse, proud of his strength, In chamo, et fraeno,
God shall bit him, and bridle him so, as that he shall be able to do no harm;
and certainly, the godly have not a greater joy, when they are able to do good
to others, then the wicked have sorrow, when having power in their hands, yet
they are not able to execute their mischievous purposes upon them that they
hate. Satan was glad of any Commission upon Job, because God made a hedge about
him, and about his house, Ne approximaret, That Satan could not come near him;
He was glad God gave him power, to annoy him any way; but sorry that he
exempted his person, in that first Commission, (Only upon himself put not
forth thy hand) He was glad that in a second Commission, God did lay open his
person to his power, but sorry that he excepted his life, Job 2.6.
(Behold he is in thy hand, but save his life.) For, till the wicked come to an
utter destruction of their enemies, they think it no approximation, They are
never come near enough to them. And In chamo, and fraeno, therefore God bits
and bridles them, that they shall not come near, not so near, to destroy; and
certainly, Gods children have not so much sorrow for that which the wicked do
inflict upon them, as the wicked have for that which they cannot inflict upon
them; The wicked are more tormented that they can do no more, then the godly
are, that they have done so much. And this is a comfortable, (and truly, the
most literal sense of this Ne approximent) Their mouths must be held, They
must, though none can hold them but God, yet God must, God himself for his
own glory, and the preservation of his Church, is reduced to a necessity, he
must, he will hold them in with bit and bridle, lest they come near us. But
there is a sadder, and a heavier sense arising out of these words, as S. Hierom
accepts and pursues the words, with which we shall end all that belongs to them.

S. Hierom reads these words so, as that when God has said, Nolite fieri, Be
not as the Horse or Mule, that have no understanding, God has done, and says
no more; and that in the rest of the words, In chamo and fraeno maxillas eorum
constringe, (hold in their mouths with bit and bridle, who come not near
thee) the Church speaks to God; and so, this inhibition, Ne approximent, That
they come not near thee, may very well be, That they come not near God, That
God bits and bridles them so, afflicts and multiplies afflictions so, that even
those afflictions drive them farther from God, and seal their condemnation in
their own blood. Gods Spirit shall fan them, sift them; That might do them
good; Esaias 30.28.
purify them, cleanse them; No, it shall do them no good; for, (as it follows)
God shall sift them with a sieve of vanity; In vain, to no purpose, without
any amendment; And there shall be, Fraenum erroris, a bridle in their jaws
causing them to err; Their impatient mis-interpretation of Gods corrections,
shall turn them upon a wrong way on the left hand, and depart them farther and
farther from God. And then, Prove. 29.1.
He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy; suddenly, and irrecoverably; suddenly, no time given
him to deprecate his destruction, no reprieve; Irrecoverably, Jere. 11.14.
if he had never so much time; I will not hear them in the time that they cry
unto me for their trouble. Shall any be able to cry unto God, and not be heard?
Yes, to cry, and to cry for their trouble; for all this may be done, and yet no
true prayer made, nor right foundation laid; when only impatience upon
affliction extorts, and presses, and vents a cry, God will not hear them. No,
nor when they are thus disabled to pray for themselves, will God hear any
other to pray for them. Thrice does God chide the Prophet Jeremy from that
charitable disposition of praying for that people. Lift not up a cry nor prayer
for them; Ibid. and 7.16. and 14.11.
Not a Cry, by way of remembering me of their pressures and afflictions, as
though that should move me; Not a Prayer, by remembering me of my Covenant of
mercy toward them, as though that should bind me. At other times, Ezck. 22.30.
God sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in
the gap before him for the land, that he might not destroy it, but he found
none. Here Jeremy offers himself in the gap, and God will not receive him to
that Mediatorship, to that Intercession for that people. When Moses importuned
God for the people, God tells him, for thy self thou shall be no loser; Exodus
32.10.
whatsoever become of this people; (I will make thee a great Nation) But yet,
says God, (Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against this people, that I
may consume them.) O how contagious and pestilent are the sins of man, that
can thus (if we may so speak) infect God himself! How violent, how impetuous,
how tempestuous are the sins of man, that can thus, (if we may so speak)
transport God himself, and carry him beyond himself! for himself is mercy,
and there is no room for our own prayers, no room for the prayers of others
to open any door, any pore of mercy to flow out, or to breath out upon us.

Truly, Beloved, it is hard to conceive, how any height of sin in man should
work thus upon God, as to throw him away, without any purpose of re-assuming
him again, or any possibility of returning to him again. But to impute that
distemper to God, that God should thus peremptorily hate Man, thus irreparably
destroy Man, before he considered that Man, as a sinner, and as a manifold
sinner, and as an obdurate sinner, nay before he considered him, as a Man, as a
Creature, that first he should mean to damn him, if he had him, and then mean
to make him, that he might damn him; this is to impute to God, a sowrer and
worse affected nature, then falls into any man. Does any man desire that his
enemy had a son, that he might kill him? Does any man beget a son
therefore, that he might dis-inherit him? Does God hate any man therefore,
because he will hate him? Deliver me, O Lord, from my sins, pardon them, and
then return to thy first purposes upon me; for I am sure they were good, till
I was ill; and my illness came not from thee; but may be so multiplied by my
self, as that thou may bit me and bridle me so, as that I shall not come
near thee, in any of those accesses which thou have opened in thy Church:
Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, Absolution, all shall be unavailable upon me,
ineffectuall to me. And therefore, as God would have us conserve the dignity of
our nature in his Image, and not descend to the qualities of these Beasts,
Horse and Mule, specified by the Holy Ghost, to represent to us those two sins,
which are the wombes and mothers of very many others, Pride and Lust, (the
greatest spiritual, and the greatest bodily sin) because thereby we lose all
understanding, which is the matter upon which Grace works; so would he have us
do it for this also, that he might not be put to a necessity of bitting and
bridling us, of hard usage toward us, which may turn us as well to Obduration
as Contrition, and so come to lose our faith at last, as we had done our reason
and understanding before.

SERMON. LXIII. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 32.10, 11. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked; But he that trusts in
the Lord, Mercy shall compass him about.

Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous; And shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart.


THe two Elements, of which Heaven is proposed to us to be composed, are Joy
and Glory. That which is opposed to these, is Sorrow and Contempt: Of the sense
of contempt and ingloriousnesse, Men are not alike capable in this world; but
of the sense of sorrow, we are somewhat more equal. A man must have had some
possession, or at least some hopes of glory and greatness, that apprehends
contempt or ingloriousnesse very passionately. And besides, in the lowest and
most abject contempt a man may relieve himself by conveniences of a plentiful
Fortune at home, how much soever he be undervalued and despised abroad. But
when it comes to a sorrow of heart, which dwells not imaginarily in the opinion
of others, as contempt does, but really in mine own bosom, it is a heavy
colluctation. Therefore does the Holy Ghost so often, so very often, blow that
coal, and threaten that insupportable, that inextinguishable fire, sorrow,
sorrow of heart, sorrow of soul; Many sorrows shall be to the wicked. But the
Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Consolation; He is a Dove that hasts to a better
air, to a whiter house, to the Arc of Peace, the station of the Righteous;
Joy in the mercy of God; for, He that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall
compass him about; Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye Righteous, and shout
for joy all ye that are upright in heart.

Our parts are, the Persons, and their Portions; Who they Be, and what they
Have. Divisio.
The Persons are all the Inhabitants of this world; for all are wicked, or
righteous; And the Portion is all that the soul receives here, or hereafter;
for all is joy or sorrow; Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he etc.

First then, here are sorrows; A passion which we cannot express, and from the
understanding whereof, in this sense, God bless us all: A sorrow, that is
nothing but sorrow; a sorrow that determines not in joy at last. And here are
Dolores multi, his sorrows are multiplied, Many sorrows; And as the word Rabbim
does as properly import, and might be as well so translated, here are Dolores
magni, Great sorrows; Great in their own weight, great in themselves, and
great also in the apprehension, and tenderness, and impatience of the
sufferer, great to him; And then all these heavy circumstances, as the dregs
and lees of this cup of malediction, meet in the bottom, in the center of all;
That these sorrows are determinable by no time; for in the Original, there is
neither that which our first Translation inserted, (Shall come) Sorrows shall
come to the wicked, lest the wicked might say, Let it go as it came, if I know
how it came, what occasioned the sorrow, I know how to overcome it; nor is
there that which our later Translation added, (Shall be) Sorrows shall be to
the wicked; for though that imply a Continuance, when it comes, yet the wicked
might say, It is not come yet, and why should I anticipate sorrow, or execute
my self before the Executioner be sent? But it is without all limitation of
time, and so includes all parts of time; Est, fuit, and erit, The wicked are
not, never were, or shall be without sorrows, many sorrows, great sorrows,
everlasting sorrows. This is the Portion in our first part; and then the
Person, for whom this cup is thus filled there, is The wicked; Which denotes a
Plurality, and a Singularity too; For it is not said, The wanton, The
ambitious, The covetous, The man that is a little leavened, or sowred, or
discolored with some degrees of some of these; but it is The wicked; a man
whose whole complexion, and structure seems made up of wickedness; And so it
is Super impium, Upon the wicked, Emphatically, The wicked; And then, Super
impium, Upon the wicked, in the singular; that is, upon every such wicked
person. The sorrow is not lessened by being divided amongst many; The wicked is
not eased by having companions in his torments. And this is the Portion, and
these be the Persons of the first kind; which will determine the first Part,
Many sorrows shall be to the wicked.

And then in the second, to give all this the full weight, and to make the
sorrow the more discernible, and the more terrible, God puts into the other
balance, The joy of the righteous. In which, that all may be in opposition to
the other, we have also the Person, Him that trusts in the Lord; Where we
have, as in the former part, a plurality intimated, and a singularity too. For
it is not said, He that trusts not in Man, He that trusts not in Princes,
He that trusts not in this or that miserable Comforter in the world, but He
that trusts in the Lord; Whose present refuge, be the case what it will, or
can be, is the Lord; Him, Emphatically Him, mercies shall compass. And then,
Ille, He, every such man, is infallibly interessed in this portion, in this
true cause of joy, which is not, that he shall have no affliction, but that he
shall have Mercy in his afflictions, patience and ease all the way, and an end
and joy at last. And then, this mercy shall Compass him; It shall not suffer
his confidence to break out into a presumption in God, nor any diffidence, or
distrust in God, to break in upon him; But he shall see, that only to him, who
Trusts in the Lord, to him who is Righteous, to him who is Upright in heart,
(with which three Characters the Holy Ghost specifies the person, in this
second Part of our Text) belong those three great privileges, those glorious
beams of joy, which flow out here; first, Laetari, To be glad, that is, to
conceive an inward joy; And then, Exultari, To rejoice, that is, to testify
that inward joy, by outward demonstrations; And lastly, Iubilare, To be full of
joy, which our last Translation has expressed well, in that word, To shout for
joy, that is, to extend our joy to others, to glorify God by drawing in of
others, and to call upon them, to call upon God: Many sorrows shall be to the
wicked, but, etc.

First then, 1. Part. Sorrow.
they shall have sorrow, and cause of sorrow. For when we conceive a sorrow in
the mind, without any real, and external cause, without pain, or shame, or
loss, this is but a melancholy, but an abundance of a distempered humor, but
a natural thing, to which some in their constitutions are borne, and to be
considered but so: But when God lays his hand, and his crosses upon us, the
sorrow of the wicked, conceived upon that impression, is the sorrow. For this
Word, which we Translate Sorrows here, is according to the Septuagint,
Scourges, and Whips; God shall scourge them, and that shall only work to a
sorrow; So far, and no farther. As a startling horse, they shall avoid a
shadow, and fall into a ditch; They shall sorrow, and murmr at their
afflictions in this life, and fall the sooner for that into the Eternal.
Amongst the Romans, condemned persons were first whipped; but that excused them
not; when they were whipped, they were executed too. The wicked are scourged by
God in this life; and then their temporal afflictions shall meet, August.
and join with the everlasting, they have begun already here, that which they
shall never end there. Deeis qui voluntatem Dei facere nolunt, fit voluntas
Dei; It is Panis quotidianus, A loaf of that bread which is to be distributed
every day; A saying of S. Augustine, worthy to be repeated in every Sermon,
That upon them, who will not do the will of God, the will of God is done; And
God executes his righteous sentence upon them, and he executes his justice upon
others also by giving them instructions from the impatience and obduration of
these. Fata fugiendo in fata ruant; They chide, and they wrangle, they wrestle,
and they exclaim at their miseries in an intemperate sorrow, and this
intemperate sorrow is the heaviest part of the judgment of God upon them; they
are too sensible of their afflictions, that is, too tender, too impatient; and
yet altogether unsensible, without all sense of Gods purpose in those
afflictions. In hell it self, they know that they are in hell; And yet in this
world, there are Dolores inferni, Sorrows that have begun hell here, and they
that are under them, are stupefied, and divested of all sense of them. That
sense that is bodily, and carnal, they abound in; They feel them impatiently;
but of all spiritual sense they are absolutely destitute; They understand not
them, nor Gods purpose in them at all; yet they are Many, and Great, and
Eternal. For by all these heavy talents does the Holy Ghost weigh them in
these words.

They are Many. Many.
Now the pride of the wicked is to conceal their sorrows, that God might
receive no glory by the discovery of them. And therefore if we should go about
to number their sorrows, they would have their victory still, and still say to
themselves, yet for all his cunning he has mist; they would ever have some
bosome-sorrowes, which we could not light upon. Yet we shall not easily miss,
nor leave out any, if we remember those men, that even this false and imaginary
joy, which they take in concealing their forrow and affliction, is a new
affliction, a new cause of sorrow. We shall make up the number apace, if we
remember these men, that all their new sins, and all their new shifts, to put
away their sorrows, are sorrowful things, and miserable comforters; if their
conscience do present all their sins, the number grows great; And if their
own conscience have forgotten them, if God forget nothing that they have
thought, or said, or done, in all their lives, are not their occasions of
sorrow the more for their forgetting, the more for Gods remembering? Indgements
are prepared for the scorners, says Solomon, Prove. 19.29.
God foresaw their wickedness from before all times, and even then set
himself on work, To prepare judgments for them; And as they are Prepared
before, so affliction follows sinners, Prove. 13.21.
says the same Wise King; It follows them, and it knows how to overtake
them; either by the sword of the Magistrate, or by that which is nearer them,
Diseases in their own bodies, accelerated and complicated by their sins. And
then, as affliction is Prepared, and Follows, and Overtakes, so says that
wise King still, There shall be no end of plagues to the evil man; We know the
beginning of their plagues; Prove. 24.20.
they are Prepared in Gods Decree, as soon as God saw their sins; we know
their continuance, they shall Follow, and they shall Overtake; Their end we do
not know, we cannot know, for they have none. Thus they are Many.

And if we consider farther, the manifold Topiques, and places, from which the
sorrows of the wicked arise, That every inch of their ground is overgrown with
that venomous weed, that every place, and every part of time, and every person
buddes out a particular occasion of sorrow to him, that he can come into no
chamber, but he remembers, In such a place as this, I finned thus, That he
cannot hear a Clock strike, but he remembers, At this hour I sinned thus, That
he cannot converse with few persons, but he remembers, With such a person I
sinned thus, And if he dare go no farther then to himself, he can look
scarcely upon any limb of his body, but in that he sees some infirmity, or some
deformity, that he imputes to some sin, and must say, By this sin, this is
thus: When he can open the Bible in no place, but if he meet a judgment, he
must say, Vindicta mihi, This vengeance belongs to me; and if he meet a mercy,
he must say, Quid mihi? What have I to do to take this mercy into my mouth? In
this deluge of occasions of sorrow, I must not say with God to Abraham, Look up
to heaven, and number the Stars, (for this man cannot look up to heaven) but
I must say, Continue thy dejected look, and look down to the earth, thy earth,
and number the grains of dust there, and the sorrows of the wicked are more
then they. Many are the sorrows; And as the word as naturally denotes, Great;
Great sorrows are upon the wicked.

That Pill will choke one man, which will slide down with another easily, Great.
and work well. That sorrow, that affliction would strangle the wicked, which
would purge, and recover the godly. The coare of Adams apple is still in their
throat, which the blood of the Messiah has washed away in the righteous; Adams
disobedience works in them still, and therefore Gods Physic, the affliction,
cannot work. So they are great to them, as Cains punishment was to him, greater
then he could bear, because he could not ease himself upon the consideration
of Gods purpose, in laying that punishment upon him. But it is not only their
indisposition, and impatience, that makes their sorrows and afflictions great;
They are truly so in themselves; as the Holy Ghost expresses it, Job 31.3.
Is not destruction to the wicked, and strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity? A punishment, which we cannot tell how to measure, how to weigh, how
to call, A strange punishment; Greater then former examples have presented.
There the greatness is expressed in the Word; And in Esaias it is expressed in the
action; When the scourge shall run over you, Esaias 28.18.
and pass through you, Eritis in conculcationem, You shall be trodden to dust;
Which is, as the Prophet calls it there, Flagellum inundans, An affliction that
overflowes, and surrounds all, as a deluge, a flood, that shall wash away from
thee, even the water of thy Baptism, and all the power of that, And wash away
from thee the blood of thy Savior, and all his offers of grace to worthy
receivers; A flood that shall carry away the Ark it self out of thy sight, and
leave thee no apprehension of reparation by Gods institution in his Church; A
flood that shall dissolve, and wash thee thy self into water; Thy sorrows
shall scatter thee into drops, into tears, upon a carnal sense of thy
torment, And into drops, into incoherent doubts, and perplexities, and
scruples, in understanding, and conscience, and into desperation at last. And
this is the Greatness: Solutis doloribus inferni, In another sense then David
speaks that of Christ; There it is, that the sorrows of hell were loosed, that
is, were slacked, dissolved by him: But here it is that the sorrows of hell
are loosed, that is, let loose upon thee; and when thou shall hear Christ say
from the Cross, Behold and see, if ever there were any sorrow like my sorrow,
thou shall find thy sorrow like his in the Greatness, and nothing like his in
the Goodness: Christ bore that sorrow, that every man might rejoice, and thou
would be the more sorry, if every man had not as much cause of desperate
sorrow, as thou have.

Many, and great are the sorrows of the wicked, and then eternal too, which is
more then intimated, in that the Original has neither of those particles of
supplement, which are in our Translations, no such (shall come) no such (shall
be) nor no (shall) at all; but only, Many sorrows to the wicked, Many and
great now, more and greater hereafter, All for ever, if they amend not.

It is not, Eternal.
They have had sorrows, but they are overblown; nor that they have them, but
patience shall outweare them; nor that they shall have them, but they have a
breathing time to gather strength before hand; But as it was in the beginning,
is now, and ever shall be, Sorrows upon them, and upon them for ever.
Whatsoever any man conceives for ease in this case, Esaias 33.11.
it is a false conception; You shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble.
And this stubble is your vain hope of a determination of this sorrow; But the
wicked shall not be able to lodge such a hope, though this hope, if they could
apprehend it, would be but an aggravating of their sorrows in the end. It is
eternal, no determination of time afforded to it. Ibid. ver. 14.
For, They shall be as the burning of lime, and as thorns cut up shall they
be burnt in the fire. Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who
amongst us shall dwell with that everlasting burning? It is a devouring fire,
and yet it is an everlasting burning. The Prophet asks, Who can dwell there? In
that intensenesse who can last? Deuteronomy. 32.22.
They that must, and that is, All the wicked. Fire is kindled in my wrath,
says God; Yet may not tears quench it? Tears might, if they could be had;
But It shall burn to the bottom of hell, says God there. And Dives that
could not procure a drop of water to cool his tongue there, can much less
procure a repentant tear in that place: There, as S. John speaks, Revel. 18.8.
Plagues shall come in one day; Death, and Sorrow, and Famine. But it is in a
long day; Short for the suddenness of coming, for that is come already, which
for any thing we know, may come this minute, before we be at an end of this
point, or at a period of this sentence: So it is sudden in coming, but long
for the enduring. For it is that day, Ibid.
when They shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, that will
condemn them. That is argument enough of the vehemence of that fire, that the
Lord God, who is called the strong God, makes it a Masterpiece of his
strength, to make that fire.

Art thou able to dispute out this Fire, and to prove that there can be no
real, no material fire in Hell, after the dissolution of all material things
created? If thou be not able to argue away the immortality of thine own soul,
but that that soul must last, nor to argue away the eternity of God himself,
but that that must last, thou have but little ease, in making shift to give a
figurative interpretation to that fire, and to say, It may be a torment, but it
cannot be a fire, since it must be an everlasting torment; nor to give a
figurative signification to the Worm, and to say, It may be a pain, a
remorse, but it can be no worm after the general dissolution, since that
Conscience, in which that remorse, and anguish shall ever live, must live ever:
If there be a figure in the names, and words, of Fire and Worms, there is an
indisputable reality in the sorrow, in the torment, and in the manifoldnesse,
and in the weightinesse, and in the everlastingnesse thereof. For in the
inchoation of these sorrows, in this life, and in the consummation of them, in
the life to come, The sorrows of the wicked are many, and great, and eternal.

This then is the portion prepared here, The Person. Psalm. 50.18.
Thy portion was with the Adulterers, as our last Translators have expressed that
place in their Margin. Thy portion was with them here, in this world, and thy
portion shall be with them for ever; for God expresses all kind of wickedness,
carnal and spiritual, in that name of Adultery, throughout the body of the
Scriptures. And therefore when you meet judgments denounced against
Adulterers, never think that those judgments concern not you, if you have
forborne that one sin, (and yet even that sin may have been committed in a
look, in a letter, in a word, in a wish, in a dream) when S. James says, Ye
Adulterers, and Adulteresses, Iam. 4 4.
know you not this? Think not that S. James calls not upon you if you be but
Covetous, but Ambitious, but Superstitious, and no Adulteters; for every
aversion from the Creator, every converting to the creature is Adultery. Even
in nature you are made for that marriage; In the covenant of God you were
betroathed, and affianced for that marriage; In the Sacrament of Baptism you
were actually, personally married; and in the other Sacrament there is a
consummation of that marriage; And every departing from that contract which you
made with God at your Baptism, and renewed at your receiving the other
Sacrament, is an Adultery. Thus a Hermit is a husband, and a Nun a wife; and
thus both may be adulterers, though in a Wilderness, though in a Cloister.
August.
Si deseris Deum qui te fecit, and amas illa quae fecit, adultera es; If thou
turn from God that made thee, to those things that he made, this is an
adultery. Therefore Christ calls them, An evil and adulterous generation,
because they sought a sign; Matt. 12.39.
because they turned upon other ways of satisfaction, then he had ordained for
them, that was adultery. And as David says, Thy portion was with adulterers
here; so, as theirs is said to be, Revel. 21.8.
Thy portion also shall be in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death. Thou art this person, if thou be this adulterer,
which is intended in this emphaticall word, The wicked.

So then, as these Sorrows in our Text, are an inchoative Hell, The wicked
they are such wounds as induce, such pangs as precede even the second death,
sorrows that flow into desperation, and impenitiblenesse, (and
impenitiblenesse is hell.) As the torment is an inchoative hell, so is the
person, the Wicked here, an inchoated Devil: It is S. Chrysostoms spontaneus
demon, and voluntarius demon; He that is a devil to himself, that could be,
and would be ambitious in a Spittle, licentious in a Wilderness, voluptuous in
a Famine, and abound with tentations in himself, though there were no devil.
Most of the names of the devil in the Scripture, denote some action of his
upon us; As he is called The Prince of the power of the Air, there he is
called so, because as it is added there, Ephesians. 2.2.
He works in the children of disobedience; As the air works upon our bodies,
this Prince of the Air works upon our minds; how works he? he deceives;
Revel. 12.9.
He deceived the whole world, says S. John; from this infinuation, he has
those other names there, the great Dragon, and the old Serpent. When he has
crept in as a Serpent, then he grows A roaring Lion; He professes his power,
he disguises not a tentation; then he grows Satan an Adversary, an Enemy, he
opposes all good endeavors in us; and then he grows Diabolus, an Accuser, an
accuser to God, an accuser to our own conscience; and when he has made our
sin, as great as it can be in our practice, when by age, or sickness, or
poverty, he cannot multiply our sins for the present, then by his multiplying
glass, he multiplies the sins of our former times, and presents them greater,
then even the mercies of God, or the merits of Christ Jesus. So he grows in
mischievous names, according to his mischievous actions and practices upon us;
but then out of himself arises the most vehement, and the most collective name
that is given him in all the Scriptures, (...), and that with the emphaticall
article, The wicked one; One that is all wickedness, and one that is the
wickedness of all; One, who if he had no object to direct his wickedness
upon, no subject to exercise his wickedness in, If God should proclaim so
general a Pardon, That all men, All, should effectually be saved, and so all
hope to have enlarged his Kingdom be withdrawn, yet would still be as wicked,
and as opposite to God as he is.

So then, by this character of Multiplicity, Plurality.
this emphaticall note of the wicked in our Text, the person, whose portion
this sorrow is, this sorrow which is a brand of Hell, at least a match, by
which Hell fire it self is kindled, is not he that is an Adulterer, or that
is a Murderer; not he that has fallen into some particular sins, though
great, and continued those great sins in habits, though long, for David fell
so, and yet found a holy sorrow, a medicinal sorrow: but it is the wicked, he
that runs headlong into all ways of wickedness, and usque ad finem,
precludes, or neglects all ways of recovery: That is glad of a tentation, and
afraid of a Sermon; that is dry wood, and tinder to Satan's fire, if he do but
touch him, and is ashes it self to Gods Spirit, if he blow upon him; That from
a love of sin, at first, because it is pleasing, comes at last to a love of
sin, because it is sin, because it is liberty, because it is a deliverance
of himself from the bondage, as he thinks it, of the law of God, and from the
remorse and anguish of considering sin too particularly. This is the person,
in whom, at first, by this emphaticall note, the wicked, we design a
Plurality, (as we called it) that is, a Complicated, a Multiplied, a Compact
sinner, a Body, rather a Carcass of Many, of All sins, all that have fallen
within his reach. And then, in the word we noted also a Singularity, That upon
such a sinner, upon every such sinner, these Many, these Great, these Eternal
sorrows shall fall and tarry.

As in the former Circumstance, Singularity.
we noted that it was the They, that aggravated it, it was not an An, an
Adulterer, an Ambitious man, but a The, The wicked, whom God enwrapped in this
irrecoverable, this undeterminable sorrow: so here, it is not a This, or That,
This wicked, or that wicked man, but The wicked, every wicked man is surrounded
with this sorrow. He can propose no comfort in a decimation, as in popular
Rebellions, where nine may be spared, and the tenth man hanged; No, nor so much
hope as to have nine hanged, and the tenth spared; He is not in Sodoms case,
That a few righteous might have saved the wicked; Ezekiel. 14.20.
But he feels a necessity of applying to himself, that, If Noah; Daniel, and
Job were in the midst of them, as I live, says the Lord God, they should
deliver neither Son, August.
nor Daughter. Iussisti Domine, and sic est, ut poena sit sibi omnis
inordinatus animus; It is thy pleasure O God, and thy pleasure shall be
infallibly accomplished, that every wicked person should be his own
Executioner. He is Spontaneus Demon, as S. Chrysostom speaks, an In-mate, an
in-nate Devil; a bosom devil, a selfe-Devill; That as he could be a tempter
to himself, though there were no Devil, so he could be an Executioner to
himself, though there were no Satan, and a Hell to himself, though there were
no other Torment. Sometimes he stays not the Assizes, but prevents the hand of
Justice; he destroies himself before his time. But when he stays, he is
evermore condemned at the Assizes. Let him sleep out as much of the morning as
securelyas he can; embellish, and adorn himself as gloriously as he can; dine
as largely and as delicately as he can; wear out as much of the afternoon, in
conversation, in Comedies, in pleasure, as he can; sup with as much
distension, and inducement of drowsiness as he can, that he may escape all
remorse, by falling asleep quickly, and fall asleep with as much discourse,
and music, and advantage as he can, he has a conscience that will survive,
and overwatch all the company; he has a sorrow that shall join issue with him
when he is alone, and both God, and the devil, who do not meet willingly,
shall meet in his case, and be in league, and be one the sorrows side, against
him. The anger of God, and the malice of the devil, shall concur with his
sorrow, to his farther vexation. No one wicked person, by any diversion or
cunning, shall avoid this sorrow, for it is in the midst, and in the end of all
his forced contentments; Prove. 14.13.
Even in laughing, the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness.

The person is The wicked; Communication.
Every wicked person; He has no relief in a decimation, that some may escape:
Nor relief in the communication of the torment; It is no ease to him, that so
many bear a part with him. In some afflictions in the world, men lay hold upon
such a relief, Many men are in as ill case, as I; why am I so sensible of it?
and they make shift to patch up a comfort of that kind, out of some chips of
Poets, and fragmentary sentences; And they that cannot find this relief ready
made, will make shift to make it; when they are under the burden of a
defamation, of an ill name, they will cast aspersions of the same crime, upon
as many as they can, and think themselves the better, if they can make others
be thought as ill as they. But all these are amongst Jobs miserable comforters;
It is a part of our joy in Heaven, that every man's joy shall be my joy; I shall
have fullness of salvation in my self, and I shall have as many salvations, as
there are souls saved: But in hell there is no one feather toward such a
Pillow, no degree of ease, in the communication of the torment. Every soul
shall murmr against God, and curse God, for damning every other soul, as
well as for damning his: Though they would have them damned, that are damned,
yet they shall reproach God, for damning them: And though they wish all the
Saints in Heaven, in hell, yet they shall call it tyranny in God, to have sent
a Cain, or an Achitophel, or a Judas thither. And as the person whom we
consider in this text, is an embryon of the Devil, Genimina viperarum, The
spawne of the Devil, a potentiall, and as we said, an inchoated Devil; so is
the torment, this sorrow, a Lucifer, Such a Lucifer, as hell can send out; not
a light of any light, but a cloud of that darkness: As sure as this man, The
wicked, shall be a Devil, so sure this sorrow, shall end, not end, but reach
to hell.

Yet when all this is thus said, said with a holy vehemence, with a zealous
animosity, as indeed belongs to the denouncing of Gods judgments, yet may we
not be asked, where is there any such person, or upon whom works there any such
sorrow? Is it always true, that the wicked make no good use of afflictions? or
is it always true, that they have them? The first may admit a doubt, for if
God justify the ungodly, Romans 8.5.
(God justifies the ungodly) then their affliction may be a way, to prepare
justification in them, as well as in them whom we call godly; And if Christ
dyed for the ungodly, Romans 5.6.
(Christ dyed for the Ungodly) they also may fulfill his sufferings in their
flesh, and their afflictions may produce good effects. But for that, they which
are called ungodly, in both those places, are only such as were ungodly before
Gods justification began to work upon them, before Christ's Death began to be
applied to them, but did not continue in their ungodliness after; But these
ungodly persons, whom afflictions supple and mollify no farther, but to an
intemperate, and excruciating, and exclamatory sorrow, and continue ungodly
still, are such as never have good effect of affliction or sorrow.

But then have these always affliction inflicted upon them? one would doubt
it, by that in Job, The Tabernacles of robbers do prosper, and they are in
safety that provoke God. Job 12.6.
Gods children are robbed and spoiled by the wicked, and the wicked show it in
Gods face, they hide not their Theft, they maintain publicly their
Wantonness, and their Excesses, with the spoil of the poor; They have it,
and they will hold it, and they bid God bring his action, and recover how he
can. This the Prophet Jeremy saw, and was affected, and scandalized with it; O
Lord, if I plead with thee, thou art righteous; Ier. 12.1.
I know thou can maintain, and make good that which thou have done; But yet,
says he, Let me talk with thee of thy judgments; wherefore does the way of
the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?
Why, their ways prosper in a just punishment of God for their former sins,
that they may have a larger and a broader way to destruction; and they are
happy in temporal happinesses, that they may have more occasions of smarting;
If their wealth stick not to their heirs, in a third generation, call them
not Rich; If their prosperity cleave not to their souls, call them not Happy;
He is a poor man, whose wealth can be writ in an Inventorie; That has locked
all in such an iron Chest, in such a Cabinet, and has sent up nothing to meet
him in Heaven. As all the wealth of the wicked is but counterfeit, so is all
the joy that they have in it counterfeit too. And howsoever they disguise their
sorrow, yet if their torment be invisible to us, it is the liker hell; If we
know not how they are afflicted, it is the liker hell; Their damnation sleeps
not, nor they neither; And when at midnight their own consciences are a
thousand witnesses to them, it is but a poor ease, that other men do not
know, that they are those wicked persons, and their sorrow the sorrow of this
text; that they are The wicked, and their sorrows many, and great, and
eternal sorrows. But I would be glad to reserve as much time as I could for
the other part, The person and The portion, that is in the other scale; Mercy
shall compass, etc.

In this part we will begin with the persons; For when we come to their
portion, 2 Part.
with which we must end, of that we shall be able to find no end, nay no
beginning, for it begins with Mercy, (Mercy shall compass them) and mercy is
as much without beginning, as eternal, as God himself, and it flows on to
joy and gladness, and exultation, and this joy shall no more see an end of it
self, then God himself shall see an end of himself. Upon the persons we have
three characters, and in their portions we have three waights; Three degrees
of goodness in their persons, three degrees of greatness in their portions.
The persons first Trust in God, and then They are Righteous, and lastly, They
are upright in heart; So also, the reward is first Inward joy, and then Outward
declaration, and lastly, An exemplary working upon others; And then, all these
are rooted in the root of all, that mercy shall compass them.

First then They trust in God. And that, first Exclusive; They trust in him so,
Trust in God.
as that they trust in nothing else, and Inclusive too; so, as that they do
actually, and positively trust in God. Some have bin so beaten out of all
confidences in this world, so evacuated of former power, so divested of former
favor, so dispoiled of former treasures, as that they are brought to trust in
nothing else; But then they trust not in God neither; August.
Quia Deo non audent dare iniquitatem, auferunt ei gubernationem; Because they
dare not say, that God does any thing ill, they come to say, that God does
nothing at all; and to avoid the making of an unjust God, they make an idle
God; which is as great an Atheism as the other. But because it goes thus with
them, that they have many and great sorrows, they conclude that all have so;
But The heart knows his own bitterness; Prove. 14.10.
They know their own case, Ibid.
the case of the godly they know not. The stranger shall not meddle with their
Joy; He that is a stranger to this trust in God, understands nothing of the joy
that appertains to them that have it. Esth. 14.19.
Let that be thy prayer, which was the prayer of Esther, Thy handmaid has had
no joy but in thee, O Lord God of Abraham; O thou mighty God, above all, hear
thou the voice of them that have no other hope.

Our Adversaries of Rome charge us, that we have but a negative Religion; If
that were true, it were a heavy charge, if we did only deny, and establish
nothing; But we deny all their new additions, so as that we affirm all the old
foundations. The Negative man, that trusts in nothing in the world, may be but
a Philosopher, but an Atheist, but a stupid and dead carcass. The Affirmative
man, that does acknowledge all blessings, spiritual and temporal, to come
from God, that prepares himself by holiness to be fit to receive them from
God, that comes for them by humble prayer to God, that returns for them humble
thanks to God, this man has the first mark of this person upon him, He
trusts in God. But he that trusts not in the world, nor in God neither, is
worse then he, that trusts in the world, and not in God; because he is farther
removed from all humility, that attributes all to himself; He pretends to be
an Atheist, and to believe in no God; and yet he constitutes a new Idolatry, he
sacrifices to himself, and makes himself his God.

The second Character, Righteous.
and specification of this Person, is, that he is Righteous. And this word, we
shall do best to contain here within a legal Righteousness; that
Righteousness, in which S. Paul protested, and proclaimed himself to be
unblamable. For howsoever this apparent Righteousness, Righteousness in the
eyes of the world, be not enough alone, yet no other Righteousness is enough
without this. The hypocrite, by being an hypocrite, may aggravate his own
condemnation, when he comes to reckon with God; But to the Church, who knows
him not to be an hypocrite, he does good, by his exemplar and outward
Righteousness. He that does good for vainglory, may lead another man to good
upon good grounds; And the prayers of those poor souls, whom he may have
benefited by his vainglorious good work, may prevail so with God in his
behalf, as that his vainglory here, may become true glory, even in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

So then we carry this word Righteous no farther, but to the doing of those
honest things, which we are bound to do in the sight of men. The word is
Tzadok, which is often used for the exaltation and perfection of all true
holiness; But as it is very often in the old Testament taken for Verax and
Aequus, when a man's word and work answer one another toward men; so in the
New Testament, in the Syriake Translation, where the word is the same as in the
Hebrew, it is Oportuit, It behoved Christ to suffer; and in such a sense, in
very many places, to be Righteous, is to do that which it behoved us to do,
became us to do, concerned us to do in the sight of men. Which can be expressed
in no one thing more fully, then in this, To embrace a lawful Calling, and to
walk honestly in that Calling; That is Righteousness; For, Iustus sua fide
vivit, The Righteous lives by his own faith; Not without faith, nor with the
faith of another; so Iustus suo sudore vescitur, The Righteous eats his Bread
in the sweat of his own brows; He labors in an honest Calling, and drinks
not the sweat of others labors; And this is that Righteousness in this Text,
the second mark upon this Person, who is partaker of this Portion.

And the third is, Upright in heart.
that he is Rectus cord, Upright in heart; That he direct even all the works
of his Calling, all the actions of his life upon the glory of God. If you carry
a Line from the Circumference, to the Circumference again, as a Diameter, it
passes the Center, it flows from the Center, it looks to the Center both
ways. God is the Center; The Lines above, and the Lines below, still respect
and regard the Center; Whether I do any action honest in the sight of men, or
any action acceptable to God, whether I do things belonging to this life, or
to the next, still I must pass all through the Center, and direct all to the
glory of God, and keep my heart right, without variation toward him. For as I
do no good action here, merely for the interpretation of good men, though that
be one good and justifiable reason of my good actions: so I must do nothing
for my Salvation hereafter, merely for the love I bear to mine own soul,
though that also be one good and justifiable reason of that action; But the
primary reason in both, as well the actions that establish a good name, as the
actions that establish eternal life, must be the glory of God. Distortum
lignum semper nutat, August.
A wry and crooked planke in the floor, will always shake and kick up, and
creake under a man's foot. A wry and a crooked heart will always shake
distrustfully, and kick rebelliously, and creake repiningly, under the hand of
God. Non potest collineari rectitudine Dei, Idem.
says the same Father, He is not paralleld with God, he is not leveld with
God, if he use not his blessings, if he accept not his corrections, as God
intends them. First, To trust in God, and then to deal Righteously with men,
and all the way to keep the heart straight upon God; these three make up the
Person; And these three his Portion, That he shall be glad, and he shall
rejoice, and jubilabit, he shall shout for joy.

Now as three great sums of gold put into one bag, Mercy.
these three branches of this Portion of the Righteous, are fixed in one root,
raised upon one foundation, Mercy shall compass him about. But then this
mercy, this Compassing mercy reaches not so far, as that thou shall have no
affliction, though thou trust in God; David had been an unfit person, to have
delivered such a Doctrine, who says of himself, Psalm. 73.14.
Daily have I been punished, and chastned every morning: He had it every day,
it was his daily bread; and it was the first thing that he had, he had it in
the morning. Here is mention of a morning, early sorrows, even to the godly;
and mention of a Day, continuing sorrows, even to the godly; But he speaks of
no Night here, the Son of grace, the Son of God, does not set in a Cloud of
anger upon him. The Martyrs that abounded with this Trust in God, and this
Righteousness, and this Uprightness of heart, abounded with these afflictions
too. They that bestowed themselves upon God and his Church, 2 Cor. 12.15.
as the Apostle expresses it, had these sorrows plentifully bestowed upon
themselves. And to pass from them to the Author of their constancy, Christ
himself, He is Vir dolorum, A man of sorrows, Esaias 53.3.
and acquainted with Grief. And now, Whom he loves he chastneth, and he
scourges every one that he receives; Flagellat omnem, He scourges every one;
Vis audire quem omneem? August.
Will you know how general, and yet how particular this is? Vnicus sine
peccato, non tamen sine flagello, There was one Man without any sin, but even
that Man was not without punishment, Christ Jesus himself. So general is
correction, as that in this case, and in this sense, it is more general then
sin it self.

It is not then that the godly shall no afflictions, no sorrows; But mutant
fortitudinem, They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, Esaias
40.31.
say our Translators in the body of their Translation; but in the Margin, (and
nearer to the Original) They shall change their strength. They that have been
strong in sinning, that have sinned with a strong hand, when they feel a
judgment upon them, and find that it is Gods hand, and Gods hand for their
sins, they faint not, they lose not their strength, but mutant fortitudinem,
They change their strength, they grow as strong in suffering, as they were in
sinning, and invest the Prophets resolution, I will bear the indignation of
the Lord, Mic. 7.9. Ezekiel. 2.10.
because I have sinned against him. The Book which God gave Ezekiel to eat,
was written within and without, with Lamentations, and Mournings, and Woes; but
when he eat it, he found it in his mouth as sweet as honey. When God offers
the Book, which is the Register of our sins to our Consciences, or the
Decree of his Judgments to our understanding, or to our sense, it is writ in
gall and wormwood, and in the bitterness of sorrow; but if we can bring it to
the first concoction, the first digestion, to that mastication, that
rumination, which is the consideration of Gods purpose upon us in that
Judgment, we shall change our taste, for we shall Taste and See, Quam suavis
Dominus, Psalm. 34.9.
How good, and how sweet the Lord is; for even this Judgment is Mercy.

Think not then thy valor sufficiently tried, if thou can take it patiently,
to have mist a fute long pursued, or failed of a Preferment long expected; no
not if thou have stood in a hail of bullets without winking, or sat the
searching of a wound without starting; but Muta fortitudinem, Change thy
valor, and when thou come to bear great crosses, proportionable to thy
great sins, with a spiritual courage, acknowledge that courage to be the mercy
of God, and not thine own moral constancy. God loves his own example, to do
as he has done; Omni quaestione severius, a te interrogari; It was said to a
Roman Emperor, who examined with Wisdom, and Majesty too: It is truer of
God; that it is more fearful then any rack, or torture, when he comes to
search and sift a conscience: Yet God did come to that office upon Adam, before
he would condemn him. He came to a worse place then Paradise; he came to
Sodom, to rack and torture them, with that confession, that there could not be
found ten Righteous men amongst them. But yet this he did, before he condemned
them. God will visit thee in this wrack, in this furnace, in these trialls,
before he proceed to thy condemnation. But when God does so, believe thou
David, in his Indulgence to his Son, to have been a Type of Gods disposition to
thy soul. When he sent out his Army against Absalom, he stood in the gate to
survey the Muster, and to every one of the Commanders, Ioab, and the rest,
still he said, Servate mihi puerum Absalom, Entreat the young man Absalom well
for my sake. The Lord of Hosts may send forth his Army against thee, Sickness,
Loss, Shame, Pain, Banishment, Imprisonment, (which are all swords of his)
but he says to them all, Servate mihi Absalom, That soul that I have bought
with my blood, preserve for me; Fight but against mine enemies, his Pride, his
Security, his Presumption; but Servate Absalom, Preserve his soul unshaken,
and un-offended. God has said it before, Jer. 29.11.
and he says again to thee, in all thy afflictions, I know the thoughts that
I think toward you, the thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an
expected end. God said this, when a False Prophet had promised them deliverance
in two years; God prorogues the time; he would do it, but he would not do it
under threescore and ten years. Limit not God in his time, nor in his means;
The mercy consists in relieving thee so, as that thy soul suffer not, though
thou do. And if that be preserved, this mercy is a Compassing mercy, which is
also another Circumstance in this Branch.

The Devil had Compast all the Earth, Compass.
and he was angry that God had Compast Job. He says in indignation, Job 1.9.
Have thou not made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has, on every side? God did so for Job, and he will do so for thee: He
redeemeth thy life from the grave, Psalm. 103.4.
and crowns thee with mercy, and compassion. This is the Compassing in
heaven, when we come to be crowned there. But there is a Compassing here, Rom 8
28.
and an empailing of Gods children, in S. Paul's Co-operantur, When all things
work together, for good, to them that love God. When Prosperity and Adversity,
Honor and Disgrace, Profit and Loss, the Lords Giving and the Lords Taking,
do all concur to the making up of this Paile, that must Compass us; When we
acknowledge that there must be nails in the Paile, as well as stakes, there
must be thorns in the hedge, as well as fruit trees; Crosses as well as
Blessings; when we leere not over the Paile, neither into the Common; that is,
to the Gentiles and Nations, and begin to think, that we might be saved by the
light of nature, without this burden of Christianity: nor leere over into the
Pastures, and Corn of our neighbors; that is, to think, that we are not well
in our own Church, but must needs hearken to the Doctrine, or Discipline of
another; When we see all that comes, to come from God, and are content with
that, then Omnia co-operantur, Every piece serves to the making up this Paile,
and his Mercy compasses us about.

This is the root of our three Branches, the foundation of our three Stories;
the bag of our three sums, in this portion, Mercy, Compassing mercy; and
then the Branches themselves, Be glad, Rejoice, and Shout for joy; Which joy,
is first an inward love of the Law of God, Glad. Psalm. 119.111.
Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the joy of
my heart: It is not Dant, but Sunt, not that they Bring joy, but that they Are
joy; There is no other joy but the delight in the Law of the Lord: For all
other joy, the Wise King said, Eccles. 2.2.
Of laughter, thou art mad, and of joy, what is this that thou do? True joy
is the earnest which we have of heaven, It is the treasure of the soul, and
therefore should be laid in a safe place, and nothing in this world is safe to
place it in: And therefore with the Spouse we say, Cant. 1.4.
We will be glad in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine. Let others
seek their joy in wine, in society, in conversation, in music; for me, Thou
have put gladness into my heart, more then in the time that their corn and
their wine increased.

Rejoice therefore in the Lord always, Rejoice. Phil. 4.4.
and again I say, rejoice: Again, that is, Rejoice in the second manner of
expressing it, by external declarations. Go cheerfully, and joyfully forward,
in the works of your callings. Rejoice in the blessings of God without
murmuring, or comparing with others. And establish thy joy so, in an honest,
and religious manner of getting, that thy joy may descend to thine heir, as
well as thy land. No land is so well fenced, no house so well furnished, as
that, which has this joy, this testimony of being well gotten. Job 20.4.
For, This thou know of old, since man was placed upon earth, that the
Triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite but for a
moment.

And then the last degree is louder then this, Iubilate, Shout for joy;
Iubilate.
Declare thy joy in the ears of other men. As the Angels said to the
Shepherds, Luke 2.
I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people, So be thou a
cheerful occasion of glorifying God by thy joy. Declare his loving kindness
unto the sons of men; Tell them what he has done for thy soul, thy body, thy
state. Say, With this staff came I over Iordane: Be content to tell whose Son
thou wast, and how small thy beginning. Smother not Gods blessings, by making
thy self poor, when he who is truly poor, begges of thee, for that Gods
sake, who gave thee all that thou have. Hold up a holy cheerfulness in thy
heart; Go on in a cheerful conversation; and let the world see, that all this
grows out of a peace, betwixt God and thee, testified in the blessings of this
world; and then thou art that Person, and then thou have that Portion, which
grows out of this root, in this Text, Mercy shall compass him about that
trusts in the Lord.

SERMON. LXIV. Preached upon the Penitential Psalms.
PSALM. 51.7. Purge me with Hyssope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall
bewhiter then snow.


IN the Records of the growth, and propagation of the Christian Church, The
Ecclesiastical Story, we have a relation of one Pambo, an unlearned, but
devout, and humble Ermit, who being informed of another man, more learned then
himself, that professed the understanding, and teaching of the Book of
Psalms, sought him out, and applied himself to him, to be his Disciple. And
taking his first lesson casually, at the first verse of the thirty ninth
Psalm, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue, He went
away with that lesson, with a promise to return again when he was perfect in
that. And when he discontinued so long, that his Master, sometimes occasionally
lighting upon him, accused him of this slacknesse, for almost twenty years
together he made several excuses, but at last professed, that at the end of
those twenty years, he was not yet perfect in his first lesson, in that one
verse, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. Now, that
which made this lesson hard unto him, was, that it employed all his diligence,
and his watchfulness upon future things; to examine and debate all his
actions, and all his words; for, else he did not take heed to his ways; at
least, not so, as that he would not sin with his tongue. But if he had begun
with this lesson, with this Psalm, which is but a calling to our memory that
which is past, The sinful employment of that time, which is gone, and shall
not return, The sinful heats of our youth, which, since we wanted remorsefull
tears to quench them, even the sin it self, and the excess thereof has
overcome, and allayed in us, sinful omissions, sinful actions, and habits,
and all those transitory passages, in which the Apostle shows us, our
prodigality, our unthriftinesse, our ill bargain, when he asks us that
question of Confusion, Romans 6.21.
What fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? If he had
begun his first lesson at this, with the presenting of all his passed sins, in
the sight of the Father, and in the Mediation and merit of the Son, he would
have been sonner perfect in that lesson, and would have found himself, even by
laying open his disease, so purged with Hyssop as that he should have been
clean, and so washed, as that he should have been whiter then snow. For,
Repentance of sins past is nothing but an Audit, a casting up of our accounts,
a consideration, a survey, how it stands between God and our soul. And yet, as
many men run out of plentiful estates, only because they are loath to see a
list of their debts, to take knowledge how much they are behind hand, or to
contract their expenses: so we run out of a whole and rich inheritance, the
Kingdom of heaven, we profuse and pour out even our own soul, rather then we
will cast our eye upon that which is past, rather then we will present a list
of our spiritual debts to God, or discover our disease to that Physician, who
only can Purge us with hyssope, that we may be clean, and wash us, that we
may be whiter then snow.

In the words we shall consider the Person, Divisio.
and the Action, who petitions, and what he asks. Both are twofold; for, the
persons are two, the Physician and the Patient, God and David, Do thou purge
me, do thou wash me; and the Action is twofold, Purgabis, do thou purge me,
and Lavabis, do thou wash me. In which last part, and in the first branch
thereof, we shall see first, the Action it self, Purgabis, Thou shall purge
me, and what that imports; And then the means, Purgabis hyssopo, Thou shall
purge me with hyssope, what that implies; and then the effect, Mundaber, I
shall be made clean, and what that comprehends. And in the other branch of
that second part, Lavabis, Thou shall wash me, we shall also look upon the
Action on Gods part, Lavabis, Thou shall wash me, and the Effect on our part,
Dealbabor, I shall be white, and the Degree, the Extent, the Exaltation of that
Emundation, that Dealbation, that Cleansing, supra nivem, I shall be whiter
then snow. And then we shall conclude all with that consideration, That though
in the first part, we find two persons in action; for God works, but man
prays that God would work, yet in the other part, the work it self; Though
the work be diverse, a purging, and then a washing of the soul, the whole
work is Gods alone: David does not say, no man can say, Do thou purge me, and
then, I will wash my self; nor do thou make the Medicine, and I will bring
the Hyssope; nor do thou but wash me, begin the work, and I will go forward
with it, and perfect it, and make my self whiter then snow; but the entire
work is his, who only can infuse the desire, and only accomplish that
desire, who only gives the will, and the ability to second, and execute that
will, He, He purges me, or I am still a vessel of peccant humors; His, His is
the hyssope, or there is Mors in olla, Death in the cup; He, He washes me, or I
am still in my blood; He, He exalts that cleanness, which his, his washing
has endued, or I return again to that red earth, which I brought out of
Adams bowels; Therefore Do thou purge me with Hyssope, and I shall be clean;
Do thou wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.

First then, 1. Part.
for our first part, we consider the persons. Of these God is the first; Esaias
spoke boldly, Deus.
says the Apostle, when he said, God is found by them that seek him not; But
still we continue in that humble boldness, Romans 10.20.
to say, God is best found, when we seek him, and observe him in his operation
upon us. God gives audiences, and admits accesses in his solemn and public
and out-roomes, in his Ordinances: In his Cabinet, in his Bedchamber, in his
unrevealed purposes, we must not press upon him. It was ill taken in the
Roman State, when men enquired in Arcana Imperii, the secrets of State, by what
ways, and means, public businesses were carried: Private men were to rest in
the general effects, peace, and protection, and Justice, and the like, and to
enquire no more; But to enquire in Arcana Domus, what was done in the
Bedchamber, was criminal, capital, inexcusable. We must abstain from
enquiring De modo, how such or such things are done in many points, in which it
is necessary to us to know that such things are done: As the manner of Christ's
presence in the Sacrament, and the manner of Christ's descent into Hell, for
these are Arcana Imperii, secrets of State, for the manner is secret, though the
thing be evident in the Scriptures. But the entering into Gods unrevealed, and
bosome-purposes, are Arcana domus, a man is as far from a possibility of
attaining the knowledge, as from an excuse for offering at it. That curiosity
will bring a man to that blasphemy of Alfonsus King of Castile, the great
Astronomer, who said, That if he had been of Gods Counsel in the creation of
the world, he could have directed him to have done many things better then he
did. They that look too far into Gods unrevealed purposes, are seldom
content with that that they think God has done; but stray either into an
uncharitable condemning of other men, or into a jealous, a suspicious, a
desperate condemning of themselves. Here, in this first branch of this first
part, we seek God, and because we seek him, where he has promised to be, we
are sure to find him; Because we join with David, in an humble confession of
our sins, the Lord joins us with David, in a fruition of himself. And more of
that first Person, God himself, we say not, but pass to the other, to the
petitioner, to the penitent, to the patient, to David himself.

His example is so comprehensive, so general, that as a well made, David.
and well placed Picture in a Gallery looks upon all that stand in several
places of the Gallery, in several lines, in several angles, so does David's
history concern and embrace all. For his Person includes all states, between
a shepherd and a King, and his sin includes all sin, between first
Omissions, and complications of Habits of sin upon sin: So that as S. Basil
said, he needed no other Book, for all spiritual uses, but the Psalms, so
we need no other Example to discover to us the slippery ways into sin, or the
penitential ways out of sin, then the Author of that Book, David. From his
Example then, we first deduce this, That in the war-fare of this life, there
are no Emeriti milites; none of that discipline, that after certain years
spent in the wars, a man should return to ease, and honor, and security, at
home. A man is not delivered from the tentation of Ambition, by having overcome
the heats and concupiscences of his youth; nor from the tentation of
Covetousness in his age, by having escaped ambition, and contented himself
with a mean station in his middle years. David, whom neither a sudden growth
into such degrees of greatness, as could not have fallen into his thought, or
wish before, nor the persecution of Saul, which might have enraged him to a
personal revenge, considering how many advantages, and occasions he might
have made shift to think that God had put into his hands, to execute that
revenge; David, whom neither the concourse and application of the people, who
took knowledge of him, as of a rising Sun, nor the interest and nearenesse in
the love and heart of Jonathan the Kings Son, which falls seldom upon a new,
and a popular man; David, whom not that highest place, to which God had brought
him, in making him King, nor that addition even to that highest place, that he
made him Successor to a King of whom the State was weary; (for, as the
Panegyrique says, Onerosum est succedere bono principi, It is a heavy thing,
and binds a Prince to a great diligence, to come immediately after one, whom
his subjects loved, So had David an ease, in coming after one, with whom the
Kingdom was discontented) David, whom this sudden preferment, and
persecutions, and popularity, did not so shake, but that we may say of him, as
it is said of Job, That in all this height, David did not sin, nor in all these
afflictions, He did not charge God foolishly; Though he had many victories, he
came not to a Triumph; but him, whom an Army, and an armed Giant, Goliath, near
hand, could not hurt, a weaker person, and naked, and far off, overthrowes
and ruins.

It is therefore but an imperfect comfort for any man to say, I have overcome
tentations to great sins, and my sins have been but of infirmity, not of
malice. For herein, more then in any other contemplation appears the
greatness, both of thy danger, and of thy transgression. For, consider what a
dangerous, and slippery station thou art in, if after a victory over Giants,
thou may be overcome by Pigmees; If after thy soul has been Canon proof
against strong tentations, she be slain at last by a Pistol; And, after she
has swom over a tempestuous Sea, she drown at last, in a shallow and
standing ditch. And as it shows the greatness of thy danger, so it aggravates
the greatness of thy fault; That after thou have had the experience, that by a
good husbanding of those degrees of grace, which God has afforded thee, thou
have been able to stand out the great batteries of strong tentations, and
see by that, that thou art much more able to withstand tentations to lesser
sins, if thou will, yet by disarming thy self, by devesting thy garrisons, by
discontinuing thy watches, merely by inconsideration, thou sellest thy soul
for nothing, for little pleasure, little profit, thou frustratest thy Savior
of that purchase, which he bought with his precious blood, and thou enrichest
the Devils treasure as much, with thy single money, thy frequent small sins, as
another has done with his talent; for, as God was well pleased with the
widows two farthings, so is the Devil well pleased, with the negligent man's
lesser sins. O who can be confident in his footing, or in his hold, when David,
that held out so long, fell, and if we consider but himself, irrecoverably,
where the tempter was weak, and afar off?

De long vidit illam in qua captus est. Berseba was far off; Mulier long,
libido prope, August.
but David's disposition was in his own bosom. Yet David came not up into the
Teras, with any purpose or inclination to that sin. Here was no such plotting
as in his son Hammons case, to get his sister Tamar, by dissembling himself to
be sick, to his lodging. That man post-dates his sin, and begins his reckning
too late, that dates his sin at that hour, when he commits that sin. You must
not reckon in sin, from the Nativity, but the Conception; when you conceived
that sin in your purpose, then you sinned that sin, and in every letter, in
every discourse, in every present, in every wish, in every dream, that
conduces to that sin, or rises from that sin, you sin it over, and over again,
before you come to the committing of it, and so your sin is an old, an
inveterate sin, before it be borne, and that which you call the first, is not
the hundredth time, that you have sinned that sin.

It is not much that David contributed to this sin on his part: He is only
noted in the Text, to have been negligent in the public business, and to
have given himself too much ease in this particular, 2 Samuel 11.
that he lay in bed all day; When it was evening, David arose out of his bed,
and walked upon the Teras. And it is true, that the justice of God is subtle,
as searching, as unsearchable; and oftentimes punishes sins of Omission, with
other sins, Actual sins, and makes their laziness, who are slack in doing
that they should, an occasion of doing that they should not.

It was not much that Bathsheba contributed to this tentation, on her part. The
Vulgat Edition of the Roman Church, has made her case somewhat the worse, by a
mistranslation, Ex adverso super solarium suum, as though she had been washing
her self, upon her own Teras, and in the eye of the Court; whereas indeed, it
is no more, but that David saw her, he upon his Teras, not her upon hers. For
her washing, it may well be collected out of the fourth verse, that it was a
Legal washing, to which she was bound by the Leviticall Law, being a
purification after her natural infirmity, and which it had been a sin in her,
to have omitted. But had it been a washing of Refreshing, or of Delicacy, even
that was never imputed to Susanna for a fault, that she washed in a Garden, and
in the day, and employed not only soap, but other ingredients and materials,
of more delicacy, in that washing.

Certainly the limits of adorning and beautifying the body are not so narrow,
so strict, as by some sour men they are sometimes conceived to be. Differences
of Ranks, of Ages, of Nations, of Customs, make great differences in the
enlarging, or contracting of these limits, in adorning the body; and that may
come near sin at some time, and in some places, which is not so always, nor
every where. Amongst the women there, the Jewish women, it was so general a
thing to help themselves with aromaticall Oils, and liniments, as that that
which is said by the Prophets poor Widow, to the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 4
That she had nothing in the house but a pot of Oil, is very properly by some
collected from the Original word, that it was not Oil for meat, but Oil for
unction, aromaticall Oil, Oil to make her look better; she was but poor,
but a Widow, but a Prophets Widow, (and likely to be the poorer for that) yet
she left not that. We see that even those women, whom the Kings were to take
for their Wives, and not for Mistresses, (which is but a later name for
Concubines) had a certain, and a long time assigned to be prepared by these
aromaticall unctions, and liniments for beauty. Neither do those that consider,
that when Abraham was afraid to lose his wife Sara in Egypt, and that every man
that saw her, would fall in love with her, Sara was then above threescore; And
when the King Abimelech did fall in love with her, and take her from Abraham,
she was fourscore and ten, they do not assign this preservation of her
complexion, and habitude to any other thing, then the use of those unctions,
and liniments, which were ordinary to that Nation. But yet though the extent
and limit of this adorning the body, may be larger then some austere persons
will allow, yet it is not so large, as that it should be limited only, by the
intention and purpose of them that do it; So that if they that beautify
themselves, mean no harm in it, therefore there should be no harm in it;
for, except they could as well provide, that others should take no harm, as
that they should mean no harm, they may participate of the fault. And since
we find such an impossibility in rectifying and governing our own senses, (we
cannot take our own eye, nor stop our own ear, when we would) it is an
unnecessary, and insupportable burden, to put upon our score, all the
lascivious glances, and the licentious wishes of other persons, occasioned by
us, in over-adorning our selves.

And this may well have been Bathshebaes fault, That though she did not bathe
with a purpose to be seen, yet she did not enough to provide against the
infirmity of others. It had therefore been well if David had risen earlier, to
attend the affairs of the State; And it had been well, if Bathsheba had bathed
within doors, and with more caution; but yet these errors alone, we should not
be apt to condemn in such persons, except by Gods permitting greater sins to
follow upon these, we were taught, that even such things, as seem to us in
their nature to be indifferent, have degrees of natural and essential ill in
them, which must be avoided, even in the probability, nay even in the
possibility that they may produce sin.

And as from this Example, we draw that Conclusion, That sins, which are but
the Children of indifferent actions, become the Parents of great sins; which is
the industry of sin, to exalt it self, and (as it were) ennoble it self,
above the stock, from which it was derived, The next sin will needs be a
better sin then the last: So have we also from David this Conclusion, that this
generation of sin is infinite; infinite in number, infinite in duration; So
infinite both ways, as that Luther (who seldom checks himself in any
vehement expression) could not forbear to say, Si Nathan non venisset, If
Nathan had not come to David, David had proceeded to the sin against the Holy
Ghost. O how impossible a thing is it then, for us to condition and capitulate
with God, or with our own Nature, and say to him, or to our selves, We will
sin thus long and no longer, Thus far, and no farther, this sin, and no more;
when not only the frailty of man, but even the justice of God provokes us
(though not as Author, or cause of sin) to commit more and more sins, after we
have entangled and enwrapped our selves in former! Who can doubt, but that in
this years space, in which David continued in his sin, but that he did
ordinarily all the external acts of the religious Worship of God? who can
doubt but that he performed all the Legal Sacrifices, and all the Ceremonial
Rites? Yea, we see, that when Nathan put David's case in another name, of a rich
man that had taken away a poor man's only sheep, David was not only just,
but he was vehement in the execution of Justice; He was, says the text,
exceeding wroth, and said, As the Lord lives, that man shall dye; But yet, for
all this external Religion, for all this Civil justice in matter of
government, no mention of any repentance in all this time. How little a thing
then is it, nay how great a thing, that is, how great an aggravating of thy
sin, if thou think to bribe God with a Sabbath, or with an alms; And, as a
criminal person would feign come to Sanctuary, not because it is a consecrated
place, but because it rescues him from the Magistrate, So thou come to Chuch,
not because God is here, but that thy being here may redeem thee from the
imputation of profaneness. At last Nathan came; David did not send for him,
but God sent him; But yet David laid hold upon Gods purpose in him. And he
confesses to God, he confesses to the Prophet, he confesses to the whole
Church; for, before he pleads for mercy in the body of the Psalm, in the title
of the Psalm, which is as Canonical Scripture, as the Psalm it self, he
confesses himself plainly, A Psalm of David, when the Prophet Nathan came to
him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.

Audiunt male viventes, and quaerunt sibi patrocinia peccandi; We hear of
David's sin, August.
and we justify our sins by him; Si David, cur non and ego? If David went in
to a Bathsheba, why may not I? That Father tells you why, Qui facit, quia David
fecit, id facit, quod David non fecit, He that does that, because David did it,
does not do that which David did; Quia nullum exemplum proposuit, For David
did not justify his sin, by any precedent example; So that he that sins as
David did, yet sins worse then David did; and he that continues as unsensible
of his sin, as David was, is more unsensible then David was; Quia ad te
mittitur ipse David, For God sends Nathan to thee, August.
with David in his hand; He sends you the Receipt, his invitations to
Repentance, in his Scriptures, and he sends you a Probatum est, a personal
testimony how this Physic has wrought upon another, upon David.

And so having in this first Part, which is the Consideration of the persons in
our Text, God and David, brought them by Nathans mediation, together, consider
we also, for a conclusion of this Part, the personal applications, that David
scatters himself upon none but God, Tu me, and he repeats it, do Thou purge
me, do Thou wash me.

Damascen has a Sermon of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, which whole
Sermon is but a Dialogue, in which Eve acts the first part, and the blessed
Virgin another; Tu.
It is but a Dialogue, yet it is a Sermon. If I should insist upon this
Dialogue, between God and David, Tu me, Tu me, Do thou work upon me, it would
not be the less a profitable part of a Sermon for that. For first, when we
hear David in an anhelation and panting after the mercy of God, cry out,
Domine Tu, Lord do thou that that is to be done, do Thou purge, do Thou
wash, and may have heard God, (thereby to excite us to the use of his means)
say, Purget natura, purget lex, I have infused into thee a light and a law of
nature, and exalted that light and that law, by a more particular law and a
clearer light then that, by which thou know what is sin, and know that in
a sinful state thou can not be acceptable to me, Purget natura, purget lex,
let the light of nature, or of the law purge thee, and rectify thy self by
that; Do but as much for thy self, as some natural men, some Socrates, some
Plato has done, we may hear David reply, Domine Tu, Lord put me not over to
the catechizing of Nature, nor to the Pedagogie of the Law, but take me into
thine own hands, do Thou, Thou, that is to be done upon me. When we hear God
say, Purget Ecclesia, I have established a Church, settled constant Ordinances,
for the purging and washing of souls there; Purget Ecclesia, Let the Church
purge thee, we may hear David reply, Domine Tu, Alas Lord, how many come to
that Bath, and go foul out of it? how many hear Sermons, and receive
Sacraments, and when they return, return to their vomit? Domine Tu, Lord,
except the power of thy Spirit make thine Ordinance effectual upon me, even
this thy Jordan will leave me in my leprosy, and exalt my leprosy, even this
Sermon, this Sacrament will aggravate my sin. If we hear God say, Shall I
purge thee? Do thou know what thou ask, what my method in purging is,
That if I purge, I shall purge thee with fire, with seven fires, with
tribulations, nay, with tentations, with temporal, nay, with spiritual
calamities, with wounds in thy fortune, wounds in thine honor, wounds in thy
conscience, yet we may hear David reply, Josh. 24.16.
Tu Domine; As the people said to Ioshuah, God forbid we should forsake the
Lord, we will serve the Lord; And when Ioshuah said, You cannot serve the Lord,
for he is a jealous God; and if ye turn from him, he will turn and do you
hurt, and consame you after he has done you good; The people replied, Nay, but
we will serve the Lord; so whatsoever God threatens David of afflictions and
tribulations, and purgings in fire, we may hear David reply, Nay but Lord, do
Thou do it, do it how Thou will, but do Thou do it: Thy corrosives are better
then others somentations; Thy bitternesses sweeter then others honey; Thy fires
are but lukewarm fires, nay, they have nothing of fire in them, but light to
direct me in my way; And thy very frowns are but as trenches cut out, as lanes
that lead me to thy grave, or Rivers or Channels, that lead me to the sea of
thy blood. Let me go upon Crouches, so I go to Heaven; Lay what weight thou will even upon my foul, that that be heavy, and heavy unto death, so I may
have a cheerful transmigration then. Domine Tu, Lord do thou do it, and I
shall not wish it mended.

And then when we hear David say, Domine Me, Lord purge Me, wash Me, and
return four times in this short Text, to that personal appropriation of Gods
work upon himself, Purge Me, that I may be clean, wash Me, that I may be
whiter then snow, if we hear God say (as the language of his mercy is, for the
most part, general) As the Sea is above the Earth, so is the blood of my Son
above all sin; Congregations of three thousand, and of five thousand were
purged and washed, converted and baptized at particular Sermons of S. Peter,
whole legions of Soldiers, that consisted of thousands, were purged in their
own blood, and became Martyrs in one day. There is enough done to work upon
all; Examples enough given to guide all; we may hear David reply, Domine Me, Nay
but Lord, I do not hear Peter preach, I live not in a time, or in a place,
where Crowns of Martyrdom are distributed, nor am I sure my Constancy would
make me capable of it if I did, Lord I know, that a thousand of these worlds
were not worth one drop of thy blood, and yet I know, that if there had been
but one some distressed, and that soul distressed but with one sin, thou
would have spent the last drop of that blood for that soul; Blessed be thy
Name, for having wrapped me up in thy general Covenants, and made me partaker
of thy general Ordinances, but yet Lord, look more particularly upon me, and
appropriate thy self to me, to me, not only as thy Creature, as a man, as a
Christian, but as I am I, as I am this sinner that confesses now, and as I am
this penitent that begs thy mercy now. And now, Beloved, we have said so much
toward enough of the persons, God and David; The access of David to God, and
the appropriation of God to David, as that we may well pass to our other
general part, the petitions which David in his own and our behalf makes to
God, Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow.

In this, 2 Part. Purgabis.
the first is a great work, That which we translate, Purge me. And yet how
soon David is come to it? It is his first period. The passage of a Spirit is
very quick, but it is not immediate; Not from extreme to extreme, but by
passing the way between. The Evil spirit passes not so; no good soul was ever
made very ill in an instant, no, nor so soon as some ill have been made good:
No man can give me Examples of men so soon perverted, as I can of men
converted. It is not in the power of the Devil to do so much harm, as God
can do good; Nay, we may be bold to say, it is not in the will, not in the
desire of the Devil to do so much harm, as God would do good; for illness
is not in the nature of the Devil; The Devil was naturally good, made,
created good. His first illness was but a defection from that goodness; and
his present illness is but a punishment for that defection; but God is good,
goodness in his nature, essentially, eternally good; and therefore the good
motions of the Spirit of God work otherwise upon us, then the tentations of
the evil Spirit do. How soon, and to what a height came David here? He makes
his Petition, his first Petition with that confidence, as that it has scarce
the nature of a Petition: for it is in the Original, Thou will purge me, Thou will wash me, Thou had a gracious will, and purpose to do it, before thou
did infuse the will and the desire in me to petition it. Nay, this word may
well be translated not only Thou will, but by the other denotation of the
future, Thou shall, Thou shall purge me, Thou shall wash me, Lord I do but
remember thee of thy debt, of that which thy gracious promise has made thy
debt, to show mercy to every penitent sinner. And then, as the word implies
confidence, and acceleration, infallibility, and expedition too, That as soon
as I can ask, I am sure to be heard; so does it imply a totality, an
entireness, a fullness in the work; for the root of the word is Peccare, to
sin, for purging is a purging of peccant humors; but in this Conjugation in
that language, it has a privative signification, and literally signifies
Expeccabis; and if in our language, that were a word in use, it might be
translated, Thou shall un-sin me; that is, look upon me as a man that had never
sinned, as a man invested in the innocence of thy Son, who knew no sin. David
gives no man rule nor example of other assurance in God, then in the remission
of sins: Not that any precontract or Election makes our sins no sins, or makes
our sins no hindrances in our way to salvation, or that we are in Gods favor
at that time when we sin, nor returned to his favor before we repent our sin;
It is only this expeccation, this unsinning, this taking away of sins formerly
committed, that restores me; And that is not done with nothing; David assigns,
proposes a means, by which he looks for it, Hyssop, Thou shall purge me with
Hyssop.

The Fathers taking the words as they found them, and fastening with a
spiritual delight, Hyssopo.
as their devout custom was, their Meditations upon the figurative and
Metaphorical phrase of purging by Hyssop, have found purgative virtues in that
plant, and made useful and spiritual applications thereof, for the purging of
our souls from sin. In this do S. Ambrose, and Augustine, and Hierome agree,
that Hyssop has virtue in it proper for the lungs, in which part, as it is the
furnace of breath, they place the seat of pride and opposition against the
Truth, making their use of that which is said of Saul, Acts 9.
That he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord. And by this interpretation, David's disease that he must be purged of,
should be pride. But except, as the Schoolmen, when they have tired themselves
in seeking out the name of the sin of the Angels, are content at last for their
ease to call it Pride, both because they thought they need go no farther, for,
where pride is, other sins will certainly accompany it; and because they
extended the name of Pride to all refusals and resistances of the will of God,
and so pride, in effect, includes all sin; Except, I say, the Fathers take
Pride in so large a sense as that they would not prescribe Hyssop to purge
David's lungs, for his disease lay not properly there; They must have purged his
liver, the seat of blood, the seat of concupiscence; They must have purged his
whole substance, for the distemper was gone over all. And to this rectifying of
his blood, by the application of better blood, and David relation in this place.

All the sacrifices of Expiation of sin, in the old Law, were done by blood,
and that blood was sprinkled upon the people, by an instrument made of a
certain plant, which because the word in Hebrew is Ezob, for the nearness of
the sound, and for the indifferency of the matter, (for it imports us nothing
to know, of what plant that Aspergillum, that Blood-sprinckler was made) the
Interpreters have ever used in all languages to call this word Hyssop. And
though we know no proper word for Hyssop in Hebrew, (for when they find not a
word in the Bible, the Hebrew Rabbis will acknowledge no Hebrew word for any
thing) yet the other languages deduced from the Hebrew, Syriaque, and Arabique,
have clearly another word for Hyssop, Zus; And the Hebrew Rabbis think this
word of our text, Ezob, to signify any of three or four plants, rather then
our Hyssop. But be the plant what it will, the form and the use of that
Blood-sprinkler is manifest. Exodus 12. Levit. 14.
In the institution of the Passover, Take a bunch of Hyssop, and dip it in
blood. In the cleansing of the Leper, there was to be the blood of a sparrow,
and then Cedar wood, and scarlet lace, and Hyssop: And about that Cedar stick,
they bound this Hyssop with this lace, and so made this instrument to sprinkle
blood. And so the name of the Hyssop, because it did the principal office, was
after given to the whole Instrument; all the sprinkler was called an Hyssop; As
we see when they reached up a sponge of vinegar to Christ upon the Cross, Ioh.
19.29.
They put it, says the text, upon Hyssop, that is, upon an Hyssop; not upon an
Hyssop stalk, (as the old translation had it) for no Hyssop has such a
stalk, but they called such sticks of Cedar, as ordinarily served for the
sprinkling of blood, Hyssops. And whether this were such a Cedar stick, or some
other such thing, Mat. 27.48.
fit to reach up that sponge to Christ, we cannot say. For S. Matthew calls
that, that S. John calls an Hyssop, a Reed.

This then was David's petition here; first, That he might have the blood of
Christ Jesus applied and sprinkled upon him; David thought of no election, he
looked for no sanctification, but in the blood of Christ Jesus. And then he
desired this blood to be applied to him, by that Hyssope, by that
Blood-sprinkler, which was ordained by God, for the use of the Church.
Home-infusions, and inward inspirations of grace, are powerful seals of Gods
love; but all this is but the Privy seal, David desired to bring it to the
Great seal, the public Ordinance of the Church. In a case of necessity God
gave his children Manna and Quails; Josh. 5.
In cases of necessity God allows Sermons, and Sacraments at home; But as
soon as ever they came to the Land of promise, the same day both Manna and
Quails ceased: God has given us a free and public passage of his Word, and
Sacraments, the diet and the ordinary food of our souls, and he purges us with
that Hyssope, with the application of his promises, with the absolution of our
sins, with a redintegration into his mystical body, by the seals of
reconciliation. And this reconciliation to God, by the blood of Christ, applied
in the Ordinances of the Church, is that which David begs for his cleansing,
and is the last circumstance of this branch, Purge me with Hyssope, and I shall
be clean.

This Cleansing then implies that, Cleansing.
which we commonly call the enwrapping in the Covenant, the breeding in the
visible Church, when God takes a Nation out of the Common, and encloses it,
empailes it for his more peculiar use, when God withdrawes us from the
impossibility, under which the Gentiles sterve, who hear not Christ preached,
to live within the sound of his voice, and within the reach of our spiritual
food, the Word and Sacraments. It is that state, which the holy Ghost so
elegantly expresses and enlarges, Ezekiel. 16.
That God found Jerusalem, Her father an Amorite, and her mother an Hittite,
none of the seed of the faithful in her; that he found her in Canaan, not so
much as in a place of true profession; that he found her in her blood, and her
navell uncut, still incorporated in her former stock; And, The time was a time
of love, says God, and I covered thy nakedness, and swear unto thee, and
entered into a covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. Will you say, this
could not be the subject of David's petition, this could not be the cleansing
that he begged at Gods hand, to be brought into that Covenant, to be a member
of that Church? for he was in possession of that before. Beloved, how many are
borne in this Covenant, and baptized, and catechized in it, and yet fall away?
How many have taught, and wrought, and thought in their own conscience that
they did well, in defense of the Covenant, and yet fell away? And from how many
places, which gave light to others, has God removed the Candlestick, and left
themselves in darkness? Psalm. 84.8.
Though David say, A day in thy Courts is better then a thousand, (then a
thousand any where else) yet he expresses his desire, That he might continue
in that happiness all the days of his life; It is as fearful a thing to be
removed from the means of salvation, as never to have had them.

This then is Cleansing, To be continued in the distance, and working of the
means of cleansing, that he may always grow under the dew, and breath in the
air of Gods grace exhibited in his Ordinance. Amongst the Jews there were
many uncleanness, which did not amount to sin: They reckon in the Ceremonial
law, at least fifty kinds of uncleanness, from which if they neglected to
cleanse themselves, by those ceremonies which were appropriated to them, then
those uncleanness became sins, and they were put to their sacrifices, before
they could be discharged of them. Many levities, many omissions, many acts of
infirmity might be prevented by consideration before, or cleansed by
consideration now, if we did truly value the present grace, that is always
offered us in these the Ordinances of God. What sin can I be guilty of, that is
without example of mercy, in that Gospel which is preached to me here? But if
you will not accept it, when God offers it, you can never have it so good
cheap, because hereafter you shall have this present sin, of refusing that
offer of grace, added to your burden. Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
any more, til I have caused my fury to light upon thee. But shall we be purged
then? Then, when his fury in any calamity has lighted upon us? Is not this
donec, this until, such a donec, as donec faciam, Till I make thine cnemies
thy footstool: Such a donec as the donec peperit, she was a Virgin, Till she
brought forth her first son? Is it not an everlasting donec? That we shall
not be purged till Gods Judgments fall upon us, nor then neither: Physic may
be ministered too late to work, and Judgments may fall too late, to souple or
entender the soul: For as we may die with that Physic in our stomach, so may
we be carried to the last Judgment, with that former Judgment upon our
shoulders. And therefore our later Translation has expressed it more fully,
Not that that fury shall light, but shall rest upon us.

This cleansing therefore, is that disposition, which God by his grace, infuses
into us, That we stand in the congregation, and Communion of Saints, capable of
those mercies, which God has by his Ordinance, annexed to these meetings; That
we may so feel at all times when we come hither, such a working of his Hyssop,
such a benefit of his Ordinance, as that we believe all our former sins to be
so forgiven, as that if God should translate us now, this minute, to another
life, this Dosis of this purging Hyssop, received now, had so wrought, as that
we should be assuredly translated into the Kingdom of heaven. This cleansing
applies to us those words of our Savior, My son, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee; But yet there is a farther degree of cleanenesse
expressed in Christ's following words, Go, and sin no more; And that grace
against relapses, the gift of sanctification, and perseverance, is that that
David asks in his other Petition, Lava me, Wash me, and I shall be whiter then
snow.

Here we proposed first the action, Lava, Wash me. This is more then a
sprinkling, Lava.
A total, and entire washing; More then being an ordinary partaker of the
outward means, The Word, and Sacraments; more then a temporary feeling of the
benefit thereof in a present sense; for it is a building up of habits of
religious actions, visible to others, and it is a holy and firm confidence
created in us by the Spirit of God, that we shall keep that building in
reparation, and go forward with it to our lives end. It is a washing like
Naamans in Jordan, to be iterated seven times, seaventy seven times, daily,
hourly, all our life; A washing begun in Baptism, pursued in sweat, in the
industry of a lawful calling, continued in tears, for our deficiencies in the
works of our calling, and perchance to be consummated in blood, at our
deaths. Not such a washing, as the Washes have, which are those sands that are
overflowed with the Sea at every Tide, and then lie dry, but such a washing as
the bottom of the Sea has, that is always equally wet. It is not a
stillicidium, a spout, a shower, a bucket powered out upon us, when we come to
Church, a Sabbath-sanctification, and no more, but a water that enters into
every office of our house, and washes every action proceeding from every
faculty of the soul. And this is the washing, A continual succession of
Grace, working effectually to present Habits of religious acts, and
constituting a holy purpose of persevering in them that induces the Whiteness,
the Candor, the Dealbation that David begs here, Lava and Dealbabor.

The purging with Hyssope, which we spoke of before, Dealbabor.
which is the benefit which we have by being bred in a true Church, delivers us
from that redness, which is in the earth of which we are made, from that
guiltiness, which is by our natural derivation from our Parents imprinted in
us; Baptism does much upon that; but that that is not Red, is not therefore
White. But this is our case: Our first color was white; God made man
righteous. Our redness is from Adam, and the more that redness is washed off,
2 Cor. 7.1.
the more we return to our first whiteness; And this which is petitioned
here, is a washing of such perfection, as cleanses us Ab omni inquinamento,
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Those inquinamenta, which are
ordinary, are first in the flesh, Concupiscence and Carnality, Gal. 5.19.
and those other, of which the Apostle says, The works of the flesh are
manifest; And in the spirit, they are Murmuring, Diffidence in God, and such
others. But besides these, as an over-diligent cleansing of the Body, and
additionall beauty of the Body, is inquinamentum carnis, one of S. Paul's
filthinesses upon the flesh, so an over purifying of the spirit, in an
uncharitable undervaluing of other men, and in a schismatic departing from
the unity of the Church, is Inquinamentum spiritus: False beauties are a
foulness of the body, false purity is a foulness of the spirit. But the
washing, that we seek, cleanses us Ab omni inquinamento, from all foulness
of flesh and spirit. All waters will not cleanse us, nor all fires dry us, so
as we may be clean, smoaky fires will not do that. I will pour clean water
upon you, Ezekiel. 36.25.
and you shall be clean. The Sun produces sweat upon us, and it dries us
too: Zeal cleanses us; but it must be zeal impermixt as the Sun, not mingled
with our smoaky, sooty, factious affections. Some Grammarians have noted, the
word Washing here, to be derived from a word, that signifies a Lamb; we must
be washed in the blood of the Lamb, and we must be brought to the whiteness,
the candor, the simplicity of the Lamb; no man is pure, that thinks no man
pure but himself. And this whiteness, which is Sanctification in our selves,
and charitable interpretation of other men, is exalted here to that
Superlative, Super Nivem, Wash me, and I shall be whiter then Snow.

Though your sins be as Scarlet, Super nivem. Esaias 1.18.
they shall be as white as snow. Esaias was an Evangelical Prophet, a
prophetical Evangelist, and speaks still of the state of the Christian Church.
There, by the ordinary means exhibited there, our Scarlet sins are made as
white as Snow; And the whiteness of Snow, is a whiteness that no art of man
can reach to; So Christ's garments in his Transfiguration are expressed to have
been as white as Snow, Mark 9.3.
so, as no Fuller on earth could white them. Nothing in this world can send me
home in such a whiteness, no moral counsel, no moral comfort, no moral
constancy; as Gods Absolution by his Minister, as the profitable hearing of a
Sermon, the worthy receiving of the Sacrament do. This is to be as white as
snow; In a good state for the present. But David begs a whiteness above Snow;
for Snow melts, and then it is not white; our present Sanctification withers,
and we lose that cheereful verdure, the testimony of an upright conscience; And
Snow melted, Snow water, is the coldest water of all; Devout men departed from
their former fervor are the coldest and the most irreducible to true zeal,
true holiness. Therefore David who was metal tried seven times in the fire,
and desired to be such gold as might be laid up in Gods Treasury, might
consider, that in transmutation of metals, it is not enough to come to a
calcination, or a liquefaction of the metal, (that must be done) nor to an
Ablution, to sever dross from pure, nor to a Transmutation, to make it a
better metal, but there must be a Fixion, a fettling thereof, so that it shall
not evaporate into nothing, nor return to his former nature. Therefore he saw
that he needed not only a liquefaction, a melting into tears, nor only an
Ablution, and a Transmutation, those he had by this purging and this washing,
this station in the Church of God, and this present Sanctification there, but
he needed Fixionem, an establishment, which the comparison of Snow afforded
not; That as he had purged him with Hyssop, and so cleansed him, that is,
enwrapped him in the Covenant, and made him a member of the true Church; and
there washed him so, as that he was restored to a whiteness, that is, made his
Ordinances so effectual upon him, as that then he durst deliver his soul into
his hands at that time: So he would exalt that whiteness, above the whiteness
of Snow, so as nothing might melt it, nothing discolor it, but that under the
seal of his blessed Spirit, he might ever dwell in that calm, in that
assurance, in that acquiescence, that as he is in a good state this minute, he
shall be in no worse, whenever God shall be pleased to translate him.

We end all the Psalms in our service, Conclusio.
those of Praise, and those of Prayer too, with a Gloria Patri, Glory be to the
Father, etc. For our conclusion of this Prayer in this Psalm, we have reserved
a Gloria Patri too, This consideration for the glory of God, that though in the
first Part, The Persons, the persons were varied, God and man, yet in our
second Part, where we confider the work, the whole work is put into Gods
hand, and received from Gods hand. Let God be true, and every man a liar; Let
God be strong and every man infirm; Let God give, and man but receive. What
man that has no propriety therein, can take a penny out of another man's house,
or a root out of his Garden, but the Law will take hold of him? Has any man a
propriety in Grace? what had he to give for it? Nature? Is Nature equivalent to
Grace? No man does refine, and exalt Nature to the height it would bear, but
if natural faculties were exalted to their highest, is Nature a fit exchange
for Grace? and if it were, is Nature our own? Why should we be loath to
acknowledge to have all our ability of doing good freely from God, and
immediately by his grace, when as, even those faculties of Nature, by which we
pretend to do the offices of Grace, we have from God himself too? For that
question of the Apostle involves all, What have thou that thou have not
received? Thy natural faculties are no more thine own, then the grace of God
is thine own; I would not be beholden to God for Grace, and I must be as much
beholden to him for Nature, if Nature do supply Grace; Because he has made
thee to be a man, he has given thee natural faculties; because he has
vouchsafed thee to be a Christian, he has given thee means of Grace. But, as
thy body, conceived in thy Mothers womb, could not claim a soul at Gods
hand, nor wish a soul, no nor know that there was a soul to be had: So
neither by being a man endued with natural faculties can thou claim grace,
or wish grace; nay those natural faculties, if they be not pre-tincted with
some infusion of Grace before, cannot make thee know what Grace is, or that
Grace is. To a child rightly disposed in the womb, God does give a soul; To a
natural man rightly disposed in his natural faculties, God does give Grace;
But that Soul was not due to that child, nor that grace to that man.

Therefore, (as we said at first) David does not bring the Hyssop, and pray God
to make the potion, but, Do thou purge me with Hyssop, All is thine own;
There was no pre-existent matter in the world, when God made the world; There
is no pre-existent merit in man, when God makes him his. David does not say, Do
thou wash me, and I will perfect thy work; Give me my portion of Grace, and I
will trouble thee for no more, but deal upon that stock; But Qui
sanctificatur, sanctificetur adhuc, Let him that is holy be more holy, but
accept his Sanctification from him, of whom he had his Justification; and
except he can think to glorify himself because he is sanctified, let him not
think to sanctify himself because he is justified; God does all. Yet thus
argues S. Augustine upon David's words, Tuus sum Domine, Lord I am thine, and
therefore safer then they, that think themselves their own. Every man can and
must say, I was thine, Thine by Creation; but few can say, I am thine, few that
have not changed their Master. But how was David his so especially? says S.
Augustine: Quia quaesivi justificationes tuas, as it follows there; Because I
sought thy Righteousness, thy Justification. But where did he seek it? He
sought it, and he found it in himself. In himself, as himself, there was no
good thing to be found, how far soever he had sought: But yet he found a
Justification, though of Gods whole making, yet in himself.

So then, this is our Act of Recognition, we acknowledge God, and God only to
do all; But we do not so make him Sovereign alone, as that we leave his
presence naked, and empty; Nor so make him King alone, as that we depopulate
his Country, and leave him without Subjects; Nor so leave all to Grace, as that
the natural faculties of man do not become the servants, and instruments of
that Grace. Let all, that we all seek, be, who may glorify God most; and we
shall agree in this, That as the Pelagian wounds the glory of God deeply, in
making Natural faculties joynt-Commissioners with Grace, so do they diminish
the glory of God too, if any deny natural faculties to be the subordinate
servants and instruments of Grace; for as Grace could not work upon man to
Salvation, if man had not a faculty of will to work upon, because without that
will man were not man; so is this Salvation wrought in the will, by conforming
this will of man to the will of God, not by extinguishing the will it self, by
any force or constraint that God imprints in it by his Grace: God saves no man
without, or against his will. Glory be to God on high, and on earth Peace, and
Good will toward men; And to this God of Glory, the Father, and this God of
Peace and reconciliation, the Son, and this God of Good will and love amongst
men, the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all praise, etc.

PREBEND SERMONS Preached at St. PAUL'S.
The first of the Prebend of Cheswicks five Psalms; which five are appointed
for that Prebend; as there are five other, for every other of our thirty
Prebendaries.

SERMON. LXV. Preached at S. Paul's, May 8. 1625.
PSALM. 62.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
lie; To be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.


WE consider the dignity of the Book of Psalms, either in the whole body
together, or in the particular limbs and distribution thereof. Of the whole
Body, Basil.
it may be enough to tell you that which S. Basil says, That if all the other
books of Scripture could perish, there remained enough in the book of Psalms
for the supply of all: And therefore he calls it Amuletum ad profligandum
daemonem; Any Psalm is Exorcisme enough to expel any Devil, Charm enough to
remove any tentation, Enchantment enough to ease, nay to sweeten any
tribulation. It is abundantly enough that our Savior Christ himself cites the
Psalms, not only as Canonical Scripture, but as a particular, and entire,
and noble limme of that Body; All must be fulfilled of me, (says he) which is
written in the Law, Luke 24.44.
in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. The Law alone was the Sadduces Scripture,
they received no more: The Law and the Prophets were (especially) the Scribes
Scripture, they interpreted that: The Christians Scripture, in the Old
Testament, is especially the Psalms. For (except the Prophecy of Esaias be
admitted into the comparison) no book of the Old Testament is so like a
Gospel, so particular in all things concerning Christ, as the Psalms.

So has the Book of Psalms an especial dignity in the entire Body, all
together. It has so also in diverse distributions thereof into parts. For even
amongst the Jews themselves, those fifteen Psalms which follow immediately and
successively after the 119. Psalm, were especially distinguished, and
dignified by the name of Graduall Psalms; Whether because they were sung upon
the Degrees and stairs ascending to the Altar, Or because he that read them
in the Temple, ascended into a higher and more eminent place to read them, Or
because the word Graduall implies a degree of excellency in the Psalms
themselves, I dispute not; But a difference those fifteen Psalms ever had
above the rest, in the Jewish and in the Christian Church too. So also has
there been a particular dignity ascribed to those seven Psalms, which we have
ever called the Penitential Psalms; Of which S. Augustine had so much
respect, August.
as that he commanded them to be written in a great Letter, and hung about the
curtains of his Deathbed within, that he might give up the ghost in
contemplation, and meditation of those seven Psalms. And it has been
traditionally received, and recommended by good Authors, that that Hymn, Matt.
26.30.
which Christ and his Apostles are said to have sung after the Institution and
celebration of the Sacrament, was a Hymn composed of those six Psalms, which
we call the Allelujah Psalms, immediately preceding the hundred and nineteenth.

So then, in the whole Body, and in some particular limbs of the Body, the
Church of God has had an especial consideration of the book of Psalms. This
Church in which we all stand now, and in which my self, by particular
obligation serve, has done so too. In this Church, by ancient Constitutions,
it is ordained, That the whole book of Psalms should every day, day by day
be rehearsed by us, who make the Body of this Church, in the ears of Almighty
God. And therefore every Prebendary of this Church, is by those Constitutions
bound every day to praise God in those five Psalms which are appointed for his
Prebend. And of those five Psalms which belong to me, this, out of which I
have read you this Text, is the first. And, by Gods grace, (upon like
occasions) I shall here handle some part of every one of the other four
Psalms, for some testimony, that those my five Psalms return often into my
meditation, which I also assure my self of the rest of my brethren, who are
under the same obligation in this Church.

For this whole Psalm, Psalmus integer.
which is under our present consideration, as Athanasius amongst all the
Fathers, was most curious, and most particular, and exquisite, in observing the
purpose, and use of every particular Psalm, (for to that purpose, he goes
through them all, in this manner; If thou will encourage men to a love, and
pursuit of goodness, say the first Psalm, and 31. and 140, etc. If thou will
convince the Jews, say the second Psalm; If thou will praise God for things
past, say this, and this, And this, and this if thou will pray for future
things) so for this Psalm, which we have in hand, he observes in it a summary
abridgement of all; For of this Psalm he says in general, Adversus
insidiantes, Against all attempts upon thy body, thy state, thy soul, thy
fame, tentations, tribulations, machinations, defamations, say this Psalm. As
he says before, that in the book of Psalms, every man may discern motus
animi sui, his own finfull inclinations expressed, and arm himself against
himself; so in this Psalm, he may arm himself against all other adversaries
of any kind. And therefore as the same Father entitles one Sermon of his,
Contr a omnes haereses, A Sermon for the convincing of all Heresies, in which
short Sermon he meddles not much with particular heresies, but only
establishes the truth of Christ's Person in both natures, which is indeed enough
against all Heresies, and in which (that is the consubstantiality of Christ
with the Father, God of God) this Father Athanasius, has enlarged himself
more then the rest (insomuch, that those heretics which grow so fast, in
these our days, The Socinians, (who deny the Godhead of Christ) are more vexed
with that Father, then with any other, and call him for Athanasius,
Sathanasius) As he calls that Sermon, a Sermon against all Heresies, so he
presents this Psalm against all Tentations, and Tribulations; Not that therein
David puts himself to weigh particular tentations, and tribulations, but that
he puts every man, in every trial, to put himself wholly upon God, and to
know, that if man cannot help him in this world, nothing can; And, for man,
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; To be
laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

We consider in the words, Divisie.
The manner, and the matter, How it is spoken, And what is said. For the first,
the manner, this is not absolutely spoken, but comparatively, not peremptorily,
but respectively, not simply, but with relation. The Holy Ghost, in David's
mouth, does not say, That man can give no assistance to man; That man may look
for no help from man; But, that God is always so present, and so
all-sufficient, that we need not doubt of him, nor rely upon any other,
otherwise then as an instrument of his. For that which he had spread over all
the verses of the Psalm before, he sums up in the verse immediately before
the Text, Trust in God at all times, for he is a refuge for us; and then, he
strengthens that with this, What would ye prefer before God, or join with
God? man? what man? Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree
are a lie; To be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

Which words being our second part, open to us these steps: First, that other
Doctrins, moral or civil Instructions may be delivered to us possibly, and
probably, and likely, and credibly, and under the like terms, and
modifications, but this in our Text, is Assuredly, undoubtedly, undeniably,
irrefragably, Surely men of low degree, etc. For howsoever when they two are
compared together, with one another, it may admit discourse and disputation,
whether men of high degree, or of low degree do most violate the laws of God;
that is, whether prosperity or adversity make men most obnoxious to sin, yet,
when they come to be compared, not with one another, but both with God, this
asseveration, this surely reaches to both; Surely, The man of low degree is
vanity, and, as Surely, The man of high degree is a lie. And though this may
seem to leave some room, for men of middle ranks, and fortunes, and places,
That there is a mediocrity, that might give an assurance, and an establishment,
yet there is no such thing in this case, for (as surely still) to be laid in
the balance, they are all, (not all of low, and all of high degree, all rich,
and all poor, but) All, of all conditions, altogether lighter then vanity.

Now, all this does not destroy, not extinguish, not annihilate that affection
in man, of hope, and trust, and confidence in any thing; but it rectifies that
hope, and trust, and confidence, and directs it upon the right object: Trust
not in flesh, but in spiritual things, That we neither bend our hopes
downward, to infernal spirits, to seek help in Witches; nor mis-carry it
upward, to seek it in Saints, or Angels, but fix it in him, who is nearer us
then our own souls, our blessed, and gracious, and powerful God, who in this
one Psalm is presented unto us, by so many names of assurance and confidence,
My expectation, my salvation, my rock, my defense, my glory, my strength, my
refuge, and the rest.

First then these words, Surely men of low degree, and men of high degree are
vanity, 1 Part. Quid home erga Deum.
are not absolutely, simple, unconditionally spoken; Man is not nothing: Nay,
it is so far from that, as that there is nothing but man. As, though there
may be many other creatures living, which were not derived from Eve, and yet
Eve is called Matter viventium, Genesis 3.20.
The Mother of all that live, because the life of none but man, is considered;
so there be so many other Creatures, and Christ sends his Apostles to preach,
Omni Creaturae, Mark 16.15.
to every creature, yet he means none but Man. All that God did in making all
other creatures, in all the other days, was but a laying in of Materials; The
setting up of the work was in the making of Man. God had a picture of himself
from all eternity; from all eternity, the Son of God was the Image of the
invisible God; Colos. 1.15.
But then God would have one picture, which should be the picture of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost too, and so made man to the Image of the whole Trinity.
As the Apostle argues, Cui dixit, To whom did God ever say, This day have I
begotten thee, but to Christ? so we say, Heb. 1.5.
for the dignity of man, Cui dixit, of what creature did God ever say,
Faciamus, Let us, us make it, All, all, the Persons together, and to employ,
and exercise, not only Power, but Counsel in the making of that Creature?
Nay, when man was at worst, he was at a high price; man being fallen, yet then,
in that undervalue, he cost God his own and only Son, before he could have
him. Neither became the Son of God capable of redeeming man, by any less, or
any other way, then by becoming man. The Redeemer must be better then he whom
he is to redeem; and yet, he must abase himself to as low a nature as his; to
his nature; else he could not redeem him. God was aliened from man, and yet
God must become man, to recover man.

God joined man in Commission with himself, upon his Creation, Genesis 1.28.
in the Replete and Dominamini, when he gave Man power to possess the Earth,
and subdue the Creature; And God has made man so equal to himself, as not
only to have a soul endless and immortal, as God himself, (though not
endless and immortal as himself, yet endless and immortal as himself too,
though not immortal the same way, (for Gods immortality is of himself) yet as
certainly, and as infallibly Immortal as he) but God has not only given man
such an immortal soul, but a body that shall put on Incorruption and
Immortality too, which he has given to none of the Angels. In so much, that
howsoever it be, whether an Angel may wish it self an Archangel, or an
Archangel wish it self a Cherubin; yet man cannot deliberately wish himself
an Angel, because he should lose by that wish, and lack that glory, which he
shall have in his body. We shall be like the Angels, says Christ; In that
wherein we can be like them, Mark 12.25.
we shall be like them, in the exalting and refining of the faculties of our
souls; But they shall never attain to be like us in our glorified bodies.
Neither has God only reserved this treasure and dignity of man to the next
world, but even here he has made him filium Dei, Luke 6.35.
The Son of God, 1 John 3.9. 2 Pet. 1.4.
and Semen Dei, The seed of God, and Consortem divinae naturae, Partaker of the
divine Nature, and Deos ipsos, Gods themselves, for Ille dixit Dii estis, he
has said we are Gods. So that, as though the glory of heaven were too much for
God alone, God has called up man thither, in the ascension of his Son, to
partake thereof; and as though one God were not enough for the administration
of this world, God has multiplied gods here upon Earth, and imparted,
communicated, not only his power to every Magistrate, but the Divine nature to
every sanctified man. David asks that question with a holy wonder, Quid est
homo? What is man that God is so mindful of him? But I may have his leave, and
the holy Ghosts, to say, since God is so mindful of him, since God has set
his mind upon him, What is not man? Man is all.

Since we consider men in the place that they hold, and value them according to
those places, and ask not how they got thither, when we see Man made The Love
of the Father, The Price of the Son, The Temple of the Holy Ghost, The Signet
upon Gods hand, The Apple of Gods eye, Absolutely, unconditionally we cannot
annihilate man, not evacuate, not evaporate, not extenuate man to the levity,
to the vanity, to the nullity of this Text (Surely men altogether, high and
low, are lighter then vanity.) For, man is not only a contributary Creature,
but a total Creature; He does not only make one, but he is all; He is not a
piece of the world, but the world it self; and next to the glory of God, the
reason why there is a world.

But we must not determine this consideration here, That man is something, a
great thing, Quid home erga hominem.
a noble Creature, if we refer him to his end, to his interest in God, to his
reversion in heaven; But when we consider man in his way, man amongst men, man
is not nothing, not unable to assist man, not unfit to be relied upon by man;
for, even in that respect also, God has made Hominem homini Deum, He has made
one man able to do the offices of God to another, in procuring his
regeneration here, and advancing his salvation hereafter; Obad. 21.
As he says, Saviors shall come up on Mount Sion; which is the Church.
Neither has God determined that power of assisting others, in the Character of
Priesthood only, (that the Priest should be a god, that is, do the offices
and the work of God to the people, by delivering salvation unto them) but he
has also made the Prince, and the secular Magistrate, a god, that is able to
do the offices, and the works of God, not only to the people, but to the
Priest himself, to sustain him, yea, and to countenance, and favor, and
protect him too, in the execution and exercise of his priestly office; As we
see in the first plantation of those two great Cedars, The Secular, and the
Ecclesiastical Power, (which, that they might always agree like brethren, God
planted at first in those two brethren, Moses and Aaron) There, though Moses
were the temporal, and Aaron the spiritual Magistrate, Exodus 7.1.
yet God says to Moses, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, (but not only to
Pharaoh) but Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet; for, (as he had said
before) Thou shall be to him in stead of a God. Exodus 4.16.
So useful, so necessary is man to man, as that the Priest, who is of God,
incorporated in God, subsists also by man; for, Isidor.
Principes hujus seculi rationem reddituri sunt, The Princes of this world must
give God an account, Propter Ecclesiam, quam a Christo tuendam susceperunt, for
that Church, which Christ has committed to their protection. In spiritual
difficulties, and for spiritual duties, God sends us to the Priest; but to
such a Priest as is a man; and (as our comfort is expressed) A Priest which was
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
and was in all points tempted like as we are: for the businesses of this
world, Rights, and Titles, and Proprieties, Deuteronomy. 16.18.
and Possessions, God sends us still to the Judge; (Judges and officers shall
thou make in all thy gates) Judges to try between man and man; And the sword in
battle tryes between State and State, Prince and Prince; And therefore God
commands and directs the levying of men to that purpose, in many places of the
history of his people; Judge. 6.
particularly God appoints Gideon to take a certain proportion of the army, a
certain number of Soldiers. Exodus 32.26.
And in another place, there goes out a press for Soldiers from Moses mouth;
He presses them upon their holy allegiance to God, when he says, Who is on the
Lords side, let him come unto me. So, in infirmities, in sicknesses of the
body, Jer. 8.22.
we ask with the Prophet, Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician
there? God does not reprove Asa for seeking of help of the Physicians; 2 Chro.
16.12.
but the increpation lies only upon this, That he sought to the Physician, and
not to the Lord. God sends man to the Priest, to the Prince, to the Judge, to
the Physician, to the Soldier, and so, (in other places) to the Merchant, and
to cunning Artificers, (as in the building of the Temple) that all that man
needs might be communicated to man by man.

So that still, simply, absolutely, unconditionally, we cannot say, Surely men,
men altogether, high or low, or mean, all are less then vanity. And surely
they that pervert and detort such words as these, to such a use, and argue from
thence, Man is nothing, no more then a worm or a fly, and therefore what needs
this solemn consideration of man's actions, it is all one what he does, for all
his actions, and himself too are nothing; They do this but to justify or
excuse their own laziness in this world, in passing on their time, without
taking any Calling, embracing any profession, contributing any thing to the
spiritual edification, or temporal sustentation of other men. But take the
words, as the Holy Ghost intends them, comparatively, what man compared with
God, or what man considered without God, can do any thing for others, or for
himself? When the Apostle says, That all the world is but dung, when the
Prophet says, Phil. 3.8. Esaias 40.15. 2 Cor. 12.11. 1 Cor. 1.21.
That all the Nations of the world are less then nothing, when the Apostle
says even of himself, that he is nothing, all this is nothing in comparison
of that expression in the same Apostle, That even the preaching of the Gospel
is foolishness, That that which is the favor of life unto life, Gods own
Ordinance, Preaching, is but foolishness; Let it be a Paul that plants, and an
Apollo that waters, if God give not increase, all is but frivolousnesse, but
foolishness; And therefore boldly, confidently, uncontroulably we may proceed
to the propositions of our Text, which constitute our second part, Man, any
man, every man, all men, collectively, distributively, considered so,
(comparatively with God, or privatively without God) is but a lie, but vanity,
less then vanity.

To make our best use of the words, 2 Part. Surely.
(as our translation exhibits them) we make our entrance, with this word of
confidence, and infallibility, which only becomes the holy Ghost, in his
asseverations, and in which he establishes the propositions following; Surely,
surely men of low degree, and as surely, men of high, and, surely still all men
together, are lighter then vanity. Men deliver their assertions otherwise
modified, and under other qualifications. They obtrude to us miraculous
doctrines of Transubstantiation, and the like, upon a possibility only; It may
be done, say they, It is possible, God can do it. But that is far from the
assuredness of the Holy Ghost, Surely it is so; Chrysoft.
for Asylum hareticorum, est omnipotentia Dei, is excellently said, and by more
then one of the Fathers, The omnipotence of God is the Sanctuary of Heretics,
Thither they fly, to countenance any such error; This God can do, why should
you not believe it? Men proceed in their asseverations farther then so, from
this possibility to a probability; It will abide argument, it has been
disputed in the School, and therefore is probable; why should not you believe
it? And so they offer us the doctrine of the immaculate conception of the
blessed Virgin without Original sin; But this probability reaches not to
this assuredness of our text, surely. They will go farther then this
probability, to a verisimilitude, it is more then merely possible, more then
fairly probable, it is likely to be so; some of the ancient Fathers have
thought so; and then, why should not you believe it? and so they offer us
prayer for the dead. Farther then this verisimilitude they go too; They go to
a Pie creditur, It may be piously believed, and it is fit to believe it,
because it may assist and exalt devotion to think so; And then why should you
not believe it? And so they offer us the worship of Images and Relics (...)
But still, all this comes short of our assuredness, Surely, undoubtedly,
undisputably it is so.

And when the Roman Church would needs counter ^it the language of the Holy
Ghost, and pronounce this surenesse upon so many new Articles in the Council
of Trent, it has not prospered well with them; for we all know, they have
repented that forwardness since, and wished they had not determined so many
particulars to be matter of fait^^ because after such a determination by a
Council, they have bound themselves not to recede from those doctrines, how
unmaintenable soever they be in themselves, or how inconvenient soever they
fall out to be to them. And therefore we see, that in all the solicitations
that can be used, even by Princes, to whom they are most affected, they will
not come now to pronounce so surely, to determine so positively upon diverse
points that rest yet in perplexity amongst them. Which has raised so many
commotions in the kingdom of Spain, and put more then one of their later
Kings, to send diverse Ambassages to Rome, to solicit a clear declaration in
that point, but could never, nor can yet attain it, that is, The immaculate
conception of the blessed Virgin without Original sin. So also, for the
obligation that the laws of secular Magistrates lay upon the Conscience, so
also for the Concurrence of Grace, and Free Will, and diverse others; in which
they will not be drawn to this, Surely, to determine and declare of either
side; for, indeed that is the language of the Holy Ghost.

It has been observed amongst Philosophers, that Plato speaks probably, and
Aristotle positively; Platoes way is, It may be thus, and Aristotle's, It must
be thus. The like has been noted amongst Divines, between Calvin, and
Melanchton; Calvin will say, Videtur, It seems to be thus, Melanchton, It can
be no otherwise but thus. But the best men are but Problematicall, Only the
Holy Ghost is Dogmaticall; Only he subscribes this surely, and only he seals
with Infallibility. Our dealings are appointed to be in yea, yea, 2 Cor. 1.20.
Rev. 3.14.
and nay, nay, and no farther; But all the promises of God are yea, and Amen,
that is, surely, verily; for that is his Name; These things says The Amen, He
that is Amen. And it is not (I hope) an impertinent note, That that Evangelist
S. John, who considers the Divinity of Christ, more then the other Evangelists
do, does evermore, constantly, without any change, double that which was
Christ's ordinary asseveration, Amen. As often as the other Evangelists mention it
in Christ's mouth, still they express it with one Amen, verily I say; S. John
always, Amen, Amen, verily, verily, it is thus and thus. The nearer we come to
the consideration of God, the farther we are removed from all contingencies,
and all inclination to Error, and the more is this Amen, verily, surely,
multiplied and established unto us.

It is in doctrines and opinions, as it is in designs and purposes; Go to,
(says the Prophet, by way of reprehension) Go to, you that say, we will go
to such a City, and trade thus and thus there, etc. So, go to, you that
pronounce upon every invention, and Tradition of your own, a Quicunque vult
salvus esse, Whosoever will be saved, must believe this, and clogge every
problematicall proposition with an Anathema, Cursed be he, Excommunicated he
that thinks the contrary to this; Go to you, that make matters of faith of the
passions of men. So also, go to you that proceed and continue in your sins,
and say, Surely I shall have time enough to repent hereafter. Go to you that
in a spiritual and irreligious melancholy and diffidence in Gods mercy, say,
Surely the Lord has locked up his mercy from me, surely I shall never see that
Sun more, never receive, never feel beam of his mercy more, but pass
through this darkness into a worse. This word, surely, in such cases, in such
senses, is not your mothers tongue, not the language of the Christian Church.
She teaches you, to condition all in Christ; In him you are enabled to do all
things, and without him nothing. But absolutely, unconditionally, this surely
is appropriated to the propositions, to the assertions of God himself; And
some of those follow in this text.

Now that which the Holy Ghost presents here upon this assuredness, Comparatio
Divitis and Pauperis.
is, That men of low degree are vanity, and that men of high degree are a lie;
These are both sure, and alike sure. It is true that it constitutes a Problem,
that it admits a Discourse, it will abide a debatement, whether men of high
degree, or of low degree be worst; whether riches or poverty, (both considered
in a great measure, very rich, and very poor) Prosperity or Adversity occasion
most sins. Though God call upon us in every leaf of the Scripture, to pity
the poor, and relieve the poor, and ground his last Judgment upon our works
of mercy, Mat. 25.34.
(Because you have fed and clothed the poor, inherit the kingdom) yet, as the
rich and the poor stand before us now, (as it were in Judgment) as we inquire
and hear evidence, which stato^^ most obnoxious, and open to most sins, we
embrace, and apply to our selves that law, Exodus 23.3. Levit. 19.15.
Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his cause; And (as it is repeated)
Thou shall not respect the person of the poor in Judgment.

There is then a poverty, which, without all question, is the direct way to
heaven; but that is spiritual; Mat. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit. This poverty is humility, it is not beggary.
A rich man may have it, and a beggar may be without it. The Wiseman found not
this poverty, Ecclus 25.2.
(not humility) in every poor man. He found three sorts of men, whom his soul
hated; And one of the three, was a poor man that is proud. And when the
Prophet said of Jerusalem in her afflictions, Esaias 51.21.
Paupercula es and ebria, Thou art poor, and miserable, and yet drunk, though
(as he adds there) it were not with wine, (which is now, in our days an
ordinary refuge of men of all sorts, in all sadnesses and crosses to relieve
themselves upon wine and strong drink, which are indeed strong illusions) yet,
though Jerusalems drunkenness were not with wine, it was worse; It was a
staggering, a vertiginousnesse, an ignorance, a blindness, a not discerning
the ways to God; which is the worst drunkenness, and falls often upon the
poor and afflicted, That their poverty and affliction staggers them, and damps
them in their recourse to God, so far, as that they know not, That they are
miserable, and wretched, and poor, and blind, Revel. 3.17.
and raked. The Holy Ghost always makes the danger of the poor great, as well
as of the rich. The rich man's wealth is his strong City. There is his fault,
his confidence in that; Pro. 10.15.
But Pavor pauperum, The destruction of the poor is his poverty; There is his
fault, Desperation under it. Solomon presents them, as equally dangerous, Give
me neither poverty, nor riches. Pro. 30.8. Ruth. 3.10.
So does Booz to Ruth, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter, in as much as
thou followedst not young men, whether poor, or rich. That which Booz intended
there, Incontinency, and all vices that arise immediately out of the corruption
of nature, and are not induced by other circumstances, have as much inclination
from poverty, as from riches. May we not say, more? I doubt we may. He must be
a very sanctified man, whom extreme poverty, and other afflictions, do not
decline toward a jealousy, and a suspicion, and a distrusting of God; And
then, the sins that bend toward desperation, are so much more dangerous, then
those that bend toward presumption, that he that presumes, has still mercy in
his contemplation, He does not think, that he needs no mercy, but that mercy
is easily had; He believes there is mercy, he doubts not of that; But the
despairing man imagines a cruelty, an unmercifulness in God, and destroys the
very nature of God himself. Riches is the Metaphor, in which, the Holy Ghost
has delighted to express God and Heaven to us; Despise not the riches of his
goodness, says the Apostle; And again, Romans 2.4.11.33. Ephesians. 3.8. ver. 16.
O the depth of the riches of his wisdom; And so, after, The unsearchable
riches of Christ; And for the consummation of all, The riches of his Glory,
Gods goodness toward us in general, our Religion in the way, his Grace here,
his Glory hereafter, are all represented to us in Riches. With poverty God
ordinarily accompanies his comminations; he threatens feebleness, and war,
and captivity, and poverty every where, but he never threatens men with riches.

Ordinary poverty, (that is a difficulty, with all their labors, and industry
to sustain their family, and the necessary duties of their place) is a shrewd,
and a slippery tentation. But for that street-beggery, which is become a
Calling, (for Parents bring up their children to it, nay they do almost take
prentises to it, some expert beggars teach others what they shall say, how they
shall look, how they shall lie, how they shall cry) for these, whom our laws
call Incorrigible, I must say of them (in a just accommodation of our Saviors
words, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, Matt. 25.26.
and to cast it to dogs) It is not meet, that this vermin should devour any of
that, which belongs to them who are truly poor. Neither is there any measure,
any proportion of riches, that exposes man naturally to so much sin, as this
kind of beggary does. Rich men forget, or neglect the duties of their
Baptism; but of these, how many are there, that were never baptized? Rich men
sleep out Sermons, but these never come to Church: Rich men are negligent in
the practice, but these are ignorant in all knowledge.

It would require a longer disquisition, then I can afford to it now, whether
Riches, or Poverty (considered in lesser proportions, ordinary riches, ordinary
poverty) open us to more, and worse sins; But consider them in the highest and
in the lowest, abundant riches, beggarly poverty, and it will scarce admit
doubt, but that the incorrigible vagabond is farther from all ways of
goodness, then the corruptest rich man is. And therefore labor we all
earnestly in the ways of some lawful calling, that we may have our portion of
this world by good means. For first, the advantages of doing good to others in
a real relief of their wants, is in the rich only, whereas the best way of a
good poor man, to do good to others, is but an exemplary patience, to
catechize others by his suffering; And then, all degrees of poverty are
dangerous and slippery, even to a murmuring against God, or an invading of the
possessions, and goods of other men, but especially the lowest, the desperate
degree of beggary, and then especially, when we cannot say it is inflicted by
the hand of God, but contracted by our own laziness, or our own wastfulnesse.

This is a problematicall, a disputable case, Whether riches or poverty
occasion most sins. And because on both sides there arise good doctrines of
edification, Men of low degree.
I have thus far willingly stopped upon that disputable consideration. But now,
that which we receive here, upon David's, upon the Holy Ghosts security, Surely
it is thus, It is surely so, is this, That we shall be deceived, if we put our
trust in men; for, what sort of men would we trust? Surely men of low degree
are vanity. And this, if it be taken of particular men, needs no proving, no
illustrating, no remembering. Every man sees and acknowledges, that to rely upon
a man of no power, of no place, no blood, no fortune, no friends, no favor, is
a vanity, Surely men of low degree are vanity. The first younger brother that
was borne in the world, because he was less then another, is called by the
very name of vanity; The eldest brother Cain signifies possession, but Abel is
vanity.

But take it of a whole body of such men, Men of low degree, and it is so too;
the Applause of the people is vanity, Popularity is vanity. At how dear a rate
does that man buy the peoples affections, that pays his own head for their
hats? How cheaply does he sell his Princes favor, that has nothing for it,
but the peoples breath? And what age does not see some examples of so ill
merchants of their own honors and lives too? How many men, upon confidence of
that flattering gale of wind, the breath and applause of the people, have
taken in their anchors, (that is, departed from their true, and safe hold, The
right of the Law, and the favor of the Prince) and as soon as they hoysed
their sails, (that is, entered into any by-action) have found the wind in their
teeth, that is, Those people whom they trusted in, armed against them. And as
it is in Civil, and Secular, so it is in Ecclesiastical, and Spiritual
things too. How many men, by a popular hunting after the applause of the
people, in their manner of preaching, and humouring them in their distempers,
have made themselves incapable of preferment in the Church where they took
their Orders, and preached themselves into a necessity of running away into
foreign parts, that are receptacles of seditious and schismatic
Separatists, and have been put there, to learn some trade, and become
Artificers for their sustentation? The same people that welcomed Christ, from
the Mount of Olives, into Jerusalem, Matt. 21.9.
upon Sunday, with their Hosannaes to the Son of David, upon Friday mocked
him in Jerusalem, with their Hail King of the Jews, and blew him out of
Jerusalem to Golgotha, with the pestilent breath, with the tempestuous
whirlwind of their Crucifige's. And of them, Matt. 10.25.
who have called the Master Beelzebub, what shall any servant look for? Surely
men of low degree are vanity.

And then, High degree
under the same oath, and asseveration, Surely, as surely as the other, men of
high degree are a lie. Does David mean these men, whom he calls a lie, to be
any less then those whom he called vanity? Less then vanity, then
emptiness, then nothing, nothing can be; And low, and high are to this
purpose, and in this consideration, (compared with God, or considered without
God) equally nothing. He that has the largest patrimony, and space of earth,
in the earth, must hear me say, That all that was nothing; And if he ask, But
what was this whole Kingdom, what all Europe, what all the World? It was all,
not so much as another nothing, but all one and the same nothing as thy
dunghill was. But yet the Holy Ghost has been pleased to vary the phrase
here, and to call Men of high degree, not vanity, but a lie, because the poor,
men of low degree, in their condition promise no assistance, feed not men with
hopes, and therefore cannot be said to lie, but in the condition of men of high
degree, who are of power, there is a tacit promise, a natural and inherent
assurance of protection, and assistance, flowing from them. For, the Magistrate
cannot say, That he never promised me Justice, never promised me Protection;
for in his assuming that place, he made me that promise. I cannot say, that I
never promised my Parish, my service; for in my Induction, I made them that
promise, and if I perform it not, I am a lie; for so this word Chasab (which
we translate a lie) is frequently used in the Scriptures, for that which is
defective in the duty it should perform; Thou shall be a spring of water,
(says God in Esaias) Cujus aquae non mentiuntur, mhose waters never lie, Esaias
58.11.
that is, never dry, never fail.

So then, when men of high degree do not perform the duties of their places,
then they are a lie of their own making; And when I over-magnifie them in
their place, flatter them, humor them, ascribe more to them, expect more from
them, rely more upon them, then I should, then they are a lie of my making. But
whether the lie be theirs, That they fear greater men then themselves, and so
prevaricate in their duties; Or the lie be mine, that canonize them and make
them my God, they, and I shall be disappointed; for, Surely men of high degree
are a lie. But we are upon a Sermon, not upon a Satyr, therefore we pass from
this.

And, Mediocrity.
for all this, there may seem to be room left for the Middle-state, for a
mediocrity; when it is not so low as to be made the subject of oppression, nor
so high as to be made the object of ambition, when it is neither exposed to
scorn and contempt, nor to envy, and undermining, may we not then trust upon,
not rest in such a condition? Indeed, this mediocrity seems (and justly) the
safest condition; for this, and this only enjoyes it self: The lazy man gets
not up to it; The stirring man stays not at it, but is gone beyond it. From
our first Themes at School, to our Texts in the Pulpit, we continue our
praising and persuading of this mediocrity. A man may have too much of any
thing; Anima saturata, A full soul will tread honey under his seete; Prove.
27.7. Ier. 10.14.
He may take in knowledge till he be ignorant; Let the Prophet Jeremy give the
Rule, Stultus factus est omnis homo a scientia, Every man becomes a fool by
knowledge, by overweening, and over-valuing his knowledge; And let Adam be the
example of this Rule, His eyes were opened by eating the fruit, and he knew so
much, as he was ashamed of it; Let the Apostle be the Physician, the moderator,
Sapere ad sobrietatem, not to dive into secrets, Romans 12.3.
and unrevealed mysteries. There is enough of this doctrine involved in the
fable, Acteon saw more then he should have seen, and perished. There is
abundantly enough expressed in the Oracle of Truth, Vzza was over-zealous in an
office that appertained not to him, 2 Samuel 6.6.
in assisting the Arc, and suffered for that.

We may quickly exceed a mediocrity, even in the praise of Mediocrity. But all
our diligence will scarce find it out. What is mediocrity? Or where is it? In
the Hierarchy of the Roman Church they never thought of this mediocrity; They
go very high, and very low, but there is no mean station; I mean no
denomination of any Order from meannesse, from mediocrity. In one degree you
find embroydered shoes, for Kings to kiss, and in another degree bare feet;
we find an Order of the Society of Jesus; and that is very high, for, Society
implies community, partnership; And we find low descents, Minorits, men less
then others, And Minims, least of all men; and lower then all them, Nullans,
men that call themselves, Nothing; And truly, this Order, best of all others
has answered and justified the name, for, very soon, they came to nothing.
We find all extremes amongst them, even in their names, but none denominated
from this mediocrity.

But to pass from names to the thing; indeed what is Mediocrity? where is it?
Is it the same thing as Competency? But what is competency? or where is that?
Is it that which is sufficient for thy present degree? perchance thy present
degree is not sufficient for thee; Thy charge perchance, perchance thy parts
and abilities, or thy birth and education may require a better degree. God
produced plants in Paradise therefore, that they might grow; God has planted
us in this world, that we might grow; and he that does not endeavor that by
all lawful means, is inexcusable, as well as he that pursues unlawful. But,
if I come to imagine such a mediocrity, such a competency, such a sufficiency
in my self, as that I may rest in that, that I think I may ride out all
storms, all dis-favours, that I have enough of mine own, wealth, health, or
moral constancy, if any of these decay, this is a verier vanity, then trusting
in men of low degree, and a verier lie, then men of high degree; for, this is
to trust to our selves; Habbak. 1.16.
this is a sacrificing to our own nets, our own industry, our own wisdom,
our own fortune; And of all the Idolatries of the Heathen, who made Gods of
every thing they saw or imagined, of every thing, in, and between Heaven and
hell, we read of no man that sacrificed to himself. Indeed no man flatters me
so dangerously, as I flatter my self, no man wounds me so desperately, as I
wound my self; And therefore, since this which we call Mediocrity, and
Competency is conditioned so, that it is enough to subsist alone, without
relation to others, dependency upon others, fear from others, induces a
confidence, a relying upon my self; As, that which we imagine to be the middle
region of the air, is the coldest of all, So this imagined mediocrity, that
induces a confidence in our selves, is the weakest rest, the coldest comfort of
all, and makes me a lie to my self. Therefore may the Prophet well spread, and
safely extend his asseveration, his Surely, upon all, high, and low, and mean;
Surely to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

Here then, upon a full enumeration of all parts, the Prophet concludes upon
all. Lighter then vanity.
If therefore thou have the favor of great ones, the applause of the people,
confidence in thy self, in an instant, the power of those great ones may be
overthrown, or their favor to thee withdrawn from thee, (and so, that
bladder is pricked, upon which thou swommest) The applause of the people may be
hushed and silenced, (either they would not, or they dare not magnify thee)
And, thine own constancy may be turned into a dejection of spirit, and
consternation of all thy faculties. Put all together, (which falls out seldom,
that any man can do so) but if he can do that, (which is the best state of man,
that can be imagined in this world, that he has all these together, the favor
of High and low, and of himself, that is, his own testimony in his
conscience, (though perchance an erring, a mistaking conscience) yet, the
Prophet had delivered the same assurance before (even of that state of man,
which is rather imagined, then ever possessed) Surely every man, Psalm. 39.5.
at his best state, is altogether vanity; And here, he adds, lighter then
vanity. Vanity is nothing, but there is a condition worse then nothing.
Confidence in the things, or persons of this world, but most of all, a
confidence in our selves, will bring us at last to that state, wherein we would
feign be nothing, and cannot. But yet, we have a balance in our text; And all
these are but put together in one balance. In the other scale there is
something put to, in comparison whereof all this world is so light. God does
not leave our great and noble faculty, and affection of hope, and trust, and
confidence, without something to direct it self upon, and rectify it self
in. He does not; for, for that he proposes himself; The words immediately
before the text, are, God is a refuge; and in comparison of him, To be laid in
the balance, Surely they are altogether lighter then vanity.

So then, Deus omnia. Ier. 17.5.
it is not enough not to trust in the flesh (for, for that, Cursed be man, that
trusted in man, or makes flesh his arm; Their flesh cannot secure thee,
neither is thine own flesh brass, Job 6.12. Mat. 16.17.
that thou can endure the vexations of this world, neither can flesh and
blood reveal unto thee the things of the next world) It is not enough not to
trust in flesh, but thou must trust in that that is Spirit. And when thou art
to direct thy trust upon him, who is spirit, the spirit of power, and of
consolation, stop not, stray not, divert not upon evil spirits, to seek
advancement, or to seek knowledge from them, nor upon good spirits, the
glorious Saints of GOD in Heaven, to seek salvation from them, nor upon thine
own spirit, in an over-valuation of thy purity, or thy merits. For, there is a
pestilent pride in an imaginary humility, and an infectious foulness in an
imaginary purity; but turn only to the only invisible and immortal God, who
turns to thee, in so many names and notions of power, and consolation, in this
one Psalm. In the last verse but one of this Psalm, David says, God bath
spoken once, and twice have I heard him. God has said enough at once; but
twice, in this Psalm, has he repeated this, in the second, and in the sixth
verse, He only is my Rock, and my Salvation, and my Defense, And, (as it is
enlarged in the seventh verse) my Refuge, and my Glory. If my Refuge, what
enemy can pursue me? If my Defense, what tentation shall wound me? If my Rock,
what storm shall shake me? If my Salvation, what melancholy shall deject me?
If my Glory, what calumny shall defame me?

I must not stay you now, to infuse into you, the several consolations of
these several names, and notions of God toward you. But, go your several
ways home, and every soul take with him that name, which may minister most
comfort unto him. Let him that is pursued with any particular tentation, invest
God, as God is a Refuge, a Sanctuary. Let him that is buffeted with the
messenger of Satan, battered with his own concupiscence, receive God, as God
is his Defenoe and target. Let him that is shaked with perplexities in his
understanding, or scruples in his conscience, lay hold upon God, as God is his
Rock, and his anchor. Let him that has any diffident jealousy or suspicion of
the free and full mercy of God, apprehend God, as God is his Salvation; And him
that walks in the ingloriousnesse and contempt of this world, contemplate God,
as God is his Glory. Any of these notions is enough to any man, but God is all
these, and all else, that all souls can think, to every man. We shut up both
these Considerations, (man should not, Mic. ult. 5.
(that is not all) God should be relied upon) with that of the Prophet, Trust
ye not in a friend, put not your confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy
mouth from her that lies in thy bosom; (there is the exclusion of trust in
man) and then he adds in the seventh verse, because it stands thus between man
and man, I will look unto the Lord, I will look to the God of my Salvation,
my God will hear me.

SERMON. LXVI. The second of my Prebend Sermons upon my five Psalms. Preached at
S. Paul's, January 29. 1625.
PSALM. 63.7. Because thou have been my help, Therefore in the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice.


THe Psalms are the Manna of the Church. Wisd. 16.20.
As Manna tasted to every man like that that he liked best, so do the Psalms
minister Instruction, and satisfaction, to every man, in every emergency and
occasion. David was not only a clear Prophet of Christ himself, but a
Prophet of every particular Christian; He foretells what I, what any shall do,
and suffer, and say. And as the whole book of Psalms is Oleum effusum, Cant.
1.3.
(as the Spouse speaks of the name of Christ) an Ointment powered out upon all
sorts of sores, A Searcloth that souples all bruises, A Balm that searches all
wounds; so are there some certain Psalms, that are Imperial Psalms, that
command over all affections, and spread themselves over all occasions,
Catholic, universal Psalms, that apply themselves to all necessities. This
is one of those; for, of those Constitutions which are called Apostolical,
Constitut. Apostol.
one is, That the Church should meet every day, to sing this Psalm. And
accordingly, S. Chrysostom testifies, That it was decreed, and ordained by the
Primitive Fathers, Chrysostom.
that no day should pass without the public singing of this Psalm. Under
both these obligations, (those ancient Constitutions, called the Apostles, and
those ancient Decrees made by the primitive Fathers) belongs to me, who have my
part in the service of Gods Church, the especial meditation, and
recommendation of this Psalm. And under a third obligation too, That it is one
of those five psalms, the daily rehearsing whereof, is enjoined to me, by the
Constitutions of this Church, as five other are to every other person of our
body. As the whole book is Manna, so these five Psalms are my Gomer, which I
am to fill and empty every day of this Manna.

Now as the spirit and soul of the whole book of Psalms is contracted into
this psalm, so is the spirit and soul of this whole psalm contracted into
this verse. Divisie.
The key of the psalm, (as S. Hierome calls the Titles of the psalms) tells
us, Hieron.
that David uttered this psalm, when he was in the wilderness of Iudab; There
we see the present occasion that moved him; And we see what was passed between
God and him before, in the first clause of our Text; (Because thou have been my
help) And then we see what was to come, by the rest, (Therefore in the shadow
of thy wings will I rejoice.) So that we have here the whole compass of Time,
Past, Present, and Future; and these three parts of Time, shall be at this
time, the three parts of this Exercise; first, what David's distress put him
upon for the present; and that lies in the Context; secondly, how David built
his assurance upon that which was past; (Because thou have been my help) And
thirdly, what he established to himself for the future, (Therefore in the
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.) First, His distress in the Wilderness,
his present estate carried him upon the memory of that which God had done for
him before. And the Remembrance of that carried him upon that, of which he
assured himself after. Fix upon God any where, and you shall find him a
Circle; He is with you now, when you fix upon him; He was with you before, for
he brought you to this fixation; and he will be with you hereafter, for He is
yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
and to day; and the same for ever.

For David's present condition, who was now in a banishment, in a persecution in
the Wilderness of Judah, (which is our first part) we shall only insist upon
that, (which is indeed spread over all the psalm to the Text, and ratified in
the Text) That in all those temporal calamities David was only sensible of
his spiritual loss; It grieved him not that he was kept from Saul's Court, but
that he was kept from Gods Church. For when he says, Ver. 1.
by way of lamentation, That he was in a dry and thirsty land, where no water
was, he expresses what penury, what barrenness, what drought and what thirst
he meant; To see thy power, Ver. 2. Ver. 5. Ver. 3.
and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. For there, my soul
shall be satisfied as with marrow, and with satnesse, and there, my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips. And in some few considerations conducing to
this, That spiritual losses are incomparably heavier then temporal, and that
therefore, The Restitution to our spiritual happiness, or the continuation of
it, is rather to be made the subject of our prayers to God, in all pressures
and distresses, then of temporal, we shall determine that first part. And for
the particular branches of both the other parts, (The Remembering of Gods
benefits past, And the building of an assurance for the future, upon that
Remembrance) it may be fitter to open them to you, anon when we come to handle
them, then now. Proceed we now to our first part, The comparing of temporal
and spiritual afflictions.

In the way of this Comparison, 1 Part. Afflictio universalis. 2 Cor. 4.17.
falls first the Consideration of the universality of afflictions in general,
and the inevitableness thereof. It is a blessed Meraphore, that the Holy Ghost
has put into the mouth of the Apostle, Pondus Gloriae, That our afflictions
are but light, because there is an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory
attending them. If it were not for that exceeding weight of glory, no other
weight in this world could turn the scale, or weigh down those infinite
waights of afflictions that oppress us here. There is not only Pestis valde
gravis, (the pestilence grows heavy upon the Land) but there is Musca valde
gravis, Exodus 9.3.8.24.
God calls in but the fly, to vex Egypt, and even the fly is a heavy burden
unto them. Job 7.20. 2 Samuel 14.26. Lament. 3.7.
It is not only Job that complains, That he was a burden to himself, but even
Absaloms hair was a burden to him, till it was polled. It is not only Jeremy
that complains, Aggravavit compedes, That God had made their fetters and their
chains heavy to them, but the workmen in harvest complain, That God had made a
fair day heavy unto them, Mat. 20.12. Pro. 27.3.
(We have borne the heat, and the burden of the day.) Sand is heavy, says
Solomon; And how many suffer so? under a sand-hill of crosses, daily, hourly
afflictions, that are heavy by their number, if not by their single weight? And
a stone is heavy; (says he in the same place) And how many suffer so? How
many, without any former preparatory cross, or comminatory, or commonitory
cross, even in the midst of prosperity, and security, fall under some one
stone, some grind-stone, some mil-stone, some one insupportable cross that
ruins them? But then, (says Solomon there) A fools anger is heavier then
both; And how many children, and servants, and wives suffer under the anger,
and morosity, and peevishness, and jealousy of foolish Masters, and Parents,
and Husbands, though they must not say so? David and Solomon have cried out,
That all this world is vanity, and levity; And (God knows) all is weight, and
burden, and heaviness, and oppression; And if there were not a weight of
future glory to counterpoyse it, we should all sink into nothing.

I ask not Mary Magdalen, whether lightness were not a burden; (for sin is
certainly, sensibly a burden) But I ask Susanna whether even chaste beauty were
not a burden to her; And I ask Joseph whether personal comeliness were not a
burden to him. I ask not Dives, who perished in the next world, the question;
but I ask them who are made examples of Solomon's Rule, Eccles. 5.13.
of that sore evil, (as he calls it) Riches kept to the owners thereof for
their hurt, whether Riches be not a burden.

All our life is a continual burden, yet we must not groan; A continual
squeasing, yet we must not pant; And as in the tenderness of our childhood, we
suffer, and yet are whipped if we cry, so we are complained of, if we complain,
and made delinquents if we call the times ill. And that which adds weight to
weight, and multiplies the sadness of this consideration, is this, That still
the best men have had most laid upon them. As soon as I hear God say, that he
has found an upright man, that fears God, and eschews evil, in the next
lines I find a Commission to Satan, to bring in Sabeans and Chaldeans upon his
cattle, and servants, and fire and tempest upon his children, and loathsome
diseases upon himself. As soon as I hear God say, That he has found a man
according to his own heart, I see his sons ravish his daughters, and then
murder one another, Mat. 3.17.
and then rebel against the Father, and put him into straites for his life. As
soon as I hear God testify of Christ at his Baptism, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, I find that Son of his led up by the
Spirit, to be tempted of the Devil. Matt. 4.1. Matt. 17.5.
And after I hear God ratify the same testimony again, at his
Transfiguration, (This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased) I find
that beloved Son of his, deserted, abandoned, and given over to Scribes, and
Pharisees, and Publicans, and Herodians, and Priests, and Soldiers, and
people, and Judges, and witnesses, and executioners, and he that was called the
beloved Son of God, and made partaker of the glory of heaven, in this world,
in his Transfiguration, is made now the Sewer of all the corruption, of all the
sins of this world, as no Son of God, but a mere man, as no man, but a
contemptible worm. As though the greatest weakness in this world, were man,
and the greatest fault in man were to be good, man is more miserable then other
creatures, and good men more miserable then any other men.

But then there is Pondus Gloriae, An exceeding weight of eternal glory,
Afflictio spiritualis.
and that turns the scale; for as it makes all worldly prosperity as dung, so
it makes all worldly adversity as feathers. And so it had need; for in the
scale against it, there are not only put temporal afflictions, but spiritual
too; And to these two kinds, we may accommodate those words, He that falls upon
this stone, (upon temporal afflictions) may be bruised, Matt. 21.44.
broken, But he upon whom that stone falls, (spiritual afflictions) is in
danger to be ground to powder. And then, the great, and yet ordinary danger is,
That these spiritual afflictions grow out of temporal; Murmuring, and
diffidence in God, and obduration, out of worldly calamities; And so against
nature, the fruit is greater and heavier then the Tree, spiritual heavier then
temporal afflictions.

They who write of Natural story, propose that Plant for the greatest wonder
in nature, Plin. l. 27.11. Lithospermus.
which being no firmer then a bull-rush, or a reed, produces and bears for the
fruit thereof no other but an entire, and very hard stone. That temporal
affliction should produce spiritual stoninesse, and obduration, is unnatural,
yet ordinary. Therefore does God propose it, as one of those greatest
blessings, which he multiplies upon his people, I will take away your stony
hearts, and give you hearts of flesh; And, Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26. Plin. and
Plutar.
Lord let me have a fleshly heart in any sense, rather then a stony heart. We
find mention amongst the observers of rarities in Nature, of hairy hearts,
hearts of men, that have been overgrowne with hair; but of petrified hearts,
hearts of men grown into stone, we read not; for this petrefaction of the
heart, this stupefaction of a man, is the last blow of Gods hand upon the heart
of man in this world. Revel. 16.
Those great afflictions which are powered out of the Vials of the seven Angels
upon the world, are still accompanied with that heavy effect, that that
affliction hardened them. They were scorched with heats and plagues, by the
fourth Angel, and it follows, They blasphemed the name of God, and repented
not, ver. 9.
to give him glory. Darkness was induced upon them by the fifth Angel, and it
follows, ver. 11.
They blasphemed the God of heaven, and repented not of their deeds. And from
the seventh Angel there fell hailestones of the weight of talents, ver. 29.
(perchance four pound weight) upon men; And yet these men had so much life
left, as to blaspheme God, out of that respect, which alone should have brought
them to glorify God, Because the plague thereof was exceeding great. And when
a great plague brings them to blaspheme, how great shall that second plague be,
that comes upon them for blaspheming?

Let me wither and wear out mine age in a discomfortable, in an unwholesome,
in a penurious prison, and so pay my debts with my bones, and recompense the
wastfulnesse of my youth, with the beggary of mine age; Let me wither in a
spittle under sharp, and foul, and in famous diseases, and so recompense the
wantonness of my youth, with that loath somnesse in mine age; yet, if God with
draw not his spiritual blessings, his Grace, his Patience, If I can call my
suffering his Doing, my passion his Action, All this that is temporal, is but
a caterpiller got into one corner of my garden, but a mill-dew fallen upon one
acre of my Corn; The body of all, the substance of all is safe, as long as the
soul is safe. But when I shall trust to that, which we call a good spirit,
and God shall deject, and empoverish, and evacuate that spirit, when I shall
rely upon a moral constancy, and God shall shake, and enfeeble, and enervate,
destroy and demolish that constancy; when I shall think to refresh my self in
the serenity and sweet air of a good conscience, and God shall call up the
damps and vapors of hell it self, and spread a cloud of diffidence, and an
impenetrable crust of desperation upon my conscience; when health shall fly
from me, and I shall lay hold upon riches to succor me, and comfort me in my
sickness, and riches shall fly from me, and I shall snatch after favor, and
good opinion, to comfort me in my poverty; when even this good opinion-shall
leave me, and calumnies and misinformations shall prevail against me; when I
shall need peace, because there is none but thou, O Lord, that should stand for
me, and then shall find, that all the wounds that I have, come from thy hand,
all the arrows that stick in me, from thy quiver; when I shall see, that
because I have given my self to my corrupt nature, thou have changed thine;
and because I am all evil toward thee, therefore thou have given over being
good toward me; When it comes to this height, that the fever is not in the
humors, but in the spirits, that mine enemy is not an imaginary enemy, fortune,
nor a transitory enemy, malice in great persons, but a real, and an
irresistible, and an inexorable, and an everlasting enemy, The Lord of Hosts
himself, The Almighty God himself, the Almighty God himself only knows the
weight of this affliction, and except he put in that pondus gloriae, that
exceeding weight of an eternal glory, with his own hand, into the other
scale, we are waighed down, we are swallowed up, irreparably, irrevocably,
irrecoverably, irremediably.

This is the fearful depth, this is spiritual misery, to be thus fallen from
God. But was this David's case? was he fallen thus far, into a diffidence in
God? No. But the danger, the precipice, the slippery sliding into that
bottomless depth, is, to be excluded from the means of coming to God, or
staying with God; And this is that that David laments here, That by being
banished, and driven into the wilderness of Judah, he had not access to the
Sanctuary of the Lord, to sacrifice his part in the praise, and to receive his
part in the prayers of the Congregation; for Angels pass not to ends, but by
ways and means, nor men to the glory of the triumphant Church, but by
participation of the Communion of the Militant. To this note David sets his
Harp, in many, many Psalms: Sometimes, Psalm. 78.60.
that God had suffered his enemies to possess his Tabernacle, ( He for sooke
the Tabernacle of Shiloh, He delivered his strength into captivity, and his
glory into the enemies hands) But most commonly he complains, that God
disabled him from coming to the Sanctuary. In which one thing he had summed up
all his desires, all his prayers, ( One thing have I desired of the Lord, Psalm.
27.4.
that will I look after; That I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple) His vehement desire of this, Psalm. 42.2.
he expresses again, ( My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when
shall I come and appear before God?) He expresses a holy jealousy, a
religious envy, Psalm. 84.3.
even to the sparrows and swallows, (yea, the sparrow has found a house, and
the swallow a nest for her self, and where she may lay her young, Even thine
Altars, O Lord of Host, my King and my God.) Thou art my King, and my God, and
yet excludest me from that, Luke 12.7.
which thou affordest to sparrows, And are not we of more value then many
sparrows?

And as though David felt some false ease, some half-tentation, some whispering
that way, Psalm. 84.3.
That God is in the wilderness of Judah, in every place, as well as in his
Sanctuary, there is in the Original in that place, a patheticall, a vehement,
a broken expressing expressed, O thine Altars; It is true, (says David) thou
art here in the wilderness, and I may see thee here, and serve thee here, but,
O thine Altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God. When David could not come
in person to that place, yet he bent toward the Temple, Psalm. 5.7.
( In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.) Which was also Daniels
devotion; when he prayed, Dan. 6.10.
his Chamber windows were open toward Jerusalem; And so is Hezekias turning
to the wall to weep, Esa. 38.2.
and to pray in his sick bed, understood to be to that purpose, to conform,
and compose himself toward the Temple. In the place consecrated for that use,
God by Moses fixes the service, and fixes the Reward; And toward that place,
Deuteronomy. 31.11.
(when they could not come to it) does Solomon direct their devotion in the
Consecration of the Temple, 1 King. 8.44.
( when they are in the wars, when they are in Captivity, and pray toward
this house, do thou hear them.) For, as in private prayer, when (according to
Christ's command) we are shut in our chamber, there is exercised Modestia fidei,
The modesty and bashfulnesse of our faith, not pressing upon God in his house:
so in the public prayers of the Congregation, there is exercised the fervor,
and holy courage of our faith, Tertull.
for Agmine facto obsidemus Deum, It is a Mustering of our forces, and a
besieging of God. Therefore does David so much magnify their blessedness,
that are in this house of God; ( Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, for
they will be still praising thee) Those that look toward it, may praise thee
sometimes, but those men who dwell in the Church, and whose whole service lies
in the Church, have certainly an advantage of all other men (who are
necessarily withdrawn by worldly businesses) in making themselves acceptable
to almighty God, if they do their duties, and observe their Church-services
aright.

Man being therefore thus subject naturally to manifold calamities,
Excommunicatio.
and spiritual calamities being incomparably heavier then temporal, and the
greatest danger of falling into such spiritual calamities being in our absence
from Gods Church, where only the outward means of happiness are ministered
unto us, certainly there is much tenderness and deliberation to be used,
before the Church doors be shut against any man. If I would not direct a
prayer to God, to excommunicate any man from the Triumphant Church, (which were
to damn him) I would not oil the key, I would not make the way too slippery
for excommunications in the Militant Church; For, that is to endanger him. I
know how distasteful a sin to God, contumacy, and contempt, and disobedience to
Order and Authority is; And I know, (and all men, that choose not ignorance,
may know) that our Excommunications (though calumniators impute them to small
things, because, many times, the first complaint is of some small matter) never
issue but upon contumacies, contempts, disobediences to the Church. But they
are real contumacies, not interpretative, apparent contumacies, not
presumptive, that excommunicate a man in Heaven; And much circumspection is
required, and (I am far from doubting it) exercised in those cases upon earth;
for, though every Excommunication upon earth be not sealed in Heaven, though it
damn not the man, yet it dammes up that man's way, by shutting him out of that
Church, through which he must go to the other; which being so great a danger,
let every man take heed of Excommunicating himself. The imperswasible Recusant
does so; The negligent Libertin does so; The fantastique Separatist does so;
The halfe-present man, he, whose body is here, and mind away, does so; And he,
whose body is but half here, his limbs are here upon a cushion, but his eyes,
his ears are not here, does so: All these are are selfe-Excommunicators, and
keep themselves from hence. Only he enjoyes that blessing, the want whereof
David deplores, that is here entirely, and is glad he is here, and glad to
find this kind of service here, that he does, and wishes no other.

And so we have done with our first Part, David's aspect, his present condition,
and his danger of falling into spiritual miseries, because his persecution,
and banishment amounted to an Excommunication, to an excluding of him from the
service of God, in the Church. And we pass, in our Order proposed at first, to
the second, his retrospect, the Consideration, what God had done for him
before, Because thou have been my help.

Through this second part, we shall pass by these three steps. First, 2 Part.
That it behooves us, in all our purposes, and actions, to propose to our selves
a copy to write by, a pattern to work by, a rule, or an example to proceed
by, Because it has been thus heretofore, says David, I will resolve upon
this course for the future. And secondly, That the copy, the pattern, the
precedent which we are to propose to our selves, is, The observation of Gods
former ways and proceedings upon us, Because God has already gone this way,
this way I will awaite his going still. And then, thirdly and lastly, in this
second part, The way that God had formerly gone with David, which was, That he
had been his help, ( Because thou have been my help.)

First then, from the meanest artificer, through the wisest Philosopher, to God
himself, Ideae.
all that is well done, or wisely undertaken, is undertaken and done according
to pre-conceptions, fore-imaginations, designs, and patterns proposed to our
selves beforehand. A Carpenter builds not a house, but that he first sets up a
frame in his own mind, what kind of house he will build. The little great
Philosopher Epictetus, would undertake no action, but he would first propose to
himself, what Socrates, or Plato, what a wise man would do in that case, and
according to that, he would proceed. Of God himself, it is safely resolved in
the School, that he never did any thing in any part of time, of which he had
not an eternal pre-conception, an eternal Idea, in himself before. Of which
Ideaes, that is, pre-conceptions, pre-determinations in God, S. Augustine
pronounces, Tanta vis in Ideis constituitur, There is so much truth, August.
and so much power in these Ideaes, as that without acknowledging them, no man
can acknowledge God, for he does not allow God Counsel, and Wisdom, and
deliberation in his Actions, but sets God on work, before he have thought what
he will do. And therefore he, and others of the Fathers read that place, Ioh.
1.3, 4.
(which we read otherwise) Quod factum est, in ipso vita erat; that is, in all
their Expositions, whatsoever is made, in time, was alive in God, before it was
made, that is, in that eternal Idea, and pattern which was in him. So also
do diverse of those Fathers read those words to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.3.
(which we read, The things that are seen, are not made of things that do
appear) Ex invisibilibus visibilia facta sunt, Things formerly invisible, were
made visible; that is, we see them not till now, till they are made, but they
had an invisible being, in that Idea, in that pre-notion, in that purpose of
God before, for ever before. Of all things in Heaven, and earth, but of
himself, God had an Idea, a pattern in himself, before he made it.

And therefore let him be our pattern for that, to work after patterns; To
propose to our selves Rules and Examples for all our actions; and the more, the
more immediately, the more directly our actions concern the service of God. If
I ask God, by what Idea he made me, God produces his Faciamus hominem ad
Imaginem nostram, That there was a concurrence of the whole Trinity, to make me
in Adam, according to that Image which they were, and according to that Idea,
which they had pre-determined. If I pretend to serve God, and he ask me for my
Idea, How I mean to serve him, shall I be able to produce none? If he ask me
an Idea of my Religion, and my opinions, shall I not be able to say, It is that
which thy word, and thy Catholic Church has imprinted in me? If he ask me
an Idea of my prayers, shall I not be able to say, It is that which my
particular necessities, that which the form prescribed by thy Son, that which
the care, and piety of the Church, in conceiving fit prayers, has imprinted in
me? If he ask me an Idea of my Sermons, shall I not be able to say, It is that
which the Analogy of Faith, the edification of the Congregation, the zeal of
thy work, the meditations of my heart have imprinted in me? But if I come to
pray or to preach without this kind of Idea, if I come to extemporall prayer,
and extemporall preaching, I shall come to an extemporall faith, and
extemporall religion; and then I must look for an extemporall Heaven, a Heaven
to be made for me; for to that Heaven which belongs to the Catholic Church, I
shall never come, except I go by the way of the Catholic Church, by former
Idea's, former examples, former patterns, To believe according to ancient
beliefes, to pray according to ancient forms, to preach according to former
meditations. God does nothing, man does nothing well, without these Idea's,
these retrospects, this recourse to pre-conceptions, pre-deliberations.

Something then I must propose to my self, Via Domini.
to be the rule, and the reason of my present and future actions; which was our
first branch in this second Part; And then the second is, That I can propose
nothing more availably, then the contemplation of the history of Gods former
proceeding with me; which is David's way here, Because this was Gods way before,
I will look for God in this way still. That language in which God spoke to
man, the Hebrew, has no present tense; They form not their verbs as our
Western Languages do, in the present, I hear, or I see, or I read, But they
begin at that which is past, I have seen and heard, and read. God carries us
in his Language, in his speaking, upon that which is past, upon that which he
has done already; I cannot have better security for present, nor future, then
Gods former mercies exhibited to me. Quis non gaudeat, August.
says S. Augustine, Who does not triumph with joy, when he considers what God
has done? Quis non and ea, quae nondum venerunt, ventura sperat, propter illa,
quae jam tanta impleta sunt? Who can doubt of the performance of all, that sees
the greatest part of a Prophecy performed? If I have found that true that God
has said, of the person of Antichrist, why should I doubt of that which he
says of the ruin of Antichrist? Credamus modicum quod restat, says the same
Father, It is much that we have seen done, and it is but little that God has
reserved to our faith, to believe that it shall be done.

There is no State, no Church, no Man, that has not this tie upon God, that
has not God in these bands, That God by having done much for them already,
has bound himself to do more. Men proceed in their former ways, sometimes,
lest they should confess an error, and acknowledge that they had been in a
wrong way. God is obnoxious to no error, and therefore he does still, as he did
before. Every one of you can say now to God, Lord, Thou broughtest me hither,
therefore enable me to hear; Lord, Thou do that, therefore make me
understand; And that, therefore let me believe; And that too, therefore
strengthen me to the practice; And all that, therefore continue me to a
perseverance. Carry it up to the first sense and apprehension that ever thou
had of Gods working upon thee, either in thy self, when thou came first to
the use of reason, or in others in thy behalf, in thy baptism, yet when thou
think thou art at the first, God had done something for thee before all
that; before that, he had elected thee, in that election which S. Augustine
speaks of, Habet electos, quos creaturus est eligendos, August.
God has elected certain men, whom he intends to create, that he may elect
them; that is, that he may declare his Election upon them. God had thee, before
he made thee; He loved thee first, and then created thee, that thou loving him,
he might continue his love to thee. The surest way, and the nearest way to lay
hold upon God, is the consideration of that which he had done already. So David
does; And that which he takes knowledge of, in particular, in Gods former
proceedings toward him, is, Because God had been his help, which is our last
branch in this part, Because thou have been my help.

From this one word, That God has been my He^^^ Quia auxilium.
I make account that we have both these notions; first, That God has not left
me to my self, He has come to my succor, He has helped me; And then, That
God has not left out my self; He has been my Help, but he has left some
thing for me to do with him, and by his help. My security for the future, in
this consideration of that which is past, lies not only in this, That God has
delivered me, but in this also, that he has delivered me by way of a Help,
and Help always presumes an endeavor and cooperation in him that is helped.
God did not elect me as a helper, nor create me, nor redeem me nor convert me,
by way of helping me; for he alone did all, and he had no use at all of me. God
infuses his first grate, the first way, merely as a Giver; entirely, all
himself; but his subsequent graces, as a helper; therefore we call them
Auxiliant graces, Helping graces; and we always receive them, when we endeavor
to make use of his former grace. Lord, I believe, Mar. 9.24.
(says the Man in the Gospel to Christ) Help mine unbelief. If there had not
been unbelief, weakness, unperfectnesse in that faith, there had needed no
help; but if there had not been a Belief, a faith, it had not been capable of
help and assistance, but it must have been an entire act, without any
concurrence on the man's part.

So that if I have truly the testimony of a rectified Conscience, That God has
helped me, it is in both respects; first, That he has never forsaken me, and
then, That he has never suffered me to forsake my self; He has blessed me
with that grace, that I trust in no help but his, and with this grace too,
That I cannot look for his help, except I help my self also. God did not
help heaven and earth to proceed out of nothing in the Creation, for they had
no possibility of any disposition toward it; for they had no being: But God
did help the earth to produce grass, and herbs; for, for that, God had
infused a seminall disposition into the earth, which, for all that, it could
not have perfected without his farther help. As in the making of Woman, there
is the very word of our Text, Gnazar, God made him a Helper, one that was to
do much for him, but not without him. So that then, if I will make Gods former
working upon me, an argument of his future gracious purposes, as I must
acknowledge that God has done much for me, so I must find, that I have done
what I could, by the benefit of that grace with him; for God promises to be but
a helper. Lord open thou my lips, says David; Psalm. 51.15.
that is Gods work entirely; And then, My mouth, My mouth shall show forth thy
praise; there enters David into the work with God. And then, says God to him,
Dilata os tuum, Open thy mouth, (It is now made Thy mouth, and therefore do
thou open it) and I will fill it; All inchoations and consummations, beginnings
and perfectings are of God, of God alone; but in the way there is a concurrence
on our part, (by a successive continuation of Gods grace) in which God proceeds
as a Helper; and I put him to more then that, if I do nothing. But if I pray
for his help, and apprehend and husband his graces well, when they come, then
he is truly, properly my helper; and upon that security, that testimony of a
rectified Conscience, I can proceed to David's confidence for the future,
Because thou have been my Help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice; which is our third, and last general part.

In this last part, which is, (after David's aspect, and consideration of his
present condition, Divisio. 3 Part.
which was, in the effect, an Exclusion from Gods Temple, And his retrospect,
his consideration of Gods former mercies to him, That he had been his Help)
his prospect, his confidence for the future, we shall stay a little upon these
two steps; first, That that which he promises himself, is not an immunity from
all powerful enemies, nor a sword of revenge upon those enemies; It is not
that he shall have no adversary, nor that that adversary shall be able to do
him no harm, but that he should have a refreshing, a respiration, In velamento
alarm, under the shadow of Gods wings. And then, (in the second place) That
this way which God shall be pleased to take, this manner, this measure of
refreshing, which God shall vouchsafe to afford, (though it amount not to a
full deliverance) must produce a joy, a rejoicing in us; we must not only not
decline to a murmuring, that we have no more, no nor rest upon a patience for
that which remains, but we must ascend to a holy joy, as if all were done and
accomplished, In the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.

First then, Vmbra Alarm.
lest any man in his dejection of spirit, or of fortune, should stray into a
jealousy or suspicion of Gods power to deliver him, As God has spangled the
firmament with stars, so has he his Scriptures with names, and Metaphors,
and denotations of power. Sometimes he s^^es out in the name of a Sword, and of
a Target, and of a Wall, and of a Tower, and of a Rock, and of a Hill; And
sometimes in that glorious and manifold constellation of all together, Dominus
exercituum, The Lord of Hosts. God, as God, is never represented to us, with
Defensive Arms; He needs them not. When the Poets present their great Heroes,
and their Worthies, they always insist upon their Arms, they spend much of
their invention upon the description of their Arms; both because the greatest
valor and strength needs Arms, ( Goliath himself was armed) and because to
expose ones self to danger unarmed, is not valor, but rashness. But God is
invulnerable in himself, and is never represented armed; you find no shirts
of mayle, no Helmets, Esaias 59.17.
no Cuirasses in Gods Armory. In that one place of Esaias, where it may seem to
be otherwise, where God is said to have put on righteousness as a breastplate,
and a Helmet of salvation upon his head; in that prophecy God is Christ, and is
therefore in that place, called the Redeemer. Christ needed defensive arms,
God does not. Gods word does; His Scriptures do; And therefore S. Hierome has
armed them, and set before every book his Prologum galeatum, that prologue
that arms and defends every book from calumny. But though God need not, nor
receive not defensive arms for himself, yet God is to us a Helmet, a
Breastplate, a strong tower, a rock, every thing that may give us assurance
and defense; and as often as he will, he can refresh that Proclamation, Nolite
tangere Christos meos, Psalm. 105.15.
Our enemies shall not so much as touch us.

But here, by occasion of his Metaphore in this Text, ( Sub umbra alarm, In
the shadow of thy wings) we do not so much consider an absolute immunity, That
we shall not be touched, as a refreshing and consolation, when we are touched,
though we be pinched and wounded. The Names of God, which are most frequent in
the Scriptures, are these three, Elohim, and Adonai, and Jehovah; and to assure
us of his Power to deliver us, two of these three are Names of Power. Elohim is
Deus fortis, The mighty, The powerful God: And (which deserves a particular
consideration) Elohim is a plural Name; It is not Deus fortis, but Dii fortes,
powerful Gods. God is all kind of Gods; All kinds, which either Idolaters and
Gentiles can imagine, (as Riches, or Justice, or Wisdom, or Valor, or such)
and all kinds which God himself has called gods, (as Princes, and Magistrates,
and Prelates, and all that assist and help one another) God is Elohim, All
these Gods, and all these in their height and best of their power; for Elohim,
is Dii fortes, Gods in the plural, and those plural gods in their exaltation.

The second Name of God, is a Name of power too, Adonai. For, Adonai is
Dominus, The Lord, such a Lord, as is Lord and Proprietary of all his
creatures, and all creatures are his creatures; And then, Dominium est potestas
tum utendi, tum abutendi, says the law; To be absolute Lord of any thing,
gives that Lord a power to do what he will with that thing. God, as he is
Adonai, The Lord, may give and take, quicken and kill, build and throw down,
where and whom he will. So then two of Gods three Names are Names of absolute
power, to imprint, and re-imprint an assurance in us, that he can absolutely
deliver us, and fully revenge us, if he will. But then, his third Name, and
that Name which he chooses to himself, and in the signification of which
Name, he employes Moses, for the relief of his people under Pharaoh, that
Name Jehovah, is not a Name of Power, but only of Essence, of Being, of
Subsistence, and yet in the virtue of that Name, God relieved his people. And
if, in my afflictions, God vouchsafe to visit me in that Name, to preserve me
in my being, in my subsistence in him, that I be not shaked out of him,
disinherited in him, excommunicate from him, divested of him, annihilated
toward him, let him, at his good pleasure, reserve his Elohim, and his Adonai,
the exercises and declarations of his mighty Power, to those great puklike
causes, that more concern his Glory, then any thing that can befall me; But if
he impart his Jehovah, enlarge himself so far toward me, as that I may live,
and move, and have my being in him, though I be not instantly delivered, nor
mine enemies absolutely destroyed, yet this is as much as I should promise my
self, this is as much as the Holy Ghost intends in this Metaphor, Sub umbra
alarm, Under the shadow of thy wings, that is a Refreshing, a Respiration, a
Conservation, a Consolation in all afflictions that are inflicted upon me.

Yet, is not this Metaphor of Wings without a denotation of Power. As no Act of
Gods, though it seem to imply but spiritual comfort, is without a denotation
of power, (for it is the power of God that comforts me; To overcome that
sadness of soul, and that dejection of spirit, which the Adversary by
temporal afflictions would induce upon me, is an act of his Power) So this
Metaphor, The shadow of his wings, (which in this place expresses no more, then
consolation and refreshing in misery, and not a powerful deliverance out of
it) is so often in the Scriptures made a denotation of Power too, as that we
can doubt of no act of power, if we have this shadow of his wings. For, in this
Metaphor of Wings, does the Holy Ghost express the Maritime power, the power
of some Nations at Sea, in Navies, ( Woe to the land shadowing with wings;)
that is, Esaias 18.1.
that hovers over the world, and intimidates it with her sails and ships. In
this Metaphor does God remember his people, of his powerful deliverance of
them, Exodus 19.14.
( You have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on Eagles
wings, and brought you to my self.) In this Metaphor does God threaten his and
their enemies, what he can do, Ezekiel. 1.24.
( The noise of the wings of his Cherubims, are as the noise of great waters,
and of an Army.) So also, what he will do, ( He shall spread his wings over
Bozrah, Ier. 49.22.
and at that day shall the hearts of the mighty men of Edom, be as the heart of
a woman in her pangs.) So that, if I have the shadow of his wings, I have the
earnest of the power of them too; If I have refreshing, and respiration from
them, I am able to say, (as those three Confessors did to Nebuchadnezzar) My
God is able to deliver me, I am sure he has power; And my God will deliver me,
Dan. 3.17.
when it conduces to his glory, I know he will; But, if he do not, be it
known unto thee, O King, we will not servethy Gods; Be it known unto thee, O
Satan, how long soever God defer my deliverance, I will not seek false
comforts, the miserable comforts of this world. I will not, for I need not; for
I can subsist under this shadow of these Wings, though I have no more.

The Mercy-seat it self was covered with the Cherubims Wings; Exodus 25.20.
and who would have more then Mercy? and a Mercy-seat; that is, established,
resident Mercy, permanent and perpetual Mercy; present and familiar Mercy: a
Mercy-seat. Our Savior Christ intends as much as would have served their
turn, if they had laid hold upon it, when he says, That he would have
gathered Jerusalem, Matt. 23.37.
as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings. And though the other Prophets
do (as ye have heard) mingle the signification of Power, and actual
deliverance, in this Metaphor of Wings, yet our Prophet, whom we have now in
especial consideration, David, never does so; but in every place where he
uses this Metaphor of Wings (which are in five or six several Psalms) still
he rests and determines in that sense, which is his meaning here; That though
God do not actually deliver us, nor actually destroy our enemies, yet if he
refresh us in the shadow of his Wings, if he maintain our subsistence (which
is a religious Constancy) in him, this should not only establish our patience,
(for that is but half the work) but it should also produce a joy, and rise to
an exultation, which is our last circumstance, Therefore in the shadow of thy
wings, I will rejoice.

I would always raise your hearts, and dilate your hearts, to a holy Joy,
Gaudium.
to a joy in the Holy Ghost. There may be a just fear, that men do not grieve
enough for their sins; but there may be a just jealousy, and suspicion too,
that they may fall into inordinate grief, and diffidence of Gods mercy; And
God has reserved us to such times, as being the later times, give us even the
dregs and lees of misery to drink. For, God has not only let loose into the
world a new spiritual disease; which is, an equality, and an indifferency,
which religion our children, or our servants, or our companions profess; (I
would not keep company with a man that thought me a knave, or a traitor; with
him that thought I loved not my Prince, or were a faithless man, not to be
believed, I would not associate my self; And yet I will make him my bosom
companion, that thinks I do not love God, that thinks I cannot be saved) but
God has accompanied, and complicated almost all our bodily diseases of these
times, with an extraordinary sadness, a predominant melancholy, a faintness
of heart, a chearlesnesse, a joylesnesse of spirit, and therefore I return
often to this endeavor of raising your hearts, dilating your hearts with a holy
Joy, Joy in the holy Ghost, for Under the shadow of his wings, you may, you
should rejoice.

If you look upon this world in a Map, you find two Hemisphears, two half
worlds. If you crush heaven into a Map, you may find two Hemisphears too, two
half heavens; Half will be Joy, and half will be Glory; for in these two, the
joy of heaven, and the glory of heaven, is all heaven often represented unto
us. And as of those two Hemisphears of the world, the first has been known
long before, but the other, (that of America, which is the richer in treasure)
God reserved for later Discoveries; So though he reserve that Hemisphear of
heaven, which is the Glory thereof, to the Resurrection, yet the other
Hemisphear, the Joy of heaven, God opens to our Discovery, and delivers for our
habitation even whilst we dwell in this world. As God has cast upon the
unrepentant sinner two deaths, a temporal, and a spiritual death, so has he
breathed into us two lives; Genesis 2.17.
for so, as the word for death is doubled, Morte morieris, Thou shall die the
death, so is the word for life expressed in the plural, Chaiim, vitarum, God
breathed into his nostrils the breath of lives, of diverse lives. Though our
natural life were no life, but rather a continual dying, yet we have two
lives besides that, an eternal life reserved for heaven, but yet a heavenly
life too, a spiritual life, even in this world; And as God does thus inflict
two deaths, and infuse two lives, so does he also pass two Judgments upon
man, or rather repeats the same Judgment twice. For, that which Christ shall
say to thy soul then at the last Judgment, Matt. 25.23.
Enter into thy Masters joy, He says to thy conscience now, Enter into thy
Masters joy. The everlastingnesse of the joy is the blessedness of the next
life, but the entering, the inchoation is afforded here. For that which Christ
shall say then to us, Verse 24.
Venite benedicti, Come ye blessed, are words intended to persons that are
coming, that are upon the way, though not at home; Here in this world he bids
us Come, Luke 15.10.
there in the next, he shall bid us Welcome. The Angels of heaven have joy in
thy conversion, and can thou be without that joy in thy self? If thou
desire revenge upon thine enemies, as they are Gods enemies, That God would be
pleased to remove, and root out all such as oppose him, that Affection
appertains to Glory; Let that alone till thou come to the Hemisphear of Glory;
There join with those Martyrs under the Altar, Revel. 6.10.
Vsquequo Domine, How long O Lord, do thou defer Judgment? and thou shall
have thine answer there for that. Whilst thou art here, here join with David,
and the other Saints of God, in that holy increpation of a dangerous sadness,
Why art thou cast down O my soul? why art thou disquieted in me? That soul
that is dissected and anatomized to God, Psalm. 42.5.
in a sincere confession, washed in the tears of true contrition, embalmed in
the blood of reconciliation, the blood of Christ Jesus, can assign no reason,
can give no just answer to that Interrogatory, Why art thou cast down O my
soul? why art thou disquieted in me? No man is so little, as that he can be
lost under these wings, no man so great, as that they cannot reach to him;
Semper ille major est, August.
quantumcumque creverimus, To what temporal, to what spiritual greatness
soever we grow, still pray we him to shadow us under his Wings; for the poor
need those wings against oppression, and the rich against envy. The Holy Ghost,
who is a Dove, shadowed the whole world under his wings; Incubabat aquis, He
hovered over the waters, he sat upon the waters, and he hatched all that was
produced, and all that was produced so, was good. Be thou a Mother where the
Holy Ghost would be a Father; Conceive by him; and be content that he produce
joy in thy heart here. First think, that as a man must have some land, or else
he cannot be in wardship, so a man must have some of the love of God, or else he
could not fall under Gods correction; God would not give him his physic, God
would not study his cure, if he cared not for him. And then think also, that
if God afford thee the shadow of his wings, that is, Consolation, respiration,
refreshing, though not a present, and plenary deliverance, in thy afflictions,
not to thank God, is a murmuring, and not to rejoice in Gods ways, is an
unthankfulness. Howling is the noise of hell, singing the voice of heaven;
Sadness the damp of Hell, Rejoicing the serenity of Heaven. And he that has
not this joy here, lacks one of the best pieces of his evidence for the joys
of heaven; and has neglected or refused that Earnest, by which God uses to
bind his bargain, that true joy in this world shall flow into the joy of
Heaven, as a River flows into the Sea; This joy shall not be put out in death,
and a new joy kindled in me in Heaven; But as my soul, as soon as it is out
of my body, is in Heaven, and does not stay for the possession of Heaven, nor
for the fruition of the sight of God, till it be ascended through air, and
fire, and Moon, and Sun, and Planets, and Firmament, to that place which we
conceive to be Heaven, but without the thousandth part of a minutes stop, as
soon as it issues, is in a glorious light, which is Heaven, (for all the way
to Heaven is Heaven; And as those Angels, which came from Heaven hither, bring
Heaven with them, and are in Heaven here, So that soul that goes to Heaven,
meets Heaven here; and as those Angels do not divest Heaven by coming, so
these souls invest Heaven, in their going.) As my soul shall not go toward
Heaven, but go by Heaven to Heaven, to the Heaven of Heavens, So the true joy
of a good soul in this world is the very joy of Heaven; and we go thither,
not that being without joy, we might have joy infused into us, but that as
Christ says, John 16.24.22.
Our joy might be full, perfected, sealed with an everlastingnesse; for, as he
promises, That no man shall take our joy from us, so neither shall Death it
self take it away, nor so much as interrupt it, or discontinue it, But as in
the face of Death, when he lays hold upon me, and in the face of the Devil,
when he attempts me, I shall see the face of God, (for, every thing shall be a
glass, to reflect God upon me) so in the agonies of Death, in the anguish of
that dissolution, in the sorrows of that valediction, in the irreversiblenesse
of that transmigration, I shall have a joy, which shall no more evaporate, then
my soul shall evaporate, A joy, that shall pass up, and put on a more
glorious garment above, and be joy super-invested in glory. Amen.

SERMON. LXVII. The third of my Prebend Sermons upon my five Psalms: Preached at
S. Paul's, November 5. 1626. In Vesperis.
PSALM. 64.10. And all the upright in heart shall glory.


I Have had occasion to tell you more then once before, that our Predecessors,
in the institution of the Service of this Church, have declared such a
reverence and such a devotion to this particular Book of Scripture, The
Psalms, as that by distributing the hundred and fifty Psalms (of which number
the body of this book consists) into thirty portions, (of which number the
body of our Church consists) and assigning to every one of those thirty
persons, his five Psalms, to be said by him every day, every day God receives
from us (howsoever we be divided from one another in place) the Sacrifice of
Praise, in the whole Book of Psalms. And, though we may be absent from this
Quire, yet wheresoever dispersed, we make up a Quire in this Service, of saying
over all the Psalms every day. This sixty fourth Psalm, is the third of my
five. And when, (according to the obligation which I had laid upon my self, to
handle in this place some portion of every one of these my five Psalms) in
handling of those words, of the Psalm immediately before this, in the seventh
verse, (Because thou have been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy Wings
I will rejoice) I told you, that the next world, Heaven, was (as this world is)
divided into two Hemispheares, and that the two Hemispheares of Heaven, were
Joy and Glory, (for, in those two notions of Joy and Glory, is Heaven often
represented unto us) as in those words which we handled then, we sailed about
the first Hemispheare, That of Joy, (In the shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice)
So, in these which I have read to you now, our voyage lies about the
Hemispheare of Glory, for, (All the upright in heart shall Glory.) As we said
then of Joy, we say of Glory now; There is an inchoative joy here, though the
consummative joy be reserved for Heaven; so is there also such a taste, such an
inchoation of glory in this life. And as no man shall come to the joys of
Heaven, that has no joy in this world, (for, there is no peace of conscience
without this joy) so no man shall come to the glory of Heaven, that has not a
holy ambition of this glory in this world; for, this glory which we speak of,
is the evidence, and the reflection of the glory from above; for, the glory of
God shines through godly men, and we receive a beam and a tincture of that
glory of God, when we have the approbation, and testimony, and good opinion,
and good words of good men; which is the Glory of our Text, as far as this
world is capable of glory. All the upright in heart shall glory, that is, They
shall be celebrated and encouraged with the glory and praise of good men here,
and they shall be rewarded with everlasting glory in Heaven.

In these words we propose to you but two parts; Divisio.
First, The disposition of the Persons, Omnes recti cord, All the upright in
heart, and then, The retribution upon these Persons, Gloriabuntur, They shall
Glory, or, (as it is in the Vulgat, and well) Laudabuntur, They shall be
celebrated, they shall be praised. In the first, The qualification of the
persons, we shall pass by these steps; First, that God in his punishments and
rewardings proposes to himself Persons, Persons already made, and qualified.
God does not begin at a retribution, nor begin at a condemnation, before he
have Persons, Persons fit to be rewarded, Persons fit to be condemned. God did
not first make a Heaven and a Hell, and after think of making man, that he
might have some persons to put in them; but, first for his Glory he made Man,
and for those, who by a good use of his grace preserved their state, Heaven,
and for those, who by their own fault fell, he made Hell. First, he proposed
Persons, Persons in being; And then, for the Persons (as his delight is for the
most part to do) in this Text he expresses it; which is, rather to insist upon
the Rewards, which the Good shall receive, then upon the condemnation and
judgments of the wicked. If he could choose, that is, If his own Glory, and
the edification of his Children would bear it, he would not speak at all of
judgments, or of those persons that draw necessary judgments upon themselves,
but he would exercise our contemplation wholly upon his mercy, and upon Persons
qualified and prepared for his gracious retributions. So he does here; He
speaks not at all of perverse, and froward, and sinister, and oblique men, men
incapable of his retributions, but only of Persons disposed, ordained,
prepared for them.

And, in the qualification of these Persons, he proposes first a rectitude, a
directnesse, an uprightness; declinations downward, deviations upon the wrong
hand, squint-eyed men, splay footed men, left handed men, (in a spiritual
sense) he meddles not withal. They must be direct, and upright; And then,
upright in heart; for, to be good to ill ends, (as, in many cases, a man may
be) God accepts not, regards not. But, let him be a person thus qualified,
Upright; upright because he loves uprightness, Upright in heart; And then, he
is infallably embraced, and enwrapped in that general rule, and proposition,
that admits no exception, Omnes recti cord, All the upright in heart shall be
partakers of this retribution: And in these branches we shall determine our
first Part, first, That God proposes to himself Persons; Persons thus and thus
qualified; he begins at them. Secondly, That God had rather dwell himself, and
propose to us the consideration of good persons, then bad, of his mercies, then
his judgments, for he mentions no other here, but persons capable of his
retributions; And then, the goodness that God considers, is rectitude, and
rectitude in the root, in the heart; And from that root grows that spreading
universality, that infallibility, Omnes, All such are sure of the Reward.

And then, in our second Part, in the Reward it self, though it be delivered
here in the whole bar, in the Ingot, in the Wedge, in Bulloyn, in one single
word, Gloriabuntur, Laudabuntur, They shall Glory, yet it admits this Mintage,
and coining, and issuing in lesser pieces, That first we consider the thing it
self, The metal in which God rewards us, Glory, Praise; And then, since Gods
promise is fastened upon that, (We shall be praised) As we may lawfully seek
the praise of good men, so must we also willingly afford praise to good men,
and to good actions. And then, since we find this retribution fixed in the
future, (We shall be praised, we shall be in glory) there arises this
Consolation, That though we have it not yet, yet we shall have it, Though we
be in dishonor, and contempt, and under a cloud, of which we see no end our
selves, yet there is a determined future in God, which shall be made present,
we shall overcome this contempt, and Gloriabimur, and Laudabimur, we shall
Glory, we shall be celebrated; In which future, the consolation is thus much
farther exalted, that it is an everlasting future; the glory, and praise, the
approbation, and acclamation, which we shall receive from good men, here, shall
flow out and continue, to the Hosannaes in Heaven, in the mouth of Saints, and
Angels, and to the Euge bone serve, Well done, good and faithful Servant, Mat.
25.21.
in the mouth of God himself.

First then, God proposes to himself, (in his Rewards and Retributions)
Persons; 1 Part. Personae qualificatae.
Persons disposed and qualified. Not disposed by nature, without use of grace;
that is flat and full Pelagianisme; Not disposed by preventing grace, without
use of subsequent grace, by Antecedent and anticipant, without concomitant and
auxiliant grace; that is Semi-pelagianisme. But persons obsequious to his
grace, when it comes, and persons industrious and ambitious of more and more
grace, and husbanding his grace well all the way, such persons God proposes to
himself. God does not only read his own works, nor is he only delighted
with that which he has writ himself, with his own eternal Decrees in heaven,
but he loves also to read our books too, our histories which we compose in our
lives and actions, and as his delight is to be with the sons of men, Pro.
8.31. Ephesians. 3.7.
so his study is in this Library, to know what we do. S. Paul says, That God
made him a Minister of the Gospel, to preach to the Gentiles, to the intent that
the Angels might know the manifold wisdom of God by the Church; That is, by
that that was done in the Church. The Angels saw God; Did they not see these
things in God? No; for, These things were hid in God, says the Apostle there;
And the Angels see no more in God, then God reveals unto them; and these
things of the Church, God reserved to a future, and to an experimental
knowledge, to be known then when they were done in the Church. So there are
Decrees in God, but they are hid in God; To this purpose and entendment, and in
this sense, hid from God himself, that God accepts or condemns Man Secundum
allegata and Probata, according to the Evidence that arises from us, and not
according to those Records that are hid in himself. Our actions and his
Records agree; we do those things which he has Decreed; but only our doing
them, and not his Decreeing them, has the nature of evidence. God does not
Reward, nor Condemn out of his Decrees, but out of our actions. God sent down
his Commissioners the Angels to Sodom, to inquire, Genesis 18.17. Genesis 3.9.
and to inform him how things went. God goes down himself to inquire, and
inform himself, how it stood with Adam and Eve. Not that God was ever
ignorant of any thing concerning us, but that God would prevent that dangerous
imagination in every man, That God should first mean to destroy him, and then
to make him, that he might destroy him, without having any evidence against
him. For God made man Ad imaginem suam, To his own Image. If he had made him
under an inevitable, and irresistible necessity of damnation, he had made him
Ad Imaginem Diabolicam, to the Image of the Devil, and not to his own. God
goes not out as a Fowler, that for his pleasure and recreation, or for his
commodity, or commendation, would kill, and therefore seeks out game that he
may kill it; It is not God that seeks whom he may devour: 1 Pet. 5.8.
But God sees the Vulture tearing his Chickens, or other birds picking his
Corn, or pecking his fruit, and then when they are in that mischievous action,
God takes his bow and shoots them for that. When God condemns a man, he
proposes not that man to himself, as he meant to make him, and as he did make
him, but as by his sins he has made himself. At the first Creation, God
looked upon nothing; there was nothing; But ever since there have been
Creatures, God has looked upon the Creature: and as Adam gave every Creature
the Name, according as he saw the Nature thereof to be; so God gives every man
reward or punishment, the name of a Saint or a Devil, in his purpose, as he
sees him a good or a bad user of his graces. When I shall come to the sight of
the Book of life, and the Records of heaven, amongst the Reprobate, I shall
never see the name of Cain alone, but Cain with his addition, Cain that killed
his brother; Nor Judas name alone; but Judas with his addition, Judas that
betrayed his Master. God does not begin with a morte moriendum, some body must
die, and therefore I will make some body to kill; But God came to a morte
morieris, yet thou art alive, and may live, but if thou will rebel, thou
must die. God did not call up fevers, and pestilence, and consumptions, and
fire, Levit. 26.16.
and famine, and war, and then make man, that he might throw him into their
mouths, but when man threw down himself, God let him fall into their mouths.
Had I never sinned in wantonness, I should never have had consumption; nor
fever, if I had not sinned in Riot; nor death, if I had not transgressed
against the Lord of life. If God be pleased to look upon me, at the last day,
as I am renewed in Christ, I am safe. But if God should look upon me, (as he
made me) in Adam, I could not be un-acceptable in his sight, except he looked
farther, and saw me in mine own, or in Adams sin. I would never wish my self
better, then God wished me at first; no, nor then God wishes me now, as
manifold a sinner as he sees me now, if yet I would conform my will to his.
God looks upon persons; persons so conditioned as they were, which was our
first branch, in this first part; and our second is, That he delights to
propose to himself Persons that are capable of his rewards; for he mentions no
others in this place, All that are upright in heart.

The first thing that Moses names to have been made, Insistit in bonis.
was Heaven, (In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth) And infinite millions
of generations before this Heaven was made, there was a Heaven, an eternal
emanation of beams of glory, from the presence of God. But Moses tells us of no
Hell made at the Creation; And before the Creation, such a Hell, as there was a
Heaven, there could not be; for, the presence of God made Heaven; and God was
equally present every where. And they who have multiplied Hells unto us, and
made more Hells then God has made, more by their two Limboes, (one for
Fathers, another for Children) and one Purgatory, have yet made their new
Hells, more of the nature of Heaven then of Hell. For, in one of their Limboes,
(that of the Fathers) and in their Purgatory, there is in them, who are there,
an infallible assurance of Heaven, They that are there, are infallibly assured
to come to Heaven; And an assurance of salvation will hardly consist with Hell;
He that is sure to come to Heaven, can hardly be said to be in Hell.

God was loath and late in making places of torment; He is loath to speak of
Judgments, or of those that extort Judgments from him. How plentifully, how
abundantly is the word Beatus, Blessed, multiplied in the Book of Psalms?
Blessed, and Blessed in every Psalm, in every Verse; The Book seems to be
made out of that word, Blessed, And the foundation raised upon that word,
Blessed, for it is the first word of the Book. But in all the Book, there is
not one Vae, not one woe, so denounced; Not one woe, upon any soul in that
Book. And when this Vae, this woe is denounced in some other of the Prophets,
it is very often Vox dolentis, and not Increpantis, That Vae, that woe, is a
voice of compassion in him that speaks it, and not of destruction to them to
whom it is spoken. God, Jerem. 9.1.
in the person of Jeremy, weeps in contemplation of the calamities threatened,
Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my people. It is God that
was their Father, and it is God, their God that slew them; but yet, that God,
their Father weeps over the slaughter. So in the person of Esaias, Esaias 16.9.
God weeps again, I will bewail thee with weeping, and I will water thee with
tears. And without putting on the person of any man, God himself avowes his
sighing, Esaias 1.24.
when he comes to name Judgments, Heu, vindicabor, Alas, I will revenge me of
mine enemies; And he sighs, when he comes but to name their sins, Heu
abominationes, Ezekiel. 16.11.
Alas, for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel. As though God had
contracted an Irregularity, by having to do in a cause of blood, He sighs, he
weeps when he must draw blood from them. God delights to institute his
discourses, and to take, and to make his Examples, from men that stand in state
of grace, and are capable of his Mercies, and his Retributions, as here in this
Text, he names only those, who are Recti cord, The upright in heart, They
shall be considered, rewarded.

The disposition that God proposes here in those persons, Recti.
whom he considers, is Rectitude, Uprightness, and Directnesse. God has given
Man that form in nature, much more in grace, that he should be upright, and
look up, and contemplate Heaven, and God there. And therefore to bend
downwards upon the earth, to fix our breast, our heart to the earth, to lick
the dust of the earth with the Serpent, to inhere upon the profits and
pleasures of the earth, and to make that which God intended for our way, and
our rise to heaven, (the blessings of this world) the way to hell; this is a
manifest Declination from this Uprightness, from this Rectitude. Nay, to go
so far toward the love of the earth, as to be in love with the grave, to be
impatient of the calamities of this life, and murmur at Gods detaining us in
this prison, to sink into a sordid melancholy, or irreligious dejection of
spirit; this is also a Declination from this Rectitude, this Uprightness. So
is it too, to decline toward the left hand, to Modifications, and Temporisings
in matter or form of Religion, and to think all indifferent, all one; or to
decline toward the right hand, in an over-vehement zeal, To pardon no errors,
to abate nothing of heresy, if a man believe not all, and just all that we
believe; To abate nothing of Reprobation, if a man live not just as we live;
this is also a Diversion, a Deviation, a Deflection, a Defection from this
Rectitude, this Uprightness. For, the word of this Text, Iashar, signifies
Rectitudinem, and Planiciem; It signifies a direct way; for, the Devils way was
Circular, Compassing the Earth; But the Angels way to heaven upon Jacobs
ladder, was a straight, a direct way. And then it signifies, as a direct and
straight, so a plain, a smooth, an even way, a way that has been beaten into
a path before, a way that the Fathers, and the Church have walked in before,
and not a discovery made by our curiosity, or our confidence, in venturing from
our selves, or embracing from others, new doctrines and opinions.

The persons then, whom God proposes here to be partakers of his Retributions,
Recti Cord.
are first Recti, (that is, both Direct men, and Plain men) and then recti
cord, this qualification, this straightness, and smoothness must be in the
heart; All the upright in heart shall have it. Upon this earth, a man cannot
possibly make one step in a straight, and a direct line. The earth it self
being round, every step we make upon it, must necessarily be a segment, an
arch of a circle. But yet though no piece of a circle be a straight line, yet
if we take any piece, nay if we take the whole circle, there is no corner, no
angle in any piece, in any entire circle. A perfectt rectitude we cannot have
in any ways in this world; In every Calling there are some inevitable
tentations. But, though we cannot make up our circle of a straight line, (that
is impossible to humane frailty) yet we may pass on, without angles, and
corners, that is, without disguises in our Religion, and without the love of
craft, and falsehood, and circumvention in our civil actions. A Compass is a
necessary thing in a Ship, and the help of that Compass brings the Ship home
safe, and yet that Compass has some variations, it does not look directly
North; Neither is that star which we call the North Pole, or by which we know
the North Pole, the very Pole it self; but we call it so, and we make our uses
of it, and our conclusions by it, as if it were so, because it is the nearest
star to that Pole. He that comes as near uprightness, as infirmities admit,
is an upright man, though he have some obliquities. To God himself we may
always go in a direct line, a straight, a perpendicular line; For God is
vertical to me, over my head now, and vertical now to them, that are in the
East, and West Indies; To our Antipodes, to them that are under our feet, God
is vertical, over their heads, then when he is over ours.

To come to God there is a straight line for every man every where: But this we
do not, if we come not with our heart. Praebe mihi fili cor tuum, says God,
Pro. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart. Was he his son, and had he not his heart? That
may very well be. There is a filiation without the heart; not such a
filiation, as shall ever make him partaker of the inheritance, but yet a
filiation. The associating our selves to the sons of God, in an outward
profession of Religion, makes us so far the sons of God, as that the
judgment of man cannot, and the judgment of God does not distinguish them.
Job 1.6.
Because, then when the sons of God stood in his presence, Satan stood
amongst the sons of God; God does not disavow him, God does not excommunicate
him, God makes his use of him, and yet God knew his heart was far from him.
So, when God was in Council with his Angels, about Ahabs going up to Ramoth
Gilead, 1 King. 22.22.
A spirit came forth and offered his service, and God refuses not his service,
but employes him, though he knew his heart to be far from him. So, no doubt,
many times, they to whom God has committed supreme government, and they who
receive beams of this power by subordination, and delegation from them, they
see Satan amongst the sons of God, hypocrites and impiously disposed men come
into these places of holy convocation, and they suffer them, nay they employ
them, nay they prefer them, and yet they know their hearts are far from
them; but as long as they stand amongst the sons of God, that is, appear and
conform themselves in the outward acts of Religion, they are not disavowed,
they are not ejected: by us here, they are not. But howsoever we date our
Excommunications against them, but from an overt act, and apparent
disobedience, yet in the Records of heaven, they shall meet an Excommunication,
and a conviction of Recusancy, that shall bear date from that day, when they
came first to Church, with that purpose to delude the Congregation, to elude
the laws in that behalf provided, to advance their treacherous designs by
such disguises, or upon what other collateral and indirect occasion soever,
men come to this place: for, though they be in the right way, when they are
here, at Church, yet because they are not upright in heart, therefore that
right way brings not them to the right end.

And that is it which David looks upon in God, and desires that God should
look upon in him; 2 Samuel 7.21.
( According to thine own heart, says David to God, have thou done all these
great things unto us) (For, sometimes God does give temporal blessings to men,
upon whom he has not set his heart) And then in the 27. Verse he says, (
Therefore has thy servant found in his heart, to pray this prayer unto thee)
If he had only found it in the Liturgy, and in the manner of the Service of
that Church, to which he came with an ill will, and against his heart, he
would not have prayed that prayer, nay he would not have come to that Church.
Psalm. 35.11. 40.10.
For, though David place a great joy in that, ( That he can come to praise God
in the Congregation, and in the great Congregation) And though David seem even
to determine Gods presence in the Church, (for he multiplies that
expostulation, that adprecation many times, When shall I come, in conspectum
tuum, into thy presence? And, Restore me, O Lord, conspectui tuo, to thy
presence, He was not right, not in the right way, if he came not to Church)
yet there is a case in which David glories in, though (as he says there) In
cord meo abscondi eloquium tuum, Psalm. 119.11.
Thy word have I hidden, locked up, in my heart. Though in another, in many
other places, he rejoice in that, ( I have not hid thy righteousness in my
heart, Psalm. 40.10.
I have not concealed thy truth from the great Congregation) yet here he
glories in his Abscondi, I have hid it. Which, (as both S. Hilary, and S.
Ambrose refer it to a discreet and seasonable suppressing of the mysteries of
Religion, and not to cast pearls before swine) may also infer this
Instruction; That a man were better serve God at home, (though not in so right
a way, if he think it right) then to come hither against his heart, and
conscience. Not, but that there is better means of receiving good here, then
at home in private prayer, (though made the right way) But his end in coming
is not to make this means his way to that good; And therefore his very being
here, (though he be thereby in the right way) because it comes not from an
upright heart, as it is a greater danger to us, who are deluded by their
hypocritical conformity, so is it a greater sin to them, who come so against
their conscience. David prays thus, Psalm. 119.19.
Incola sum, ne abscondas, I am a stranger, hide not thy commandments from
me, (Let me not be a stranger at Church, at thy Service.) And so it behooves
us to pray too, That those Doors, and those Books may always be open unto
us; But yet I will say with David too, Abscondam eloquium, where I am a
stranger, and in a place of strange, and superstitious worship, I will hide my
religion so far, as not to communicate with others, in a service against my
heart; It is not safe for us to trust our selves at a superstitious Service,
though curiosity, or company, or dependency upon others draw us thither;
neither is it safe to trust all that come hither, if their hearts be not here.
For the Retribution of our Text, that is, Thanks and Praise, belongs only to
them, who are Right, and Right of heart, and to them it is made due, and
infallible, by this promise from God, and made universal, Omnes, All the
upright in heart shall glory.

How often God admits into his own Name, Omnes.
this addition of Universality, Omne, All, as though he would be known by that
especially. He is Omnipotent, There he can do All; He is Omniscient, There he
can know All; He is Omnipresent, There he can direct All. Neither does God
extend himself to all, that he may gather from all, but that he may gather
all, and all might meet in him, and enjoy him. So, God is all Center, as that
he looks to all, and so, all circumference, as that he embraces all. The
Sun works upon things that he sees not, (as Mines in the womb of the earth)
and so works the less perfectly. God sees all, and works upon all, and desires
perfection in all. There is no one word so often in the Bible, as this, Omne,
All. Neither has God spread the word more liberally upon all the lines of this
Book, then he has his gracious purposes upon all the souls of men. And
therefore, to withdraw Gods general goodness out of his general
propositions, That he would have all repent, That he came to save all, is to
contract and abridge God himself, in his most extensive Attribute, or
Denotation, that is, his Mercy: And as there is a curse laid upon them, that
take away any part, any proposition out of this Book, so may there be a curse,
or an ill affection, and countenance and suspicion from God, that presses any
of his general propositions to a narrower, and less gracious sense then God
meant in it. It were as easily believed, that God looks toward no man, as
that there should be any man (in whom he sees, that is, considers no sin) that
he looks not toward. I could as easily doubt of the universal providence of
God, as of the universal mercy of God, if man continued not in rebellion, and
in opposition. If I can say, by way of confession, and accusing my self, Lord,
my ways have not been right, nor my heart right, there is yet mercy for me.
But, to them who have studied and accustomed themselves to this uprightness of
heart, there is mercy in that exaltation, mercy in the nature of a Reward, of a
Retribution; And this Retribution expressed here, in this word Glory,
constitutes our second Part, All the upright in heart shall Glory.

This Retribution is expressed in the Original, in the word Halal; And Halal,
2 Part. Laus.
to those Translators that made up our Book of Common Prayer, presented the
signification of Gladness, for so it is there, They shall be glad; So it did
to the Translators that came after, for there it is, They shall rejoice; And to
our last Translators it seemed to signify Glory, They shall Glory, say they.
But the first Translation of all into our Language (which was long before any
of these three) calls it Praise, and puts it in the Passive, All men of
rightful heart shall be praised. He followed S. Hierom, who reads it so, and
interprets it so, in the Passive, Laudabuntur, They shall be praised. And so
truly Iithhalelu, in the Original, bears it, nay requires it; which is not of
a praise that they shall give to God, but of a praise, that they shall receive
for having served God with an upright heart; not that they shall praise God in
doing so, but that godly men shall praise them for having done so. All this
will grow naturally out of the root; for, the root of this word, is Lucere,
Splendere, To shine out in the eyes of men, and to create in them a holy and a
reverentiall admiration, as it was John Baptists praise, That he was A burning,
and a shining Lamp. Properly it is, by a good and a holy exemplary life, to
occasion others to set a right value upon Holiness, and to give a due respect
to holy men. For so, where we read, Psalm. 78.63.
Their Maidens were not given in Marriage, we find this word of our Text,
Their Maidens were not praised, that is, there was not a due respect held of
them, nor a just value set upon them.

So that, this retribution intended for the upright in heart, as in the growth
and extension of the word, it reaches to Joy, and Glory, and Eminency, and
Respect, so in the root, it signifies Praise; And it is given them by God, as
a Reward, That they shall be Praised; now, Praise (says the Philosopher) is
Sermo elucidans magnitudinem virtutis; It is the good word of good men, a good
testimony given by good men of good actions. And this difference we use to
assign between Praise, and Honor, Laus est in ordine ad finem, Honor eorum
qui jam in fine; Praise is an encouragement to them that are in the way, and so
far, a Reward, a Reward of good beginnings; Honor is reserved to the end, to
crown their constancy, and perseverance. And therefore, where men are rewarded
with great honors at the beginning, in hope they will deserve it, they are
paid beforehand. Thanks, and Grace, and good countenance, and Praise, are
interlocutory encouragements, Honors are final Rewards. But, since Praise is
a part of Gods retribution, a part of his promise in our text, They shall be
praised, we are thereby not only allowed, but bound to seek this praise from
good men, and to give this praise to good men; for, in this Coin God has
promised, that the upright in heart shall be paid, They shall be praised.

To seek praise from good men, by good means, Laus a bonis quaerenda. Prove.
22.1. Bernar.
is but the same thing which is recommended to us by Solomon, A good name is
rather to be chosen, then great riches, and loving favor, then silver and
Gold. For, Habent and mores colores suos, habent and odores; Our good works
have a color, and they have a savor; we see their Candor, their sincerity in
our own consciences, there is their color; (for, in our own consciences our
works appear in their true colors; no man can be an hypocrite to himself,
nor seriously, deliberately deceive himself) And, when others give allowance
of our works, and are edified by them, there is their savor, their odor, their
perfume, their fragrancy. And therefore S. Hierom, and S. Augustine differ
little in their manner of expressing this, Hieron.
Non paratum habeas illud e trivio, Serve not thy self with that trivial, and
vulgar saying, As long as my conscience testifies well to me, I care not what
men say of me; August.
And so says that other Father, They that rest in the testimony of their own
consciences, and contemn the opinion of other men, Imprudenter agunt, and
crudeliter, They deal weakly, and improvidently for themselves, in that they
assist not their consciences, with more witnesses, And they deal cruelly
toward others, in that they provide not for their edification, by the
knowledge and manifestation of their good works. For, (as he adds well there)
Qui a criminibus vitam custodit, been facit, He that is innocent in his own
heart, does well for himself, but Qui famam custodit, and in alios misericors
est, He that is known to live well, he that has the praise of good men, to be
a good man, is merciful, in an exemplary life, to others, and promoves their
salvation. For, when that Father gives a measure, how much praise a man may
receive, and a rule, how he may receive it, when he has first said, Nec totum,
nec nihil accipiatur, Receive not all, but yet refuse not all praise, he adds
this, That that which is to be received, is not to be received for our own
sakes, sed propter illos, quibus consulere non potest, si nimia dejectione
vilescat, but for their sakes, who would undervalue goodness it self, if good
men did too much undervalue themselves, or thought themselves never the better
for their goodness. And therefore S. Bernard applies that in the Proverbs to
this case; Prove. 25.16.
Have thou found Honey? eat that which is sufficient. Mellis nomine, favor
humanae laudis, says he, By Honey, favor, and praise, and thankfulness is
meant; Meritoque non ab omni, sed ab immoderato edulio prohibemur, We are not
forbid to taste, nor to eat, but to surfeit of this Honey, of this praise of
men. S. Augustine found this love of praise in himself, and could forbid it no
man, Laudari a been viventibus, si dicam, nolo, mentior, If I should say, that
I desired not the praise of good men, I should belie my self. He carries it
higher then thus; He does not doubt, but that the Apostles themselves had a
holy joy, and complacency, when their Preaching was acceptable, and thereby
effectual upon the Congregation. Such a love of praise is rooted in Nature;
and Grace destroys not Nature; Grace extinguishes not, but moderates this love
of praise in us, nor takes away the matter, but only exhibits the measure.
Certainly, he that has not some desire of praise, will be negligent in doing
praiseworthy things; and negligent in another duty intended here too, that is,
To praise good men, which is also another particular branch in this Part.

The hundred forty fifth Psalm is, Laus danda aliis.
in the Title thereof, called A Psalm of Praise; And the Rabbis call him
Filium futuri Seculi, A child of the next World, that says that Psalm thrice
a day. We will interpret it, by way of Accommodation, thus, that he is a child
of the next World, that directs his Praise every day, upon three objects, upon
God, upon himself, upon other men. Of God, there can be no question; And for
our selves, it is truly the most proper, and most literal signification of
this word in our Text, Iithhalelu, That they shall praise themselves, that is,
They shall have the testimony of a rectified conscience, that they have
deserved the praise of good men, in having done laudible service to God. And
then, for others, That which God promises to Israel in their restoration,
Zephan. 3.19.
belongs to all the Israel of the Lord, to all the faithful, I will get thee
praise, and fame in every land, and I will make thee a name, and a praise
amongst all the people of the earth. This, God will do; procure them a name, a
glory: By whom? When God binds himself, he takes us into the band with him,
and when God makes himself the debtor, he makes us stewards; when he promises
them praise, he means that we should give them that praise. Be all ways of
flatterings, and humourings of great persons precluded with a Protestation,
with a detestation; Be Philo Iudaeus his comparison received, His Coquus, and
his Medicus, One provides sweetness for the present taste, but he is but a
Cook, The other is a Physician, and though by bitter things, provides for thy
future health; And such is the honey of Flatterers, and such is the wormwood of
better Counselors. I will not shake a Proverb, not the Ad Corvos, That we
were better admit the Crows, that pick out our eyes, after we are dead, then
Flatterers that blind us, whilst we live; I cast justly upon others, I take
willingly upon my self, the name of wicked, (if I bless the covetous whom the
Lord abhors) or any other whom he has declared to be odious to him. But
making my object goodness in that man, and taking that goodness in that man,
to be a Candle, set up by God in that Candlestick, God having engaged
himself, that that good man shall be praised, I will be a Subsidy man so far,
so far pay Gods debts, as to celebrate with condign praise the goodness of
that man; for, in that, I do, as I should desire to be done to, And in that, I
pay a debt to that man, And in that I succor their weakness, who, (as S.
Gregory says) when they hear another praised, Greg^r.
Si non amore virtutis, at delectatione laudis accenduntur, At first for the
love of Praise, but after, for the love of goodness it self, are drawn to
be good. Phil. 4.8.
For, when the Apostle had directed the Philippians upon things that were True,
and honest, and just, and purc, and lovely, and of a good report, he ends all
thus, If there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things. In those two says S. Augustine, he divides all, Virtue, and Praise;
Virtue in our selves, that may deserve Praise; Praise toward others, that may
advance and propagate Virtue. This is the retribution which God promises to all
the upright in heart, Gloriabuntur, Laudabuntur, They shall Glory, they shall
have, they shall give praise. And then it is so far from diminishing this
Glory, as that it infinitely exalts our consolation, that God places this
Retribution in the future, Gloriabuntur, If they do not yet, yet certainly
they shall glory, And if they do now, that glory shall not go out, still they
shall, they shall for ever glory.

In the Hebrew there is no Present tense; In that language wherein God spoke,
Futurum.
it could not be said, The upright in heart, Are praised; Many times they are
not. But God speaks in the future; first, that he may still keep his Children
in an expectation and dependence upon him, (you shall be, though you be not
yet) And then, to establish them in an infallibility, because he has said it,
(I know you are not yet, but comfort your selves, I have said it, and it shall
be.) As the Hebrew has no Superlatives, because God would keep his Children
within compass, and in moderate desires, to content themselves with his
measures, though they be not great, and though they be not heaped; so,
considering what pressures, and contempts, and terrors, the upright in heart
are subject to, it is a blessed relief, That they have a future proposed unto
them, That they shall be praised, That they shall be redeemed out of contempt.
This makes even the Expectation it self as sweet to them, as the fruition
would be. This makes them, that when David says, Expecta viriliter, Wait upon
the Lord with a good courage; Wait, I say, Psalm. 27.14.
upon the Lord, they do not answer with the impatience of the Martyrs under
the Altar, Vsquequo, How long, Lord, will thou defer it? Rev. 6.10. Psalm. 40.1.
Psalm. 52.9.
But they answer in David's own words, Expectans expectavi, I have waited long,
And, Expectabo nomen tuum, still I will wait upon thy Name; I will wait till
the Lord come; His kingdom come in the mean time, His kingdom of Grace, and
Patience; and for his Ease, and his Deliverance, and his Praise, and his Glory
to me, let that come, when he may be most glorified in the coming thereof.
Nay, not only the Expectation, (that is, that that is expected) shall be
comfortable, because it shall be infallible, but that very present state that
he is in, shall be comfortable, according to the first of our three
Translations, They that are true of heart, shall be glad thereof; Glad of that;
Glad that they are true of heart, though their future retribution were never so
far removed; Nay, though there were no future retribution in the case, yet they
shall find comfort enough in their present Integrity. Nay, not only their
present state of Integrity, but their present state of misery, shall be
comfortable to them; for this very word of our Text, Halal, that is here
translated Joy, and Glory, and Praise, in diverse places of Scripture, (as
Hebrew words have often such a transplantation) signifies Ingloriousnesse, and
contempt, and dejection of spirit; Psalm. 75.4. Esa. 44.25. Job 12.17.
So that Ingloriousnesse, and contempt, and dejection of spirit, may be a part
of the retribution; God may make Ingloriousnesse, and Contempt, and Dejection
of spirit, a greater blessing and benefit, then Joy, and Glory, and Praise
would have been; and so reserve all this Glory and Praising to that time, that
David intends, Psalm. 112.6.
The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. Though they live and die
contemptibly, they shall be in an honorable remembrance, even amongst men, as
long as men last, and even when time shall be no more, and men no more, they
shall have it in futuro aeterno; where there shall be an everlasting present,
and an everlasting future, there the upright in heart shall be praised, and
that for ever, which is our conclusion of all.

If this word of our Text, Halal, shall signify Joy, (as the Service Book,
Aeternum.
and the Geneva translation render it) that may be somewhat toward enough,
which we had occasion to say of the Joys of heaven, in our Exercise upon the
precedent Psalm, when we say-led thorough that Hemispheare of Heaven, by the
breath of the Holy Ghost, in handling those words, Under the shadow of thy
wings I will rejoice. So that, of this signification of the word, Gaudebunt in
aeterno, They shall rejoice for ever, we add nothing now. If the word shall
signify Glory, (as our last translation renders it) consider with me, That
when that Glory which I shall receive in Heaven, shall be of that exaltation,
as that my body shall invest the glory of a soul, (my body shall be like a
soul, like a spirit, like an Angel of light, in all endowments that glory it
self can make that body capable of, that body remaining still a true body)
when my body shall be like a soul, there will be nothing left for my soul to
be like but God himself; 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 6.17.
I shall be partaker of the Divine nature, and the same Spirit with him. Since
the glory that I shall receive in body, and in soul, shall be such, so
exalted, what shall that glory of God be, which I shall see by the light of
this glory shed upon me there? In this place, and at this time the glory of God
is; but we lack that light to see it by. When my soul and body are glorified
in heaven, by that light of glory in me, I shall see the glory of God. But
then, what must that glory of the Essence of God be, which I shall see thorough
the light of Gods own glory? I must have the light of glory upon me, to see the
glory of God, and then by his glory I shall see his Essence. Romans 11.33.
When S. Paul cries out upon the bottomless depth of the riches of his
Attributes, ( O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God!) how glorious, how bottomless is the riches of his Essence? If I cannot
look upon him in his glass, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.
in the body of the Sun, how shall I look upon him face to face? And if I be
dazeled to see him as he works, how shall I see him, Sicutiest, as he is, and
in his Essence? But it may be some ease to our spirits, (which cannot endure
the search of this glory of heaven, which shall show us the very Essence of
God) to take this word of our Text, as our first translation of all took it,
for one beam of this glory, that is Praise; Consider we therefore this
everlasting future only so, How the upright in heart shall be praised in
heaven.

First, The Militant Church shall transmit me to the Triumphant, with her
recommendation, That I lived in the obedience of the Church of God, That I dyed
in the faith of the Son of God, That I departed and went away from them, in
the company and conduct of the Spirit of God, into whose hands they heard me,
they saw me recommend my spirit, 1 Cor. 6.19.
And that I left my body, which was the Temple of the Holy Ghost, to them, and
that they have placed it in Gods treasury, in his consecrated earth, to attend
the Resurrection, which they shall beseech him to hasten for my sake, and to
make it joyful and glorious to me, and them, when it comes. So the Militant
Church shall transmit me to the Triumphant, with this praise, this testimony,
this recommendation. And then, if I have done any good to any of Gods servants,
(or to any that has not been Gods servant, for Gods sake) If I have but fed a
hungry man, If I have but clothed a naked child, If I have but comforted a sad
soul, or instructed an ignorant soul, If I have but preached a Sermon, and
then printed that Sermon, that is, first preached it, and then lived according
to it, (for the subsequent life is the best printing, and the most useful and
profitable publishing of a Sermon) All those things that I have done for Gods
glory, shall follow me, shall accompany me, shall be in heaven before me, and
meet me with their testimony, That as I did not serve God for nothing, (God
gave me his blessings with a large hand, and in overflowing measures) so I did
not nothing for the service of God; Though it be as it ought to be, nothing in
mine own eyes, nothing in respect of my duty, yet to them who have received any
good by it, it must not seem nothing; for then they are unthankful to God,
who gave it, by whose hand soever.

This shall be my praise to Heaven, my recommendation thither; And then, my
praise in Heaven, shall be my preferment in Heaven. That those blessed Angels,
that rejoiced at my Conversion before, shall praise my perseverance in that
profession, and admit me to a part in all their Hymns and Hosannaes, and
Hallelujahs; which Hallelujah is a word produced from the very word of this
Text, Halal; My Hallelujah shall be my Halal, my praising of God shall be my
praise. And from this testimony I shall come to the accomplishment of all, to
receive from my Saviors own mouth, that glorious, that victorious, that
harmonious praise, that Dissolving, and that Recollecting testimony, that shall
melt my bowels, and yet fix me, power me out, and yet gather me into his
bosom, that Euge bone serve, Mat. 25.21.
Well done, good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy. And when he
has sealed me with his Euge, and accepted my service, who shall stamp a Vae
quod non, upon me? who shall say, Woe be unto thee, that thou did not preach,
this or that day, in this or that place? When he shall have styled me Bone and
fidelis, Good and faithful servant, who shall upbraid me with a late
undertaking this Calling, or a slack pursuing, or a lazy intermitting the
function thereof? When he shall have entered me into my Masters joy, what
fortune, what sin can cast any Cloud of sadness upon me? This is that that
makes Heaven, Heaven, That this Retribution, which is future now, shall be
present then, and when it is then present, it shall be future again, and
present and future for ever, ever enjoyed, and expected ever. The upright in
heart shall have, whatsoever all Translations can enlarge and extend themselves
unto; They shall Rejoice, they shall Glory, they shall Praise, and they shall
be praised, and all these in an everlasting future, for ever. Which
everlastingnesse is such a Term, as God himself cannot enlarge; As God cannot
make himself a better God then he is, because he is infinitely good, infinite
goodness, already; so God himself cannot make our Term in heaven longer then
it is; for it is infinite everlastingnesse, infinite eternity. That that we
are to beg of him is, that as that state shall never end, so he will be pleased
to hasten the beginning thereof, that so we may be numbered with his Saints in
Glory everlasting. Amen.

SERMON. LXVIII. The fourth of my Prebend Sermons upon my five Psalms: Preached
at S. Paul's, 28. January, 1626.
PSALM. 65.5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of
our salvation; who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are a far off, upon the Sea.


GOd makes nothing of nothing now; God eased himself of that incomprehensible
work, and ended it in the first Sabbath. But God makes great things of little
still; And in that kind he works most upon the Sabbath; 1 Cor. 1.21.
when by the foolishness of Preaching he infatuates the wisdom of the
world, and by the word, in the mouth of a weak man, he enfeebles the power of
sin, and Satan in the world, and by but so much breath as blows out an
houreglasse, gathers three thousand souls at a Sermon, and five thousand
souls at a Sermon, as upon Peter's preaching, in the second, and in the fourth
of the Acts. And this work of his, to make much of little, and to do much by
little, is most properly a Miracle. For, the Creation, (which was a production
of all out of nothing) was not properly a miracle: A miracle is a thing done
against nature; when something in the course of nature resists that work, then
that work is a miracle; But in the Creation, there was no reluctation, no
resistance, no nature, nothing to resist. But to do great works by small
means, to bring men to heaven by Preaching in the Church, this is a miracle.
When Christ intended a miraculous feeding of a great multitude, he asked, Quot
panes habetis? Mark 6.38.
First he would know, how many loaves they had; and when he found that they
had some, though they were but five, he multiplied them, to a sufficiency for
five thousand persons. This Psalm is one of my five loaves, which I bring; One
of those five Psalms, which by the Institution of our Ancestors in this Church,
are made mine, appropriated especially to my daily meditation, as there are
five other Psalms to every other person of our Church. And, by so poor means
as this, (my speaking) his Blessing upon his Ordinance may multiply to the
advancement, and furtherance of all your salvations. He multiplies now, farther
then in those loaves; not only to feed you all, (as he did all that multitude)
but to feed you all three meals.

In this Psalm (and especially in this Text) God satisfies you with this
threefold knowledge: First, what he has done for man, in the light and law of
nature; Then, how much more he had done for his chosen people, the Jews, in
affording them a law; And lastly, what he had reserved for man after, in the
establishing of the Christian Church. The first, (in this Metaphore, and
miracle of feeding) works as a breakfast; for though there be not a full
meal, there is something to stay the stomach, in the light of nature. The
second, that which God did for the Jews in their Law, and Sacrifices, and
Types, and Ceremonies, is as that Dinner, which was spoken of in the Gospel,
which was plentifully prepared, but prepared for some certain guests, that
were bidden, and no more; Better means then were in nature, they had in the
law, but yet only appropriated to them that were bidden, to that Nation, and
no more. But in the third meal, Gods plentiful refection in the Christian
Church, and means of salvation there; first, Christ comes in the visitation of
his Spirit, Revel. 3.20.
(Behold I come, and knock, and will sup with him) (He sups with us, in the
private visitation of his Spirit) And then, (as it is added there) he invites
us to sup with him, he calls us home to his house, and there makes us
partakers of his blessed Sacraments; And by those means we are brought at last
to that blessedness, Revel. 19.9.
which he proclaims, (Blessed are all they which are called to the marriage
Supper of the Lamb) in the Kingdom of heaven. For all these three meals, we
say Grace in this Text, (By terrible things, in righteousness, will thou
answer us, O God of our salvation) for all these ways of coming to the
knowledge and worship of God, we bless God in this Text, (Thou art the
confidence of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that are a far off, upon
the Sea.

The consideration of the means of salvation, afforded by God to the Jews in
their law, inanimates the whole Psalm, and is transfused through every part
thereof; and so, it falls upon this Verse too, as it does upon all the rest;
And then, for that, that God had done before in nature, and for all, is in the
later part of this Verse, (Who art the confidence of all the ends of the Earth,
and of them that are a far off, upon the Sea) And lastly, that that he has
reserved for the Christian Church, God has centred, and embowelled in the
womb and bosom of the Text, in that compellation, (O God of our salvation)
for there the word salvation, is rooted in Iashang, which Iashang is the very
Name of Jesus, the foundation, and the whole building of the Christian Church.
So then our three parts will be these; What God has done in Nature, what in
the Law, what in the Gospel. And, when in our Order we shall come to that last
part, which is that, that we drive all to, (The advantage which we have in the
Gospel, above Nature, and the Law) we shall then propose, and stop upon the
Holy Ghosts manner of expressing it in this place, (By terrible things in
righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our salvation) But first, look we
a little into the other two, Nature, and Law.

First then, 1 Part. Natura.
the last words settle us upon our first consideration, What God has done for
man in Nature, He is the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are a far off, upon the Sea, that is, of all the world, all places, all
persons in the world; All, at all times, every where, have Declarations enough of
his power, Demonstrations enough of his Goodness, to confide in him, to rely
upon him. The Holy Ghost seems to have delighted in the Metaphore of Building.
I know no figurative speech so often iterated in the Scriptures, Phil. 3.20.
Heb. 3.6. Psalm. 147.2.
as the name of a House; Heaven and Earth are called by that name, and we, who
being upon earth, have our conversation in heaven, are called so too, (Christ
has a House, which House we are) And as God builds his House, ( The Lord
builds up lerusalem, says David) so he furnishes it, he plants Vineyards,
Gardens, and Orchards about it, Ioh. 14.6. Matt. 7.13. Ioh. 10.7.
He lays out a way to it, (Christ is the way) He opens a gate into it, (Christ
is the gate) And when he has done all this, (built his house, furnished it,
planted about it, made it accessible, and opened the gate) then he keeps
house, as well as builds a house, he feeds us, and feasts us in his house, as
well as he lodges us, and places us in it. And as Christ professes what his
own Diet was, Ioh. 4.34.
what he fed upon, (My meat is to do the will of my Father) so our meat is to
know the will of the Father; Every man, even in nature, has that appetite,
that desire, to know God. And therefore if God have made any man, and not given
him means to know him, Psalm. 145.15.
he is but a good Builder, he is no good Housekeeper, He gives him lodging, but
he gives him no meat; But the eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them
their meat in due season. All, (not only we) wait upon God; and he gives them
Their meat, though not our meat, (The Word and the Sacramenss) yet Their meat,
such as they are able to digest and endue. Even in nature, He is the confidence
of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are a far off, upon the Sea.
That is his daily bread, which even the natural man begs at Gods hand, and God
affords it him.

The most precious and costly dishes are always reserved for the last
services, but yet there is wholesome meat before too. The clear light is in
the Gospel, but there is light in Nature too. Revel. 19.9.
At the last Supper, (the Supper of the Lamb in Heaven) there is no bill of
fare, there are no particular dishes named there. It is impossible to tell us
what we shall feed upon, what we shall be feasted with, at the Marriage Supper
of the Lamb; Our way of knowing God there cannot be expressed. At that Supper
of the Lamb, which is here, here in our way homewards, that is, in the
Sacramental Supper of the Lamb, it is very hard to tell, what we feed upon;
How that meat is dressed, how the Body and Blood of Christ is received by us,
at that Supper, in that Sacrament, is hard to be expressed, hard to be
conceived, for the way and manner thereof. So also in the former meal, that
which we have called the Dinner, which is The knowledge which the Jews had in
the Law, it was not easy to distinguish the taste, and the nature of every
dish, and to find the signification in every Type, and in every Ceremony.
There are some difficulties (if curious men take the matter in hand, and be too
inquisitive) even in the Gospel; more in the Law; most of all in Nature. But
yet, even in this first refection, this first meal, that God sets before man,
(which is our knowledge of God in Nature) because we are then in Gods House,
(all this World, and the next make God but one House) though God do not give
Marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.6. 81.16.
(as David speaks) though he do not feed them with the fat of the wheat, nor
satisfy them with honey out of the Rock, (for the Gospel is the honey, and
Christ is the Rock) yet, even in Nature, he gives sufficient means to know
him, though they come to neither of the other Meals, neither to the Jews
Dinner, The benefit of the Law, nor to the Christians Supper, either when they
feed upon the Lamb in the Sacrament, or when they feed with the Lamb in the
possession and fruition of Heaven.

Though therefore the Septuagint, in their Translation of the Psalms, have, in
the Title of this Psalm, added this, A Psalm of Jeremy and Ezekiel, when they
were departing out of the Captivity of Babylon, intimating therein, that it is
a Psalm made in contemplation of that blessed place which we are to go to,
(as, literally, it was of their happy state in their restitution from Babylon
to Jerusalem) And though the ancient Church, by appropriating this Psalm to
the office of the dead, to the service at Burials, intimate also, that this
Psalm is intended of that fullness of knowledge, and Joy, and Glory, which
they have that are departed in the Lord, yet the Holy Ghost stops, as upon the
way, before we come thither, and, since we must lie in an Inn, that is, Lodge
in this World, he enables the World to entertain us, as well as to lodge us,
and has provided, that the World, the very world it self, (before we
consider the Law in the World, or the Church in the World, or Glory in the next
World) This very World, that is, Nature, and no more, should give such an
universal light of the knowledge of God, as that he should be The confidence
of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that are a far off upon the Sea.

And therefore as men that come to great places, and preferments, when they
have entered by a fair and wide gate of Honor, but yet are laid down upon
hard beds of trouble and anxiety in those places, (for, when the body seems in
the sight of men, to go on in an easy amble, the mind is every day (if not
all day) in a shrewd and diseasefull trot) As those men will sometimes say, It
was better with me, when I was in a lower place, and fortune, and will
remember, being Bishops, the pleasures they had when they were Schoole-boyes,
and yet, for all this, intermit not their thankfulness to God, who has raised
them to that height, and those means of glorifying him: so, howsoever we
abound with joy and thankfulness, for these gracious and glorious
Illustrations of the Law, and the Gospel, and beams of future Glory, which we
have in the Christian Church, Let us reflect often upon our beginning, upon the
consideration of Gods first benefits, which he has given to us all in Nature,
That light, John 1.9.
by which he enlighteneth every man that comes into the World, That he has
given us a reasonable soul capable of grace, here, (that, he has denied no
man, and no other creature has that) That he has given us an immortal soul
capable of glory hereafter, (and that, that immortality he has denied no man,
and no other creature has that.) Consider we always the grace of God, to be
the Sun it self, but the nature of man, and his natural faculties to be the
Sphere, in which that Sun, that Grace moves. Consider we the Grace of God to be
the soul it self, but the natural faculties of man, to be as a body, which
ministers Organs for that soul, that Grace to work by. That so, as how much
soever I fear the hand of a mighty man, that strikes, yet I have a more
immediate fear of the sword he strikes with; So, though I impute justly my
sins, and my fears of judgments for them, to Gods withdrawing, or to my
neglecting his grace, yet I look also upon that which is next me, Nature, and
natural light, and natural faculties, and that I consider how I use to use
them; whether I be as watchful upon my tongue, that that minister no tentation
to others, and upon mine eye, that that receive no tentation from others, as by
the light of Nature, I might, and as some moral Men, without addition of
particular Grace, have done. That so, first for my self, I be not apt to lay
any thing upon God, and to say, that he starved me, though he should not bid
me to the Jews dinner, in giving me the light of the Law, nor bid me to the
Christians Supper, in giving me the light of the Gospel, because he has given
me a competent refection even in Nature. And then, that for others, I may first
say with the Apostle, Romans 1.20. 11.33.
That they are without excuse, who do not see the invisible God, in the
visible Creature, and may say also with him, O altitudo! The ways of the Lord
are past my finding out; And therefore to those, who do open their eyes to
that light of Nature, in the best exaltation thereof, God does not hide
himself, though he have not manifested to me, by what way he manifests
himself to them. For, God disappoints none, and he is The confidence of all
the ends of the Earth, and of them who are a far off upon the Sea.

Commit thy way unto the Lord, Psalm. 37.5.
says David; And he says more, then our Translation seems to express; The
Margin has expressed it; for, according to the Original word, Galal, it is in
the Margin, not Commit, but Roll thy way upon the Lord; which may very well
imply, and intend this precept, Carry thy Rolling trench up to God, and gather
upon him; Genesis 18.23.
As Abraham, when he beat the price with God for Sodom, from fifty, to ten,
rolled his Petition upon God, fo roll thy ways upon him, come up to him in a
thankful acknowledgement, what he has done for thee, in the Gospel, in the
Law, and in Nature; And then, as Tertullian says of public Prayers,
Obsidemus Deum, In the Prayers of the Congregation we besiege God, So this way
we entrench our selves before God, so, as that nothing can beat us out of our
trenches; for, if all the Canons of the Church beat upon me, so that I be by
Excommunication removed from the assistances of the Church, (though I be
inexcusable, if I labor not my Reconciliation, and my Absolution) yet, before
that be effected, I am still in my first trench, still I am a man, still I have
a soul capable of Grace, still I have the light of Nature, and some presence
of God in that; though I be attenuated, I am not annihilated, though by my
former abuses of Gods graces, and my contumacy, I be cast back to the ends of
the earth, and a far off upon the Sea, yet even there, God is the confidence of
all them; As long as I consider that I have such a soul, capable of Grace and
Glory, I cannot despair.

Thus Nature makes Pearls, Thus Grace makes Saints. A drop of dew hardens, and
then another drop falls, and spreads it self, and clothes that former drop,
and then another, and another, and become so many shells and films that invest
that first feminall drop, and so (they say) there is a pearl in Nature. A good
foul takes first Gods first drop into his consideration, what he has shed
upon him in Nature, and then his second coat, what in the Law, and
successively his other manifold graces, as so many shells, and films, in the
Christian Church, and so we are sure, there is a Saint.

Roll thy ways upon God; And (as it follows in the same verse) Spera in eo,
and ipse faciet; we translate it, Trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass;
Begin at Alpha, and he shall bring it to Omega: Consider thy self but in the
state of Hope, (for the state of Nature is but a state of Hope, a state of
Capablenesse; In Nature we have the capacity of Grace, but not Grace in
possession, in Nature) Et ipse faciet, says that Text, God shall do, God
shall work; There is no more in the Original but so, Ipse faciet; Not God
shall do it, or do this, or do that, but do all; do but consider that God
has done something for thee, and he shall do all, for, He is the confidence
of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are a far off upon the Sea.
Here is a new Mathematiques; without change of Elevation, or parallax, I that
live in this Climate, and stand under this Meridian, look up and fix my self
upon God, And they that are under my feet, look up to that place, which is
above them, And as diverse, as contrary as our places are, we all fix at once
upon one God, and meet in one Center; but we do not so upon one Sun, nor
upon one constellation, or configuration in the Heavens; when we see it, those
Antipodes do not; but they, and we see God at once. How various forms of
Religion soever pass us through diverse ways, yet by the very light and power
of Nature, we meet in one God; and for so much, as may make God accessible to
us, and make us inexcusable toward him, there is light enough in this dawning
of the day, refection enough in this first meal, The knowledge of God, which
we have in Nature; That alone discharges God, and condemns us; for, by that, He
is, that is, He offers himself to be, The confidence of all the ends of the
Earth, and of them who are a far of upon the Sea; that is, of all mankind.

But then, Lunae radiis non matureseit botrus, fruits may be seen by the
Mooneshine, but the Mooneshine will not ripen them. Therefore a Sun rises
unto us, in the law, and in the Prophets, and gives us another manner of light,
then we had in nature. Prove. 4.19.
The way of the wicked is as Darkness, says Solomon; Wherein? It follows,
They know not at what they stumble. A man that calls himself to no kind of
account, that takes no candle into his hand, never knows at what he stumbles,
not what occasions his sin. But by the light of nature, if he will look upon
his own infirmities, his own deformities, his own inclinations, he may know at
what he stumbles, what that is that leads him into tentation. For, though S.
Paul say, That by the law is the knowledge of sin, And, Romans 3.20. Romans 5.13.
Romans 7.7.
Sin is not imputed when there is no law; And again, I had not known sin, but
by the law; in some of these places, the law is not intended only of the law
of the Jews, but of the law of nature in our hearts, (for, by that law, every
man knows that he sins) And then, sin is not only intended of sin produced
into act, but sin in the heart; as the Apostle instances there, I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet. Of some sins,
there is no clear evidence given by the light of nature: That the law
supplied; and more then that. The law did not only show, what was sin, but
gave some light of remedy against sin, and restitution after sin, by those
sacrifices, which, though they were ineffectuall in themselves, yet involved,
and represented Christ, who was their salvation. So then, God was to the Jews,
in general, as he was to his principal servant amongst them, Moses; He saw
the land of promise, but he entered not into it; The Jews saw Christ, Deuteronomy. 34.1.
but embraced him not. Abraham saw his day, and rejoiced; They saw it, that is,
they might have seen it, but winked at it. Luther says well, Iudaei habuere
jus mendicandi, The Jews had a license to beg, They had a Breve, and might
gather, They had a Covenant, and might plead with God; But they did not; and
therefore, though they were inexcusable for their neglect of the light of
Nature, and more inexcusable for resisting the light of the law, That they and
we might be absolutely inexcusable, if we continued in darkness after that,
God set up another light, the light of the Gospel, which is our third and last
part, wrapped up in those first words of our Text, By terrible things, in
righteousness, will thou answer us, O God of our salvation.

This word, Salvation, Iashang, is the root of the name of Jesus. 3 Part.
Ecclesia Christiana.
In the beginning of the Primitive Church, when the followers of Christ left or
discontinued their being called the Disciples, and the Faithful, and the
Brethren, and the Professors, as they had been called before, and would bring
the Name of their founder, Christ Jesus, into more evidence and manifestation,
yet they were not called by the Name of Jesus, but from Christ; at Antioch
first they were called Christians. For, it is well distinguished, Acts 11.26.
That the Name of Jesus, as it signifies a Savior, first contemplates God, and
the Divine nature, Bonavent.
(which only could save us) And then has relation to Man, and the Humane
nature, without assuming of which, the Son of God could not have saved us
that way, that God had proposed, The satisfaction of his Justice; And then, the
Name of Christ, (as it signifies Anointed, and appointed to a certain purpose,
as to die for us) first contemplates Man, and the Humane nature, which only
could die, And then has relation to God, and the Divine nature. So that Jesus
is God, and Man in Him; And Christ is Man, and God in Him. So the Name Jesus
seems to taste of more Mystery, and more Incomprehensiblenesse; And the Name
of Christ, of more Humility, and Appliablenesse.

And with this lower Name, to be called Christians from Christ, was the Church
of God contented; Whereas a later race of men in the Roman Church, will needs
take their Denomination from Jesus himself; But I know not whether they mean
our Jesus or no. Josephus remembers two (at least) of that name, Jesus,
Josephus.
that were infamous malefactors, and men of blood; and they may deduce
themselves from such a Jesus. And a Jesuit teaches us, that it is the common
opinion, that Barrabas the murderer, Lorinus. Act. 13.6.
was by his proper Name called Jesus; that his name was Jesus Barrabas; and
that therefore Pilate made that difference upon our Savior, Jesus Nazarenus,
This is Jesus of Nazareth, and not Jesus Barrabas; and from that Jesus, Jesus
Barrabas they may deduce themselves. And we know also, that that mischievous
sorcerer, was called by that Name, Bar-jesu, Ibid.
The Son of Jesus. From which Jesus amongst these, they will make their
extraction, let them choose. As amongst the Jesuits, the bloodiest of them all,
(even to the drawing of the sacred blood of Kings) is, by his name, Mariana; So
all the rest of them, both in that respect, of sucking blood, and occasioning
massacres, and other respects too, are rather Marianits then Jesuits, Idolaters
of the blessed Virgin Mary, then worshippers of Jesus.

We consist in the Humility of the Ancients; we are Christians, Jesus is merely
a Savior, A name of Mystery, Christ is Anointed, A name of Communication, of
Accommodation, of Imitation; Cant. 1.3.
And so this name, the name of Christ, is Oleum effusum, (as the Spouse speaks)
An ointment, a perfume powered out upon us, and we are Christians. In the name
of Jesus, Corn. Lap. Ephesians. 1.10.
S. Paul abounded, but in the Name of Christ more; for, (as a Jesuit gives us
the account) he repeats the name of Jesus almost three hundred times, but the
name of Christ more then four hundred, in his Epistles. In this Church then,
which is gathered in the Name of Christ, (though in the power and merit of
Jesus) This light which we speak of, This knowledge of God, and means of
salvation, is in the highest exaltation. In the state of nature, we consider
this light, as the Sun, to be risen at the Moluccae, in the farthest East; In
the state of the law, we consider it, as the Sun come to Ormus, the first
Quadrant; But in the Gospel, to be come to the Canaries, the fortunate Islands,
the first Meridian. Now, whatsoever is beyond this, is Westward, toward a
Declination. If we will go farther then to be Christians, and those doctrines,
which the whole Christian Church has ever believed, 1 Cor. 1.12.
if we will be of Cephas, and of Apollos, if we will call our selves, or
endanger, and give occasion to others, to call us from the Names of men,
Papists, or Lutherans, or Calvinists, we depart from the true glory and
serenity, from the luster and splendour of this Sun; This is Tabernaculum
Solis, Here in the Christian Church, Psalm. 19.5.
God has set a Tabernacle for the Sun; And, as in nature, Man has light
enough to discern the principles of Reason; So in the Christian Church,
(considered without subdivisions of Names, and Sects) a Christian has light
enough of all things necessary to salvation.

So then, still roll thy ways upon God, Gather upon him nearer and nearer;
for, all these are emanations of lights from him, that he might be found, and
seen, and known by thee. The looking upon God, by the first light of Nature,
is, to catechize, and examine thy self, whether thou do govern, and employ
thy natural faculties to his glory; whether thou do shut thine eyes at a
tentation, stop thine ears at a blasphemy upon God, or a defamation upon thy
neighbor; and withhold thy hand from blood and bribes, and thy feet from
fellowship in sin. The looking upon God, by the second light, the light of the
law, is, to discern by that, that God has always had a peculiar people of
his own, and gathered them, and contained them in his worship, by certain
visible, sensible Ordinances and Institutions, Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and
rituall Ceremonies, and to argue and conclude out of Gods former proceedings
with them, his greatness and his goodness toward the present world. And
then, to see God by that last and best light, the light of the Christian
Church, is, to be content with so much of God, as God has revealed of himself
to his Church; And (as it is expressed here) to hear him answer thee, By
terrible things in righteousness; for, that he does as he is the God of our
salvation, that is, as he works in the Christian Church; which is our last
Consideration; By terrible, etc.

In this Consideration, Respondet, ergo Orandum.
(Gods proceeding with us in the Christian Church) this observation meets us
first, That Gods conversation with us there, is called an Answering; (He shall
answer us) Now if we look that God should answer us, we must say something to
God; and our way of speaking to God, is by petition, by prayer. If we present
no petition, Romans 10.20.
if we pray not, we can look for no answer, for we ask none. Esaias is very
bold, (says S. Paul) when he says, That God was found of them that sought him
not, and made manifest to them that asked not after him; Yet though it were
boldly said, it was truly said; so early, and so powerful is Gods preventing
grace toward us. So it is a very ordinary phrase amongst the Prophets, God
answered, and said thus, and thus, when the Prophet had asked nothing of God.
But here we are upon Gods proceeding with man in the Christian Church; and so,
God answers not, but to our petitions, to our prayers. In a Sermon, God speaks
to the Congregation, but he answers only that soul, that has been with him
at Prayers before. A man may pray in the street, in the fields, in a fair; but
it is a more acceptable and more effectual prayer, when we shut our doors,
and observe our stationary houses for private prayer in our Chamber; and in our
Chamber, when we pray upon our knees, then in our beds. But the greatest power
of all, is in the public prayer of the Congregation.

It is a good remembrance that Damascene gives, Non quia gentes quaedam
faciunt, Damase.
a nobis linquenda; We must not forbear things only therefore, because the
Gentiles, or the Jews used them. The Gentiles, particularly the Romans,
(before they were Christians) had a set Service, a prescribed form of Common
prayer in their Temples; and they had a particular Officer in that State, who
was Conditor precum, that made their Collects, and Prayers upon emergent
occasions; And Omni lustro, every five years there was a review, and an
alteration in their Prayers, and the state of things was presumed to have
received so much change in that time, as that it was fit to change some of
their Prayers and Collects. It must not therefore seem strange, that at the
first, there were certain Collects appointed in our Church; nor that others,
upon just occasion, be added.

Gods blessing here, in the Christian Church, (for, to that we limit this
consideration) is, that here He will answer us; Therefore, here we must ask;
Here, our asking is our communion at Prayer: And therefore they that
undervalue, or neglect the prayers of the Church, have not that title to the
benefit of the Sermon; for though God do speak in the Sermon, yet he
answers, that is, applies himself, by his Spirit, only to them, who have
prayed to him before. If they have joined in prayer, they have their interest,
and shall feel their Consolation in all the promises of the Gospel, shed upon
the Congregation, in the Sermon. Have you asked by prayer, Is there no Balm in
Gilead? He answers you by me, Yes, there is Blame; Esaias 53.5.
He was wounded for your transgressions, and with his stripes you are healed;
His Blood is your Balm, his Sacrament is your Gilead. Have you asked by
prayer, Is there no Smith in Israel? 1 Samuel 13.18.
No means to discharge my self of my fetters, and chains, of my temporal,
and spiritual Encumbrances? God answers thee, Yes, there is; He bids you but
look about, and you shall find your self in Peter case; The Angel of the
Lord present, A light shining, Act. 12.7.
and his chains falling off: All your manacles locked upon the hands, All your
chains loaded upon the legs, All your stripes numbered upon the back of
Christ Jesus. You have said in your prayers here, (Lord, from whom all good
counsails do proceed) And God answers you from hence, The Angel of the great
Counsel shall dwell with you, and direct you. You have said in your prayers,
Lighten our darkness, and God answers you by me, Esaias 60.19.
(as he did his former people by Esaias) The Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Petition God at prayers, and God
shall answer all your petitions at the Sermon. There we begin, (if we will
make profit of a Sermon) at Prayers; And thither we return again, (if we
have made profit by a Sermon) in due time, to prayers. For, Confess. l. 1. c. 1.
that is S. Augustines holy Circle, in which he walks from Prayers to the
Sermon, and from the Sermon, next day to Prayers again. Invocat te fides mea,
says he to God; Here I stand or kneel in thy presence, and in the power of
faith, to pray to thee. But where had I this faith, that makes my prayer
acceptable? Dedisti mihi per ministerium Praedicatoris; I had it at the Sermon,
I had it, says he, by the ministry of the Preacher; but I had it therefore,
because thy Spirit prepared me by prayer before; And I have it therefore, that
is, to that end, that I might return faithfully to prayers again. As he is
The God of our salvation, (that is, As he works in the Christian Church) he
answers us: If we ask by prayer, he applies the Sermon; And, He answers by
terrible things, in righteousness.

These two words, (Terribilia per Iustitiam) By Terrible things in
Righteousness, Terribilia per Iustitiam
are ordinarily by our Expositors taken, to intimate a confidence, that God
imprints by the Ordinance of his Church, that by this right use of Prayer and
Preaching, they shall always be delivered from their enemies, or from what may
be most terrible unto them. In which exposition, Righteousness signifies
faithfulness, and Terrible things signify miraculous deliverances from, and
terrible Judgments upon his, and our enemies. Therefore is God called, Deus
fidelis, The faithful God; for, Deuteronomy. 7.9.
that faithfulness implies a Covenant, made before, (and there entered his
Mercy, that he would make that Covenant) and it implies also the assurance of
the performance thereof, for there enters his faithfulness. So he is called,
Fidelis Creator, (We commit our souls to God, 1 Pet. 4.19.
as to a faithful Creator) He had an eternal gracious purpose upon us, to
create us, and he has faithfully accomplished it. So, Fidelis quia vocavit,
He is faithful in having called us; 1 These. 5.24.
That he had decreed, and that he has done. So Christ is called, Fidelis
Pontifex, Heb. 2.17.
A merciful and a faithful high Priest; Merciful in offering himself for
us, faithful in applying himself to us. So Gods whole word is called so
often, so very often Testimonium fidele, A faithful witness, an evidence that
cannot deceive, nor mislead us. Psalm. 19.8.
Therefore we may be sure, that whatsoever God has promised to his Church,
(And whatsoever God has done upon the enemies of his Church heretofore, those
very performances to them, are promises to us, of the like succors in the like
distresses) he will perform, re-performe, multiply performances thereof upon
us. Esaias 25.1.
Thy counsails of old are faithfulness and truth; That is, whatsoever thou
did decree, was done even then, in the infallibility of that Decree; And when
that Decree came to be executed, and actually done, in that very execution of
that former Decree was enwrapped a new Decree, That the same should be done
over and over again for us, when soever we needed it. So that then, casting
up our account, from the destruction of Babel, by all the plagues of Egypt,
through the depopulation of Canaan, and the massacre in Sennacheribs Army, to
the swallowing of the Invincible Navy upon our Seas, and the bringing to light
that Infernal, that subterranean Treason in our Land, we may argue, and
assume, That the God of our salvation will answer us by terrible things, by
multiplying of miracles, and ministering supplies, to the confusion of his, and
our enemies, for, By terrible things in righteousness, will the God of our
salvation answer us.

So then, Per Iustitiam.
his Judgments are these Terribilia, Terrible, fearful things; And he is
faithful in his Covenant, and by terrible Judgments he will answer, that is,
satisfy our expectation. And that is a convenient sense of these words. But,
the word, which we translate Righteousness here, is Tzadok, and Tzadok is not
faithfulness, but holiness; And these Terrible things are Reverend things;
and so Tremellius translates it, and well; Per res Reverendas, By Reverend
things, things to which there belongs a Reverence, thou shall answer us. And
thus, the sense of this place will be, That the God of our salvation, (that is,
God working in the Christian Church) calls us to Holiness, to Righteousness,
by Terrible things; not Terrible, in the way and nature of revenge; but
Terrible, that is, stupendous, reverend, mysterious: That so we should not
make Religion too homely a thing, but come always to all Acts, and Exercises
of Religion, with reverence, with fear, and trembling, and make a difference,
between Religious, and Civil Actions.

In the frame and constitution of al Religions, these Materials, these Elements
have ever entered; Some words of a remote signification, not vulgarly
understood, some actions of a kind of halfe-horror and amazement, some places
of reservation and retiredness, and appropriation to some sacred persons, and
inaccessible to all others. Not to speak of the services, and sacrifices of
the Gentiles, and those selfe-manglings and lacerations of the Priests of Isis,
and of the Priests of Baal, (faintly counterfaited in the scourgings and
flagellations in the Roman Church) In that very discipline which was delivered
from God, by Moses, the service was full of mystery, and horror, and
reservation, By terrible things, (Sacrifices of blood in manifold effusions)
God answered them, then. So, the matter of Doctrine was delivered mysteriously,
and with much reservation, and in-intelligiblenesse, as Tertullian speaks. The
Joy and Glory of Heaven was not easily understood by their temporal abundances
of Milk, and Honey, and Oil, and Wine; and yet, in these (and scarce any
other way) was Heaven presented, and notified to that people by Moses. Christ,
a Messiah, a Savior of the World, by shedding his blood for it, was not easily
discerned in their Types and Sacrifices; And yet so, and scarce any other way
was Christ revealed unto them. Hos. 12.10.
God says, I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry
of the Prophets. They were Visions, they were Similitudes, nor plain and
evident things, obvious to every understanding, that God led his people by. And
there was an Order of Doctors amongst the Jews that professed that way, To
teach the People by Parables and dark sayings; Sandaei symbulica fol. 108.
and these were the powerfullest Teachers amongst them, for they had their very
name (Mosselim) from power and dominion; They had a power, a dominion over the
affections of their Disciples, because teaching them by an obscure way, they
created an admiration, and a reverence in their hearers, and laid a necessity
upon them, of returning again to them, for the interpretation and
signification of those dark Parables. Many think that Moses cites these
obscure Doctors, these Mosselim, in that place, Number. 21.7.
in the book of Numbers, when he says, Wherefore they that speak in
Proverbs, say thus, and thus, And so he proceeds in a way and words, as hard to
be understood, Psalm. 49.4.
as any place in all his Books. David professes this of himself often; I will
open dark sayings upon my Harp, Psalm. 77.2.
And, I will open my mouth in a Parable. And this was the way of Solomon; for
that very word is the Title of his book of Proverbs. And in this way of
teaching, Matt. 7.19.
our Savior abounded, and excelled; for when it is said, He taught them as one
having authority, And when it is said, They were astonished at his Doctrine,
Luke 4.32.
for his word was with Power, they refer that to this manner of teaching, that
he astonished them with these reserved and dark sayings, and by the
subsequent interpretation thereof, gained a reverend estimation amongst them,
that he only could lead them to a desire to know, (that dark way increased
their desire) and then he only satisfy them with the knowledge of those
things which concerned their salvation. For these Parables, and comparisons of
a remote signification, were called by the Jews, Potestates, Powers, Powerful
insinuations, as, amongst the Grecians, the same things were called Axiomata,
Dignities; And of Christ it is said, Without a Parable spoke he not. Mat. 13.34.


So that God in the Old, and Christ in the New Testament, has conditioned his
Doctrine, and his Religion (that is, his outward worship) so, as that evermore
there should be preserved a Majesty, and a reverentiall fear, and an awful
discrimination of Divine things from Civil, and evermore something reserved to
be inquired after, and laid up in the mouth of the Priest, that the People
might acknowledge an obligation from him, in the exposition, and application
thereof. Nay, this way of answering us by terrible things, (that is, by things
that imprint a holy horror, and a Religious reverence) is much more in the
Christian Church, then it can have been in any other Religion; Because, if we
consider the Jews, (which is the only Religion, that can enter into any
comparison with the Christian, in this kind) yet, we look more directly and
more immediately upon God in Christ, then they could, who saw him but by way of
Prophecy, a future thing that should be done after; we look upon God, in
History, in matter of fact, upon things done, and set before our eyes; and so
that Majesty, and that holy amazement, is more to us then ever it was to any
other Religion, because we have a nearer approximation, and vicinity to God in
Christ, then any others had, in any representions of their Gods; and it is a
more dazeling thing to look upon the Sun, in a direct, then in an oblique or
side line. And therefore, the love of God, which is so often proposed unto us,
is as often seasoned with the fear of God; nay, all our Religious affections
are reduced to that one, To a reverentiall fear; If he be a Master, he calls
for fear, and, Mal. 1.6.
If he be a Father, he calls for honor; And honor implies a reverentiall
fear. And that is the Art that David professes to teach, Artem timendi, Come
ye children, and hearken unto me, Psalm. 34.12.
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. That you think not Divinity an
Occupation, nor Church Service a recreation; but still remember, That the God
of our Salvation (God working in the Christian Church) will answer you; but
yet, by terrible things; that is, by not being over-fellowly with God, nor
over-homely with places, and acts of Religion; which, it may be an advancement
to your Devotion and edification, to consider, in some particulars in the
Christian Church.

And first, consider we it, in our manners, and conversation. Christ says, In
moribus. John 15.14. Mat. 22.12.
Henceforth I call you not servants, but friends. But, howsoever Christ called
him friend, that was come to the feast without the wedding garment, he cast him
out, because he made no difference of that place from another. First then,
remember by what terrible things God answers thee in the Christian Church, when
he comes to that round and peremptory issue, Mark 16.16.
Qui non credider it, damnabitur, He that believes not every Article of the
Christian faith, and with so steadfast a belief, as that he would dye for it,
Damnabitur, (no modification, no mollification, no going less) He shall be
damned. Consider too the nature of Excommunication, That it tears a man from
the body of Christ Jesus; That that man withers that is torn off, and Christ
himself is wounded in it. Consider the insupportable penances that were laid
upon sinners, by those penitential Canons, that went through the Church in
those Primitive times; when, for many sins which we pass through now, without
so much as taking knowledge that they are sins, men were not admitted to the
Communion all their lives, no, nor easily upon their deathbeds. Consider how
dangerously an abuse of that great doctrine of Predestination may bring thee to
think, that God is bound to thee, and thou not bound to him, That thou may
renounce him, and he must embrace thee, and so make thee too familiar with God,
and too homely with Religion, upon presumption of a Decree. Consider that when
thou preparest any unclean action, in any sinful nakedness, God is not only
present with thee in that room then, but then tells thee, That at the day of
Judgment thou must stand in his presence, and in the presence of all the
World, not only naked, but in that foul, and sinful, and unclean action of
nakedness, which thou committedst then; Consider all this and confess, that
for matter of manners, and conversation, The God of thy Salvation answers thee
by terrible things. And so it is also, if we consider Prayer in the Church.

God House is the house of Prayer; In oratione.
It is his Court of Requests; There he receives petitions, there he gives Order
upon them. And you come to God in his House, as though you came to keep him
company, to sit down, and talk with him half an hour; or you come as
Ambassadors, covered in his presence, as though ye came from as great a Prince
as he. You meet below, and there make your bargains, for biting, for devouring
Usury, and then you come up hither to prayers, and so make God your Broker. You
rob, and spoil, and eat his people as bread, by Extortion, and bribery, and
deceitful waights and measures, and deluding oaths in buying and selling, and
then come hither, and so make God your Receiver, and his house a den of
Thieves. His house is Sanctum Sanctorum, The holiest of holies, and you make it
only Sanctuarium; It should be a place sanctified by your devotions, and you
make it only a Sanctuary to privilege Malefactors, A place that may redeem
you from the ill opinion of men, who must in charity be bound to think well of
you, because they see you here. Offer this to one of your Princes, (as God
argues in the Prophet) and see, if he will suffer his house to be profaned by
such uncivil abuses; Psalm. 47.3.
And, Terribilis Rex, The Lord most high is terrible, and a great King over all
the earth; Psalm. 96.4.
and, Terribilis super omnes Deos, More terrible then all other Gods. Let thy
Master be thy god, or thy Mistress thy god, thy Belly be thy god, or thy Back
be thy god, thy fields be thy god, or thy chests be thy god, Terribilis super
omnes Deos, The Lord is terrible above all gods, Psalm. 95.3. Deuteronomy. 28.58.
A great God, and a great King above all gods. You come, and call upon him by
his name here, But Magnu^ and terribile, Glorious and fearful is the name of
the Lord thy God. And, as if the Son of God were but the Son of some Lord, that
had been your Schoole-fellow in your youth, and so you continued a boldness
to him ever after, so, because you have been brought up with Christ from your
cradle, and catechized in his name, Psalm. 111.4.
his name becomes less reverend unto you, And Sanctum and terribile, Holy, and
reverend, Holy and terrible should his name be.

Consider the resolution that God has taken upon the Hypocrite, and his
prayer; What is the hope of the Hypocrite, Job 27.8. Hos 7.14.
when God takes away his soul? Will God hear his cry? They have not cried
unto me with their hearts, when they have howled upon their beds. Consider,
that error in the matter of our prayer frustrates the prayer and makes it
ineffectuall. Zebedees Sons would have been placed at the right hand, Mat.
20.21.
and at the left hand of Christ, and were not heard. Error in the manner may
frustrate our prayer, and make it ineffectuall too. Iam. 4.3.
Ye ask, and are not heard, because ye ask amiss. It is amiss, if it be not
referred to his will, Luke 5.12. Iam. 1.6.
(Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.) It is amiss, if it be not
asked in faith, (Let not him that wavereth, think he shall receive any thing
of the Lord.) It is amiss, if prayer be discontinued, 1 These. 5.17. Luke
22.44. Esaias 1.15.
intermitted, done by fits, (Pray incessantly) And it is so too, if it be not
vehement; for Christ was in an Agony in his prayer, and his sweat was as great
drops of blood. Of prayers without these conditions, God says, When you spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes, and when you make many prayers, I will
not hear you. Their prayer shall not only be ineffectuall, Prove. 28.9. Psalm.
129.7.
but even their prayer shall be an abomination; And not only an abomination to
God, but destruction upon themselves; for, Their prayer shall be turned to sin.
And, when they shall not be heard for themselves, no body else shall be heard
for them; (Though these three men, Ezekiel. 14.14.
Noah, Job, and Daniel, stood for them, they should not deliver the^; Though
the whole Congregation consisted of Saints, they shall not be heard for him,
nay, they shall be forbidden to pray for him, forbidden to mention, or mean him
in their prayers, as Jeremy was. When God leaves you no way of reconciliation
but prayer, and then lays these heavy and terrible conditions upon prayer;
Confess that though he be the God of your salvation, and do answer you, yet By
terrible things does the God of your salvation answer you. And consider this
again, as in manners, and in prayer, so in his other Ordinance of Preaching.

Think with your selves what God looks for from you, In concionibus. 1 Cor.
1.21.
and what you give him, in that Exercise. Because God calls Preaching
foolishness, you take God at his word, and you think Preaching a thing under
you. Hence is it, that you take so much liberty in censuring and comparing
Preacher and Preacher, nay Sermon and Sermon from the same Preacher; as though
we preached for wagers, and as though coin were to be valued from the
inscription merely, and the image, and the person, and not for the metal. You
measure all by persons; 1 (...) 4.^^.
and yet, Non erubescit is faciem Sacerdotis, You respect not the person of the
Priest, you give not so much reverence to Gods Ordinance, as he does. In no
Church of Christendom but ours, does the Preacher preach uncovered. And for
all this good, and humble, and reverend example, (fit to be continued by us)
cannot we keep you uncovered till the Text be read. All the Sermon is not Gods
word, but all the Sermon is Gods Ordinance, and the Text is certainly his
word. There is no salvation but by faith, nor faith but by hearing, nor bearing
but by preaching; and they that think meanliest of the Keys of the Church,
and speak faintliest of the Absolution of the Church, will yet allow, That
those Keys lock, and unlock in Preaching; That Absolution is conferred, or
with held in Preaching, That the proposing of the promises of the Gospel in
preaching, is that binding and loosing on earth, which binds and looses in
heaven. And then, though Christ have bid us, Preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mar. 16.15.
yet, in his own great Sermon in the Mount, he has forbidden us, to give holy
things to dogs, Mat. 7.6.
or to cast pearl before swine, lest they trample them, and turn and rend us.
So that if all those manifold and fearful judgments, which swell in every
Chapter and blow in every verse, and thunder in every line of every Book of
the Bible, fall upon all them that come hither, as well, if they turn, and
rend, that is, Calumniate us, the person of the Preacher, as if they trample
upon the pearls, that is, undervalue the Doctrine, and the Ordinance it self;
If his terrible Judgments fall upon every uncharitable mis-interpretation of
that which is said here, and upon every irreverence in this place, and in this
action; Confess, that though he be the God of your salvation, and do answer
you, yet, by terrible things does the God of your salvation answer you. And
confess it also, as in manners, and in prayers, and in preaching, so in the
holy and blessed Sacrament.

This Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior, Luther calls safely, In
Sacramento.
Venerabile and adorabile; for certainly, whatsoever that is which we see, that
which we receive, is to be adored; for, we receive Christ. He is Res
Sacramenti, The form, the Essence, the substance, the soul of the Sacrament;
And Sacramentum sine re Sacramenti, mors ost, Bernar.
To take the body, and not the soul, the bread, and not Christ, is death. But
he that feels Christ, in the receiving of the Sacrament, and will not bend his
knee, would scarce bend his knee, if he saw him. The first of that royal
Family, Alvarez de Auxil. Epist. ad Phil. 3.
which thinks it self the greatest in Christendom at this day, The House of
Austrich, had the first marks of their Greatness, The Empire, brought into
that House, for a particular reverence done to the holy and blessed Sacrament.
What the bread and wine is, or what becomes of it, Damasc.
Damascen thinks impertinent to be inquired. He thinks he has said enough;
(and so may we do) Migrat in substantiam animae; There is the true
Transubstantiation, that when I have received it worthily, it becomes my very
soul; that is, My soul grows up into a better state, and habitude by it, and
I have the more soul for it, the more sanctified, the more deified soul by
that Sacrament.

Now this Sacrament, which as it is ministered to us, is but a Sacrament, but as
it is offered to God, is a Sacrifice too, is a fearful, a terrible thing: If
the sacrifices of the Law, the blood of Goats and Rams, were so, how
fearful, how terrible, how reverentiall a thing is the blood of this
immaculate Lamb, the Son of God? And though God do so abound in goodness
toward us, Vt possint injuriata Sacramenta prodesse reversis, Cyprian.
(as S. Cyprian excellently expresses it) That that Sacrament which we have
injured and abused, received unworthily, or irreverently, at one time, may yet
benefit us, and be the savor and seal of life unto us, at another, yet when
you hear that terrible Thunder break upon you, That the unworthy receiver eats
and drinks his own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.27.
That he makes Christ Jesus, who is the propitiation of all the world, his
damnation; And then, That not to have come to a severe examination of the
Conscience before, and to a sincere detestation of the sin, and to a formed,
and fixed, and deliberate, and determinate resolution against that sin, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, (which, alas, how few do? Is there one that does
it? There is scorce one) That this makes a man an unworthy receiver of the
Sacrament, That thus we make a mock of the Son of God, Heb. 10.29.
thus we tread the blood of the Covenant under foot, and despite the Spirit of
grace; And that for this, at the last day, we shall be ranked with Judas, and
not only with Judas, as a negligent despiser, but with Judas, as an actual
betrayer of the blood of Christ Jesus. Consider well, with what fearful
Conditions even this scale of your reconciliation is accompanied, and though
you may not doubt, but that God, the God of your salvation does answer you, yet
you must confess too, That it is by terrible things, that he does it. And, as
it is so in matter of manners, and so in our prayers, and so in our preaching,
and so in the Sacrament, so is it also at the hour of our Death, which is as
far as we can pursue this Meditation, (for, after Death we can ask nothing at
Gods hands, and therefore God makes us no answer) And therefore with that
Conclusion of all, we shall conclude all, That by terrible things, the God of
our salvation answers us, at the hour of our death.

Though death be but a sleep, In morte.
yet it is a sleep that an Earthquake cannot wake; And yet there is a Trumpet
that will, when that hand of God, that gathered dust to make these bodies,
shall crumble these bodies into dust again, when that soul that evaporated it
self in unnecessary disputations in this world, shall make such fearful and
distempered conclusions, as to see God only by absence, (never to see him face
to face) And to know God only by ignorance, (never to know him sicuti est, as
he is) (for he is All mercy) And to possess immortality, and impossibility of
dying only in a continual dying; when, as a Cabinet whose key were lost, must
be broken up, and torn in pieces, before the Jewel that was laid up in it,
can be taken out; so thy body, (the Cabinet of thy soul) must be shaked and
shivered by violent sickness, before that soul can go out, And when it is
thus gone out, must answer for all the imperfections of that body, which body
polluted it, And yet, though this soul be such a loser by that body, it is not
perfectly well, nor fully satisfied, till it be reunited to that body again;
when thou remembrest, Mat. 26.36.
(and, oh, never forget it) that Christ himself was heavy in his soul unto
Death, Mat. 26.39.
That Christ himself came to a Si possibile, If it be possible, let this Cup
pass; That he came to a Quare dereliquisti, Mat. 27.46.
a bitter sense of Gods dereliction, and forsaking of him, when thou
considerest all this, compose thy self for death, but think it not a light
matter to dye. Death made the Lion of Judah to roar; and do not thou think,
that that which we call going away like a Lamb, does more testify a
conformity with Christ, then a strong sense, and bitter agony, and colluctation
with death, does. Christ gave us the Rule, in the Example; He taught us what we
should do, by his doing it; And he pre-admitted a fearful apprehension of
death. A Lamb is a Hieroglyphique of Patience, but not of stupidity. And death
was Christ's Consummatum est, All ended in death; yet he had sense of death; How
much more does a sad sense of our transmigration belong to us, to whom death is
no Consummatum est, but an In principio; our account, and our everlasting state
begins but then.

Apud te propitiatio, Psalm. 130.4.
ut timearis; In this knot we tie up all; With thee there is mercy, that thou
might be feared. There is a holy fear, that does not only consist with an
assurance of mercy, Pro. 21.15.
but induces, constitutes that assurance. Pavor operantibus iniquitatem, says
Solomon; Pavor, horror, and servile fear, jealousy and suspicion of God,
diffidence, and distrust in his mercy, and a bosome-prophecy of
self-destruction; Destruction it self, (so we translate it) be upon the
workers of iniquity; Pavor operantibus iniquitatem; And yet says that wise
King, Pro. 28.14.
Beatus qui semper Pavidus; Blessed is that man that always fears; who, though
he always hope, and believe the good that God will show him, yet also fears
the evils, that God might justly multiply upon him; Blessed is he that looks
upon God with assurance, but upon himself with fear. For, though God have
given us light, by which we may see him, even in Nature, (for, He is the
confidence of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that are a far of upon the
Sea) Though God have given us a clearer light in the Law, and experience of his
providence upon his people throughout the Old Testament, Though God have
abundantly, infinitely multiplied these lights and these helps to us in the
Christian Church, where he is the God of salvation, yet, as he answers us by
terrible things, (in that first acceptance of the words which I proposed to
you) that is, Gives us assurances, by miraculous testimonies in our behalf,
that he will answer our patient expectation, by terrible Judgments and
Revenges upon our enemies, In his Righteousness, that is, In his
faithfulness, according to his Promises, and according to his performances of
those Promises, to his former people; So in the words, considered the other
way, In his Holiness, that is, in his ways of imprinting Holiness in us, He
answers us by terrible things, in all those particulars, which we have
presented unto you; By infusing faith; but with that terrible addition,
Damnabitur, He that believes not, shall be damned; He answers us, by composing
our manners, and rectifying our life and conversation; but with terrible
additions of censures, and Excommunications, and tearings off from his own
body, which is a death to us, and a wound to him; He answers us by enabling us
to speak to him in Prayer; but with terrible additions, for the matter, for
the manner, for the measure of our Prayer, which being neglected, our very
Prayer is turned to sin. He answers us in Preaching; but with that terrible
commination, that even his word may be the savor of death unto death. He
answers us in the Sacrament; but with that terrible perplexity and distraction,
that he that seems to be a John, or a Peter, a Loving, or a Beloved Disciple,
may be a Judas, and he that seems to have received the seal of his
reconciliation, may have eat and drunk his own Damnation. And he answers us at
the hour of death; but with this terrible obligation, That even then I make
sure my salvation with fear and trembling. That so we imagine not a God of
wax, whom we can melt, and mold, when, and how we will; That we make not the
Church a Market, That an over-homelines and familiarity with God in the acts of
Religion, bring us not to an irreverence, nor indifferency of places; But that,
as the Militant Church is the porch of the Triumphant, so our reverence here,
may have some proportion to that reverence which is exhibited there, Revel.
4.10.
where the Elders cast their Crowns before the Throne, and continue in that
holy and reverend acclamation, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and
Honor, and Power; for, (as we may add from this Text) By terrible things, O
God of our salvation, do thou answer us in righteousness.

SERMON. LXIX. The fifth of my Prebend Sermons upon my five Psalms: Preached at
S. Paul's.
PSALM. 66.3. Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! Through the
greatness of thy Power shall thine Enemies submit themselves unto thee.


IT is well said, (so well, as that more then one of the Fathers seem to have
delighted themselves in having said it) Titulus Clavis, The Title of the
Psalm, is the Key of the Psalm; the Title opens the whole Psalm. The Church
of Rome will needs keep the Key of heaven, and the key to that Key, the
Scriptures, wrapped up in that Translation, which in no case must be departed
from. There, the key of this Psalm, (the Title thereof) has one bar wrested,
that is, made otherwise, then he that made the Key, (the Holy Ghost) intended
it; And another bat inserted, that is, one clause added, which the Holy Ghost
added not. Where we read, in the Title, Victori, To the chief Musician, they
read, In finem, A Psalm directed upon the end. I think, they mean upon the
later times, because it is in a great part, a Prophetical Psame, of the
calling of the Gentiles. But after this change, they also add, Resurrectionis,
A Psalm concerning the Resurrection; and that is not in the Hebrew, nor any
thing in the place thereof. And, after one Author in that Church had charged
the Jews, That they had rased that clause out of the Hebrew, Leo Castr.
and that it was in the Hebrew at first, A learned, and a laborious Jesuit,
(for truly, Lorinus.
Schools may confess the Jesuits to be learned, for they have assisted
there; and States, and Councell-tables may confess the Jesuits to be
laborious, for they have troubled them there) he, I say, after he has chidden
his fellow, for saying, That this word had ever been in the Hebrew, or was
razed out from thence by the Jews, concludes roundly, Vndecunque advenerit,
Howsoever those Additions, which are not in the Hebrew, came into our
Translation, Authoritatem habent, and retineri debent, Their very being there,
gives them Authentikenesse, and Authority, and there they must be. That this,
in the Title of this Psalm, be there, we are content, as long as you know,
that this particular, (That this Psalm by the Title thereof concerns the
Resurrection) is not in the Original, but added by some Expositor of the
Psalms; you may take knowledge too, That that addition has been accepted and
followed, by many, and ancient, and reverend Expositors, almost all of the
Eastern, and many of the Western Church too; and therefore, for our use and
accommodation, may well be accepted by us also.

We consider ordinarily three Resurrections: A spiritual Resurrection, a
Resurrection from sin, by Grace in the Church; A temporal Resurrection, a
Resurrection from trouble, and calamity in the world; And an eternal
Resurrection, a Resurrection after which no part of man shall die, or suffer
again, the Resurrection into Glory. Of the first, The Resurrection from sin,
Esaias 60.1.
is that intended in Esaias, Arise, and shine, for thy light is come, and the
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Of the later Resurrection, is that
harmonious strain of all the Apostles in their Creed intended, I believe the
Resurrection of the body. And of the third Resurrection, from oppressions and
calamities which the servants of God suffer in this life, Calvin. Job 19.26.
Ezekiel. 37.
some of our later men understand that place of Job, I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that in my flesh I shall see God; And that place of Ezekiel all
understand of that Resurrection, where God says to the Prophet, Son of man,
can these bones live? Can these men thus ruined, thus dispersed, be restored
again by a resurrection in this world? And to this resurrection from the
pressures and tribulations of this life, do those Interpreters, who interpret
this Psalm, of a Resurrection, refer this our Text, (Say unto God, How
terrible art thou in thy works! Through the greatness of thy power shall thine
enemies submit themselves unto thee.) Consider how powerfully God has, and you
cannot doubt, but that God will give them a Resurrection in this world, who
rely upon him, and use his means, whenever any calamity has dejected them,
ruined them, scattered them in the eyes of men. Say unto the Lord, That he has
done it, and the Lord will say unto thee, that he will do it again, and
again for thee.

We call Noah, Divisio.
Ianus, because he had two faces, in this respect, That he looked into the
former, and into the later world, he saw the times before, and after the flood.
David in this Text, is a Ianus too; He looks two ways, he has a Prospect, and
a Retrospect, he looks backward and forward, what God had done, and what God
would do. For, as we have one great comfort in this, That Prophecies are
become Histories, that whatsoever was said by the mouths of the Prophets,
concerning our salvation in Christ, is effected, (so prophecies are made
histories) so have we another comfort in this Text, That Histories are made
Prophecies; That whatsoever we read that God had formerly done, in the relief
of his oppressed servants, we are thereby assured that he can, that he will
do them again; and so Histories are made Prophecies: And upon these two
pillars, A thankful acknowledgement of that which God has done, And a
faithful assurance that God will do so again, shall this present Exercise of
your devotions be raised; And these are our two parts. Dicite Deo, Say unto
God, How terrible art thou in thy works! (that part is Historical, of things
past) In multitudine virtutis, In the greatness of thy power, shall thine
enemies submit themselves unto thee, (that part is Prophetical, of things to
come.)

In the History we are to turn many leafes, and many in the Prophecy too, to
pass many steps, to put out many branches in each. In the first, these;
Dicite, say ye; where we consider first, The Person that enjoins this public
acknowledgement and thanksgiving, It is David, and David as a King; for to Him,
to the King, the ordering of public actions, even in the service of God
appertains. David, David the King speaks this, by way of counsel, and
persuasion, and concurrence to all the world, (for so in the beginning, and in
some other passages of the Psalm, it is Omnis terra, All ye lands, Verse 1.
and All the earth, Verse 4.) David does what he can, that all the world might
concur in one manner of serving God. By way of Assistance he extends to all,
And by way of Injunction and commandment to all his, to all that are under his
government, Dicite, say you, that is, you shall say, you shall serve God thus.
And as he gives counsel to all, and gives laws to all his subjects, so he
submits himself to the same law; For, (as we shall see in some parts of the
Psalm, to which the Text refers) he professes in his particular, that he will
say and do, Josh. 24.15.
whatsoever he bids them do, and say; My house shall serve the Lord, says
Joshua; But it is, Ego, and domus mea, I and my house; himself would serve God
aright too.

From such a consideration of the persons, in the Historical part, we shall
pass to the commandment, to the duty it self; That is, first Dicite, say. It
is more then Cogitate, to Consider Gods former goodness; more then Admirari,
to Admire Gods former goodness; speculations, and ecstasies are not sufficient
services of God; Dicite, Say unto God, Declare, manifest, publish your zeal,
is more then Cogitate, Consider it, think of it; but it is less then Facite,
To come to action; we must declare our thankful zeal to Gods cause, we must
not modifie, not disguise that; But, for the particular ways of promoving, and
advancing that cause, in matter of action, we must refer that to them, to whom
God has referred it. The Duty is a Commemoration of Benefits; Dicite, Speak
of it, ascribe it, attribute it to the right Author; Who is that? That is the
next Consideration, Dicite Deo, Say unto God; Non vobis, Not to your own
Wisdom, or Power, Non Sanctis, Not to the care and protection of Saints or
Angels, Sed nomini ejus da gloriam, Only unto his name be all the glory
ascribed. And then, that which falls within this commandment, this
Consideration, is Opera ejus, The works of God, (How terrible art thou in thy
works!) It is not Decreta ejus, Arcana ejus, The secrets of his State, the
ways of his government, unrevealed Decrees, but those things, in which he has
manifested himself to man, Opera, his works. Consider his works, and consider
them so as this commandment enjoynes, that is, How terrible God is in them;
Determine not your Consideration upon the work it self, for so you may think
too lightly of it, That it is but some natural Accident, or some imposture and
false Miracle, or illusion, Or you may think of it with an amazement, with a
stupidity, with a consternation, when you consider not from whom the work
comes, consider God in the work; And God so, as that though he be terrible in
that work, yet, he is so terrible but so, as the word of this Text expresses
this terriblenesse, which word is Norah, and Norah is but Reverendus, it is a
terror of Reverence, not a terror of Confusion, that the Consideration of God
in his works should possess us withal.

And in those plain and smooth paths, we shall walk through the first part,
The historical part, what God has formerly done, (Say unto God, how terrible
art thou in thy works!) from thence we descend to the other, The Prophetical
part, what, upon our performance of this duty, God will surely do in our
behalf; he will subdue those enemies, which, because they are ours, are his;
In multitudine virtutis, In the greatness of thy power, shall thine enemies
submit themselves unto thee. Where we shall see first, That even God himself
has enemies; no man therefore can be free from them; And then we shall see,
whom God calls enemies here, Those who are enemies to his cause, and to his
friends; All those, if we will speak David's language, the Holy Ghosts
language, we must call Gods enemies. And these enemies nothing can mollify,
nothing can reduce, but Power; fair means, and persuasion will not work upon
them; Preaching, Disputing will not do it; It must be Power, and greatness of
power, and greatness of Gods Power. The Law is Power, and it is Gods Power;
All just Laws are from God. One Act of this Power (an occasional executing of
Laws at some few times, against the enemies of Gods truth) will not serve;
there must be a constant continuation of the execution thereof; nor will that
serve, if that be done only for worldly respects, to raise money, and not
rather to draw them, who are under those Laws, to the right worship of God, in
the truth of his Religion. And yet all, that even all this, This power, this
great power, his power shall work upon these, his, and our enemies, is but
this, They shall submit themselves, says the text, but how? Mentientur tibi,
(as it is in the Original, and as you find it in the Margin) They shall
dissemble, they shall lie, they shall yield a fained obedience, they shall make
as though they were good Subjects, but not be so. And yet, even this, Though
their submission be but dissembled, but counterfaited, David puts amongst Gods
blessings to a State, and to a Church; It is some blessing, when Gods enemies
dare not appear, and justify themselves, and their Cause, as it is a heavy
discouragement, when they dare do that. Though God do not so far consummate
their happiness, as that their enemies shall be truly reconciled, or thoroughly
rooted out, yet he shall afford them so much happiness, as that they shall do
them no harm.

And, Beloved, this distribution of the text, which I have given you, is rather
a Paraphrase, then a Division, and therefore the rest will rather be a
Repetition, then a Dilatation; And I shall only give some such note, and
mark, upon every particular branch, as may return them, and fix them in your
memories, and not enlarge my self far in any of them, for I know, the time
will not admit it.

First then, we remember you, in the first branch of the first part, that
David, 1 Part. Rex gubernat Ecclesia^.
in that Capacity, as King, institutes those Orders, which the Church is to
observe in the public service of God. For, the King is King of men; not of
bodies only, but of souls too; And of Christian men; of us, not only as we
worship one God, but as we are to express that worship in the outward acts of
Religion in the Church. God has called himself King; and he has called Kings
Gods. And when we look upon the actions of Kings, we determine not our selves
in that person, but in God working in that person. As it is not I that do any
good, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God in me, So it is not the King that commands, but the power
of God in the King. For, as in a Commission from the King, the King himself
works in his Commissioners, and their just Act is the Kings Act: So in the
Kings lawful working upon his Subjects, God works, and the Kings acts are Gods
acts.

That abstinence therefore, and that forbearance which the Roman Church has
used, from declaring whether the Laws of secular Magistrates do bind the
Conscience, or no, that is, whether a man sin in breaking a Temporal Law, or
no, (for, though it have been disputed in their books, and though the Bishop
of that Church were supplicated in the Trent Council, to declare it, yet he
would never be brought to it) that abstinence, I say, of theirs, though it give
them one great advantage, yet it gives us another. For, by keeping it still
undetermined, and undecided, how far the Laws of temporal Princes do bind
us, they keep up that power, which is so profitable to them, that is, To
divide Kings and Subjects, and maintain jealousies between them, because, if
the breach of any Law, constitute a sin, then enters the jurisdiction of Rome;
for, that is the ground of their indirect power over Princes, In ordine ad
spiritualia, that in any action, which may conduce to sin, they may meddle, and
direct, and constrain temporal Princes. That is their advantage, in their
forbearing to declare this doctrine; And then, our advantage is, That this
enervates, and weakens, nay destroys and annibilates that ordinary argument,
That there must be always a Visible Church, in which every man may have clear
resolution, and infallible satisfaction, in all scruples that arise in him, and
that the Roman Church is that Seat, and Throne of Infallibility. For, how does
the Roman Church give any man infallible satisfaction, whether these or these
things, grounded upon the temporal Laws of secular Princes, be sins or no,
when as that Church has not, nor will not come to a determination in that
point? How shall they come to the Sacrament? how shall they go out of the world
with a clear conscience, when many things lie upon them which they know not,
nor can be informed by their Confessors, whether they he sins or no? And thus
it is in diverse other points besides this; They pretend to give satisfaction
and peace in all cases, and pretend to be the only true Church for that, and
yet leave the conscience in ignorance, and in distemper, and distress, and
distraction in many particulars.

The Law of the Prince is rooted in the power of God. The root of all is
Order, and the orderer of all is the King; And what the good Kings of Judah,
and the religious Kings of the Primitive Christian Church did, every King may,
nay, should do. For, both the Tables are committed to him; (as well the first
that concerns our religious duties to God, as the other that concerns our
Civil duties to men.) So is the Arc, where those Tables are kept, and so is
the Temple, where that Arc is kept; all committed to him; and he oversees the
manner of the religious service of God. And therefore it is, that in the
Schools we call Sedition and Rebellion, Sacrilege; for, though the trespass
seem to be directed but upon a man, yet in that man, whose office (and
consequently his person) is sacred, God is opposed, and violated. And it is
impiously said of a Jesuit, (I may easily be believed of that Jesuit, Gretzer.
if any other might be excepted) Non est Regum etiam veram doctrinam
confirmare, The King has nothing to do with Religion, neither does it belong
to him to establish any form of Religion in his Kingdom, though it be the
right Religion, and though it be but by way of Confirmation.

This then David, Omnibus persuadet.
David as a King takes to be in his care, in his office, To rectify and settle
Religion, that is, the outward worship of God. And this he intimates, this he
conveyes by way of counsel, and persuasion to all the world, he would feign
have all agree in one service of God. Ver. 1.
Therefore he enters the Psalm so, Iubilate omnes terrae, Rejoice all ye
lands; Ver. 4.
and, Adoret te omnis terrae, All the earth shall worship thee; and again,
Venite and audite omnes, Ver. 16.
Come and hear all ye that fear God. For, as S. Cyprian says of Bishops,
That every Bishop is an universal Bishop, That is, must take into his care and
contemplation, not only his own particular Dioces, but the whole Catholic
Church: So every Christian King is a King of the whole Christian world, that
is, must study, and take into his care, not only his own kingdom, but all
others too. For, it is not only the municipall law of that kingdom, by which
he is bound to see his own subjects, in all cases, righted, but in the whole
law of Nations every King has an interest. My soul may be King, that is,
reside principally in my heart, or in my brain, but it neglects not the
remoter parts of my body. David maintains Religion at home; but he assists, as
much as he can, the establishing of that Religion abroad too.

David endeavors that, persuades that every where; but he will be sure of it at
home; Suis imperat.
There he enjoins it, there he commands it; Dicite, says he, Say; that is,
This you shall say, you shall serve God thus. We cannot provide, that there
shall be no Wolves in the world, but we have provided that there shall be no
Wolves in this kingdom. Idolatry will be, but there needs be none amongst us.
Idolaters were round about the children of Israel in the land of promise; They
could not make all those Proselytes; but yet they kept their own station. When
the Arian heresy had so surrounded the world, as that Vniversa fere Orientalis
Ecclesia, Almost all the Eastern Church, Nicephor. Vinc. Lyra.
And Cuncti pene Latini Episcopi, aut vi, aut fraud decepti, Almost all the
Bishops of the Western Church, were deceived, or threatened out of their
Religion into Arianisme; Insomuch, Hilar.
that S. Hilarie gives a note of an hundred and five Bishops of note, noted
with that heresy; When that one Bishop, who will needs be all alone, the
Bishop of Rome, Liberius, so far subscribed to that heresy, Hieron. De Roma.
pont. l. 4. c. 9.
(as S. Hieroms express words are) that Bellarmine himself does not only not
deny it, but finds himself bound, and finds it hard for him to prove, That
though Liberius did outwardly profess himself to be an Arian, yet in his
heart he was none; yet for all this impetuousnesse of this flood of this
heresy, Athanasius, as Bishop, excommunicated the Arians in his Dioces, And
Constantine, as Emperor, banished them out of his Dominions. Athanasius would
have been glad, if no other Church, Constantine would have been glad, if no
other State would have received them; When they could not prevail so far, yet
they did that which was possible, and most proper to them, they preserved the
true worship of the true God in their own Jurisdiction.

David could not have done that, if he had not had a true zeal to Gods truth,
Ipse facit. quod jub^^.
in his own heart. And therefore, as we have an intimation of his desire to
reduce the whole world, and a testimony of his earnestness toward his own
Subjects, so we have an assurance, that in his own particular, he was
constantly established in this truth, He calls to all, (Come and see the works
of God) And more particularly to all his, (O bless our God ye people) but he
proposes himself to their consideration too, Ver. 5. Ver. 8. Ver. 16. Psalm.
145.3.
(I will declare what he has done for my soul.) Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be feared, says this religious King, in another Psalm; And that is
a Proclamation, a Remonstrance to all the world. He adds, One generation shall
declare thy works to another; Ver. 4. Ver. 6.
And that is a propagation to the ends of the world. But all this is rooted in
that which is personal, and follows after, I will speak of the glorious
honor of thy Majesly; And that is a protestation for his own particular. And
to the same purpose is that which follows in the next verse, Men shall speak
of the might of thy terrible acts; They shall, that is, They should; and, I
would all men would, says David; But, whether they do, or no, I will declare
thy greatness, says he there; I will not be defective in my particular. And
David was to be trusted with a pious endeavor amongst his Neighbors, and with
a pious care over all his own subjects, as long as he nourished, and declared
so pious a disposition in his own person. And truly, it is an injurious, it is
a disloyal suspicion, and jealousy, it is an ungodly fascination of our own
happiness, to doubt of good effects abroad, and of a blessed assurance at
home, as long as the zeal of Gods truth remains so constantly in his heart,
and flows out so declaratorily in his actions, in whose person God assures
both our temporal safety, and our Religion.

We pass now from this consideration of the persons; which, though it be fixed
here, Dicite.
in the highest, in Kings, extends to all, to whom any power is committed, To
Magistrates, to Masters, to Fathers, All are bound to propagate Gods truth to
others, but especially to those who are under their charge; And this they shall
best do, if themselves be the Example. So far we have proceeded, and we come
now to the Duty, as it is here more particularly expressed, Dicite, Say unto
God, Publish, declare, manifest your zeal. Christ is Verbum, The Word, and
that excludes silence; but Christ is also (...), and that excludes rashness,
and impertinence in our speech. Inter caeteras Dei appellationes, Nazianz.
Sermonem veneramur, Amongst Gods other Names, we honor that, that he is the
Word; That implies a Communication, Gods goodness in speaking to us, and an
obligation upon us, Josh. 10.12.
to speak to him. For, Beloved, That standing of the Sun and Moon, which
gave occasion to the drawing of so much blood of the Amorites, is, in the
Original, not Siste Sol, but Sile Sol; He does not bid the Sun and Moon
stand still, but he bids them say nothing, make no noise, no motion so. Be the
Sun the Magistrate, and be the Moon, the Church, Si sileant, if they be
silent, command not, pray not, avow not Gods cause, Acts 2.3. Mat. 12.22. Mar.
7.32.
the case is dangerous. The Holy Ghost fell in fiery tongues, he inflamed them,
and inflamed them to speak. Diverse dumb men were presented to Christ; but if
they were dumb, they were deaf too, and some of them blind. Upon men that are
dumb, that is, speechless in avowing him, God heaps other mischievous
impediments too; Deafness, They shall not hear him in his word, and
Blindness, They shall not see him in his works.

Dicite, Magis quam cogitare.
Say, says David, Delight to speak of God, and with God, and for God; Dicite,
say something. We told you, this was Magis quam Cogitare, That there was more
required then to think of God. Consideration, Meditation, Speculation,
Contemplation upon God, and divine objects, have their place, and their season;
But this is more then that; And more then Admiration too, for all these may
determine in ecstasies, and in stupidities, and in useless and frivolous
imaginations. Gold may be beat so thin, as that it may be blown away; And
Speculations, even of divine things, may be blown to that thinness, to that
subtilty, as that all may evaporate, never fixed, never applied to any use. God
had conceived in himself, from all eternity, certain Idea's, certain
parterns of all things, which he would create. But these Idea's, these
conceptions produced not a creature, not a worm, not a weed; but then, Dixit,
and facta sunt, God spoke, and all things were made. Inward speculations, nay,
inward zeal, nay, inward prayers, are not full performances of our Duty. God
hears willingliest, when men hear too; when we speak alowd in the cares of
men, and publish, and declare, and manifest, and avow our zeal to his glory.

It is a duty, Minus quam facore.
which in every private man, goes beyond the Cogitare, and the Admirari; but
yet not so far as to a Facite, in the private man. Private men must think
piously, and seriously, and speak zealously, and seasonably of the cause of
God. But this does not authorize, nor justify such a forwardness in any
private man, as to come to actions, though he, in a rectified conscience,
apprehend, that Gods cause might be advantaged by those actions of his. For,
matter of action requires public warrant, and is not safely grounded upon
private zeal. When Peter, out of his own zeal, drew his sword for Christ,
Origin.
Nondum manifest conceperat Euangelium patientie. He was not yet well
instructed in the patience of the Gospel; Nay, he was submitted to the sentence
of the law, out of the mouth of the supreme Judge, Mat. 26.54.
All they that take the sword (that take it before it be given them by
Authority) shall perish by the sword. The first law, that was given to the new
world, Genesis 9.4. Genesis 9.6.
after the Flood, was against the eating of blood. God would not have man so
familiar with blood. And the second commandment, was against the shedding of
blood, (Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.) Nay, not
only where Peter was over-forward of himself, to defend Christ by arms, but
where John and James were too vehement, and importunate upon Christ, to give
them leave to revenge the wrong done to him upon the Samaritans, Luke 9.55.
(Will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them?)
Christ rebukes them, and tells them, They knew not of what spirit they were;
that is, of what spirit they ought to be. They knew, says S. Hierome; they had
no power of their own; They go to him who had; And they do not say, Domine
jube, Lord do thou do it; but, Thou shall never appear in it, never be seen
in it, only let us alone, and we will revenge thee, and consume them. Though
they went no farther then this, yet this rash, and precipitate importunity in
James and John, as well as that hasty coming to action in Peter, was
displeasing to Christ; Dicite, speak; so far goes the duty of this Text;
Speak by way of Counsel, you that are Counselors to Princes, And, by way of
Exhortation, you that are Preachers to the people; but leave the Facite, matter
of action, to them in whose hearts, and by whose hands, and thorough whose
commandments God works.

We are yet in our first, Opera.
in our Historical part, Commemoration, and there we made it, (in our
distribution and paraphrase) our next step, what we are to commemorate, to
employ this Dicite, this speaking upon; and it is upon Gods works; (Say unto
God, how terrible art thou in thy works!) So that the subject of our speech,
(let it be in holy Conferences, and Discourses, let it be in Gods Ordinance,
Preaching) is not to speak of the unrevealed Decrees of God, of his internal,
and eternal purposes in himself, but of his works, of those things in which
he has declared, and manifested himself to us. God gave not always to his
Church, the Manifestation of the pillar of Fire, but a pillar of Cloud too;
And, though it were a Cloud, yet it was a Pillar; In a holy, and devout, and
modest ignorance of those things which God has not revealed to us, we are
better settled, and supported by a better Pillar, then in an overcurious, and
impertinent inquisition of things reserved to God himself, or shut up in their
breasts, of whom God has said, Ye are gods. God would not show all himself to
Moses, as well as he loved him, and as freely as he conversed with him, He
showed him but his hinder parts. Exodus 33.23.
Let that be his Decrees then, when in his due time they came to execution; for
then, and not till then, they are works. And God would not suffer Moses his
body to be seen, when it was dead, Deuteronomy. 34.6.
because then it could not speak to them, it could not instruct them, it could
not direct them in any duty, if they transgressed from any. God himself would
not be spoken to by us, but as he speaks of himself; and he speaks in his
works. And as among men, some may Build, and some may Write, and we call both
by one name, (we call his Buildings, and we call his Books, his Works) so if
we will speak of God, this World which he has built, and these Scriptures
which he has written, are his Works, and we speak of God in his Works, (which
is the commandment of this Text) when we speak of him so, as he has
manifested himself in his miracles, and as he has declared himself in his
Scriptures; for both these are his Works. There are Decrees in God, but we can
take out no Copies of them, till God himself exemplify them, in the execution
of them; The accomplishing of the Decree is the best publishing, the best
notifying of the Decree. But, of his Works we can take Copies; for, his
Scriptures are his Works, and we have them by Translations and Illustrations,
made appliable to every understanding; All the promises of his Scriptures
belong to all. And, for his Miracles, (his Miracles are also his Works) we have
an assurance, That whatsoever God has done for any, he will do again for us.

It is then his Works upon which we fix this Commemoration, Deutipse, in
operibus illis, considerandus.
and this glorifying of God; but so, as that we determine not upon the Work it
self, but God in the Work, ( Say unto God, (to Him) how terrible art thou,
(that God) in thy Works?) It may be of use to you, to receive this note, Then
when it is said in this Psalm, Come, and see the Works of God, and after,
Come, and hear all ye that fear God, in both places it is not, Psalm. 66.5.
Verse 16.
Venite, but Ite, It is Lechu, not Come, but Go, Go out, Go forth, abroad,
to consider God in his Works; Go as far as you can, stop not in your selves,
nor stop not in any other, till you come to God himself. If you consider the
Scriptures to be his Works, make not Scriptures of your own; which you do, if
you make them subject to your private interpretation. My soul speaks in my
tongue, else I could make no sound; My tongue speaks in English, else I should
not be understood by the Congregation. So God speaks by his Son, in the
Gospel; but then, the Gospel speaks in the Church, that every man may hear.
Ite, go forth, stay not in your selves, if you will hear him. And so, for
matter of Action, and Protection, come not home to your selves, stay not in
your selves, not in a considence in your own power, and wisdom, but Ite, go
forth, go forth into Egypt, go forth into Babylon, and look who delivered
your Predecessors, (predecessors in Affliction, predecessors in Mercy) and that
God, who is Yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
and to day, and the same for ever, shall do the same things, which he did
yesterday, to day, and for ever. Turn always to the Commemoration of Works,
but not your own; Ite, go forth, go farther then that, Then your selves,
farther then the Angels, and Saints in heaven; That when you commemorate your
deliverance from an Invasion, and your deliverance from the Vault, you do not
ascribe these deliverances to those Saints, upon whose days they were wrought;
In all your Commemorations, (and commemorations are prayers, and God receives
that which we offer for a Thanksgiving for former Benefits, as a prayer for
future) Ite go forth, by the river to the spring, by the branch to the root,
by the work to God himself, and Dicite, say unto him, say of him, Quam
terribilis Tu in Tuis, which sets us upon another step in this part, To
consider what this Terriblenesse is, that God expresses in his works.

Though there be a difference between timer, and terror, Terribilis.
(fear and terror) yet the difference is not so great, but that both may fall
upon a good man; Not only a fear of God must, but a terror of God may fall
upon the Best. When God talked with Abraham, a horror of great darkness fell
upon him, Genesis 15.12.
says that Text. The Father of lights, and the God of all comfort present, and
present in an action of Mercy, and yet, a horror of great darkness fell upon
Abraham. When God talked personally, and presentially with Moses, Exodus 13.6.
Moses hid his face, for (says that Text) he was afraid to look upon God.
When I look upon God, as I am bid to do in this Text, in those terrible
Judgments, which he has executed upon some men, and see that there is nothing
between me and the same Judgment, (for I have sinned the same sins, and God
is the same God) I am not able of my self to dye that glass, that spectacle,
through which I look upon this God, in what color I will; whether this glass
shall be black, through my despair, and so I shall see God in the cloud of my
sins, or red in the blood of Christ Jesus, and I shall see God in a Bath of
the blood of his Son, whether I shall see God as a Dove with an Olive branch,
(peace to my soul) or as an Eagle, a vulture to prey, and to prey
everlastingly upon me, whether in the deep floods of Tribulation, spiritual
or temporal, I shall see God as an Arc to take me in, or as a Whale to
swallow me; and if his Whale do swallow me, (the Tribulation devour me)
whether his purpose be to restore me, or to consume me, I, I of my self
cannot tell. I cannot look upon God, in what line I will, nor take hold of God,
by what handle I will; He is a terrible God, I take him so; And then I cannot
discontinue, I cannot break off this terriblenesse, and say, He has been
terrible to that man, and there is an end of his terror; it reaches not to me.
Why not to me? In me there is no merit, nor shadow of merit; In God there is no
change, nor shadow of change. I am the same sinner, he is the same God; still
the same desperate sinner, still the same terrible God.

But terrible in his works, Reverendus.
says our Text; Terrible so, as he has declared himself to be in his works.
His Works are, as we said before, his Actions, and his Scriptures. In his
Actions we see him Terrible upon disobedient Resisters of his Graces, and
Despisers of the means thereof, not upon others, we have no examples of that.
In his word, we accept this word in which he has been pleased to express
himself, Norah, which is rather Reverendus, Mal. 2.5.
then Terribilis, as that word is used, I gave him life and peace, for the
fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my Name. So that this
Terriblenesse, which we are called upon to profess of God, is a Reverentiall,
a Majesticall, not a Tyrannical terriblenesse. And therefore he that
conceives a God, that has made man of flesh and blood, and yet exacts that
purity of an Angel in that flesh, A God that would provide himself no better
glory, then to damme man, A God who lest he should love man, and be reconciled
to man, has enwrapped him in an inevitable necessity of sinning, A God who
has received enough, and enough for the satisfaction of all men, and yet, (not
in consideration of their future sins, but merely because he hated them
before they were sinners, or before they were any thing) has made it
impossible, for the greatest part of men, to have any benefit of that large
satisfaction. This is not such a Terriblenesse as arises out of his Works, (his
Actions, or his Scriptures) for God has never said, never done any such thing,
as should make us lodge such conceptions of God in our selves, or lay such
imputations upon him.

The true fear of God is true wisdom. It is true Joy; Rejoice in trembling,
says David; Psalm. 2.11.
There is no rejoicing without this fear; there is no Riches without it;
Reverentia Ichovae, The fear of the Lord is his treasure, and that is the best
treasure. Thus far we are to go; Heb. 12.28.
Let us serve God with reverence, and godly fear, (godly fear is but a
Reverence, it is not a Jealousy, a suspicion of God.) And let us do it upon
the reason that follows in the same place, For our God is a consuming fire,
There is all his terriblenesse; he is a consuming fire to his enemies, but he
is our God; and God is love: And therefore to conceive a cruel God, a God that
hated us, even to damnation, before we were, (as some, who have departed from
the sense and modesty of the Ancients, have adventured to say) or to conceive a
God so cruel, as that at our death, or in our way, he will afford us no
assurance, that he is ours, and we his, but let us live and die in anxiety and
torture of conscience, in jealousy and suspicion of his good purpose toward
us in the salvation of our souls, (as those of the Roman Heresy teach) to
conceive such a God as from all eternity meant to damn me, or such a God as
would never make me know, and be sure that I should be saved, this is not to
profess God to be terrible in his works; For, his Actions are his works, and
his Scriptures are his works, and God has never done, or said any thing to
induce so terrible an opinion of him.

And so we have done with all those pieces, which in our paraphrasticall
distribution of the text, at beginning, did constitute our first, our
Historical part, David's retrospect, his commemoration of former blessings; In
which he proposes a duty, a declaration of Gods goodness, Dicite, publish it,
speak of it; He proposes Religious duties, in that capacity, as he is King;
(Religion is the Kings care) He proposes, by way of Counsel to all; by way of
Commandment to his own Subjects; And by a more powerful way, then either
counsel or Commandment, that is, by Example, by doing that himself, which he
counsels, and commands others to do. Dicite, Say, speak; It is a duty more
then thinking, and less then doing; Every man is bound to speak for the
advancement of Gods cause, but when it comes to action, that is not the private
man's office, but belongs to the public, or him, who is the Public, David
himself, the King. The duty is Commemoration, Dicite, Say, speak; but Dicite
Deo, Do this to God; ascribe not your deliverances to your Armies, and Navies,
by Sea, or Land; no, nor to Saints in Heaven, but to God only. Nor are ye
called upon to contemplate God in his Essence, or in his Decrees, but in his
works; In his Actions, in his Scriptures; In both those you shall find him
terrible, that is, Reverend, majesticall, though never tyrannical, nor cruel.
Pass we now, according to our order laid down at first, to our second part,
the Prophetical part, David's prospect for the future; and gather we something
from the particular branches of that, Through the greatness of thy power,
thine enemies shall submit themselves unto thee.

In this, our first consideration is, that God himself has enemies; and then,
2 Part. Habet Deus hosts.
how should we hope to be, nay, why would we wish to be without them? God had
good, that is, Glory from his enemies; And we may have good, that is, advantage
in the way to glory, by the exercise of our patience, from enemies too. Those
for whom God had done most, the Angels, turned enemies first; vex not thou thy
self, if those whom thou have loved best, hate thee deadliest. There is a
love, in which it aggravates thy condemnation, that thou art so much loved;
Does not God recompense that, if there be such a hate, as that thou art the
better, and that thy salvation is exalted, for having been hated? And that
profit, the righteous have from enemies. God loved us then, when we were his
enemies, Romans 5.10.
and we frustrate his exemplar love to us, if we love not enemies too. The word
Hostis, (which is a word of heavy signification, and implies devastation, and
all the mischiefs of war) is not read in all the New Testament: Inimicus, that
is, non amicus, unfriendly, is read there often, very very often. There is an
enmity which may consist with Evangelical charity; but a hostility, that
carries in it a denotation of revenge, of extirpation, of annihilation, that
cannot. This gives us some light, how far we may, and may not hate enemies. God
had enemies to whom he never returned, The Angels that opposed him; and that
is, because they oppose him still, and are, by their own perverseness,
incapable of reconciliation. We were enemies to God too; but being enemies,
Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.

As then actual reconciliation makes us actually friends, so in differences
which may be reconciled, we should not be too severe enemies, but maintain in
our selves a disposition of friendship; but, in those things, which are in
their nature irreconciliable, we must be irreconciliable too. There is an
enmity which God himself has made, and made perpetual: Ponam inimicitias,
says God; Genesis 3.15.
God puts an enmity between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the
woman; And, those whom God joins, let no man sever, those whom God severs, let
no man join. The School presents it well; we are to consider an enemy
formally, or materially; that is, that which makes him an enemy, or that which
makes him a man. In that which makes him a man, he has the Image of God in
him, and by that is capable of grace and glory; and therefore, that we may not
hate, which excludes all personal, and all national hatred. In that which
makes him an enemy he has the Image of the Devil, infidelity toward God,
perfidiousnesse toward man, Heresy toward God, infectious manners toward
man; and, that we must always hate; for, that is Odium perfectum, A hate that
may consist with a perfect man, nay, a hate that constitutes love it self, I
do not love a man, except I hate his vices, because those vices are the
enemies, and the destruction of that friend whom I love. Inimici tui, Dei sunt
inimici.


God himself has enemies, Thine enemies shall submit, says the text, to God;
There thou have one comfort, though thou have enemies too; but the greater
comfort is, That God calls thine enemies his. Psalm. 105.15.
Nolite tangere Christos meos, says God of all holy people; you were as good
touch me, Psalm. 17.8.
as touch any of them, for, they are the apple of mine eye. Our Savior Christ
never expostulated for himself; never said, why scourged you me? why spit you
upon me? why crucify you me? as long as their rage determined in his person,
he opened not his mouth; when Saul extended the violence to the Church, to his
servants, Acts 9.
then Christ came to that, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Cains trespass
against God himself was, that he would bind God to an acceptance of his
Sacrifice; And for that God comes no farther, Genesis 4.6. Ver. 11.
but to Why do thou thus? but in his trespass upon his brother, God
proceeds so much farther, as to say, Now art thou cursed from the earth.
Jeroboam suffered Idolatry, and God let him alone; that concerned but God
himself. But when Jeroboam stretched forth his hand to lay hold on the
Prophet, 1 King. 13.4.
his hand withered. Here is a holy league, Defensive, and Offensive; God shall
not only protect us from others, but he shall fight for us against them; our
enemies are his enemies.

And beloved, Magnitude potentiae.
it is well that it is so; for, if we were left to our selves, we were
remediless. It is his mercy that we are not consumed, by his indignation, by
himself; But it must be the exercise of his power, if we be not consumed by
his, and our enemies; for, there is but that one way in the text, that can
bring these enemies to any thing, that is, In multitudine virtutis tuae, In the
greatness of thy power. It must be power; Entreaty, Appliablenesse,
Conformity, Facility, Patience does not serve. It must be Power, and His power;
To assist our selves by his enemies, by Witches, or by Idolaters, is not his
power. It is Power that does all; for, the name that God is manifested in, in
all the making of the World, in the first of Genesis, is Elohim, and that is
Deus fortis, The powerful God. It is Power, and it is His power; for, his name
is Dominus tzebaoth, The Lord of Hosts. Hosts and Armies of which he is not the
General, are but great insurrections, great rebellions. And then, as it is
Power, and His power, so it is the greatness of his Power; His Power extended,
exalted. It is in the Original, Berob, In multitudine fortitudinis, in thy
manifold power, in thy multiplied power. Moses considers the assurance that
they might have in God, Deuteronomy. 20.4.
in this, That God fought their battails (The Lord your God goes with you, to
fight for you against your enemies, and save you) There was his power declared,
and exercised one way; and then in this, That he had afforded them particular
Laws, for their direction in all their actions, Religious, and Civil; (To what
Nation is God come so near? what people have Laws and Ordinances, such as we
have?) So that, where God defends us by Armies, and directs us by just Laws,
that is Multitudo fortitudinis, The greatness of his power, his power
magnified, his power multiplied upon us.

Now, Mentientur.
through this power, and not without this power, this double power, Law and
Arms, Thine enemies shall submit themselves unto thee, says our text. And
then, is all the danger at an end? shall we be safe then? Not then. The word is
Cacash, and Cacash is but Mendacem fieri, to be brought to lie, to dissemble,
to equivocate, to modifie, to temporize, to counterfeit, to make as though they
were our friends, in an outward conformity. And there are enemies of God, whom
no power of Armies or Laws can bring any farther then that, To hold their
tongues, and to hold their hands, but to withhold their hearts from us still.
Josh 9.
So the Gibeonites deceived Joshua, in the likeness of Ambassadors; Ioshuahs
power made them lie unto him. So Pharaoh deceived and deluded Moses and Aaron;
Every Act of power brought Pharaoh to lie unto them. I direct not your thoughts
upon public Considerations; It is not my end; It is not my way: My way and
end is to bring you home to your selves, and to consider there, That we are
full of weaknesses in our selves, full of enemies, sinful tentations about us;
That only the power of God, his power multiplied, (that is, The receiving of
his word, (that is, the power of Law) The receiving of his corrections (that
is, the power of his Hosts) can make our enemies, our sinful tentations
submit, and when they do so, it is but a lie, They return to us, and we turn
to them again, In the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit unto
thee.

But then, Consolatio.
(which is our last step and Conclusion) even this, That these enemies shall be
forced to such a submission, to any submission, though disguised and
counterfeit, is, in this Text, presented for a Consolation; There is a comfort
even in this, That those enemies shall be feign to lie, that they shall not
dare to avow their malice, nor to blaspheme God in open professions. There is a
conditional blessing proposed to Gods people; (O that my people had hearkened
unto me! O that Israel had walked in my ways!) Psalm. 80.15.
What had been their recompense? This. The haters of the Lord should have
submitted themselves unto them. Should they in earnest? No truly; there is the
same word, They should have lied unto them, they should have made as though
they had submitted themselves; and that, God presents for a great degree of his
mercy to them. And therefore, as in thy particular Conscience, though God do
not take away that Stimulum carnis, and that Angelum Satanae, though he do not
extinguish all lusts and concupiscencies in thee, yet if those lusts prevail
not over thee, if they command not, if they divert thee not from the sense, and
service of God, thou have good reason to bless God for this, to rest in this,
and to call it peace of conscience: So have thou reason too to call it Peace in
the Church, and peace in the State, when Gods enemies, though they be not
rooted out, though they be not disposed to a hearty Allegiance, and just
Obedience, yet they must be subject, they must submit themselves whether they
will or no, and though they will wish no good, yet they shall be able to do no
harm. For, the Holy Ghost declares this to be an exercise of power, of Gods
power, of the greatness of Gods power, that his enemies submit themselves,
though with a fained obedience.

SERMONS Preached at COURT, AND ELSE-VVHERE, UPON Several Occasions.
SERMON. LXX. Preached at White Hall, April 8. 1621.
PROVE. 25.16. Have thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee,
lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.


THere is a temporal unsatiablenesse of riches, and there is a spiritual
unsatiablenesse of sin. The first Covetousness, that of riches, the Apostle
calls The root of all evil, but the second Covetousness, that of sin, is the
fruit of all evil, for that is The treasure of Gods wrath, as the Apostle
speaks, when he makes our former sins, the mother of future sins, and then our
future sins the punishments of former. As though this World were too little to
satisfy man, men are come to discover or imagine new worlds, several worlds
in every Planet; and as though our Fathers heretofore, and we our selves too,
had been but dull and ignorant sinners, we think it belongs to us to perfect
old inventions, and to sin in another height and excellency, then former times
did, as though sin had had but a minority, and an infancy till now. Though the
pride of the Prince of Tyrus were ever in some Tyrans, who says there, I am a
god, and sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the Seas, Ezekiel. 28.2.
and am wiser then Daniel; Yet there is a Sea above these seas, a power above
this power, a spiritual pride above this temporal pride, one so much wiser
then Daniel, as that he is as wise as the Holy Ghost. The world has ever had
levities and inconstancies, Ecclus. 27.11.
and the fool has changed as the Moon; the same men that have cried Hosanna,
are ready to cry Crucifige; but, as in Jobs Wife, in the same mouth, the same
word was ambiguous, (whether it were bless God, or curse God, out of the word
we cannot tell) so are the actions of men so ambiguous, as that we cannot
conclude upon them; men come to our Prayers here, and pray in their hearts here
in this place, that God would induce another manner of Prayer into this place;
and so pray in the Congregation, that God would not hear the prayers of the
Congregation; There has always been ambiguity and equivocation in words, but
now in actions, and almost every action will admit a diverse sense. And it was
the Prophets complaint of old, You have multiplied your fornications, Ezekiel. 16.
and yet are not satisfied; but we wonder why the Prophet should wonder at
that, for the more we multiply temporally or spiritually, the less we are
satisfied. Others have thought, that our souls sinned before they came into
the world, and that therefore they are here as in a prison; but they are rather
here, as in a School; for, if they had studied sin in another world before,
they practice it here, If they have practiced it before, they teach it now,
they lead and induce others into sin.

But this consideration of our insatiablenesse in sin, in my purpose I seposed
for the end of this hour; But who knows whether your patience, that you will
hear, or who knows whether yours, or my life, that you can hear, shall last
to the end of this hour? and therefore it is an excusable anticipation, to
have begun with this spiritual covetousness of sin, though our first payment
be to be made in the literal sense of the text, A reprehension, and in it, a
Counsel, against our general insatiablenesse of the temporal things of this
world. Have thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou
be filled therewith, and vomit it.

In which words, Divisio.
there being first a particular Compellation, Tu, have thou found it? it
remembers thee, that there be a great many, that have not found it, but lack
that which thou aboundest in; And Invenisti, thou have not inherited it, nor
merited it, thou have but found it; and for that which thou have found, it is
Honey, sweetness, but it is but Honey, which easily becomes choler, and gall,
and bitterness. Such as it is, Comede, thou may eat it, and eat it safely,
it is not unwholesome; but Comede sufficientiam, eat no more then is
sufficient; And in that, let not the servant measure himself by his Master,
nor the subject by the King, nor the private man by the Magistrate, but Comede
sufficientiam tuam, eat that which is sufficient for thee, for more then that
will fill thee, over-fill thee; perchance not so full as thou would be, yet
certainly so full, as that there will be no room in thee for better things;
and then thou will vomit, nay perchance thou must vomit, the malice and plots
of others shall give thee a vomit, And such a vomit shall be Evacuans, an
exinanition, leave thee empty; and Immundum, an uncleanness, leave thee in
scorn and contempt; and Periculosum, a danger, break a vein, a vein at the
heart, break thy heart it self, that thou shall never recover it. Have thou
found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled
therewith, and vomit it.

First then, Tu.
for that Compellation Tu, have thou found it? It is a word first of
familiarity, and then a word of particularity. It is a degree of familiarity,
that God has notified himself to us in several Persons; that he has come
so near to our comprehension, as to be considered not only as an universal,
and infinite God, but as a Father, and as a Son, and opened himself unto us
in these Notions, Tu Pater, Tu Fili, Thou O Father, and Thou O Son, have
mercy upon us. A Constable, or Beadle will not be spoke to so, to be thou would,
and any Person in the Trinity, the whole Trinity together is content with it;
Psalm. 92.8.
Take God altogether, and at highest, Tu altissimus, Thou Lord art most high
for evermore; Psalm. 93.2.
Take him from before any beginning, Tu a seculo, Thy throue is established of
old, and thou art from everlasting; Take him from beyond all ending, Tu autem
permanes, Psalm. 102.27.
Thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

In which, we go not about to condemn, or correct the civil manner of giving
different titles, to different ranks of men; but to note the slipperiness of
our times, where titles flow into one another, and lose their distinctions;
when as the Elements are condensed into one another, air condensed into water,
and that into earth, so an obsequious flatterer, shall condense a yeoman into a
Worshipful person, and the Worshipful into Honorable, and so that which duly
was intended for distinction, shall occasion confusion. But that which we
purpose, in noting this Tu, is rather the singularity, the particularity, then
the familiarity; That the Holy Ghost in this collects Man, abridges Man, sums
up Man in an unity, Clem Alex.
in the consideration of one, of himself. Oportet hominem fieri unum, Man must
grow in his consideration, till he be but one man, one individual man. If he
consider himself in Humanitate, in the whole mankind, a glorious creature, an
immortal soul, he shall see this immortal soul, as well in Goats at the
left hand, as in Sheep at the right hand of Christ, at the Resurrection; Men
on both sides: If he consider himself in Qualitate, Mat. 7.22.
in his quality, in his calling, he shall hear many then plead their
Prophetavimus, we have prophesied, and their Ejecimus, we have exercised, and
their Virtutes secimus, we have done wonders, and all in thy Name, and yet
receive that answer, Nunquam cognovi, I do not know you now, I never did know
you. Oportet unum fieri, he must consider himself in individuo, that one man,
not that man in nature, not that man in calling, Origin Homil. unica in lib.
r^g.
but that man in actions. Origin makes this use of those words, as he found
them, Erat vir unus, There was one man; (which was Elkanah) He adds, Nomen
ejus possessio Dei, this one man, says he, was, in his Name, Gods possession;
Nam quem Daemones possident, non unus sed mulii, for he whom the Devil
possesses, is not one. The same sinner is not the same thing; still he clambers
in his ambitious purposes, there he is an Eagle; and yet lies still grovelling,
and trodden upon at any greater man's threshold, there he is a worm. He swells
to all that are under him, there he is a full Sea; and his dog that is above
him, may wade over him, there he is a shallow, an empty River. In the compass
of a few days, he neighes like a horse in the rage of his lust over all the
City, and groans in a corner of the City, in an hospital. A sinner is as many
men, as he has vices; he that is Elkanah, Possessio Dei, possessed by God, and
in possession of God, he is unus homo, one and the same man. And when God calls
upon man so particularly, he intends him some particular good. It is S.
Hieromes note, Hieron.
That when God in the Scriptures speaks of diverse things in the singular
number, it is ever in things of grace; And it is S. Augustins note, that when
he speaks of any one thing in the plural Number, it is of heavy and sorrowful
things; as Ieptha was buried In civitatibus Gilead, Judge. 12.7.
in the Cities, but he had but one grave; And so that is, they made Aureos
vitulos, Golden Calves, when it was but one Calfe.

When Gods voice comes to thee in this Text, in particular, Tu, Have thou
found, he would have thee remember, how many seek and have sought, with
tears, with sweat, with blood, and lack that, that thou aboundest in. That
whereas his Evidence to them whom he loves not, in the next world shall be,
Esurivi, I was hungry, Mat. 25.42.
and ye gave me no meat; And his proceeding with them whom he loves not in
this world, is, Si esuriero, If I be hungry, I will not tell thee, I will not
awaken thee, not remember thy conscience, Psalm. 50.12.
wherein thou may do me a service; He does call upon thee in particular,
and ask thee, Nonne tu, Have thou not fortune enough, to let fall some crumbs
upon him that starves? and, Nonne tu, have not thou favor enough, to shed some
beams upon him that is frozen in disgrace? There is a squint eye, that looks
side-long; to look upon riches, and honor, on the left hand, and long life
here, on the right, is a squint eye. There is a squint eye, that looks upwards
and downwards; to look after God and Mammon, is a squint eye. There are squint
eyes, that look upon one another; to look upon ones own beauty, or wisdom,
or power, is a squint eye. The direct look is to look inward upon thine own
Conscience; Not with Nabuchadnezzar, Is not this great Babylon, Dan. 4.30.
which I have built by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty?
But with David, Quid retribuam? for if thou look upon them with a clear eye,
thou will see, that though thou have them, thou have but found them, which is
our next step.

Now, if you have but found them, thou have them but by chance, by contingency,
Invenisti. Co. l. 10. Pand.
by fortune. The Emperor Leo, he calls money found, Dei beneficium, It is a
benefit derived from God; but the great Lawyer; Triphonius, calls it, Donum
fortunae too, An immediate gift of fortune. They consist well enough together,
God and fortune. S. Augustine in his Retract: makes a conscience of having
named her too often, lest other men should be scandalized; and so the Prophet
complains of that, Esa. 65.11.
(as the Vulgat reads it) Ponitis mensam fortunae, You sacrifice to fortune,
you make fortune a god; that you should not do; but yet you should acknowledge
that God has such a servant, such an instrument, as fortune too. Gods ordinary
working is by Nature, these causes must produce these effects; and that is his
common Law; He goes sometimes above that, by Prerogative, and that is by
miracle, and sometimes below that, as by custom, and that is fortune, that is
contingency; Fortune is as far out of the ordinary way, as miracle; no man
knows in Nature, in reason, why such, or such persons grow great; but it falls
out so often, as we do not call it miracle, and therefore rest in the Name of
Fortune. We need not quarrel the words of the Poet, Tu quamcunque Deus tibi
fortunaverit horam, Grata sum manu, Thank God for any good fortune, since the
Apostle says too, that Godliness has the promise of this life; The godly man
shall be fortunate, God will bless him with good fortune here; but still it is
fortune, and chance, in the sight and reason of man, and therefore he has but
found, whatsoever he has in that kind. It is intimated in the very word which
we use for all worldly things; It is Inventarium, an Inventory; we found them
here, and here our successors find them, when we are gone from hence. 2 King.
9.30.
Iezabel had an estimation of beauty, and she thought to have drawn the King
with that beauty, but she found it, she found it in her box, and in her
wardrope, she was not truly fair. Achitophel had an estimation of wisdom in
Counsel, I know not how he found it; he counseled by an example, which no man
would follow, he hanged himself. Thou will not be drawn to confess, that a
Man that has an office, is presently wiser then thou, or a man that is
Knighted, presently valianter then thou. Men have preferment for those parts,
which other men, equal to them in the same things, have not, and therefore
they do but find them; And to things that are but found, what is our title?
Nisi reddantur, rapina est, says the Law, If we restore not that which we
find, it is robbery. S. Augustine has brought it nearer, Qui alienum negat,
si posset, tolleret, He that confesses not that which he has found of another
man's, if he durst, he would have taken it by force. For that which we have
found in this world, our ealling is the owner, our debts are the owner, our
children are the owner; our lusts, our superfluities are no owners: of all the
rest, God is the owner, and to this purpose, the poor is God.

S. Augustine puts a case to the point: Aug. Sermon. 19. de verb. Apost.
He says when he was at Milan, a poor Usher of a Grammar School found a bag
of money, 200 Solidorum; let it be but one hundredth pounds; he set up bills;
the owner came, offered him his tithe, ten pounds; he would none; he pressed
him to five, to three, to two; he would none: and then he that had lost it, in
an honorable indignation, disclaimed it all; Nihil perdidi, says he, it is all
your own, I lost nothing: Quale certamen! Theatrum mundus, spectator Deus, Out
of importunity, he that found it, took it all, and out of conscience, that it
was not his, gave it all to the poor.

The things of this world we do but find, and of the things which we find,
we are but Stewards for others. This finding is not so merely casual, as that
it implies no manner of seeking; Matzah Exuxit, vel expressit.
We must put our selves into the way, into a calling. The word is Matza, and
that word is allowed us; but a word like it, is not allowed us; Matza is, but
Matzah is not; if there be an H added, an H, as it is an aspiration, a
breathing, a panting after the things of this world, or an Ache, as it is a
pain, that it make our bones ache, or our hearts ache, or our conscience ache, it
is a seeking, and a finding, not intended in this word. Our prosecution and
seeking must be moderate, our title and interest is but a finding; and what
has the most fortunate found? Honey; it is true, but yet but Honey.

That which Solomon may justly seem to intend, Mel.
especially by Honey in this Text, is that which the Poets, and other Masters of
language, have called Magnas amicitias, and Magnas Clientelas, dependence, and
interest, and favor in great persons. It appears by the next verse, which
depends upon this, and paraphrases it; Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors
house. Where that which we read, Withdraw, is in the Original Hokar, which is
Fac pretiosum, make not thy self cheap, not vulgar, have some respect to thy
self, to thine own ingenuity, but principally to the other, to thy great
friend: be not importune and troublesome by any indiscreet assiduity, to them
who are possessed with business, though at sometimes they descend to thee;
This is this Honey, where thou have access, yet do not push open every door,
fling up every hanging, but use thy favor modestly.

But in this Honey is wrapped up also all that is delightful in this life; and
Solomon carries us often to that Comparison; Ver. 13.
In the Chapter before this, for Wisdom; My Son, eat thou Honey, because it
is good; so shall the knowledge of wisdom be to thy soul; and in the seven
and twentieth verse of this Chapter, 27.
he uses it for Glory; It is not good to eat much honey; so for men to search
their own glory, is not glory. In the sixth Chapter of this book, when Solomon
had sent us to the Ant, Prove. 6.
to learn wisdom, between the eight verse and the ninth, he sends us to
another school, to the Be: Vade ad Apem and disce quomodo operationem vener
abilem facit, Go to the Be, and learn how reverend and mysterious a work
she works. Hieron.
For, though S. Hierome acknowledge, that in his time, this verse was not in
the Hebrew Text, yet it has ever been in many Copies of the Septuagint, and
though it be now left out in the Complutense Bible, and that which they call
the Kings, In Ezekiel. 3.3.
yet it is in that still, which they value above all, the Vatican. S. Hierome
himself takes it into his exposition, and other Fathers into theirs. So far
therefore we may hearken to that voice, as to go to the Be, and learn to
work by that Creature.

Both S. Basil, Basil. Hom. 8. in Hexa. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 110.
and S. Chrysostom put this difference in that place, between the labor of
the Ant, and the Be, That the Ants work but for themselves, the Be for
others: Though the Ants have a Commonwealth of their own, yet those Fathers
call their labor, but private labor; because no other Commonwealths have
benefit by their labor, but their own. Direct thy labors in thy calling to
the good of the public, and then thou art a civil, a moral Ant; but
consider also, That all that are of the household of the faithful, and profess
the same truth of Religion, are part of this public, and direct thy labors,
for the glory of Christ Jesus, amongst them too, and then thou art a religious
and a Christian Be, and the fruit of thy labor shall be Honey. The labor of
the Ant is sub Dio, open, evident, manifest; The labor of the Be is sub
Tecto, in a house, in a hive; They will do good, and yet they will not be
seen to do it; they affect not glory, nay, they avoid it. For in experience,
when some men curious of natural knowledge, have made their Hives of glass,
that by that transparency, they might see the Bees manner of working, the Bees
have made it their first work to line that Glasse-hive, with a crust of Wax,
that they might work and not be discerned. It is a blessed sincerity, to work
as the Ant, professedly, openly; but because there may be cases, when to do
so, would destroy the whole work, though there be a cloud and a curtain
between thee, and the eyes of men, yet if thou do them clearly in the sight
of God, that he see his glory advanced by thee, the fruit of thy labor shall
be Honey.

Pliny names one Aristomachum Solensem, Plin.
that spent threescore years in the contemplation of Bees; our whole time for
this exercise is but threescore minutes; and therefore we say no more of this,
but Vade ad Apem, practife the sedulity of the Be, labor in thy calling, And
the community of the Be, believe that thou art called to assist others, And
the secrecy of the Be, that the greatest, and most authorized spy see it
not, to supplant it, And the purity of the Be, that never settles upon any
foul thing, that thou never take a foul way to a fair end, and the fruit of
thy labor shall be Honey; God shall give thee the sweetness of this world,
honor, and ease, and plenty, and he shall give thee thy honey-combe, with thy
honey, that which preserves thy honey to thee, that is, a religious knowledge,
that all this is but honey; And honey in the dew of the flowers, Plin.
whence it is drawn, is but Coeli sudor, a sweaty excrement of the heavens,
and Siderum saliva, the spettle, the fleame of the stars, and Apum vomitus,
the casting, the vomit of the Be. And though honey be the sweetest thing that
we do take into the body, yet there it degenerates into gall, and proves the
bitterest; And all this is honey in the Antitype, in that which it signifies,
in the temporal things of this world; In the temporal things of this world
there is a bitterness, in our use of them; But in his hand, and his purpose
that gives them, they have impressions of sweetness; and so Comede, Eat thy
honey, which is also a step farther.

Here is libery for any man to eat Honey, if he have found it, Comede.
and Jonathan the Kings son found honey upon the ground, and did but dip his
staff in it, 1 Samuel 14 24.
and put it to his mouth, and he must die for it. Of forbidden honey the least
dram is poison, how sweet soever any collateral respect make it. But
Jonathan knew not that it was forbidken by the King: Ignorance is no plea in
any subject against the Kings laws; and there is a King, in breach of whose
laws, no King, no Kings son can excuse themselves by ignorance, if they do
but dip their Scepter in forbidden honey, in any unlawful delight in this
world; For they do, or they may know the unlawfulness of it. But for the
honey which God allows us, whether God give it in that plenty, Terram
fluentem, Exodus 3.8.
that the land flow with milk and honey, nay Torrentes mellis, rivers and
streams of honey, Job 20.17.
that great fortunes flow into men, in this world; or whether God put us to
suck honey out of the Rock, that that which we have, we dig, and plough, and
thresh for, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
yet when thou have found that, Comede, use it, enjoy it, eat it; He that will
not work, shall not eat; 2 These. 3.10.
He that shuts himself up in a Cloister, till the honey find him, till meat
be brought to him, should not eat.

Christ himself are Honey, but after his Resurrection; Luke 24.41.
when his body needed not refection; when our principal end in worldly things,
is not for the body, nor for the world, but that we have had a spiritual
resurrection, that we can see Gods love in them, and show Gods glory by them,
then Invenisti, thou have found; (for Invenire, Festus.
est in rem venire, id est in usum) to find a thing is to make the right use of
it, and Invenisti mel, thou have found Honey, that which God intends for
sweetness, for necessities, conveniences, abundances, recreations, and
delights; and therefore Comede, eat it, enjoy it; but to thee also belongs that
Caveat, Comede ad sufficientiam, Eat but enough.

That great Moral man Seneca, could see, that Nihil agere, to pass this life,
Sufficientiam
and intend no Vocation, was very ill; and that Aliud agere, to profess a
Vocation, and be busier in other men's callings, then his own, was worse; but
the Super-agere, to over-doe, to do more then was required at his hands, he
never brought into comparison, he never suspected; and yet that is our most
ordinary fault. That which has been ordinarily given by our Physicians, by way
of counsel, That we should rise with an appetite, has been enough followed by
worldly men; They always lie down, and always rise up with an appetite to
more, and more in this world. An Office is but an Anti-past, it gets them an
appetite to another Office; and a title of Honor, but an Anti-past, a new
stomach to a new Title. The danger is, that we cannot go upward directly; If
we have a staire, to go any height, it must be a winding staire; It is a
compassing, a circumventing, to rise: A Ladder is a straight Engine of it self,
yet if we will rise by that, it must be set a slope; Though our means be
direct in their own nature, yet we put them upon crooked ways; It is but a
poor rising, that any man can make in a direct line, and yet it is, Ad
sufficientiam, high enough, for it is to heaven. Have ye seen a glass blown
to a handsome competency, and with one breath more, broke? I will not ask you,
whether you have seen a competent beauty made worse, by an artificial
addition, because they have not thought it well enough before; you see it every
day, and every where. If Paul himself were here, Act. 14.12.
whom for his Eloquence the Lystrians called Mercury, he could not persuade
them to leave their Mercury; It will not easily be left; for how many of them
that take it outwardly at first, come at last to take it inwardly? Since the
saying of Solomon, Eccles. 7.17.
Be not over righteous, admits many good senses, even in Moral virtues, and in
religious duties too, which are naturally good, it is much more appliable in
temporal things, which are naturally indifferent; Be not over fair, over
witty, over sociable, over rich, over glorious; but let the measure be
Sufficientia tua, So much as is sufficient for thee.

But where shall a man take measure of himself? Tuam.
At what age, or in what calling shall he say, This is sufficient for me?
Jeremy says, Puer sum, I am a child, and cannot speak at all; S. Paul says,
Quando puer, When I was a child, no bigger, I spoke like a child; this was not
sufficientia sua, sufficienr for him; for since he was to be a man, he was to
speak like a man: The same clothes do not serve us throughout our lives, nay
not the same bodies, nay not the same virtues, so there is no certain Gomer,
no fixed Measure for worldly things, Clem. Alex.
for every one to have. As Clemens Alexandrinus says, Eadem Dram data
Nauclero, est Naulum, The same piece of Money given to a Water-man, is his
Fare; Publicano Vectigal, given to a Farmer of Custom, it is Impost; Mercatori
pretium, to a Merchant it is the price of his Ware; Operario Merces, Mendico
Eleemosyna, To a Labourer it is Wages, to a Beggar it is Alms; So on the other
side, this which we call sufficiency, as it has relation to diverse states,
has a different measure. I think the rule will not be inconveniently given, if
we say, That whatsoever the world does justly look for at our hands, we may
justly look for at Gods hands: Those outward means, which are requisite for
the performance of the duties of your calling to the world, arising from your
birth, or arising from your place, you are to pray for, you are to labor for;
For that is Sufficientia tua, so much is sufficient for you, and so much Honey
you may eat; but eat no more, says the Text, Ne satieris, Lest you be filled.

He does not say yet, Ne satieris.
lest thou be satisfied; there is no great fear, nay there is no hope of
that, that he will be satisfied. We know the receipt, the capacity of the
ventricle, the stomach of man, how much it can hold; and we know the receipt
of all the receptacles of blood, how much blood the body can have; so we do
of all the other conduits and cisterns of the body; But this infinite Hive of
honey, this insatiable whirlpoole of the covetous mind, no Anatomy, no
dissection has discovered to us. When I look into the larders, and cellars,
and vaults, into the vessels of our body for drink, for blood, for urine, they
are pottles, and gallons; when I look into the furnaces of our spirits, the
ventricles of the heart and of the brain, they are not thimbles; for
spiritual things, the things of the next world, we have no room; for
temporal things, the things of this world, we have no bounds. How then shall
this over-eater be filled with his honey? So filled, as that he can receive
nothing else. More of the same honey he can; Another Manor, and another
Church, is but another bit of meat, with another sauce to him; Another Office,
and another way of Extortion, is but another garment, and another lace to him.
But he is too full to receive any thing else; Christ comes to this Bethlem,
(Bethlem which is Domus panis) this house of abundance, and there is no room
for Christ in this Inn; there are no crumbs for Christ under this table; There
comes Boanerges, ( Boanerges, that is, filius Tonitrui, the son of Thunder)
and he thunders out the Vae's, the Comminations, the Judgments of God upon
such as he; but if the Thunder spoil not his drink, he sees no harm in
Thunder; As long as a Sermon is not a Sentence in the Star Chamber, that a
Sermon cannot fine and imprison him, he has no room for any good effect of a
Sermon. The Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Comfort comes to him, and offers him the
consolation of the Gospel; but he will die in his old religion, which is to
sacrifice to his own Nets, by which his portion is plenteous; he had rather
have the God of the Old Testament, that pays in this world with milk and
honey, then the God of the New Testament, that calls him into his Vineyard in
this World, and pays him no wages till the next: one Jupiter is worth all the
three Elohims, or the three Iehovahs (if we may speak so) to him. Jupiter that
can come in a shower of gold, out waighs Iehova, that comes but in a shower of
water, but in a sprinkling of water in Baptism, and sels that water so dear,
as that he will have showers of tears for it, nay showers of blood for it,
when any Persecutor has a mind to call for it. The voice of God whom he has
contemned, and wounded, The voice of the Preacher whom he has derided, and
impoverished, The voice of the poor, of the Widow, of the Orphans, of the
prisoner, whom he has oppressed, knock at his door, and would enter, but
there is no room for them, he is so full. This is the great danger indeed that
accompanies this fullness, but the danger that affects him more is that which
is more literally in the text, Evomet, he shall be so filled as that he shall
vomit; even that fullness, those temporal things which he had, he shall cast
up.

It is not a vomiting for his ease, that he would vomit; but he shall vomit;
Evomas.
he shall be forced to vomit. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall
vomit them up again; Job 20.15.
God shall cast them out of his belly; But by what hand? whether by his right
hand, by the true way of justice, or his left hand, by malice, under color of
justice, his money shall be his Antimony, his own riches shall be his vomit.
Solomon says, he saw a sore evil under the Sun; Eccles. 5.22.
but if he had lived as long as the Sun, he might have seen it every course of
the Sun, Riches reserved to their owners for their own hurt; Richmen perish,
that should not have perished, or not so soon, or not so absolutely, if they
had not been rich. Their confidence in their riches provokes them to some
unjustifiable actions, and their riches provoke others to a vehement
persecution. And in this vomit of theirs, if we had time to do so, we would
consider first, The sordidnesse, and the contempt and scorn that this
evacuated Man comes to in the world, when he has had this vomit of all his
honey; That because there can be no vacuity, he shall be filled again, but
Saturabitur ignominia, Habak. 2.16.
He shall be filled with shame for glory, and shameful spuing shall be upon
his glory. Ier. 48.26.
He magnified himself against the Lord, and therefore was made drunk, and
shall wallow in his vomit, and be had in derision. His honey was his soul, and
that being vomited, he is now but a rotten and abhorred carcass; At best he was
but a bag of money, and now he is but the bag it self, which scarce any man
will stoop to take up: And as in a vomit in a basin, the Physician is able to
show the world, what cold meat, and what raw meat, and what hard and
indigestible meat he had eaten; So when such a person comes by justice, or
malice to this vomit, every man becomes a Physician, every man brings
Inditements, and evidence against him, and can show all his falsehoods, and all
his extortions in particular.

In these particulars we would consider the scorn upon this vomit; and then
the danger of it in these, That nothing weakens the eyes more then vomiting;
when this worldly man has lost his honey, he has lost his sight; he was dim
sighted at beginning, when he could see nothing but worldly things, things
nearest to him, but when he has vomited the^, he has lost his spectacles;
through his riches he saw some glimmering, some color of comfort, now he sees
no comfort at all: And a greater danger in vomiting is, that often times it
breaks a vein within, and that is most commonly incurable; This man that
vomits without, bleeds within; his fortune is broke, and his heart is broke;
and he bleeds better blood then his own, he bleeds out the blood of Christ
Jesus himself; the blood of Christ Jesus poured into him heretofore in the
consolation of the Gospel, and in the Cup of Salvation in the Sacrament (for so
much as concerns him) is but spilt upon the ground; as though his honey, his
worldly greamesse, were his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and
Prince, and friends, and all, when that is lost by this vomit, he mournes for
all, in a sad and everlasting mourning, in such a disconsolate dejection of
spirit as ends either in an utter inconsideration of God, or in a desperation
of his mercies. This is that Incipiamte evomere (as the Vulgat reads it) in
this vomit of worldly things, Revel. 3.16.
God does begin to vomit him out of his mouth; and then God does not return to
his vomit, but leaves this impatient patient to his impenitiblenesse. But we
must not lanch into these wide Seas now, to consider the scorn, or the danger
of this vomit, but rather draw into the harbor, and but repeat the text,
transferred from this world to the text, from temporal to spiritual things.

Thus far we have been In melle, In honey, upon honey; but now Super mel,
Conclusio.
above honey. Psalm. 19.10.
The judgments of the Lord are Dulcia prae melle, Sweeter then honey, and the
honey comb; And the judgments of the Lord are that, by which the Lord will
judge us, and this world; it is his word. His word, the sincerity of the
Gospel, the truth of his Religion is our honey and honey comb; our honey, and
our wax, our Covenant, and our Seal; we have him not, if we have not his
truth, if we require other honey; and we trust him not, if we require any
other Seal, if we think the word of God needs the traditions of men. And
Invenisti tu, Has God manifested to thee the truth of his Gospel? Bless thou
the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever, whose dayspring from an high
has visited thee, and left so many Nations in darkness, who shall never hear
of Christ, till they hear himself, nor hear other voice from him then, then
the Ite maledicti; Pity them that have not this honey, and confess for thy
self, that though thou have it, thou have but found it; could thou bespeake
Christian Parents beforehand, and say, I will be borne of such Parents as shall
give me a title to the Covenant, to Baptism? or could thou procure Sureties,
that should bind themselves for thee, at the entering into the Covenant in
Baptism? Thou foundest thy self in the Christian Church, and thou foundest
means of salvation there; thou broughtest none hither, thou boughtest none
here; the Title of S. Andrew, the first of the Apostles that came to Christ,
was but that, Invenimus Mesiam, We have found the Mesias. It is only Christ
himself that says of himself, Cant. 5.1.
Comedi mel meum, I have eat my honey, his own honey. We have no grace, no
Gospel of our own, we find it here.

But since thou have found it, Comede, Eat it; do not drink the cup of
Babylon, lest thou drink the cup of Gods wrath too: but make this Honey
(Christ's true Religion) thy meat; digest that, assimilate that, incorporate
that: and let Christ himself, and his merit, be as thy soul; and let the clear
and outward profession of his truth, Religion, be as thy body: If thou give
away that body, (be flattered out of thy Religion, or threatened out of thy
Religion) If thou sell this body, (be bought and bribed out of thy Religion) If
thou lend this body, (discontinue thy Religion for a year or two, to see how
things will fall out) if thou have no body, thou shall have no Resurrection,
and the clear and undisguised profession of the truth, is the body.

Eat therefore this honey Ad sufficientiam; so much as is enough. To believe
implicitly as the Church believes, and know nothing, is not enough; know thy
foundations, and who laid them; Other foundations can no man lay, then are
laid, Christ Jesus; neither can other men lay those foundations otherwise then
they are laid by the Apostles, but eat Ad sufficientiam tuam, that which is
enough for thee, for so much knowledge is not required in thee in those things,
as in them, whose profession it is to teach them; be content to leave a room
still for the Apostles, Aemulamini charismata meliora, desire better gifts; and
ever think it a title of dignity which the Angel gave Daniel, to be Vir
desideriorum; To have still some farther object of thy desires. Do not think
thou want all, because thou have not all; for at the great last day, we
shall see more plead Catechismes for their salvation, then the great volumes of
Controversies, more plead their pockets, then their Libraries. If S. Paul so
great an Argosie held no more, but Christum crucifixum, what can thy Pinnace
hold? Let humility be thy ballast, and necessary knowledge thy freight: for
there is an over-fulnesse of knowledge, which forces a vomit; a vomit of
opprobrious and contumelious speeches, a belching and spitting of the name of
Heretic and Schismatique, and a loss of charity for matters that are not of
faith; and from this vomiting comes emptiness, The more disputing, Psalm. 90.14.
the less believing: but Saturasti nos benignitate tua, Domine, Thou have
satisfied us early with thy mercy, Thou gave us Christianity early, and thou
gave us the Reformation early: and therefore since in thee we have found this
honey, let us so eat it, Levit. 18.25.
and so hold it, That the land do not vomit her Inhabitants, nor spew us out,
as it spewed out the Nations that were before us, Levit. 18.29.
but that our days may be long in this land, which the Lord our God has given
us, and that with the Ancient of days, we may have a day without any night in
that land, which his Son our Savior has purchased for us with the inestimable
price of his incorruptible blood. To which glorious Son of God, etc.

SERMON. LXXI. At the Haghe December. 19. 1619. I Preached upon this Text. Since in
my sickness at Abrey-hatche in Essex, 1630. revising my short notes of that
Sermon, I digested them into these two.
MAT. 4.18, 19, 20. And Jesus walking by the Sea of Galile saw two brethren,
Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the Sea, (for
they were fishers.) And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you
fishers of men; And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.


SOLOMON presenting our Savior Christ, in the name and person of Wisdom, in
the book of Proverbs, puts, by instinct of the Holy Ghost, these words into
his mouth, Prove. 8.30.
Deliciae meae esse cum filiis hominum, Christ's delight is to be with the
children of men; And in satisfaction of that delight, he says in the same
verse, in the person of Christ, That he rejoiced to be in the habitable parts
of the Earth, (that is, where he might converse with men) Ludens in orb
terrarum, (so the Vulgat reads it) and so our former Translation had it, I
took my solace in the compass of the Earth. But since Christ's adversary Satan
does so too, Job 1.7.
(Satan came from compassing the Earth to and fro, and from walking in it;)
since the Scribes and Pharisees do more then so, They compass Land and Sea,
to make one of their own profession, the mercy of Christ is not less active,
not less industrious then the malice of his adversaries, He preaches in
populous Cities, he preaches in the desert wilderness, he preaches in the
tempestuous Sea: and as his Power shall collect the several dusts, and atoms,
and Elements of our scattered bodies at the Resurrection, as materials,
members of his Triumphant Church; so he collects the materials, the living
stone, and timber, for his Militant Church, from all places, from Cities, from
Deserts, and here in this Text, from the Sea, (Jesus walking by the Sea, etc.)

In these words we shall only pursue a twofold consideration of the persons
whom Christ called here to his Apostleship, Divisio.
Peter and Andrew; What their present, what their future function was, what
they were, what they were to be; They were fishermen, they were to be fishers
of men. But from these two considerations of these persons, arise many
Circumstances, in and about their calling; and their preferment for their
cheerful following. For first, in the first, we shall survay the place, The
Sea of Galile; And their education and conversation upon that Sea, by which
they were naturally less fit for this Church Service. At this Sea he found
them casting their Nets; of which act of theirs, there is an emphaticall reason
expressed in the text, For they were fishers, which intimates both these notes,
That they did it because they were fishers; It became them, it behoved them, it
concerned them to follow their trade; And then they did it as they were
fishers, If they had not been fishers they would not have done it, they might
not have usurped upon another Calling; They cast their Nets into the Sea, for
they were fishers) And then, in a nearer consideration of these persons, we
find that they were two that were called; Christ provided at first against
singularity, He called not one alone; And then they were two Brethren, persons
likely to agree; He provided at first against schism; And then, they were two
such as were nothing of kin to him, (whereas the second pair of brethren,
whom he called, James and John, were his kinsmen) He provided at first, against
partiality, and that kind of Simony, which prefers for affection. These men,
thus conditioned naturally, thus disposed at this place, and at this time, our
blessed Savior calls; And then we note their readiness, they obeyed the call,
they did all they were bid, They were bid follow, and they followed, and
followed presently; And they did somewhat more then seems expressly to have
been required, for, They left their Nets, and followed him. And all these
substantial circumstances invest our first part, these persons in their first
estate. For those that belong to the second part, Their preferment upon this
obedience, (Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men) it would be an
impertinent thing, to open them now, because I do easily foresee, that this
day we shall not come to that part.

In our first part, Andreas.
The consideration of these persons then, though in this Text Peter be first
named, yet we are to note, that this was not the first time of their meeting;
when Christ and they met first, which was, when John Baptist made that
declaration upon Christ's walking by him, Joh. 1.35.
Behold the Lamb of God, Peter was not the first that applied himself to
Christ, nor that was invited by Christ's presenting himself to him, to do it;
Peter was not there; Peter was not the second; for, Andrew, and another, who
were then John Baptists Disciples, and saw Christ declared by him, were
presently affected with a desire to follow Christ, and to converse with him,
and to that purpose press him with that question, Magister, ubi habitas? They
profess that they had chosen him for their Master, and they desire to know
where he dwelt, that they might wait upon him, and receive their instructions
from him. And in Andrews thus early applying himself to Christ, we are also to
note, both the fecundity of true Religion; for, as soon as he had found
Christ, he sought his brother Peter, Et duxit ad Iesum, he made his brother as
happy as himself, he led him to Jesus; (And that other Disciple, which came to
Christ as soon as Andrew did, yet because he is not noted to have brought any
others but himself, is not named in the Gospel) And we are to observe also,
the unsearchable wisdom of God in his proceedings, that he would have Peter,
whom he had purposed to be his principal Apostle, to be led to him by another,
of inferior dignity, in his determination. And therefore Conversus converte,
Think not thy self well enough preached unto, except thou find a desire,
that thy life and conversation may preach to others, And Edoctus disce, think
not that thou know any thing, except thou desire to learn more; neither
grudge to learn of him, whom thou think less learned then thy self; The
blessing is in Gods Calling, and Ordinance, not in the good parts of the man;
Andrew drew Peter, The lesser in Gods purpose for the building of the Church,
brought in the greater. Therefore does the Church celebrate the memory of S.
Andrew, first of any Saint in the year; and after they have been altogether
united in that one festival of All Saints, S. Andrew is the first that has a
particular day. Bernar.
He was Primogenitus Testamenti novi, The first Christian, the first begotten
of the new Testament; for, John Baptist, who may seem to have the birthright
before him, had his conception in the old Testament, in the womb of those
prophecies of Malachy, Mal. 3.1. Esa. 40.3.
and of Esaias, of his coming, and of his office, and so cannot be so entirely
referred to the new Testament, as S. Andrew is. Because therefore, our
adversaries of the Roman heresy distill, and rack every passage of
Scripture, that may drop any thing for the advantage of S. Peter, and the
allmightines of his Successor, I refuse not the occasion offered from this
text, compared with that other, Ioh. 1. to say, That if that first coming to
Christ were but (as they use to say) Ad notitiam and familiaritatem, and this
in our Text, Ad Apostolatum, That they that came there, came but to an
acquaintance, and conversation with Christ, but here, in this text, to the
Apostleship, yet, to that conversation, (which was no small happiness) Andrew
came clearly before Peter, and to this Apostleship here, Peter did not come
before Andrew; they came together.

These two then our Savior found, Mare Galilaeum.
as he walked by the Sea of Galile. No solitude, no tempest, no bleaknesse, no
inconvenience averts Christ, and his Spirit, from his sweet, and gracious, and
comfortable visitations. But yet this that is called here, The Sea of Galile,
was not properly a Sea; but according to the phrase of the Hebrews, who call
all great meetings of waters, by that one name, A Sea, this, which was indeed a
lake of fresh water, is called a Sea. From the root of Mount Libanus, spring
two Rivers, Jor, and Dan; and those two, meeting together, joining their
waters, join their names too, and make that famous river Jordan; a name so
composed, as perchance our River is, Thamesis, of Them, and Isis. And this
River Jordan falling into this flat, makes this Lake, of sixteen miles long,
and some six in breadth. Which Lake being famous for fish, though of ordinary
kinds, yet of an extraordinary taste and relish, and then of extraordinary
kinds too, not found in other waters, and famous, because diverse famous Cities
did engirt it, and become as a garland to it, Capernaum, and Chorazim, and
Bethsaida, and Tiberias, and Magdalo, (all celebrated in the Scriptures) was
yet much more famous for the often recourse, which our Savior (who was of that
Country) made to it; For this was the Sea, where he amazed Peter, with that
great draught of fishes, that brought him to say, Exi a me Domine, Depart from
me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man; Luke 5.8.
This was the Sea, where himself walked upon the waters; Matt. 14.25.8.23.
And where he rebuked the tempest; And where he manifested his Almighty power
many times. And by this Lake, this Sea, dwelt Andrew and Peter, and using the
commodity of the place, lived upon fishing in this Lake; and in that act our
Savior found them, and called them to his service. Why them? Why fishers?

First, Christ having a greater, a fairer Jerusalem to build then David's was,
Cur Piscatores.
a greater Kingdom to establish then Juda's was, a greater Temple to build
then Solomon's was, having a greater work to raise, yet he begun upon a less
ground; He is come from his twelve Tribes, that afforded armies in swarms, to
twelve persons, twelve Apostles; from his Judah and Levi, the foundations of
State and Church, to an Andrew and a Peter fishermen, seamen; and these men
accustomed to that various, and tempestuous Element, to the Sea, less capable
of Offices of civility, and sociablenesse, then other men, yet must be employed
in religious offices, to gather all Nations to one household of the faithful,
and to constitute a Communion of Saints; They were Seamen, fishermen,
unlearned, and indocil; Why did Christ take them? Not that thereby there was
any scandal given, or just occasion of that calumny of Julian the Apostat,
That Christ found it easy to seduce, and draw to his Sect, such poor ignorant
men as they were; for Christ did receive persons eminent in learning, ( Saul
was so) and of authority in the State, ( Nicodemus was so) and of wealth, and
ability, ( Zacheus was so, and so was Joseph of Arimatliea) But first he chose
such men, that when the world had considered their beginning, their
insufficiency then, and how unproper they were for such an employment, and yet
seen that great work so far, and so fast advanced, by so weak instruments,
they might ascribe all power to him, and ever after, come to him cheerfully
upon any invitation, how weak men soever he should send to them, because he
had done so much by so weak instruments before: To make his work in all ages
after prosper the better, he proceeded thus at first. And then, he chose such
men for another reason too; To show that how insufficient soever he received
them, yet he received them into such a School, such an University, as should
deliver them back into his Church, made fit by him, for the service thereof.
Christ needed not man's sufficiency, he took insufficient men; Christ excuses no
man's insufficiency, he made them sufficient.

His purpose then was, that the work should be ascribed to the Workman, Nequid
Instrumentis. August.
not to the Instrument; To himself, not to them; Nec quaesivit per Oratorem
piscatorem, He sent not out Orators, Rhetoricians, strong or faire-spoken men
to work upon these fishermen, Sed de piscatore lucratus est Imperatorem, By
these fishermen, he has reduced all those Kings, and Emperors, and States
which have embraced the Christian Religion, these thousand and six hundred
years. When Samuel was sent with that general Commission, 1 Samuel 16.6.
to anoint a son of Ishai King, without any more particular instructions,
when he came, and Eliab was presented unto him, Surely, says Samuel, 1 Samuel
30.
(noting the goodlinesse of his personage) this is the Lords Anointed. But the
Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, nor the height of his
stature, for I have refused him; for, (as it follows there, from Gods mouth)
God sees not as man setth; Man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord
beholds the heart. And so David, in appearance, less likely was chosen. But,
if the Lords arm be not shortened, let no man impute weakness to the
Instrument. For so, when David himself was appointed by God, to pursue the
Amalekites, the Amalekites that had burnt Ziklag, and done such spoil upon
Gods people, as that the people began to speak of stoning David, from whom they
looked for defense, Ver 6.
when David had no kind of intelligence, no ground to settle a conjecture upon,
which way he must pursue the Amalekites, and yet pursue them he must, in the
way he finds a poor young fellow, a famished, sick young man, derelicted of
his Master, and left for dead in the march, and by the means and conduct of
this wretch, David recovers the enemy, recovers the spoil, recovers his
honor, and the love of his people.

If the Lords arm be not shortened, let no man impute weakness to his
Instrument. But yet God will always have so much weakness appear in the
Instrument, as that their strength shall not be thought to be their own. When
Pete and John preached in the streets, Acts 4.13.
The people marvelled, (says the Text) why? for they had understood that they
were unlearned. But beholding also the man that was healed standing by, they
had nothing to say, says that story. The insufficiency of the Instrument makes
a man wonder naturally; but the accomplishing of some great work brings them
to a necessary acknowledgement of a greater power, working in that weak
Instrument. For, if those Apostles that preached, Acts 8.10.
had been as learned men, as Simon Magus, as they did in him, ( This man is
the great power of God, not that he had, but that he was the power of God) the
people would have rested in the admiration of those persons, and proceeded no
farther. It was their working of supernatural things, that convinced the
world. For all Paul's learning, (though he were very learned) never brought any
of the Conjurers to burn his books, or to renounce his Art; But when God
wrought extraordinary works by him, That sicknesses were cured by his napkins,
Acts 19.11.
and his handkerchiefs, (in which cures, Paul's learning had no more
concurrence, no more cooperaton, then the ignorance of any of the fishermen
Apostles) And when the world saw that those Exorcists, Verse 13.
which went about to do Miracles in the Name of Jesus, because Paul did so,
could not do it, because that Jesus had not promised to work in them, Verse
19.
as in Paul, Then the Conjurers came, and burnt their books, in the sight of
all the world, to the value of fifty thousand pieces of silver. It was not
learning, (that may have been got, though they that hear them, know it not;
and it were not hard to assign many examples of men that have stolen a great
measure of learning, and yet lived open and conversable lives, and never been
observed, (except by them, that knew their Lucubrations, and night-watchings)
to have spent many hours in study) but it was the calling of the world to an
apprehension of a greater power, by seeing great things done by weak
Instruments, that reduced them, that convinced them. Peter and John's preaching
did not half the good then, as the presenting of one man, which had been
recovered by them, did. Twenty of our Sermons edify not so much, as if the
Congregation might see one man converted by us. Any one of you might out-preach
us. That one man that would leave his beloved sin, that one man that would
restore ill-gotten goods, had made a better Sermon then ever I shall, and
should gain more souls by his act, then all our words (as they are ours) can
do.

Such men he took then, Non in-idoneos.
as might be no occasion to their hearers, to ascribe the work to their
sufficiency; but yet such men too, as should be no examples to insufficient men
to adventure upon that great service; but men, though ignorant before, yet
docil, and glad to learn. In a rough stone, a cunning Lapidary will easily
foresee, what his cutting, and his polishing, and his art will bring that stone
too. A cunning Statuary discerns in a Marble-stone under his feet, where there
will arise an Eye, and an Ear, and a Hand, and other lineaments to make it a
perfect Statue. Much more did our Savior Christ, who was himself the Author
of that disposition in them, (for no man has any such disposion but from God)
foresee in these fishermen, an inclinablenesse to become useful in that great
service of his Church. Therefore he took them from their own ship, but he
sent them from his Cross; He took them weatherbeaten with North and South
winds, and rough-cast with foame, and mud; but he sent them back soupled, and
smoothed, and levigated, quickened, and inanimated with that Spirit, which he
had breathed into them from his own bowels, his own eternal bowels, from
which the Holy Ghost proceeded; He took fishermen, and he sent fishers of
men. He sent them not out to preach, as soon as he called them to him; He
called them ad Discipulatum, before he called them ad Apostolatum; He taught
them, before they taught others. As S. Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 3.6.
and the rest, God has made us able Ministers of the New Testament; Idoneos,
fit Ministers, that is, fit for that service. There is a fitness founded in
Discretion; a Discretion to make our present service acceptable to our present
Auditory; for if it be not acceptable, agreeable to them, it is never
profitable.

As God gave his children such Manna as was agreeable to every man's taste, and
tasted to every man like that, that that man like best: so are we to deliver
the bread of life agreeable to every taste, to fit our Doctrine to the
apprehension, and capacity, and digestion of the hearers. For as S. Augustine
says, That no man profits by a Sermon that he hears with pain, if he do not
stand easily; so if he do not understand easily, or if he do not assent
easily to that that he hears, if he be put to study one sentence, till the
Preacher have passed three or four more, or if the doctrine be new and
doubtful, and suspicious to him, this fitness which is grounded in discretion
is not showed. But the general fitness is grounded in learning, S. Paul has
joined them safely together, 2 Timothy 4.2.
Rebuke and exhort with all long suffering, and learning. Show thy discretion
in seasonable Rebuking; show thy learning in Exhorting. Let the Congregation
see that thou studiest the good of their souls, and they will digest any
wholesome increpation, any medicinal reprehension at thy hands, Dilige and dic
quod voles. We say so first to God, August.
Lord let thy spirit bear witness with my spirit, that thou love me, and I
can endure all thy Prophets, and all the vae's, and the woes that they thunder
against me and my sin. So also the Congregation says to the Minister, Dilige
and dic quod voles, show thy love to me, in studying my case, and applying thy
knowledge to my conscience, speak so, as God and I may know thou meanest me,
but not the Congregation, lest that bring me to a confusion of face, and that
to a hardness of heart; deal thus with me, love me thus, and say what thou will; nothing shall offend me. And this is the Idoneity, the fitness which we
consider in the Minister, fitness in learning, fitness in discretion, to use
and apply that learning. So Christ fits his.

Such men then Christ takes for the service of his Church; Mittebant rete in
Mare.
such as bring no confidence in their own fitness, such as embrace the means
to make them fit in his School, and learn before they teach. And to that
purpose he took Andrew and Peter; and he took them, when he found them
casting their net into the Sea. This was a Symbolicall, a Prophetical action
of their future life; This fishing was a type, a figure, a prophecy of their
other fishing. But here (in this first part) we are bound to the consideration
of their real and direct action, and exercise of their present calling; They
cast their Net, for they were Fishers, says the Text. In which, for, (as we
told you at first) there is a double reason involved.

First, in this For is intimated, how acceptable to God that labor is, 1. Quia
piscatores.
that is taken in a calling. They did not forbear to cast their nets because
it was a tempestuous Sea; we must make account to meet storms in our
profession, yea and tentations too. A man must not leave his calling, because
it is hard for him to be an honest man in that calling; but he must labor to
overcome those difficulties, and as much as he can, vindicate and redeem that
calling from those aspersions and calumnies, which ill men have cast upon a
good calling. They did not forbear because it was a tempestuous Sea, nor
because they had cast their nets often and caught nothing, nor because it was
uncertain how the Market would go when they had catched. A man must not be an
ill Prophet upon his own labors, nor bewitch them with a suspicion that they
will not prosper. It is the slothful man that says, A Lion in the way, A Lion
in the street. Cast thou thy net into the Sea, Prove. 26.13.
and God shall drive fish into thy net; undertake a lawful Calling, and clogge
not thy calling with murmuring, nor with an ill conscience, and God shall give
thee increase, and worship in it, They cast their nets into the Sea, for they
were fishers; it was their Calling, and they were bound to labor in that.

And then this For has another aspect, looks another way too, 2. Quia
piscatores.
and implies another Instruction, They cast their nets into the Sea, for they
were fishers, that is, if they had not been fishers, they would not have done
it; Intrusion into other men's callings is an unjust usurpation; and, if it take
away their profit, it is a theft. If it be but a censuring of them in their
calling, yet it is a calumny, because it is not in the right way, if it be
extrajudiciall. To lay an aspersion upon any man (who is not under our charge)
though that which we say of him be true, yet it is a calumny, and a degree of
libelling, if it be not done judiciarily, and where it may receive redress and
remedy. And yet how forward are men that are not fishers in that Sea, to
censure State Councels, and Judiciary proceedings? Every man is an Absalom, to
say to every man, Your cause is good, 2 Samuel 15.3.
but the King has appointed none to hear it; Money brings them in, favor
brings them in, it is not the King; or, if it must be said to be the King, yet
it is the affection of the King and not his judgment, the King misled, not
rightly informed, say our seditious Absoloms, and, Ver. 4.
Oh that I were made Judge in the land, that every man might come unto me, and
I would do him justice, is the charm that Absalom has taught every man. They
cast their nets into a deeper Sea then this, and where they are much less
fishers, into the secret Councels of God. It is well provided by your Laws,
that Divines and Ecclesiastical persons may not take farms, nor buy nor sell,
for return, in Markets. I would it were as well provided, that buyers and
sellers, and farmers might not be Divines, nor censure them. I speak not of
censuring our lives; please your selves with that, till God be pleased to mend
us by that, (thought that way of whispering calumny be not the right way to
that amendment) But I speak of censuring our Doctrines, and of appointing our
doctrines; when men are weary of hearing any other thing, then Election and
Reprobation, and whom, and when, and how, and why God has chosen, or cast
away. We have liberty enough by your Law, to hold enough for the maintenance of
our bodies, and states; you have liberty enough by our Law, to know enough for
the salvation of your souls; If you will search farther into Gods eternal
Decrees, and unrevealed Councels, you should not cast your nets into that Sea,
for you are not fishers there. Andrew and Peter cast their nets, for they were
fishers, (therefore they were bound to do it) And again, for they were
fishers, (if they had not been so, they would not have done so.)

These persons then thus disposed, Duo simul.
unfit of themselves, made fit by him, and found by him at their labor, labor
in a lawful Calling, and in their own Calling, our Savior Christ calls to
him; And he called them by couples, by paires; two together. So he called his
Creatures into the world at the first Creation, by paires. So he called them
into the Arc, for the reparation of the world, by paires, two and two. God
loves not singularity; The very name of Church implies company; It is Concio,
Congregatio, Coetus; It is a Congregation, a Meeting, an assembly; It is not
any one man; neither can the Church be preserved in one man. And therefore it
has been dangerously said, (though they confess it to have been said by
many of their greatest Divines in the Roman Church) that during the time that
our blessed Savior lay dead in the grave, there was no faith left upon the
earth, but only in the Virgin Mary; for then there was no Church. God has
manifested his will in two Testaments; and though he have abridged and
contracted the doctrine of both in a narrow room, yet he has digested it into
two Commandments, Love God, love thy neighbor. There is but one Church; that
is true, but one; but that one Church cannot be in any one man; There is but
one Baptism; that is also true, but one; But no man can Baptize himself;
there must be Sacerdos and competens, (as our old Canons speak) a person to
receive, and a Priest to give Baptism. There is but one faith in the remission
of sins; that is true too, but one; But no man can absolve himself; There must
be a Priest and a penitent. God calls no man so, but that he calls him to the
knowledge, that he has called more then him to that Church, or else it is an
illusory, and imaginary calling, and a dream.

Take heed therefore of being seduced to that Church that is in one man; In
scrinio pectoris, where all infallibility, and assured resolution is in the
breast of one man; who (as their own Authors say) is not bound to ask the
counsel of others before, nor to follow their counsel after. And since the
Church cannot be in one, in an unity, take heed of bringing it too near that
unity, to a paucity, to a few, to a separation, to a Conventicle. The Church
loves the name of Catholic; and it is a glorious, and an harmonious name;
Love thou those things wherein she is Catholic, and wherein she is
harmonious, that is, Lyrinen.
Quod ubique, quod semper, Those universal, and fundamental doctrines, which
in all Christian ages, and in all Christian Churches, have been agreed by all
to be necessary to salvation; and then thou art a true Catholic. Otherwise,
that is, without relation to this Catholic and universal doctrine, to call a
particular Church Catholic, (that she should be Catholic, that is,
universal in dominion, but not in doctrine) is such a solecisme, as to speak
of a white blackness, or a great littleness; A particular Church to be
universal, implies such a contradiction.

Christ loves not singularity; Duo fratres.
he called not one alone; He loves not schism neither between them whom he
calls; and therefore he calls persons likely to agree, two brethren, (He saw two
brethren, Peter and Andrew, etc. So he began to build the Synagogues, to
establish that first government, in Moses and Aaron, brethren; So he begins to
build the Church, in Peter and Andrew, brethren. The principal fraternity and
brotherhood that God respects, is spiritual; Brethren in the profession of the
same true Religion. But Peter and Andrew whom he called here to the true
Religion, and so gave them that second fraternity and brotherhood, which is
spiritual, were natural brethren before; And that God loves; that a natural,
a secular, a civil fraternity, and a spiritual fraternity should be joined
together; when those that profess the same Religion, should desire to contract
their alliances, in marrying their Children, and to have their other dealings
in the world (as much as they can) with men that profess the same true
Religion that they do. That so (not meddling nor disputing the proceedings of
States, who, in some cases, go by other rules then private men do) we do not
make it an equal, an indifferent thing, whether we marry our selves, or our
children, or make our bargains, or our conversation, with persons of a
different Religion, when as our Adversaries amongst us will not go to a
Lawyer, nor call a Physician, no, nor scarce a Tailor, or other Tradesman of
another Religion then their own, if they can possibly avoid it. God saw a
better likelihood of avoiding Schism and dissension, when those whom he
called to a new spiritual brotherhood in one Religion, were natural brothers
too, and tied in civil bands, as well as spiritual.

And as Christ began, so he proceeded; Non cognati.
for the persons whom he called were Catechisticall, instructive persons;
persons, from whose very persons we receive instruction. The next whom he
called, (which is in the next verse) were two too; and brethren too; John and
James; but yet his own kinsmen in the flesh. But, as he chose two together to
avoid singularity, and two brethren to avoid Schism, so he preferred two
strangers before his own kindred, to avoid partiality, and respect of persons.
Certainly every man is bound to do good to those that are near him by nature;
The obligation of doing good to others lies (for the most part) thus; Let us do
good to all men, Gal. 6.10.
but especially unto them which are of the household of the faithful; (They of
our own Religion are of the Quorum) Now, when all are so, (of the household of
the faithful, of our own Religion) the obligation looks home, and lie thus,
He that provideth not for his own, denies the faith, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and is worse then an Infidel. Christ would therefore leave no example, nor
justification of that perverse distemper, to leave his kindred out, nor of
their disposition, who had rather buy new friends at any rate, then relieve or
cherish the old. But yet when Christ knew how far his stock would reach, that
no liberality, howsoever placed, could exhaust that, but that he was able to
provide for all, he would leave no example nor justification of that perverse
distemper, to heap up preferments upon our own kindred, without any
consideration how Gods glory might be more advanced by doing good to others
too; But finding in these men a fit disposition to be good laborers in his
harvest, and to agree in the service of the Church, as they did in the band of
nature, he calls Peter and Andrew, otherwise strangers, before he called his
Consins, James and John.

These Circumstances we proposed to be considered in these persons before,
Continuo sequuti.
and at their being called. The first, after their calling, is their cheerful
readiness in obeying, Continuo sequuti, They were bid follow, and forthwith
they followed. Which present obedience of theirs is exalted in this, that this
was freshly upon the imprisonment of John Baptist, whose Disciple Andrew had
been; And it might easily have deterred, and averted a man in his case, to
consider, that it was well for him that he was got out of John Baptists
school, and company, before that storm, the displeasure of the state fell
upon him; and that it behoved him to be wary to apply himself to any such new
Master, as might draw him into as much trouble; which Christ's service was very
like to do. But the contemplation of future persecutions, that may fall, the
example of persecutions past, that have fallen, the apprehension of imminent
persecutions, that are now falling, the sense of present persecutions, that are
now upon us, retard not those, upon whom the love of Christ Jesus works
effectually; They followed for all that. And they followed, when there was no
more persuasion used to them, no more words said to them, but Sequere me,
Follow me.

And therefore how easy soever Julian the Apostate might make it, for Christ
to work upon so weak men, as these were, yet to work upon any men by so weak
means, only by one Sequere me, Follow me, and no more, cannot be thought
easy. The way of Rhetorique in working upon weak men, is first to trouble the
understanding, to displace, and discompose, and disorder the judgment, to
smother and bury in it, or to empty it of former apprehensions and opinions,
and to shake that belief, with which it had possessed it self before, and then
when it is thus melted, to power it into new molds, when it is thus mollified,
to stamp and imprint new forms, new images, new opinions in it. But here in
our case, there was none of this fire, none of this practice, none of this
battery of eloquence, none of this verbal violence, only a bare Sequere me,
Follow me, and they followed. No eloquence inclined them, no terrors declined
them: No dangers withdrew them, no preferment drew them; they knew Christ, and
his kindred, and his means; August.
they loved him, himself, and not any thing they expected from him. Minus te
amat, qui aliquid tuum amat, quod non propter te amat, That man loves thee but
a little, that begins his love at that which thou have, and not at thy self.
It is a weak love that is divided between Christ and the world; especially, if
God come after the world, as many times he does, even in them, who think they
love him well; that first they love the riches of this world, and then they
love God that gave them. But that is a false Method in this art of love; The
true is, radically to love God for himself, and other things for his sake, so
far, as he may receive glory in our having, and using them.

This Peter and Andrew declared abundantly; Relictia retibus.
they did as much as they were bid; they were bid follow, and they followed;
but it seems they did more, they were not bid leave their nets, and yet they
left their nets, and followed him: But, for this, they did not; no man can do
more in the service of God, then is enjoined him, commanded him. There is no
supererogation, no making of God beholden to us, no bringing of God into our
debt. Every man is commanded to love God with all his heart, and all his power,
and a heart above a whole heart, and a power above a whole power, is a strange
extension. That therefore which was declared explicitly, plainly, directly by
Christ, to the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.21.
Vade, and vende, and sequere, Go and sell all, and follow me, was implicitly
implied to these men in our text, Leave your nets, and follow me. And, though
to do so, (to leave all) be not always a precept, a commandment to all men,
yet it was a precept, a commandment to both these, at that time; to the young
man in the Gospel, (for he was as expressly bid to sell away all, as he was to
follow Christ) and to these men in the text, because they could not perform
that that was directly commanded, except they performed that which was implied
too; except they left their nets, they could not follow Christ. When God
commands us to follow him, he gives us light, how, and in which way he will be
followed; And then when we understand which is his way, that way is as much a
commandment, as the very end it self, and not to follow him that way, is as
much a transgression, as not to follow him at all. If that young man in the
Gospel, who was bid sell all, and give to the poor, and then follow, had
followed, but kept his interest in his land; If he had divested himself of the
land, but let it fall, or conveyed it to the next heir, or other kinsmen; If
he had employed it to pious uses, but not so, as Christ commanded, to the
poor, still he had been in a transgression: The way when it is declared, is as
much a command, as the end.

But then, in this command, which was implicitly, and by necessary consequence
laid upon Peter and Andrew, to leave their nets, (because without doing so,
they could not forthwith follow Christ) there is no example of forsaking a
calling, upon pretense of following Christ; no example here, of devesting ones
self of all means of defending us from those manifold necessities, which this
life lays upon us, upon pretense of following Christ; It is not an absolute
leaving of all worldly cares, but a leaving them out of the first
consideration; Primum quaerite regnum Dei, so, as our first business be to
seek the kingdom of God. Mat. 8.14.
For, after this leaving of his nets, for this time, Peter continued owner of
his house, and Christ came to that house of his, and found his mother in law
sick in that house, and recovered her there. Upon a like commandment, upon
such a Sequere, Mat. 9.10.
Follow me, Matthew followed Christ too; but after that following, Christ went
with Matthew to his house, and sat at meat with him at home. And for this very
exercise of fishing, though at that time when Christ said, Follow me, they left
their nets, yet they returned to that trade, sometimes, upon occasions, in all
likelihood, in Christ's life; and after Christ's death, clearly they did return
to it; for Christ, after his Resurrection, Joh. 21.1.
found them fishing.

They did not therefore abandon and leave all care, and all government of their
own estate, and dispose themselves to live after upon the sweat of others; but
transported with a holy alacrity, in this present and cheerful following of
Christ, in respect of that then, they neglected their nets, and all things
else. Perfecta obedientia est sua imperfocta relinquere, Not to be too diligent
toward the world, August.
is the diligence that God requires. S. Augustine does not say, sua relinquere,
but sua imperfecta relinquere, That God requires we should leave the world, but
that we should leave it to second considerations; That thou do not forbear,
nor defer thy conversion to God, and thy restitution to man, till thou have
purchased such a state, bought such an office, married, and provided such and
such children, but imperfecta relinquere, to leave these worldly things
unperfected, till thy repentance have restored thee to God, and established thy
reconciliation in him, and then the world lies open to thy honest endeavors.
Others take up all with their net, and they sacrifice to their nets, because by
them their portion is fat, Hab. 1.16.
and their meat plenteous. They are consident in their own learning, their own
wisdom, their own practice, and (which is a strange Idolatry) they sacrifice
to themselves, they attribute all to their own industry. These men in our text
were far from that; they left their nets.

But still consider, that they did but leave their nets, they did not burn
them. And consider too, that they left but nets; those things, which might
entangle them, and retard them in their following of Christ. And such nets,
(some such things as might hinder them in the service of God) even these men,
so well disposed to follow Christ, had about them. And therefore let no man
say, Imitari vellem, sed quod relinquam, non habeo, Gregor.
I would gladly do as the Apostles did, leave all to follow Christ, but I have
nothing to leave; alas, all things have left me, and I have nothing to leave.
Even that murmuring at poverty is a net; leave that. Leave thy superfluous
desire of having the riches of this world; though thou may flatter thy
self, that thou desire to have only that thou might leave it, that thou
might employ it charitably, yet it might prove a net, and stick too close
about thee to part with it. Multa relinquitis, si desideriis renunciatis, Idem.
You leave your nets, if you leave your over-earnest greediness of catching;
for, when you do so, you do not only fish with a net, (that is, lay hold
upon all you can compass) but, (which is strange) you fish for a net, even
that which you get proves a net to you, and hinders you in the following of
Christ, and you are less disposed to follow him, when you have got your ends,
then before. He that has least, has enough to weigh him down from heaven, by
an inordinate love of that little which he has, or in an inordinate and
murmuring desire of more. And he that has most, has not too much to give for
heaven; Tantum valet regnum Dei, quantum tu vales, Idem.
Heaven is always so much worth, as thou art worth. A poor man may have
heaven for a penny, that has no greater store; and, God looks, that he to
whom he has given thousands, should lay out thousands upon the purchase of
heaven. The market changes, as the plenty of money changes; Heaven costs a rich
man more then a poor, because he has more to give. But in this, rich and
poor are both equal, that both must leave themselves without nets, that is,
without those things, which, in their own Consciences they know, retard the
following of Christ. Whatsoever hinders my present following, that I cannot
follow to day, whatsoever may hinder my constant following, that I cannot
follow to morrow, and all my life, is a net, and I am bound to leave that.

And these are the pieces that constitute our first part, the circumstances
that invest these persons, Peter, and Andrew, in their former condition,
before, and when Christ called them.

SERMON. LXXII.
MAT. 4.18, 19, 20. And Jesus walking by the Sea of Galile saw two brethren,
Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the Sea, (for
they were fishers.) And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you
fishers of men; And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.


WE are now in our Order proposed at first, come to our second part, from the
consideration of these persons, Peter and Andrew, in their former state and
condition, before, and at their calling, to their future estate in promise, but
an infallible promise, Christ's promise, if they followed him, (Follow me, and I
will make you fishers of men.) In which part we shall best come to our end,
(which is your edification) by these steps. First, that there is an Humility
enjoined them, in the Sequere, follow, come after. That though they be brought
to a high Calling, that do not make them proud, nor tyrannous over men's
consciences; And then, even this Humility is limited, Sequere me, follow me;
for there may be a pride even in Humility, and a man may follow a dangerous
guide; Our guide here is Christ, Sequere me, follow me. And then we shall see
the promise it self, the employment, the function, the preferment; In which
there is no new state promised them, no Innovation, (They were fishers, and
they shall be fishers still) but there is an emprovement, a bettering, a
reformation, (They were fishermen before, and now they shall be fishers of
men;) To which purpose, we shall find the world to be the Sea, and the Gospel
their Net. And lastly, all this is presented to them, not as it was expressed
in the former part, with a For, (it is not, Follow me, for I will prefer you)
he will not have that the reason of their following; But yet it is, Follow me,
and I will prefer you; It is a subsequent addition of his own goodness, but
so infallible a one, as we may rely upon; Whosoever does follow Christ, speeds
well. And into these considerations will fall all that belongs to this last
part, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.

First then, Sequere. Humilitas.
here is an impression of Humility, in following, in coming after, Sequere,
follow, press not to come before; And it had need be first, if we consider how
early, how primarie a sin Pride is, and how soon it possesses us. Scarce any
man, but if he look back seriously into himself, and into his former life,
and revolve his own history, but that the first act which he can remember in
himself, or can be remembered of by others, will be some act of Pride. Before
Ambition, or Covetousness, or Licentiousness is awake in us, Pride is
working; Though but a childish pride, yet pride; and this Parents rejoice at in
their children, and call it spirit, and so it is, but not the best. We enlarge
not therefore the consideration of this word sequere, follow, come after, so
far, as to put our meditation upon the whole body, and the several members
of this sin of pride; Nor upon the extent and diffusivenesse of this sin,
as it spreads it self over every other sin; (for every sin is complicated
with pride, so as every sin is a rebellious opposing of the law and will of
God) Nor to consider the weighty hainousnes of pride, how it aggravates every
other sin, how it makes a musket a Canon bullet, and a peble a Millstone; but
after we have stopped a little upon that useful consideration, That there is
not so direct, and Diametrall a contrariety between the nature of any sin and
God, as between him and pride, we shall pass to that which is our principal
observation in this branch, How early and primary a sin pride is, occasioned by
this, that the commandment of Humility is first given, first enjoined in our
first word, Sequere, follow.

But first, Nihil tam centrarium Deo.
we exalt that consideration, That nothing is so contrary to God, as Pride,
with this observation, That God in the Scriptures is often by the Holy Ghost
invested, and represented in the qualities and affections of man; and to
constitute a commerce and familiarity between God and man, God is not only
said to have bodily lineaments, eyes and ears, and hands, and feet, and to
have some of the natural affections of man, as Joy, in particular, Deuteronomy. 30.9.
(The Lord will rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy Fathers)
And so, pity too, Genesis 39.21.
(The Lord was with Joseph, and extended kindness unto him) But some of those
inordinate and irregular passions and perturbations, excesses and defects of
man, are imputed to God, by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures. For so,
laziness, drowsinesse is imputed to God; (Awake Lord, why sleep thou?) So
corruptiblenesse, and deterioration, Psalm. 44.23. Psalm. 18.26.
and growing worse by ill company, is imputed to God; ( Cum perverso
perverteris, God is said to grow froward with the froward, and that he learnes
to go crookedly with them that go crookedly) And prodigality and wastfulnesse
is imputed to God; Psalm. 44.12.
(Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by
their price) So sudden and hasty choler; (Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and
ye perish Inira brevi, Psalm. 2.12.
though his wrath be kindled but a little) And then, illimited and boundless
anger, a vindicative irreconciliablenesse is imputed to God; (I was but a
little displeased, Zech. 1.15.
(but it is otherwise now) I am very sore displeased) So there is Ira devorans;
Exodus 15.4. Job 10.17. Ier. 21.5. Psalm. 80.4.
(Wrath that consumes like stubble) So there is Ira multiplicata, (Plagues
renewed, and indignation increased) So God himself expresses it, (I will fight
against you in anger and in fury) And so for his inexorablenesse, his
irreconciliablenesse, (O Lord God of Hosts, Quousque, how long will thou be
angry against the prayer of thy people?) Gods own people, Gods own people
praying to their own God, and yet their God irreconciliable to them. Scorn
and contempt is imputed to God; which is one of the most enormious, and
disproportioned weaknesses in man; that a worm that crawles in the dust, that
a grain of dust, that is hurried with every blast of wind, should find any
thing so much inferior to it self as to scorn it, to deride it, to contemn
it; yet scorn, and derision, and contempt is imputed to God, Psalm. 2.4. Prove.
1.26.
(He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision) and again, (I will laugh at your calamity, I will mock you when your
fear comes.) Nay beloved, even inebriation, excess in that kind,
Drunkenness, is a Metaphor which the Holy Ghost has mingled in the expressing
of Gods proceedings with man; for God does not only threaten to make his
enemies drunk, (and to make others drunk is a circumstance of
drunkenness)(so Jerusalem being in his displeasure complains, Inebriavit
absynthio, Lam. 3.15. Esaias 49.26.
(He has made me drunk with wormwood) and again, (They shall be drunk with
their own blood, as with new Wine) Nor only to express his plentiful
mercies to his friends and servants, does God take that Metaphore, (Inebriabo
animam Sacerdotis, I will make the soul of the Priest drunk; fill it, Ien.
31.14. Ver. 25.
satiate it) and again, (I will make the weary soul, and the sorrowful soul
drunk) But not only all this, (though in all this God have a hand) not only
toward others, but God in his own behalf complains of the scant and
penurious Sacrificer, Non inebriasti me, Esaias 43.24.
Thou have not made me drunk with thy Sacrifices. And yet, though for the
better applying of God to the understanding of man, the Holy Ghost impute to
God these excesses, and defects of man (laziness and drowsiness,
deterioration, corruptiblenesse by ill conversation, prodigality and
wastfulnesse, sudden choler, long irreconciablenesse, scorn, inebriation, and
many others) in the Scriptures, yet in no place of the Scripture is God, for
any respect said to be proud; God in the Scriptures is never made so like man,
as to be made capable of Pride; for this had not been to have God like man,
but like the devil.

God is said in the Scriptures to apparel himself gloriously; Psalm. 104.2.
Psalm. 45.13.
(God covers him with light as with a garment) And so of his Spouse the Church
it is said, (Her clothing is of wrought gold, and her raiment of needle work)
and, as though nothing in this world were good enough for her wearing, she is
said to be clothed with the Sun. Rev. 12.1.
But glorious apparel is not pride in them, whose conditions require it, and
whose revenews will bear it. God is said in the Scriptures to appear with
greatness and majesty, Dan. 7.10.
(A stream of fire came forth before him; thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him.) And so Christ shall
come at Judgment, with his Hosts of Angels, in majesty, and in glory. But
these outward appearances and acts of greatness are not pride in those
persons, to whom there is a reverence due, which reverence is preserved by this
outward splendour, and not otherwise. God is said in the Scriptures to triumph
over his enemies, and to be jealous of his glory; (The Lord, whose name is
Jealous, Exodus 34.14.
is a jealous God) But, for Princes to be jealous of their glory, studious of
their honor, for any private man to be jealous of his good name, careful to
preserve an honest reputation, is not pride. For, Pride is Appetitus
celsitudinis perversus, It is an inordinate desire of being better then we are.

Now there is a lawful, nay a necessary desire of being better and better; And
that, not only in spiritual things, (for so every man is bound to be better
and better, better to day then yesterday, and to morrow then to day, and he
that grows not in Religion, withers, There is no standing at a stay, He that
goes not forward in godliness, goes backward, and he that is not better, is
worse) but even in temporal things too there is a liberty given us, nay there
is a law, an obligation laid upon us, to endeavor by industry in a lawful
calling, to mend and improve, to enlarge our selves, and spread, even in
worldly things. The first Commandment that God gave man, was not prohibitive;
God, Genesis 1.28.
in that, forbad man nothing, but enlarged him with that Crescite, and
multiplicamini, Increase and multiply, which is not only in the multiplication
of children; but in the enlargement of possessions too; for so it follows in
the same place, not only Replete, but Dominamini, not only replenish the
world, but subdue it, and take dominion over it, that is, make it your own.
For, Terram dedit filiis hominum, As God has given sons to men, so God gives
the possession of this world to the sons of men. For so when God delivers that
commandment, the second time, to Noah, for the reparation of the world,
Crescite and multiplicamini, Genesis 9.1.
Increase and multiply, he accompanies it with that reason, The fear of you,
and the dread of you shall be upon all, and all are delivered into your hands;
which reason can have no relation to the multiplying of Children, but to the
enlarging of possessions. God planted trees in Paradise in a good state at
first; at first with ripe fruits upon them; but Gods purpose was, that even
those trees, though well then, should grow greater. God gives many men good
estates from their parents at first; yet Gods purpose is that they should
increase those estates. He that leaves no more, then his father left him, (if
the fault be in himself) shall hardly make a good account of his stewardship
to God; for, he has but kept his talent in a handkercheif. Mat. 18.25. Prove.
18.9.
And the slothful man is even brother to the waster. The holy Ghost in
Solomon, scarce prefers him that does not get more, before him that wastes all.
Ier. 48.10.
He makes them brethren; almost all one. Cursed be he that does the work of
God negligently; that does any Commandment of God by halves; And this
negligent and lazy man, this in-industrious and illaborious man that takes no
pains, he does one part of Gods Commandment, He does multiply, but he does
not the other, he does not increase; He leaves Children enough, but he leaves
them nothing; not in possessions and maintenance, nor in vocation and calling.

And truly, 1 Timothy 6.10. 1 Timothy 9.
howsoever the love of money be the root of all evil, (He cannot mistake that
told us so) Howsoever they that will be rich (that resolve to be rich by any
means) shall fall into many tentations, Howsoever a hasty desire of being
suddenly and prematurely rich, be a dangerous and an obnoxious thing, a
pestilent and contagious disease, (for what a perverse and inordinate
anticipation and prevention of God and nature is it, to look for our harvest
in May, or to look for all grainst at once? and such a perverseness is the
hasty desire of being suddenly and prematurely rich, yet, to go on
industriously in an honest calling, and giving God his leisure, and giving God
his portion all the way, in Tithes, and in Alms, and then, still to lay up
something for posterity, is that, which God does not only permit and accept
from us, but command to us, and reward in us. And certainly, that man shall not
stand so right in Gods eye at the last day, that leaves his Children to the
Parish, as he that leaves the Parish to his Children, if he have made his
purchases out of honest gain, in a lawful Calling, and not out of oppression.

In all which, I would be rightly understood; that is, that I speak of such
poverty as is contracted by our own laziness, or wastfulnesse. For otherwise,
poverty that comes from the hand of God, is as rich a blessing as comes from
his hand. He that is poor with a good conscience, that has labored and yet
not prospered, knows to whom to go, Psalm. 4.7.
and what to say, Lord, thou have put gladness into my heart, more then in the
time when corn and wine increased; (more now, then when I had more) I will lay
me down and sleep, for thou Lord only make me to dwell in safety. Does
every rich man dwell in safety? Can every rich man lie down in peace and
sleep? no, nor every poor man neither; but he that is poor with a good
conscience, can. And, though he that is rich with a good conscience may, in a
good measure, do so too, (sleep in peace) yet not so out of the sphere and
latitude of envy, and free from the machinations, and supplantations, and
underminings of malicious men, that feed upon the confiscations, and build upon
the ruins of others, as the poor man is.

Though then S. Chrysostom call riches Absurditatis parents, the parents of
absurdities, That they make us do, not only ungodly, but inhumane things, not
only irreligious, but unreasonable things, uncomely and absurd things, things
which we our selves did not suspect that we could be drawn to, yet there is a
growing rich, which is not covetousness, and there is a desire of honor and
preferment, which is not Pride. For, Pride is, (as we said before) Appetitus
perversus, A perverse and inordinate desire, but there is a defire of honor and
preferment, regulated by rectified Reason; and rectified Reason is Religion.
And therefore, (as we said) how ever other affections of man, may, and are, by
the Holy Ghost, in Scriptures, in some respects ascribed to God, yet never
Pride. Nay, the Holy Ghost himself seems to be straightened, and in a
difficulty, when he comes to express Gods proceedings with a proud man, and
his detestation of him, and aversion from him. There is a considerable, a
remarkable, indeed a singular manner of expressing it, (perchance you find not
the like in all the Bible) where God says, Psalm. 101.5.
Hini that has a high look, and a proud heart, I will not, (in our last) I
cannot, (in our former translation) Not what? Not as it is in those
translations, I cannot suffer him, I will not suffer him; for that word of
Suffering, is but a voluntary word, supplied by the Translators; In the
Original, it is as it were an abrupt breaking off on Gods part, from the proud
man, and, (if we may so speak) a kind of froward departing from him. God does
not say of the proud man, I cannot work upon him, I cannot mend him, I cannot
pardon him, I cannot suffer him, I cannot stay with him, but merely I cannot,
and no more, I cannot tell what to say of him, what to do for him; (Him that
has a proud heart, I cannot) Pride is so contrary to God, as that the proud
man, and he can meet in nothing. And this consideration has kept us thus long,
from that which we made our first and principal collection, That this
commandment of Humility, was imprinted in our very first word, Sequere, follow,
be content to come after, to denote how early and primary a sin Pride is, and
how soon it entered into the world, and how soon into us; and that
consideration we shall pursue now.

We know that light is Gods eldest child, his first borne of all Creatures;
Superbia in Angelis.
and it is ordinarily received, that the Angels are twins with the light, made
then when light was made. And then the first act, that these Angels that fell,
did, was an act of Pride. They not thank nor praise God; for their Creation;
(which should have been their first act) They did not solicit, nor pray to God
for their Sustentation, their Melioration, their Confirmation; (so they should
have proceed) But the first act that those first Creatures did, was an act of
pride, a proud reflecting upon themselves, a proud overvaluing of their own
condition, and an acquiescence in that, in an imaginary possibility of standing
by themselves, without any farther relation, or beholdingness to God. So
early, so primary a sin is Pride, as that it was the first act of the first of
Creatures.

So early, so primary a sin, as that whereas all Pride now is but a comparative
pride, Superbia positiva.
this first pride in the Angels was a positive, a radical pride. The Pharisee
is but proud, that he is not as other men are; that is but a comparative pride.
Luke 18.11.
No King thinks himself great enough, yet he is proud that he is independent,
sovereign, subject to none. No subject thinks himself rich enough, yet he is
proud that he is able to oppress others that are poorer, Et gloriatur in malo,
quia potens est, He boasts himself in mischief, Psalm. 52.1.
because he is a mighty man. But all these are but comparative prides; and
there must be some subjects to compare with, before a King can be proud, and
some inferiors, before the Magistrate, and some poor, before the rich man can
be proud. But this pride in those Angels in heaven, was a positive pride; There
were no other Creatures yet made, with whom these Angels could compare
themselves, and before whom these Angels could prefer themselves, and yet
before there was any other creature but themselves, any other creature, to
undervalue, or insult over, these Angels were proud of themselves. So early, so
primary a sin is Pride.

So early, so primary, as that in that ground, which was for goodness next to
heaven, Superbia in Paradiso.
that is, Paradise, Pride grew very early too. Adams first act was not an act
of Pride, but an act of lawful power and jurisdiction, in naming the
Creatures; Adam was above them all, and he might have called them what he
would; There had lain no action, no appeal, if Adam had called a Lion a Dog,
or an Eagle an Owl. And yet we dispute with God, why he should not make all us
vessels of honor, and we complain of God, that he has not given us all, all
the abundances of this world. Comparatively Adam was better then all the world
beside, and yet we find no act of pride in Adam, when he was alone. Solitude
is not the scene of Pride; The danger of pride is in company, when we meet to
look upon another. But in Adams wife, Eve, her first act (that is noted) was
an act of Pride, Genesis 3.5.
a harkening to that voice of the Serpent, Ye shall be as Gods. As soon as
there were two, there was pride. How many may we have known, (if we have had
any conversation in the world) that have been content all the week, at home
alone, with their worky day faces, as well as with their worky day clothes, and
yet on Sundays, when they come to Church, and appear in company, will mend
both, their faces as well as their clothes. Not solitude, but company is the
scene of pride; And therefore I know not what to call that practice of the
Nuns in Spain, who though they never see man, yet will paint. So early, so
primary a sin is Pride, as that it grew instantly from her, Genesis 2.18.
whom God intended for a Helper, because he saw that it was not good for man to
be alone. God sees that it is not good for man to be without health, without
wealth, without power, and jurisdiction, and magistracy, and we grow proud of
our helpers, proud of our health and strength, proud of our wealth and riches,
proud of our office and authority over others.

So early, so primary a sin is pride, as that, out of every mercy, and
blessing, which God affords us, (and, His mercies are new every morning) we
gather Pride; we are not the more thankful for them, and yet we are the
prouder of them. Nay, we gather Pride, not only out of those things, which
mend and improve us, (Gods blessings and mercies) but out of those actions of
our own, that destroy and ruin us, we gather pride; sins overthrow us,
demolish us, destroy and ruin us, and yet we are proud of our sins. How many
men have we heard boast of their sins; and, (as S. Augustine confesses of
himself) belie themselves, and boast of more sins then ever they committed?
Out of every thing, out of nothing sin grows. Therefore was this commandment in
our text, Sequere, Follow, come after, well placed first, for we are come to
see even children strive for place and precedence, and mothers are ready to go
to the Heralds to know how Cradles shall be ranked, which Cradle shall have the
highest place; Nay, even in the womb, Genesis 25.26.
there was contention for precedence; Jacob took hold of his brother Esaus
heel, and would have been borne before him.

And as our pride begins in our Cradle, Superbia in monumentis.
it continues in our graves and Monuments. It was a good while in the primitive
Church, before any were buried in the Church; The best contented themselves
with the Churchyards. After, a holy ambition, (may we call it so) a holy Pride
brought them ad Limina, to the Church-threshold, to the Church-doore, because
some great Martyrs were buried in the Porches, and devout men desired to lie
near them, 1 King. 13.31.
as one Prophet did to lie near another, (Lay my bones besides his bones.) But
now, persons whom the Devil kept from Church all their lives, Separatists,
Libertines, that never came to any Church, And persons, whom the Devil brought
to Church all their lives, (for, such as come merely out of the obligation of
the Law, and to redeem that vexation, or out of custom, or company, or
curiosity, or a perverse and sinister affection to the particular Preacher,
though they come to Gods house, come upon the Devils invitation) Such as one
Devil, that is, worldly respect, brought to Church in their lives, another
Devil, that is, Pride and vainglory, brings to Church after their deaths, in
an affectation of high places, and sumptuous Monuments in the Church. And such
as have given nothing at all to any pious uses, or have determined their alms
and their dole which they have given, in that one day of their funeral, and no
farther, have given large annuities, perpetuities, for new painting their
tombs, and for new flags, and scutcheons, every certain number of years.

O the earliness! O the latenesse! how early a Spring, and no Autumn! how
fast a growth, and no declination, of this branch of this sin Pride, against
which, this first word of ours, Sequere, Follow, come after, is opposed! this
love of place, and precedence, it rocks us in our Cradles, it lies down with us
in our graves. There are diseases proper to certain things, Rots to sheep,
Murrain to cattle. There are diseases proper to certain places, as the Sweat
was to us. There are diseases proper to certain times, as the plague is in
diverse parts of the Eastern Countries, where they know assuredly, when it will
begin and end. But for this infectious disease of precedence, and love of
place, it is run over all places, as well Cloisters as Courts, And over all
men, as well spiritual as temporal, And over all times, as well the Apostles
as ours. The Apostles disputed often, who should be greatest, Man. 19.28.
and it was not enough to them, that Christ assured them, that they should sit
upon the twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes; Matt. 19.28.
it was not enough for the sons of Zebedee, to be put into that Commission,
but their friends must solicit the office, to place them high in that
Commission; their Mother must move, that one may sit at Christ's right hand, and
the other at his left, in the execution of that Commission. Because this sin of
pride is so early and primary a sin, is this Commandment of Humility first
enjoined, and because this sin appears most generally in this love of place,
and precedence, the Commandment is expressed in that word, Sequere, Follow,
Come after. But then, even this Humility is limited, for it is Sequere me,
follow me, which was proposed for our second Consideration, Sequere me.

There may be a pride in Humility, Sequere me.
and an over-weaning of our selves, in attributing too much to our own
judgment, in following some leaders; for so, we may be so humble as to go
after some man, and yet so proud, as to go before the Church, because that man
may be a Schismatike. Therefore Christ proposes a safe guide, himself, Sequere
me, follow me. It is a dangerous thing, when Christ says, Vade post me, Get
thee behind me; for that is accompanied with a shrewd name of increpation,
Satan, Get thee behind me Satan; Christ speaks it but twice in the Gospel;
once to Peter, who because he then did the part of an Adversary, Christ calls
Satan, and once to Satan himself, Matt. 16 23. Matt. 4.10.
because he pursued his tentations upon him; for there is a going behind
Christ, which is a casting out of his presence, without any future following,
and that is a fearful station, a fearful retrogradation; But when Christ's
says, not Vade retro, Get thee behind me, see my face no more, but Sequere me,
follow me, he means to look back upon us; Luke 22.63.
so the Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter wept bitterly, and all was
well; when he bids us follow him, he directs us in a good way, and by a good
guide.

The Carthusian Friars thought they descended into as low pastures as they
could go, when they renounced all flesh, and bound themselves to feed on fish
only; and yet another Order follows them in their superstitious singularity,
and goes beyond them, Foliantes, the Fueillans, they eat neither flesh, nor
fish, nothing but leafes, and roots; and as the Carthusians in a proud
humility, despise all other Orders that eat flesh, so do the Fueillans the
Carthusians that eat fish. There is a pride in such humility. That Order of
Friars that called themselves Ignorantes, Ignorant men, that pretended to know
nothing, sunk as low as they thought it possible, into an humble name and
appellation; And yet the Minorits, (Minorits that are less then any) think
they are gone lower, and then the Minimes, (Minimes that are less then all)
lower then they. And when one would have thought, that there had not been a
lower step then that, another Sect went beyond all, beyond the Ignorants, and
the Minorits, and the Minimes, and all, and called themselves, Nullanos,
Nothings. But yet, even these Diminutives, the Minorits, and Minimes, and
Nullans, as little, as less, as least, as very nothing as they profess
themselves, lie under this disease, which is opposed in the Sequere me, follow,
come after, in our Text; For no sort nor condition of men in the world are more
contentious, more quarrelsome, more vehement for place, and precedence, then
these Orders of Friars are, there, where it may appear, that is, in their
public Processions, as we find by those often troubles, which the Superiors
of the several Orders, and Bishops in their several Dioces, and some of those
Councels, which they call General, have been put to, for the ranking, and
marshalling of these contentious, and wrangling men. Which makes me remember
the words, in which the eighteenth of Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions is
conceived, That to take away fond Courtesy, (that is, needless Complement) and
to take away challenging of places, (which it seems were frequent and
troublesome then) To take away fond courtesy, and challenging of places,
Processions themselves were taken away, because in those Processions, these
Orders of Friars, that pretended to follow, and come after all the world, did
thus passionately, and with so much scandalous animosity pursue the love of
place, and precedence. Therefore is our humility here limited, Sequere me,
follow me, follow Christ. How is that done?

Consider it in Doctrinall things first, and then in Moral; Sequendus in
Doctrina.
First how we are to follow Christ in believing, and then how in doing, in
practicing. First in Doctrinall things, There must have gone some body before,
else it is no following; Take heed therefore of going on with thine own
inventions, thine own imaginations, for this is no following; Take heed of
accompanying the beginners of Heresies and Schisms; for these are no
followings where none have gone before: Nay, there have not gone enough before,
to make it a path to follow in, except it have had a long continuance, and
been much trodden in. And therefore to follow Christ doctrinally, is to embrace
those Doctrins, in which his Church has walked from the beginning, and not to
vex thy self with new points, not necessary to salvation. That is the right
way, and then thou art well entered; but that is not all; thou must walk in the
right way to the end, that is, to the end of thy life. So that to profess the
whole Gospel, and nothing but Gospel for Gospel, and profess this to thy
death, for no respect, no dependence upon any great person, to slacken in any
fundamental point of thy Religion, nor to be shaken with hopes or fears in
thine age, when thou would feign live at ease, and therefore think it
necessary to do, as thy supporters do; To persevere to the end in the whole
Gospel, this is to follow Christ in Doctrinall things.

In practical things, Sequendus in vitae. Iam. 5.11.
things that belong to action, we must also follow Christ, in the right way,
and to the end. They are both (way and end) laid together, Sufferentiam Job
audiistis, and finem Domini vidistis; You have heard of the patience of Job,
and you bave seen the end of the Lord; and you must go Jobs way to Christ's
end. Job has beaten a path for us, to show us all the way; A path that
affliction walked in, and seemed to delight in it, in bringing the Sabaean upon
his Oxen, the Chaldean upon his Camels, the fire upon his Sheep, destruction
upon his Servants, and at last, ruin upon his Children. One affliction makes
not a path; iterated, continued calamities do; and such a path Job has showed
us, not only patience, but cheerfulness; more, thankfulness for our
afflictions, because they were multiplied. And then, we must set before our
eyes, as the way of Job, so the end of the Lord; Now the end of the Lord was
the cross: So that to follow him to the end, is not only to bear
afflictions, though to death, but it is to bring our crosses to the Cross of
Christ. How is that progress made? (for it is a royal progress, Matt. 16.24.
not a pilgrimage to follow Christ to his Cross) Our Savior says, He that
will follow me, let him take up his cross, and follow me. You see four
stages, four resting, baiting places in this progress. It must be a cross,
And it must be my cross, And then it must be taken up by me, And with this
cross of mine, thus taken up by me, I must follow Christ, that is, carry my
cross to his.

First it must be a Cross, Crux. Gal. 6.14.
Tollat crucem; for every man has afflictions, but every man has not cross.
Only those afflictions are crosses, whereby the world is crucified to us, and
we to the world. The afflictions of the wicked exasperate them, enrage them,
stone and pave them, obdurate and petrifie them, but they do not crucify
them. The afflictions of the godly crucify them. And when I am come to that
conformity with my Savior, Col. 1.24.
as to fulfill his sufferings in my flesh, (as I am, when I glorify him in a
Christian constancy and cheerfulness in my afflictions) then I am crucified
with him, carried up to his Cross: 2 King. 4.34.
And as Elisha in raising the Shunamits dead child, put his mouth upon the
child's mouth, his eyes, and his hands, upon the hands, and eyes of the child;
so when my crosses have carried me up to my Saviors Cross, I put my hands
into his hands, and hang upon his nails, I put mine eyes upon his, and wash
off all my former unchaste looks, and receive a sovereign tincture, and a
lively verdure, and a new life into my dead tears, from his tears. I put my
mouth upon his mouth, and it is I that say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and it is I that recover again, and say, Into thy hands, O Lord,
I commend my spirit. Thus my afflictions are truly a cross, when those
afflictions do truly crucify me, and souple me, and mellow me, and knead me,
and roll me out, to a conformity with Christ. It must be this Cross, and then
it must be my cross that I must take up, Tollat suam.

Other men's crosses are not my crosses; Crux mea.
no man has suffered more then himself needed. That is a poor treasure which
they boast of in the Roman Church, that they have in their Exchequer, all the
works of supererogation, of the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, that suffered
so much more then was necessary for their own salvation, and those
superabundant crosses and merits they can apply to me. If the treasure of the
blood of Christ Jesus be not sufficient, Lord what addition can I find, to
match them, to piece out them! And if it be sufficient of it self, what
addition need I seek? Other men's crosses are not mine, other men's merits cannot
save me. Nor is any cross mine own, which is not mine by a good title; If I
be not Possessor bonae fidei, If I came not well by that cross. 1 Cor. 4.7.
And Quid habeo quod non accepi? is a question that reaches even to my crosses;
what have I that I have not received? not a cross; And from whose hands can I
receive any good thing, but from the hands of God? So that that only is my
cross, which the hand of God has laid upon me. Alas, that cross of present
bodily weakness, which the former wantonnesses of my youth have brought upon
me, is not my cross; That cross of poverty which the wastfulnesse of youth
has brought upon me, is not my cross; for these, weakness upon wantonness,
want upon wastfulnesse, are Natures crosses, not Gods, and they would fall
naturally, though there were (which is an impossible supposition) no God.
Except God therefore take these crosses in the way, as they fall into his
hands, and sanctify them so, and then lay them upon me, they are not my
crosses; but if God do this, they are. And then this cross thus prepared, I
must take up; Tollat.

Foreign crosses, other men's merits are not mine; spontaneous and voluntary
crosses, Tollat.
contracted by mine own sins, are not mine; neither are devious, and remote,
and unnecessary crosses, my crosses. Since I am bound to take up my cross,
there must be a cross that is mine to take up; that is, a cross prepared for
me by God, and laid in my way, which is tentations or tribulations in my
calling; and I must not go out of my way to seek a cross; for, so it is not
mine, nor laid for my taking up. I am not bound to hunt after a persecution,
nor to stand it, and not fly, nor to affront a plague, and not remove, nor to
open my self to an injury, and not defend. I am not bound to starve my self
by inordinate fasting, nor to tear my flesh by inhumane whippings, and
flagellations. I am bound to take up my Cross; and that is only mine which
the hand of God has laid for me, that is, in the way of my Calling, tentations
and tribulations incident to that.

If it be mine, that is, laid for me by the hand of God, and taken up by me,
that is, Sequatur me.
voluntarily embraced, then Sequatur, says Christ, I am bound to follow him,
with that cross, that is, to carry my cross to his cross. And if at any time
I faint under this cross in the way, let this comfort me, that even Christ
himself was eased by Simon of Cyrene, in the carrying of his Cross; and in
all such cases, Mat. 27.32.
I must fly to the assistance of the prayers of the Church, and of good men,
that God, since it is his burden, will make it lighter, since it is his yoke,
easier, and since it is his Cross, more supportable, and give me the issue
with the tentation. When all is done, with this cross thus laid for me, and
taken up by me, I must follow Christ; Christ to his end; his end is his Cross;
that is, I must bring my cross to his; lay down my cross at the foot of
his; Confess that there is no dignity, no merit in mine, but as it receives an
impression, a sanctification from his. For, if I could dye a thousand times for
Christ, this were nothing, if Christ had not dyed for me before. And this is
truly to follow Christ, both in the way, and to the end, as well in doctrinall
things as in practical. And this is all that lay upon these two, Peter and
Andrew, Follow me. Remains yet to be considered, what they shall get by this;
which is our last Consideration.

They shall be fishers; and what shall they catch? men. They shall be fishers
of men. Piscatores hominum.
And then, for that the world must be their Sea, and their net must be the
Gospel. And here in so vast a sea, and with so small a net, there was no great
appearance of much gain. And in this function, whatsoever they should catch,
they should catch little for themselves. The Apostleship, as it was the
fruitfullest, so it was the barrennest vocation; They were to catch all the
world; there is their fecundity; but the Apostles were to have no Successors,
as Apostles; there is their barrenness. The Apostleship was not intended for a
function to raise houses and families; The function ended in their persons;
after the first, there were no more Apostles.

And therefore it is an usurpation, an imposture, an illusion, it is a forgery,
when the Bishop of Rome will proceed by Apostolical authority, and with
Apostolical dignity, and Apostolical jurisdiction; If he be S. Peter's
Successor in the Bishopric of Rome, he may proceed with Episcopal authority
in his Dioces. If he be; for, though we do not deny that S. Peter was at Rome,
and Bishop of Rome; though we receive it with an historical faith, induced by
the consent of Ancient writers, yet when they will constitute matter of faith
out of matter of fact, and, because S. Peter was (de facto) Bishop of Rome,
therefore we must believe, as an Article of faith, such an infallibility in
that Church, as that no Successor of S. Peter's can ever err, when they stretch
it to matter of faith, then for matter of faith, we require Scriptures; and
then we are confident, and justly confident, that though historically we do
believe it, yet out of Scriptures (which is a necessary proof in Articles of
faith) they can never prove that S. Peter was Bishop of Rome, or ever at Rome.
So then, if the present Bishop of Rome be S. Peter's Successor, as Bishop of
Rome, he has Episcopal jurisdiction there; but he is not S. Peter's Successor
in his Apostleship; and only that Apostleship was a jurisdiction over all the
world. But the Apostleship was an extraordinary office instituted by Christ,
for a certain time, and to certain purposes, and not to continue in ordinary
use. As also the office of the Prophet was in the Old Testament an
extraordinary Office, and was not transferred then, nor does not remain now in
the ordinary office of the Minister.

And therefore they argue impertinently, and collect and infer sometimes
seditiously that say, The Prophet proceeded thus and thus, therefore the
Minister may and must proceed so too; The Prophets would chide the Kings
openly, and threaten the Kings publicly, and proclaim the fault of the Kings
in the ears of the people confidently, authoritatively, therefore the Minister
may and must do so. God sent that particular Prophet Jeremy with that
extraordinary Commission, Ier. 1.10.
Behold I have this day set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to
root out, and to pull down, to destroy and throw down, and then to build,
and to plant again; But God has given none of us his Ministers, in our
ordinary function, any such Commission over Nations, and over Kingdoms. Even
in Ieremies Commission there seems to be a limitation of time; Behold this day
I have set thee over them, where that addition (this day) is not only the date
of the Commission, that it passed Gods hand that day, but (this day) is the
term, the duration of the Commission, that it was to last but that day, that
is, (as the phrase of that language is) that time for which it was limited. And
therefore, as they argue perversely, frowardly, dangerously that say, The
Minister does not his duty that speaks not as boldly, and as publicly too,
and of Kings, and great persons, as the Prophets did, because theirs was an
Extraordinary, ours an Ordinary office, (and no man will think that the
Justices in their Sessions, or the Judges in their Circuits may proceed to
executions, without due trial by a course of Law, because Marshals, in time of
rebellion and other necessities, may do so, because the one has but an
ordinary, the other an extraordinary Commission) So do they deceive themselves
and others, that pretend in the Bishop of Rome an Apostolical jurisdiction, a
jurisdiction over all the world, whereas howsoever he may be S. Peter's
Successor, as Bishop of Rome, yet he is no Successor to S. Peter as an Apostle;
upon which only the universal power can be grounded, and without which that
universal power falls to the ground: The Apostolical faith remains spread
over all the world, but Apostolical jurisdiction is expired with their persons.

These twelve Christ calls Fishers; Piscatores, quia nomen humile.
why fishers? because it is a name of labor, of service, and of humiliation;
and names that taste of humiliation, and labor, and service, are most properly
ours; (fishers we may be) names of dignity, and authority, and command are not
so properly ours, (Apostles we are not in any such sense as they were) Nothing
inflames, nor swells, nor puffes us up, more then that leaven of the soul, that
empty, aerie, frothy love of Names and Titles. We have known men part with
ancient lands for new Titles, and with old Manors for new Honors; and as a
man that should bestow all his money upon a fair purse, and then have nothing
to put into it; so whole Estates have melted away for Titles and Honors, and
nothing left to support them. And how long last they? Exodus 3.14.
How many winds blast them? That name of God, in which, Moses was sent to
Pharaoh, is by our Translators and Expositors ordinarily said to be I Am that I
Am, (Go and say, I Am has sent me, says God there) But in truth, in the
Original, the name is conceived in the future, it is, I shall be. Every man is
that he is; but only God is sure that he shall be so still. Therefore Christ
calls them by a name of labor and humiliation. But why by that name of labor
and humiliation, Fishers?

Because it was Nomen primitivum, Piscatores, quia nomen primitivum.
their own, their former name. The Holy Ghost pursues his own way, and does
here in Christ, as he does often in other places, he speaks in such forms,
and such phrases, as may most work upon them to whom he speaks. Psalm. 78.72.
Of David, that was a shepherd before, God says, he took him to feed his
people. Mat. 2.2.
To those Magi of the East, who were given to the study of the Stars, God gave
a Star to be their guide to Christ at Bethlem. Iehn 6.24.
To those which followed him to Capernaum for meat, Christ took occasion by
that, to preach to them of the spiritual food of their souls. Iehn 4.21.
To the Samaritan woman, whom he found at the Well, he preached of the water of
Life. To these men in our Text accustomed to a joy and gladness, when they
took great, or great store of fish, he presents his comforts agreeably to
their taste, They should be fishers still. Beloved, Christ puts no man out of
his way, (for sinful courses are no ways, but continual deviations) to go
to heaven. Christ makes heaven all things to all men, that he might gain all:
To the mirthfull man he presents heaven, as all joy, and to the ambitious man,
as all glory; To the Merchant it is a Pearl, and to the husbandman it is a
rich field. Christ has made heaven all things to all men, that he might gain
all, and he puts no man out of his way to come thither. These men he calls
Fishers.

He does not call them from their calling, but he mends them in it. It is not
an Innovation; Non Innovatio, sed Renovatio.
God loves not innovations; Old doctrines, old disciplines, old words and
forms of speech in his service, God loves best. But it is a Renovation, though
not an Innovation, and Renovations are always acceptable to God; that is, the
renewing of a man's self, in a consideration of his first estate, what he was
made for, and wherein he might be most serviceable to God. Such a renewing it
is, as could not be done without God; no man can renew himself, regenerate
himself; no man can prepare that work, no man can begin it, no man can
proceed in it of himself. The desire and the actual beginning is from the
preventing grace of God, and the constant proceeding is from the concomitant,
and subsequent, and continual succeeding grace of God; for there is no
conclusive, no consummative grace in this life; no such measure of grace given
to any man, as that that man needs no more, or can lose or frustrate none of
that. The renwing of these men in our text, Christ takes to himself; Faciam
vos, I will make ye fishers of men; no worldly respects must make us such
fishers; it must be a calling from God; And yet, Mar. 1.16.
(as the other Evangelist in the same history expresses it) it is Faciam fieri
vos, I will cause ye to be made fishers of men, that is, I will provide an
outward calling for you too. Our calling to this Man-fishing is not good, Nisi
Dominus faciat, and fieri faciat, except God make us fishers by an internal,
and make his Church to make us so too, by an external calling. Then we are
fishers of men, and then we are successors to the Apostles, though not in their
Apostleship, yet in this fishing. And then, for this fishing, the world is the
Sea, and our net is the Gospel.

The world is a Sea in many respects and assimilations. It is a Sea, Mundus
Mare.
as it is subject to storms, and tempests; Every man (and every man is a
world) feels that. And then, it is never the shallower for the calmnesse, The
Sea is as deep, there is as much water in the Sea, in a calm, as in a storm;
we may be drowned in a calm and flattering fortune, in prosperity, as
irrecoverably, as in a wrought Sea, in adversity; So the world is a Sea. It is
a Sea, as it is bottomless to any line, which we can sound it with, and
endless to any discovery that we can make of it. The purposes of the world,
the ways of the world, exceed our consideration; But yet we are sure the Sea
has a bottom, and sure that it has limits, that it cannot overpasse; The
power of the greatest in the world, the life of the happiest in the world,
cannot exceed those bounds, which God has placed for them; So the world is a
Sea. It is a Sea, as it has ebbs and floods, and no man knows the true reason
of those floods and those ebbs. All men have changes and vicissitudes in their
bodies, (they fall sick) And in their estates, (they grow poor) And in their
minds, (they become sad) at which changes, (sickness, poverty, sadness)
themselves wonder, and the cause is wrapped up in the purpose and judgment of
God only, and hid even from them that have them; and so the world is a Sea. It
is a Sea, as the Sea affords water enough for all the world to drink, but such
water as will not quench the thirst. The world affords conveniences enough to
satisfy Nature, but these increase our thirst with drinking, and our desire
grows and enlarges it self with our abundance, and though we sail in a full
Sea, yet we lack water; So the world is a Sea. It is a Sea, if we consider the
Inhabitants. In the Sea, the greater fish devour the less; and so do the men
of this world too. And as fish, when they mud themselves, have no hands to make
themselves clean, but the current of the waters must work that; So have the
men of this world no means to cleanse themselves from those sins which they
have contracted in the world, of themselves, till a new flood, waters of
repentance, drawn up, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, work that blessed
effect in them.

All these ways the world is a Sea, but especially it is a Sea in this
respect, that the Sea is no place of habitation, but a passage to our
habitations. So the Apostle expresses the world, Here we have no continuing
City, but we seek one to come; we seek it not here, Heb. 13.14.
but we seek it whilst we are here, else we shall never find it. Those are
the two great works which we are to do in this world; first to know, that this
world is not our home, and then to provide us another home, whilst we are in
this world. Therefore the Prophet says, Mic. 2.10. Luke 12.19.
Arise, and depart, for this is not your rest. Worldly men, that have no
farther prospect, promise themselves some rest in this world, ( Soul, thou
have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry, says the rich man) but this is not your rest; indeed no rest; at least
not yours. You must depart, depart by death, before ye come to that rest; but
then you must arise, before you depart; for except ye have a resurrection to
grace here, before you depart, you shall have no resurrection to glory in the
life to come, when you are departed.

Now, Status navigantium.
in this Sea, every ship that sails must necessarily have some part of the
ship under water; Every man that lives in this world, must necessarily have
some of his life, some of his thoughts, some of his labors spent upon this
world; but that part of the ship, by which he sayls, is above water; Those
meditations, and those endeavors which must bring us to heaven, are removed
from this world, and fixed entirely upon God. And in this Sea, are we made
fishers of men; Of men in general; not of rich men, to profit by them, nor of
poor men, to pierce them the more sharply, because affliction has opened a
way into them; Not of learned men, to be over-glad of their approbation of our
labors, Nor of ignorant men, to affect them with an astonishment, or
admiration of our gifts: But we are fishers of men, of all men, of that which
makes them men, their souls. And for this fishing in this Sea, this Gospel is
our net.

Eloquence is not our net; Rete Euangelium.
Traditions of men are not our nets; only the Gospel is. The Devil angles
with hooks and bayts; he deceives, and he wounds in the catching; for every sin
has his sting. The Gospel of Christ Jesus is a net; It has leads and corks;
It has leads, that is, the denouncing of Gods judgments, and a power to sink
down, and lay flat any stubborn and rebellious heart, And it has corks, that
is, the power of absolution, and application of the mercies of God, that swim
above all his works, means to erect an humble and contrite spirit, above all
the waters of tribulation, and affliction. A net is Res nodosa, Rete nodosum.
a knotty thing; and so is the Scripture, full of knots, of scruple, and
perplexity, and anxiety, and vexation, if thou will go about to entangle thy
self in those things, which appertain not to thy salvation; but knots of a
fast union, and inseparable alliance of thy soul to God, and to the fellowship
of his Saints, if thou take the Scriptures, as they were intended for thee,
that is, if thou be content to rest in those places, Rete diffusivum.
which are clear, and evident in things necessary. A net is a large thing,
past thy fadoming, if thou cast it from thee, but if thou draw it to thee, it
will lie upon thine arm. The Scriptures will be out of thy reach, and out of
thy use, if thou cast and scatter them upon Reason, upon Philosophy, upon
Morality, to try how the Scriptures will fit all them, and believe them but so
far as they agree with thy reason; But draw the Scripture to thine own heart,
and to thine own actions, and thou shall find it made for that; all the
promises of the old Testament made, and all accomplished in the new Testament,
for the salvation of thy soul hereafter, and for thy consolation in the
present application of them.

Now this that Christ promises here, Non quia tanquam causa. Romans 6.23.
is not here promised in the nature of wages due to our labor, and our
fishing. There is no merit in all that we can do. The wages of sin is Death;
Death is due to sin, the proper reward of sin; but the Apostle does not say
there, That eternal life is the wages of any good work of ours. (The wages of
sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord) Through Jesus Christ, that is, as we are considered in him; and in him,
who is a Savior, a Redeemer, we are not considered but as sinners. So that
Gods purpose works no otherwise upon us, but as we are sinners; neither did God
mean ill to any man, till that man was, in his sight, a sinner. God shuts no
man out of heaven, by a lock on the inside, except that man have clapped the
door after him, and never knocked to have it opened again, that is, except he
have sinned, and never repented. Christ does not say in our text, Follow me,
for I will prefer you; he will not have that the reason, the cause. If I would
not serve God, except I might be saved for serving him, I shall not be saved
though I serve him; My first end in serving God, must not be my self, but he
and his glory. It is but an addition from his own goodness, Et faciam, Follow
me, and I will do this; but yet it is as certain, and infallible as a debt,
or as an effect upon a natural cause; Those propositions in nature are not so
certain; The Earth is at such a time just between the Sun, and the Moon,
therefore the Moon must be Eclipsed, The Moon is at such time just between
the Earth and the Sun, therefore the Sun must be Eclipsed; for upon the
Sun, and those other bodies, God can, and has sometimes wrought
miraculously, and changed the natural courses of them; (The Sun stood still
in Joshua, And there was an unnatural Eclipse at the death of Christ) But God
cannot by any Miracle so work upon himself, as to make himself not himself,
unmercifull, or unjust; And out of his mercy he makes this promise, (Do this,
and thus it shall be with you) and then, of his justice he performs that
promise, which was made merely, and only out of mercy, If we do it, (though
not because we do it) we shall have eternal life.

Therefore did Andrew, and Peter faithfully believe, such a net should be put
into their hands. Christ had vouchsafed to fish for them, and caught them with
that net, and they believed that he that made them fishers of men, would also
enable them to catch others with that net. And that is truly the comfort that
refreshes us in all our Lucubrations, and night-studies, through the course of
our lives, that that God that sets us to Sea, will prosper our voyage, that
whether he six us upon our own, or send us to other Congregations, he will
open the hearts of those Congregations to us, and bless our labors to them.
For as S. Paul's Vaesi non, lies upon us wheresoever we are, (Woe be unto us if
we do not preach) so, (as S. Paul says to) we were of all men the most
miserable, if we preached without hope of doing good. With this net S. Peter
caught three thousand souls in one day, at one Sermon, and five thousand in
another. Acts 2.41.4.4.
With this net S. Paul fished all the Mediterranean Sea, and caused the Gospel
of Christ Jesus to abound from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum. This is the
net, Romans 15.19.
with which if ye be willing to be caught, that is, to lay down all your
hopes and affiances in the gracious promises of his Gospel, then you are fishes
reserved for that great Mariage-feast, which is the Kingdom of heaven; where,
whosoever is a dish, is a ghest too; whosoever is served in at the table, sits
at the table; whosoever is caught by this net, is called to this feast; and
there your souls shall be satisfied as with marrow, and with fatness, in an
infallible assurance, of an everlasting and undeterminable term, in
inexpressible joy and glory. Amen.

SERMON. LXXIII. Preached to the King in my Ordinary waiting at White Hall, 18.
April 1626.
JOH. 14.2. In my Fathers House are many Mansions; If it were not so, I would
have told you.


THere are occasions of Controversies of all kinds in this one Verse; And one
is, whether this be one Verse or no; For as there are Doctrinall Controversies,
out of the sense and interpretation of the words, so are there Grammatticall
differences about the Distinction, and Interpunction of them: Some Translations
differing therein from the Original, (as the Original Copies are
distinguished, and interpuncted now) and some differing from one another. The
first Translation that was, that into Syriaque, as it is expressed by
Tremellius, renders these words absolutely, precisely, as our two Translations
do; And, as our two Translations do, applies the second clause and
proposition, Si quo minus, If it were not so, I would have told you, as in
affirmation, and confirmation of the former, In domo Patris, In my Fathers
house there are many Mansions, For, If it were not so I would have told you.
But then, as both our Translations do, the Syriaque also admits into this
Verse a third clause and proposition, Vado parare, I go to prepare you a
place. Now Beza does not so; Piscator does not so; They determine this Verse in
those two propositions which constitute our Text, In my Fathers house, etc. and
then they let fall the third proposition, as an inducement, and inchoation of
the next Verse, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go, I will come
again. Diverse others do otherwise, and diversely; For some do assume (as we,
and the Syriaque do) all three propositions into the Verse, but then they do
not (as we, and the Syriaque do) make the second a proof of the first, In my
Fathers house are many Mansions, For, If it were not so, I would have told you,
But they refer the second to the third proposition, If it were not so, I would
have told you, For, I go to prepare you a place, and being to go from you,
would leave you ignorant of nothing. But we find no reason to depart from that
Distinction and Interpunction of these words, which our own Church exhibits to
us, and therefore we shall pursue them so; and so determine, though not the
Verse, (for into the Verse, we admit all three propositions) yet the whole
purpose and intention of our Savior, in those two propositions, which
accomplish our Text, In my Fathers house, etc.

This Interpunction then offers and constitutes our two parts. Divisic.
First, A particular Doctrine, which Christ infuses into his Disciples, In domo
Patris, In my Fathers house are many Mansions; And then a general Rule and
Scale, by which we are to measure, and weigh all Doctrines, Si quo minus, If it
were not so, I would have told you. In the order of nature, the later part falls
first into consideration, The rule of all Doctrines; which in this place is,
The word of God in the mouth of Christ, digested into the Scriptures; In which,
we shall have just, more then just, necessary occasion to note both their
distempers, both theirs, that think, That there are other things to be
believed, then are in the Scriptures, and theirs that think, That there are
some things in the Scriptures, which are not to be believed: For when our
Savior says, Si quo minus, If it were not so, I would have told you, he
intends both this proposition, I have told you all that is necessary to be
believed; and this also, All that I have told you, is necessary to be
believed, so as I have told it you. So that this excludes both that imaginary
insufficiency of the Scriptures, which some have ventured to aver, (for God
shall never call Christian to account for any thing not notified in the
Scriptures) And it excludes also those imaginary Dolos bonos, and frauds pias,
which some have adventured to aver too, That God should use holy Illusions,
holy deceits, holy frauds, and circumventions in his Scriptures, and not intend
in them, that which he pretends by them; This is his Rule, Si quo minus, If it
were not so, I would have told you, If I have not told you so, it is not so,
and if I have, it is so as I have told you: And in these two branches we shall
determine the first part, The Rule of Doctrines, the Scripture.

The second part, which is the particular Doctrine which Christ administers to
his Disciples here, will also derive and cleave it self into two branches; For
first we shall inquire, whether this proposition in our Text, In my Fathers
house are many Mansions, give any ground, or assistance, or countenance to that
pious opinion, of a disparity, and difference of degrees of Glory in the Saints
in heaven; And then, if we find the words of this Text to conduce nothing to
that Doctrine, we shall consider the right use of the true, and natural, the
native and genuine, the direct, and literal, and uncontrovertible sense of the
words; because in them, Christ does not say, that in his Fathers house there
are Diverse Mansions, diverse for seat, or lights, or fashion, or furniture, but
only that there are Many, and in that notion, the Plurality, the Multipliciry,
lies the Consolation.

First then, 1 Part.
for the first branch of our first part, The general Rule of Doctrines, our
Savior Christ in these words involves an argument, That he has told them all
that was necessary; He has, because the Scripture has, for all the
Scriptures which were written before Christ, and after Christ, were written by
one and the same Spirit, his Spirit. It might then make a good Problem, why
they of the Roman Church, not affording to the Scriptures that dignity which
belongs to them, are yet so vehement, and make so hard shift, to bring the
books of other Authors into the rank, and nature, and dignity of being
Scriptures: What matter is it, whether their Maccabees, or their Tobies be
Scripture or no? what get their Maccabees, or their Tobies by being Scripture,
if the Scripture be not full enough, or not plain enough, to bring me to
salvation? But since their intention and purpose, their aim, and their end is,
to under-value the Scriptures, that thereby they may overvalue their own
Traditions, their way to that end may be to put the name of Scriptures upon
books of a lower value, that so the unworthiness of those additionall books,
may cast a diminution upon the Canonical books themselves, when they are made
all one: as in some foreign States we have seen, that when the Prince had a
purpose to erect some new Order of Honor, he would disgrace the old Orders, by
conferring and bestowing them upon unworthy and incapable persons.

But why do we charge the Roman Church with this undervaluing of the
Scriptures, when as they pretend, (and that cannot well be denied them) That
they ascribe to all the books of Scripture this dignity, That all that is in
them is true. It is true; they do so; But this may be true of other Authors
also, and yet those Authors remain profane and secular Authors. All may be
true that Livy says, and all that our Chronicles say, may be true; and yet our
Chronicles, nor Livy become Gospel: for so much they themselves will confess
and acknowledge, that all that our Church says is true, that our Church
affirms no error; and yet our Church must be a heretical Church, if any
Church at all, for all that. Indeed it is but a faint, but an illusory evidence
or witness, that pretends to clear a point, if, though it speak nothing but
truth, yet it does not speak all the truth. The Scriptures are our evidence
for life or death; John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, says Christ, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life. Where, ye think so, is not, ye think so, but mistake the matter, but ye
think so, is ye think so upon a well-grounded and rectified faith and
assurance. Now if this evidence, the Scripture, shall acquit me in one Article,
in my belief in God, (for I do find in the Scripture, as much as they
require of me to believe, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) And then this
evidence, the Scripture, shall condemn me in another Article, The Catholic
Church, (for I do not find so much in the Scripture, as they require me to
believe of their Catholic Church) If the Scripture be sufficient to save me
in one, and not in the rest, this is not only a defective, but an illusory
evidence, which though it speak truth, yet does not speak all the truth.

Fratres sumus, quare litigamus? says S. Augustine, We are all Brethren, by
one Father, one Almighty God, and one Mother, one Catholic Church, and then
why do we go to Law together? At least, why do we not bring our Suits to an
end? Non intestatus mortuus est Pater, says he, Our Father is dead; for, Deuteronomy.
32.30.
Is not he your Father that bought you? is Moses question; he that bought us
with himself, his blood, his life, is not dead intestate, but has left his
Will and Testament, and why should not that Testament decide the cause? Silent
Advocati, Suspensus est populus, Legant verba testamenti: This that Father
notes, to be the end in other causes, why not in this? That the Counsel give
over pleading, That the people give over murmuring, That the Judge calls for the
words of the Will, and by that governs, and according to that establishes his
Judgment. I would at last contentious men would leave wrangling, and people to
whom those things belonged not, leave blowing of coals, and that the words of
the Will might try the cause, since he that made the Will, has made it thus
clear, Si quo minus, If it were not thus, I would have told you, If there were
more to be added then this, or more clearness to be added to this, I would
have told you.

In the fifth of Matthew, Christ puts a great many cases, what others had told
them, Mat. 5.
but he tells them, that is not their Rule. Audivistis, and ab antiquis, says
he, you have heard, and heard by them of old, but now I tell you otherwise. So
Audivimus, and ab antiquis, we have heard, and heard by them of old, That the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ is so absolutely necessary, as that
Children were bound to receive it, presently after Baptism, and that no man
could be saved without it, more then without Baptism: Maldon in John 6.35.
This we have heard, and heard by them of old; for we have heard S. Augustine to
have said so, and the practice of the Church for some hundreds of years to
have said so. So Audivimus, and ab antiquis, We have heard, and heard by them
of old, That the Saints of God departed out of this life, after their
resurrection, and before their ascension into heaven, shall enjoy all worldly
prosperity and happiness upon the earth, for a thousand years: This we have
heard, and heard by them of old, for we have heard Tertullian say so, and
Ireneus, and Lactantius, and so many more as would make the balance more then
even. So also Audivimus, and ab antiquis, We have heard, and heard by them of
old, That in how good state soever they dye, yet the souls of the departed do
not see the face of God, nor enjoy his presence, till the day of Judgment,
This we have heard, and from so many of them of old, as that the voice of that
part is louder, then of the other. And amongst those reverend and blessed
Fathers, which straied into these errors, some were hearers and Disciples of
the Apostles themselves, as Papias was a Disciple of S. John, and yet Papias
was a Millenarian, and expected his thousand years prosperity upon the earth
after the Resurrection: some of them were Disciples of the Apostles, and some
of them were better men then the Apostles, for they were Bishops of Rome;
Clement was so; and yet Clement was one of them, who denied the fruition of the
sight of God, by the Saints, till the Judgment.

And yet our Adversaries will enjoy their liberty to depart from all this which
they have heard, and heard from them of old, in the mouths of these Fathers.
And where the Fathers are divided in two streams, where all the Fathers, few,
scarce any excepted, till S. Augustine, Hist^^ Vossi^ l. 7. These. 8. so. 538.
etc. Bemus ca. 26. Petetius To. 8. disp 22.
placed the cause of our Election in Gods foresight, and foreknowledge of our
faith and obedience, and, as generally after S. Augustine, they placed it in the
right Center, that is, only in the free goodness and pleasure of God in
Christ, half the Roman Church goes one way, and half the other; (for we may
be bold to call the Jesuits half that Church) And in that point the Jesuits
depart from that which they had heard, and heard of old, from the Primitive
Fathers, and adhere to the later; And their very heavy, and very bitter
adversaries, the Dominicans, apply themselves to that which they have heard of
old, to the first opinion. In that point in the Roman Church they have Fathers
on both sides; but, in a point, where they have no Father, where all the
Fathers are unanimely and diametrally against them, in the point of the
Conception of the most blessed Virgin, Canus.
Etsi omnes Sancti uno ore asseverent, says a wise Author of theirs, Though
all the Ancient Fathers with one entire consent affirm that she was conceived
in Original sin, Etsi nullus Author contravenerit, says he, Though no one
ancient Author ever denied it, yet says he, Infirmum est ex omnium patrum
consensu argumentum, Though our opinion have no ground in Scriptures (that,
says he, I confess) Though it be no Apostolical Tradition, (that, says he,
I confess) yet it is but a weak argument, says he, that is concluded out of
all the Fathers against it, because, It was a doctrine manifested to the Church
but about five hundred years since, and now for two hundred years has been
well followed and embraced: As the Jesuit Maldonat says in such another case,
whatsoever the ancient Fathers have thought, or taught, or said, or writ, that
the marriage of Priests after Orders taken, and chastity professed, was a good
marriage, Contrarium nunc verum est, whatsoever was true then, the contrary is
true now.

If then these men who take to themselves this liberty, will yet say to me, in
some other points, Si quo minus, Surely if you were in the right, some of the
ancient Fathers would have told you so; And then, if I assist my self by the
Fathers, they will say, Si quo minus, If it were not otherwise, some general
Council would have told you so; And again, if I support my self by a
Council, Si quo minus, if that Council were to be followed, some Pope would
have confirmed that Council, And if I show that to have been done, yet they
will say, that that Confirmation reaches not to that Session of the Council,
or not to that Canon of that Session, or not to that period in that Canon, or
not to that word in that period; And then, of every Father, and Council, and
Session, and Canon, and period, and word, Ejus interpretatio est sensus
Spiritus Sancti, His sense and interpretation must be esteemed the
Interpretation, and the Sense of the Holy Ghost, as Bellarmine has concluded
us, why will they not allow me a juster liberty, then that which they take?
That when they stop my prayers in their way to God, and bid me turn upon
Saints, when they stop my faith in the way to Christ, and bid me turn upon
mine own, or others merits, when they stop my hopes of Heaven upon my
deathbed, and bid me turn upon Purgatory, That when, as yet it is in
debatement and disputation, whether man can perform the Law of God or no, they
will multiply their Laws, above the proportion of Moses Tables, And when we
have Primogenitum Ecclesiae, The eldest son by the Primitive Church, The Creed
of the Apostles, they will super-induce another son, by another venture, by a
stepmother, by their sick and crazy Church, and (as the way of step-mothers
is) will then make the portion of the later, larger then the elders, make their
Trent-Creed larger then the Apostles, That in such a case, they will not allow
me, neither in my studies in the way, nor upon my deathbed at mine end, to
hearken unto this voice of my Savior, Si quo minus, If it were not so, I would
have told you, this is not only to preclude the liberty, but to exclude the
duty of a Christian.

But the mystery of their Iniquity is easily revealed, their Arcana Imperii,
the secrets of their State easily discovered. All this is not because they
absolutely oppose the Scriptures, or stiffly deny them to be the most certain
and constant rule that can be presented, (for whatsoever they pretend for their
own Church, or for the Super-soveraigne in that Church, their transcendent and
hyperbolicall supreme Head, they will pretend to deduce out of the Scriptures)
But because the Scriptures are constant, and limited, and determined, there can
be no more Scriptures, And they should be shrewdly prejudiced, and shrewdly
disadvantaged, if all emergent cases arising in the Christian world, must be
judged by a Law, which others may know beforehand, as well as they; Therefore
being wise in their own generation, they choose rather to lay up their Rule in
a Cupboard, then upon a Shelfe, rather in Scrinio pectoris, in the breast and
bosom of one man, then upon every deske in a study, where every man may lay,
or whence every man may take a Bible. Therefore have so many sad and sober men
amongst them, repented, that in the Council of Trent, they came to a final
resolution in so many particulars; because how incommodious soever some of
those particulars may prove to them, yet they are bound to some necessity of a
defense, or to some aspersion if they forsake such things as have been solemnly
resolved in that manner.

Therefore it was a prudent, and discreet abstinence in them, to forbear the
determination of some things, which have then, and since, fallen into agitation
amongst them. Be pleased to take one in the Council, and one after for all.
Long time it had, and then it did, and still it does, perplex the Consciences
of penitents that come to Confession, and the understandings of Confessors, who
are to give Absolution, how far the secular Laws of temporal Princes bind
the Conscience of the Subject, and when, and in what cases, he is bound to
confess it as a sin, who has violated and transgressed any of those Laws;
And herein, says an Author of theirs, who has written learnedly De legibus,
Carbo.
of the hand and obligation of Laws, The Pope was solicited and supplicated
from the Council, in which it was debated, that he would be pleased to come to
a Determination; but because he saw it was more advantage to him, to hold it
undetermined, that so he might serve others turns, and his own especially, it
remains undetermined, and no Confessor is able to un-entangle the Conscience of
his penitent yet. So also in another point, of as great consequence, (at least
for the peace of the Church, if not for the profit) which is, those
differences, which have arisen between the Jesuits and the Dominicans, about
the concurrence of the Grace of God, and the free will of man, Though both
sides have come to that vehemence, that violence, that virulency, as to call
one another opinion heretical, (which is a word that cuts deep, and should
not be passionately used) yet he will not be brought to a decision, to a
determination in the point, but only forbids both sides to write at all in
that point; and in that inhibition of his, we see how he suffers himself to be
deluded, for still they write with protestation, that they write not to advance
either opinion, but only to prepare the way against such time, as the Pope
shall be pleased to take off that inhibition, and restore them to their liberty
of writing; for this way has one of their last Authors, Arriba, taken to vent
himself. In a word, if they should submit themselves to try all points and
cases of Conscience by Scripture, that were to govern by a known, and
constant Law; but as they have imagined a Monarchy in their Church, so have
they a prerogative in their Monarchy, a secret judgment in one breast,
however, he who gives them all their power, make this protestation, Si quo
minus, If it were not thus, and thus, I would have told you so.

So then this proposition in our Text falls first upon them, who do not
believe All things to be contained in the Scriptures; And it falls also upon
them, who do not believe All persons to be intended in the Scriptures, who
seem to be concerned therein. The first sort dishonor God in his Scriptures,
in that kind, That there is not enough in the Scriptures for any man's
salvation; And the other in this kind, That that that is, is not intended, as
it is pretended, not in that largeness and generality, as it is proposed, but
that God has set a little Diamond in a great deal of gold, a narrow purpose
in large promises; and thereupon they impute to God (in their manner of
expressing themselves) Dolos bonos, and Frauds pias, holy deceits, holy
falsehoods, holy illusions, and circumventions, and over-good husbands of Gods
large and bountiful Grace, contract his general promises. I dispute not, but
I am glad to hear the Apostle say, Romans 5.14.
That as all were dead, so one dyed for all; and to put the force of his
argument there, in that, That except we can say, That one dyed for all, we
cannot say, that all were dead. I argue not, but I am glad to hear another
Apostle say, 1 John 2.2.
That Christ is the propitiation for the sins of all the world; for if any
man had been left out, how should I have come in?

I am not exercised, nor would I exercise these Auditories with curiosities,
but I hear the Apostle say, Romans 14.11. 1 Cor. 8.11.
Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed; And I hear him say,
Through thy knowledge may thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ dyed: and,
me thinks, he means, That though they might be destroyed, though they might
perish, yet Christ dyed for them. Only to deliver God from all aspersions, and
to defend particular Consciences from being scandalized with dangerous phrases,
and in a pious detestation of those impious Doli, and Frauds, holy deceits,
holy falsehoods, I only say, God forbid, that when our Savior Christ called
the Pharisee hypocrite, that Pharisee should have been able to recriminate that
upon Christ, and to have said, So are you, for you pretend to offer salvation
where you mean it not: God forbid, that when Christ had made that the mark of
a true Israelite in the person of Nathaniel, In quo non est dolus, In whom
there is no deceit, Joh. 1.47.
any man should have been able to have said to Christ, Then Nathaniel is a
better Israelite then you, for you pretend to offer salvation, where you mean
it not. Psalm. 35.3.
David has joined those two words together, The words of their mouth, are
Iniquity and Deceit; If there be Deceit, there is Iniquity too. Our Savior
has joined all these together, Mar. 7.22.
Adulteries, Murders, Blasphemies, and Deceit; where there is Deceit, all
mischief is justly presumed. The Apostle S. Paul discharges himself of
nothing with more earnestness then that, 2 Cor. 12.16. Acts 13.10.
Have I deceived you? have I circumvented you with fraud? Neither does he
charge him, whom he calls, The child of the Devil, Elymas the sorcerer,
farther then so, O plene omni dolo, That he was full of all Deceit. And
therefore they that think to gild and enamell deceit, and falsehood, with the
additions of good deceit, good falsehood, before they will make deceit good,
will make God bad: For, even in the Law, an action De Dolo, will not lie
against a Father, nor against a Master, and shall we emplead God De Dolo?

In the last foreign Synod, which our Divines assisted, with what a blessed
sobriety, they delivered their sentence, Art. 2. ad These. 3.
That all men are truly, and in earnest called to eternal life, by Gods
Minister; And that whatsoever is promised or offered out of the Gospel by the
Minister, is to the same men, and in the same manner promised and offered by
the Author of the Gospel, by God himself. They knew whose breasts they had
sucked; and that that Church, Art. (...).
our Church had declared, That we must receive Gods promises so, as they be
generally set forth to us in the Scriptures; And that for our actions and
manners, for our life and conversation, we follow that will of God, which is
expressly declared to us in his Word: And that is, That conditional salvation
is so far offered to every man, as that no man may preclude himself from a
possibility of such a performance of those Conditions which God requires at his
hands, as God will accept at his hands, if either he do sincerely endeavor the
performing, or sincerely repent the not performing of them. For all this is
fayrly employed in this proposition, Si quo minus, If it were not so, I would
have told you; That all that is necessary to salvation, is comprehended in the
Scriptures, which was our first branch; And then, That all that is in the
Scriptures, is intended so as it is proposed, which was our second; And these
two constitute our first part, The general Rule of Doctrines, and farther we
enlarge not that part, but descend to the other, The particular Doctrine, which
Christ gives to his Disciples, in the other Proposition, In domo patris, In my
Fathers house there are many Mansions.

This second part, 2 Part.
you may also be pleased to remember, derives it self into two branches; first
to inquire, whether this proposition assist that Doctrine of Disparity and
Degrees of Glory in the Saints in heaven; And then the right use which is to be
made of the right sense of these words, In domo patris, In my Fathers house
there are many Mansions. The occasion of the words will be the foundation of
all; Our Savior Christ had said to his Disciples in the Chapter before, Ver.
33.
That he was to stay with them but a little while; That when he was gone, they
should seek him, and not find him; And that whither he went, they could not
follow: And when, upon that, Peter, who was always forwardest, Ver. 36.
and soonest scandalized, had pressed him with that question, Lord, whither
go thou? and received that answer, whither I go, thou can not follow me
now, but hereafter thou shall follow me, lest the rest of the Disciples, who
were troubled with that which was formerly said, should be more affected with
this, to hear that Peter should come, whither none of them might, to establish
them all, as well as Peter, he says to them all, in the first verse of this
Chapter, Let not your hearts be troubled, for, (And here enters this
proposition of our Text, for their general establishment) In my Fathers house
are many Mansions. So that, that these are words of Consolation is certain,
but whether the consolation be placed in the disparity, and difference of
degrees of Glory in Heaven, or no, is not so certain.

That there are degrees of Glory in the Saints in heaven, scarce any ever
denied. Non negatur.
Heaven is a Kingdom, and Christ a King, and a popular parity agrees not with
that State, with a Monarchy. Heaven is a Church, and Christ a High Priest, and
such a parity agrees as ill with the Triumphant, as with the Militant Church.
In the Primitive Church Iovinian denied this difference, and degrees of glory;
and S. Hierome was so incensed, so inflamed for this, as if foundations had
been shaken, and the common cause endangered. Indeed it was thus far the
common cause, that all the Fathers followed this chase, (if we may use that
Metaphor) and were never at a default: No one of the Fathers, whom I have
observed to touch upon this point, did ever deny this difference of degrees of
Glory. And therefore, as in the Primitive Church, when that one man Iovinian,
came to deny it, S. Hierome was vehement upon him, so when in the Reformation,
one man (for I never found more then that one, one Schoufeldius) denies it too,
I wonder the less, Gerard.
that another (of the Reformation also) grows somewhat sharp toward him.

We deny not then this difference of degrees of glory in Heaven; But that
frame, Modus in Eccles. Romans negatur.
and that scale of these degrees, which they have set up in the Roman Church,
we do deny. We must continue, and return often to that complaint against them,
That they shake and endanger things near foundations, by their enormous
super-edifications, by their incommodious upper-buildings: That many things,
which might be well enough accepted, and would be agreed by all, become
justly suspicious, and really dangerous to the Church, by their manifold
consequences which they super-induce upon them: That many things, which in the
sincerity of their beginning, and institution, were pious, and conduced to the
exaltation of Devotion, by their additions are become impious, and destroy
Devotion so far, as to divert it upon a wrong object. In this point which we
have in hand, it is so; In these degrees of glory in Heaven, That Church, which
treads all sovereign Crowns in this world, under her feet, pretends to
impart, and distribute Crowns in Heaven also of her own making: We find
Coronam auream, a Crown of gold upon the head of that Son of Man, who is
also the Son of God, Christ Jesus, Revel. 14.14.
in the Revelation. And we find Coronas aureas, particular Crowns of gold,
upon the heads of all the Saints that stand about the Throne, in the same
Book. And these Crowns upon the Saints are the emanations, and effluences of
that Crown which is upon Christ; The glory of the Saints is the communication
of his glory. But then, because in their Translation, in the vulgat Edition of
the Roman Church, Exodus 25.25.
they find in Exodus that word Aureolam, Facies Coronam aureolam, Thou shall
make a lesser Crown of gold; out of this diminutive, and mistaken word, they
have established a Doctrine, that besides those Coronae aureae, Those Crowns
of gold, which are communicated to all the Saints from the Crown of Christ,
some Saints have made to themselves, and produced out of their own
extraordinary merits certain Aureolas, certain lesser Crowns of their own,
whereas indeed the word in the Original in that place of Exodus is Zer zehab,
which is a Crown of gold, without any intimation of any such lesser crowns
growing out of themselves. This then is their new Alchymy; that whereas old
Alchymists pretend to make gold of courser Metals, these will make it of
Nothing; Out of a supposititious word, which is not in the Text, they have
hammered and beat out these Aureolas, these lesser crowns. And these Aureolaes
they ascribe only to three sorts of persons, to Virgins, to Martyrs, to
Doctors.

Are then all the other Saints without Crowns? They must make shift with that
beam which they have from the Crown of Christ; for, for these additionall
crowns proceeding from themselves, they have none. And yet, say they, there
are Saints which have some additions growing out of themselves, though not
Aureolas, little crowns, and those they call Fructus, peculiar fruits growing
out of themselves; And for these fruits they distraine upon that place of
Matthew, where Christ says, Matt. 13.6.
That some brought forth fruit a hundred fold, some sixty, and some thirty; And
the greater measure they ascribe to Virgins, the sixty to Widows, and the
thirty to Married persons, but only such married persons, as have lived
continently in marriage. So then, to make this Riddle of theirs as plain as the
matter will admit, They place salvation it self, Blessedness it self, (if a
man will be content with that.) in that union with God, which is common to all
the Saints: But then they conceive certain Dotes, as they call them, certain
dispositions in this life, by which some have made themselves fitter to be
united to God, in a nearer distance then an ordinary Saint; And these Dotes,
these endowments, and dispositions here, produce those Aureolas, and those
Fructus, those lesser crowns, and those measures of fruits, which are a
particular Joy, not that they are united to God, (for so every Saint is) but
that they had those Dotes, those dispositions to take that particular way of
being united to God, The way of Virginity, the way of Martydome, and the way of
Preaching; for by this, they become Sancti Majores, as they call them, Saints
in favor, Saints in office, and fitter to receive our petitions, and mediate
between God and us, then those whom they call Mediocres, and Inferiores, Saints
of a middle form, or of an inferior rank. Yet these are so far provided
for, by them too, that we must pray also to these Inferior Saints, either
because I may have had a more particular interest in this life in that Saint,
then in a greater, and so the readiness, and the assiduity of that Saint may
recompense his want of power, Or else, Ad tollendum fastidium, lest a great
Saint should grow weary of me, if I trouble him every day, and for every trifle
in heaven; And some other such reasons, it pleases them to assign, why though
some Saints have more power with God then others, yet we are bound to pray to
all.

And thus they play with Divinity, as though after they had troubled all States
with political Divinity, with their Bulls, and Breves of Rebus sic stantibus,
That as long as things stood thus, this should be Catholic Doctrine, and
otherwise, when otherwise, And in this political Divinity, Machiavel is their
Pope; And after they had perplexed understandings with Philosophical Divinity
in the School, and in that Divinity, Aristotle is their Pope; They thought
themselves in courtesy, or conscience bound, to recreate the world with
Poetical Divinity, with such a Heaven, and such a Hell as would stand in their
Verses, and in this Divinity, Virgill is their Pope. And so, as Melancthon
said, when he furthered the Edition of the Alcoran, that he would have it
printed, Vt videamus quale poema sit, That the world might see what a piece of
Poetry the Alcoran was; So I have stopped upon this point, that you might see
what a piece of Poetry they have made of this Problematicall point of Divinity,
The disparity, and degrees of Glory in the Saints in Heaven.

Be this then thus settled; Non liquet ex Scripturis.
In the matter, The difference of degrees of Glory, we will not differ; In the
manner, we would not differ so, as to induce a Schism, if they would handle
such points Problematically, and no farther. But when upon matter of fact they
will induce matter of faith, when they will extend Problematicall Divinity to
Dogmaticall, when they will argue and conclude thus, It may be thus, therefore
it must be thus, A man may be saved, though he believe this, therefore he
cannot be saved except he believe this, when (in this point in hand) out of
our acknowledgement of these degrees of Glory in the Saints they will establish
the Doctrine of Merits, and of Invocation of Saints, then we must necessarily
call them to the Rule of all Doctrines, the Scriptures. When they tell us
Historically, and upon a Historical Obligation, and for a Historical
certitude, that Peter was at Rome, and that he was Bishop of Rome, we are not
so froward as to deny them that: But when upon his Historical and personal
being at Rome, they will build that mother Article, of an universal Supremacy
over all the Church, then we must necessarily call them to the Rule, to the
Scriptures, and to require them to prove both his being there, and his being
Bishop there, by the Scriptures, and either of these would trouble them; As it
would trouble them, in our present case, to assign evident places of
Scripture, for these degrees of Glory in the Saints of Heaven. For though we be
far from denying the Consentaneum est, That it is reasonable it should be, and
likely it is so, and far from denying the Pie creditur, That it may advance
Devotion, and exalt Industry to believe that it is so, Though we acknowledge a
possibility, a probability, a very similitude, a very truth, and thus far a
necessary truth, that our endeavors may flagge and slacken, except we do
embrace that help, that there are degrees of Glory in Heaven, yet if we shall
press for places of Scriptures, so evident, as must constitute an Article of
faith, there are perchance none to be found, to which very learned, and very
reverend Expositors have not given convenient Interpretations, without inducing
any such necessity.

At least, Minus ex he Taxtu.
however other places of Scripture may seem to contribute more, this
proposition of our text, In my Fathers house are many mansions (though it have
been applied to the proof of that) has no inclination, no inclinablenesse
that way. For in this text, our Savior applies himself to his Disciples, in
that wherein they needed comfort, That Christ would go away, That they might
not go too, That Peter had got a Non-obstante, He might, and they might not,
and Christ gives them that comfort, that all might, In my Fathers house are
many mansions. 1 Timothy 3.16.
When the Apostle presents a great part of our Christian Religion together, so
as that he calls it a Mystery, and a great mystery, yet he calls it a mystery
without controversy; Without controversy great is the mystery of God
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, preached to the Gentiles,
believed in the world, received into glory. When he presents matter of
consolation, he would have it without controversy; To establish a disconsolate
soul, there is always Divinity enough, that was never drawn into
Controversy. I would pray? I find the Spirit of God to dispose my heart, and
my tongue, and mine eyes, and hands, and knees to pray; Do I doubt to whom I
should pray? To God, or to the Saints? That prayer to God alone was sufficient,
was never drawn into controversy. I would have something to rely and settle
and establish my assurance upon; Do I doubt whether upon Christ, or mine own,
or others merits? That to rely upon Christ alone was sufficient, was never
drawn into Controversy. At this time, Christ disposed himself to comfort his
Disciples in that wherein they needed comfort; now their discomfort, and their
fear lay not in this, whether there were different degrees of glory in Heaven,
but their fear was, that Christ being gone, and having taken Peter, and none
but him, there should be no room for them, and thereupon Christ says, Let not
that trouble you, for, In my Fathers house are many mansions. And so we have
done with the former branch of this last part, That it is piously done to
believe these degrees of glory in Heaven; That they have inconsiderately
extended this problem in the Roman Church, That no Scriptures are so evident
as to induce a necessity in it, That this Scripture conduces not at all to it;
and therefore we pass to our last Consideration, The right use of the right
sense of these words.

First then, Christ proposes in these words Consolation; A work, Consolatio.
then which none is more divine, nor more proper to God, nor to those
instruments, whom he sends to work upon the souls and consciences of others.
Who but my self can conceive the sweetness of that salutation, when the
Spirit of God says to me in a morning, Go forth to day and preach, and preach
consolation, preach peace, preach mercy, And spare my people, spare that people
whom I have redeemed with my precious Blood, and be not angry with them for
ever; Do not wound them, do not grind them, do not astonish them with the
bitterness, with the heaviness, with the sharpness, with the consternation
of my judgments. David proposes to himself, that he would Sing of mercy,
Psalm. 101.1.
and of judgment; but it is of mercy first; and not of judgment at all,
otherwise then it will come into a song, as joy and consolation is compatible
with it. It has fallen into disputation, and admitted argument, whether ever
God inflicted punishments by his good Angels; But that the good Angels, the
ministerial Angels of the Church, are properly his instruments, for conveying
mercy, peace, consolation, never fell into question, never admitted opposition.

How heartily God seems to utter, and how delightfully to insist upon that,
which he says in Esaias, Consolamini, consolamini populum meum, Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, Esaias 40.1.
And Loquimini ad cor, Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and tell her, Thine
iniquities are pardoned? How glad Christ seems that he had it for him, when he
gives the sick man that comfort, Fili confide, My son be of good comfort, thy
sins are forgiven thee? What a Coronation is our taking of Orders, by which God
makes us a Royal Priesthood? And what an inthronization is the coming up into
a Pulpit, where God invests his servants with his Ordinance, as with a Cloud,
and then presses that Cloud with a Vaesi non, woe be unto thee, if thou do not
preach, and then enables him to preach peace, mercy, consolation, to the whole
Congregation. That God should appear in a Cloud, upon the Mercy Seat, as he
promises Moses he will do, That from so poor a man as stands here, Levit.
16.2.
wrapped up in clouds of infirmity, and in clouds of iniquity, God should drop,
rain, pour down his dew, and sweeten that dew with his honey, and crust that
honied dew into Manna, and multiply that Manna into Gomers, and fill those
Gomers every day, and give every particular man his Gomer, give every soul in
the Congregation, consolation by me; That when I call to God for grace here,
God should give me grace for grace, Grace in a power to derive grace upon
others, and that this Oil, this Balsamum should flow to the hem of the
garment, even upon them that stand under me; That when mine eyes look up to
Heaven, the eyes of all should look up upon me, and God should open my mouth,
to give them meat in due season; That I should not only be able to say, as
Christ said to that poor soul, Confide fili, My son be of good comfort, but
Fratres and Patres mei, My Brethren, and my Fathers, nay Domini mei, and Rex
meus, My Lords, and my King be of good comfort, your sins are forgiven you;
That God should seal to me that Patent, Ite praedicate omni Creaturae, Go and
preach the Gospel to every Creature, be that creature what he will, That if
God lead me into a Congregation, as into his Arc, where there are but eight
souls, but a few disposed to a sense of his mercies, and all the rest (as in
the Arc) ignobler creatures, and of brutall natures and affections, That if I
find a licentious Goat, a supplanting Fox, an usurious Wolf, an ambitious
Lion, yet to that creature, to every creature I should preach the Gospel of
peace and consolation, and offer these creatures a Metamorphosis, a
transformation, a new Creation in Christ Jesus, and thereby make my Goat, and
my Fox, and my Wolf, and my Lion, to become Semen Dei, The seed of God, and
Filium Dei, The child of God, and Participem Divinae Naturae, Partaker of the
Divine Nature it self; This is that which Christ is essentially in himself,
This is that which ministerially and instrumentally he has committed to me, to
shed his consolation upon you, upon you all; Not as his Almoner to drop his
consolation upon one soul, nor as his Treasurer to issue his consolation to a
whole Congregation, but as his Ophir, as his Indies, to derive his gold, his
precious consolation upon the King himself.

What would a good Judge, a good natured Judge give in his Circuit, what would
you, in whose breasts the Judgments of the Star Chamber, or other criminal
Courts are, give, that you had a warrant from the King, to change the sentence
of blood into a pardon, where you found a Delinquent penitent? How rufully do
we hear the Prophets groan under that Onus visionis, which they repeat so
often, O the burden of my vision upon Judah, or upon Moab, or Damascus, or
Babylon, or any place? Which is not only that that judgment would be a heavy
burden upon that place, but that it was a heavy burden to them to denounce that
judgment, even upon Gods enemies. Our errand, our joy, our Crown is
Consolation: for, if we consider the three Persons of the holy, blessed and
glorious Trinity, and their working upon us, a third part of their work (if we
may so speak) is consolation; the Father is Power, the Son Wisdom, and the
Holy Ghost Consolation: for the Holy Ghost is not in a Vulture, that hovers
over Armies, and infected Cities, and feeds upon carcasses, But the Holy Ghost
is in a Dove, that would not make a Congregation a slaughterhouse, but feeds
upon corn, corn that has in nature a disposition to a reviviscence, and a
repullulation, and would imprint in you al, the consolation and sense of a
possibility of returning to a new, and a better life. God found me nothing, and
of that nothing made me; Adam left me worse then God found me, worse then
nothing, the child of wrath, corrupted with the leaven of Original sin; Christ
Jesus found me worse then Adam left me, not only sowred with Original, but
spotted, and gangrened, and dead, and buried, and putrified in actual and
habitual sins, and yet in that state redeemed me; And I make my self worse
then Christ found me, and in an inordinate dejection of spirit, conceive a
jealousy and suspicion, that his merit concerns not me, that his blood
extends not to my sin; And in this last and worst state, the Holy Ghost finds
me, the Spirit of Consolation, And he sends a Barnabas, a son of Consolation
unto me, A Barnabas to my sick bed side, A Physician that comforts with hopes,
and means of health, A Barnabas to my broken fortune, A potent and a loving
friend, that assists the reparation, and the establishing of my state, A
Barnabas into the Pulpit, that restores and rectifies my conscience, and
scatters, and dispels all those clouds that invested it, and infested it
before. That un-imaginable work of the Creation were not ready for a Sabbath,
though I be a Creature, and a man, I could have no Sabbath, no rest, no peace
of conscience; That un-expressible work of the Redemption were not ready for
that Seal, which our Savior set to it upon the Cross, in the Consummatum
est; All were not finished that concerned me, if the Holy Ghost were not ready
to deliver that which Christ sealed, and to witness that which were so
delivered, that that Spirit might ever testify to my spirit, That all that
Christ Jesus said, and did, and suffered, was said, and done, and suffered for
my soul. Consolation is not all, if we consider God, but if I consider my
self, and my state, Consolation is all.

Christ's meaning then in this place, was to establish in his Disciples this
Consolation; Consolatio vera.
but thus, Si quo minus, If it were not thus, I would tell you; If this were
not true consolation, I would not delude you, I would not entertain you with
false: for he is Deus omnium miserationum, The God of all mercies, and yet he
will not show mercy to them, who sin upon presumption; So he is Deus omnium
Consolationum, The God of all Comforts, and yet will not comfort them, who rely
upon the false, and miserable comforts of this world. How many, how very many
of us do otherwise? Otherwise to others, otherwise to our own Consciences?
Delude all with false Comforts? They would not suffer Christ himself to sleep
upon a pillow in a storm, but they waked him with that, Master, carest not
thou, though we perish? When will we wake any Master, Mar. 4.38.
any upon whom we depend, and say, Master, carest not thou, though thou perish?
We suffer others, whom we should instruct, and we suffer our selves to pass on
to the last gasp, and we never rebuke our Consciences, till our Consciences
rebuke us at last, Alas, it is otherwise, and you never told us.

Christ comforts then, he disputes not, that is not his way; He ministers true
comfort, Domus.
he flatters not, that is not his way; And in this true comfort, the first
beam is, That that state which he promises them is a House, In my Fathers
House, etc. God has a progress house, a removing house here upon earth, His
house of prayer; At this hour, God enters into as many of these houses, as are
opened for his service at this hour: But his standing house, his house of
glory, is that in Heaven, and that he promises them. God himself dwelt in
Tents in this world, and he gives them a House in Heaven. A House, in the
design and survay whereof, the Holy Ghost himself is figurative, the Fathers
wanton, and the Schoolmen wild. The Holy Ghost, in describing this House,
Rev. 21.
fills our contemplation with foundations, and walls, and gates, of gold, of
precious stones, and all materials, that we can call precious. The Holy Ghost
is figurative; And the Fathers are wanton in their spiritual elegancies, such
as that of S. Augustins, (if that book be his) Hiems horrens, Aestas torrens,
And, Virent prata, vernant sata, and such other harmonious, and melodious, and
mellifluous cadences of these waters of life. But the Schoolmen are wild; for
as one Author, who is afraid of admitting too great a hollownesse in the Earth,
Munster.
lest then the Earth might not be said to be solid, pronounces that Hell cannot
possibly be above three thousand miles in compass, (and then one of the
torments of Hell will be the throng, for their bodies must be there, in their
dimensions, as well as their souls) so when the Schoolmen come to measure
this house in heaven, (as they will measure it, and the Master, God, and all
his Attributes, and tell us how Allmighty, and how Infinite he is) they
pronounce, that every soul in that house shall have more room to it self,
then all this world is. We know not that; nor see we that the consolation lies
in that; we rest in this, that it is a House, It has a foundation, no
Earthquake shall shake it, It has walls, no Artillery shall batter it, It
has a roof, no tempest shall pierce it. It is a house that affords security,
and that is one beam; And it is Domus patris, His Fathers house, a house in
which he has interest, and that is another beam of his Consolation.

It was his Fathers, and so his; And his, and so ours; Patris.
for we are not joint purchasers of Heaven with the Saints, but we are
co-heires with Christ Jesus. We have not a place there, because they have done
more then enough for themselves, but because he has done enough for them and
us too. By death we are gathered to our Fathers in nature; and by death,
through his mercy, gathered to his Father also. Where we shall have a full
satisfaction, in that wherein S. Philip placed all satisfaction, Ostende nobis
patrem, Lord, show us thy Father, and it is enough. We shall see his Father,
and see him made ours in him.

And then a third beam of this Consolation is, That in this house of his
Fathers, Mansiones.
thus by him made ours, there are Mansions; In which word, the Consolation is
not placed, (I do not say, that there is not truth in it) but the Consolation
is not placed in this, That some of these Mansions are below, some above
stairs, some better seated, better lighted, better vaulted, better fretted,
better furnished then others; but only in this, That they are Mansions; which
word, in the Original, and Latin, and our Language, signifies a Remaining, and
denotes the perpetuity, the everlastingnesse of that state. A state but of one
Day, because no Night shall over-take, or determine it, but such a Day, as is
not of a thousand years, which is the longest measure in the Scriptures, but
of a thousand millions of millions of generations: August.
Qui nec praeceditur hesterno, nec excluditur crastino, A day that has no
pridie, nor postridie, yesterday does not usher it in, nor to morrow shall not
drive it out. Methusalem, with all his hundreds of years, was but a Mushrome
of a nights growth, to this day, And all the four Monarchies, with all their
thousands of years, And all the powerful Kings, and all the beautiful
Queens of this world, were but as a bed of flowers, some gathered at six, some
at seven, some at eight, All in one Morning, in respect of this Day. In all
the two thousand years of Nature, before the Law given by Moses, And the two
thousand years of Law, before the Gospel given by Christ, And the two thousand
of Grace, which are running now, (of which last hour we have heard three
quarters strike, more then fifteen hundred of this last two thousand spent) In
all this six thousand, and in all those, which God may be pleased to add, In
domo patris, In this House of his Fathers, there was never heard quarter clock
to strike, never seen minute glass to turn. No time less then it self would
serve to express this time, which is intended in this word Mansions; which is
also exalted with another beam, that they are Multa, In my Fathers House there
are many Mansions.

In this Circumstance, Multa.
an Essential, a Substantial Circumstance, we would consider the joy of our
society, and conversation in heaven, since society and conversation is one
great element and ingredient into the joy, which we have in this world. We
shall have an association with Christ himself; for where he is, it is his
promise, that we also shall be. We shall have an association with the Angels,
and such a one, as we shall be such as they. We shall have an association with
the Saints, and not only so, to be such as they, but to be they: Mat. 8.11.
And with all who come from the East, and from the West, and from the North,
and from the South, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven. Where we shall be so far from being enemies to one another,
as that we shall not be strangers to one another: And so far from envying one
another, as that all that every one has, shall be every others possession:
where all souls shall be so entirely knit together, as if all were but one
soul, and God so entirely knit to every soul, as if there were as many Gods
as souls.

Be comforted then, says Christ to them, for This, which is a House, and not a
Ship, not subject to storms by the way, nor wrecks in the end, My Fathers
House, not a strangers, in whom I had no interest, A House of Mansions, a
dwelling, not a sojourning, And of many Mansions not an Abridgement, a Model
of a House, not a Monastery of many Cells, but an extension of many Houses,
into the City of the living God, This house shall be yours, though I depart
from you. Christ is nearer us, when we behold him with the eyes of faith in
Heaven, then when we seek him in a piece of bread, or in a sacramental box
here. Drive him not away from thee, by wrangling and disputing how he is
present with thee; unnecessary doubts of his presence may induce fearful
assurances of his absence: The best determination of the Real presence is to
be sure, that thou be really present with him, by an ascending faith: Make sure
thine own Real presence, and doubt not of his: Thou art not the farther from
him, by his being gone thither before thee.

No, nor though Peter be gone thither before thee neither, which was the other
point, in which the Apostles needed consolation; They were troubled that Christ
would go, and none of them, and troubled that Peter might go, and none but
he. What men soever God take into heaven before thee, though thy Father that
should give thee thy education, though thy Pastor that should give thee thy
instruction, though these men may be such in the state, and such in the Church,
as thou may think the Church and state cannot subsist without them,
Discourage not thy self, neither admit a jealousy or suspicion of the
providence and good purpose of God; for, as God has his panier full of Manna,
and of Quails, and can power out to morrow, though he have powered them out
plentifully upon his friends before; so God has his Quiver full of arrows, and
can shoot as powerfully, as heretofore, upon his Enemies. I forbid thee not S.
Paul's wish, Cupio dissolvi, To desire to be dissolved, therefore, that thou
may be with Christ; I forbid thee not David's sigh, Hei mihi, Woe is me that
I must dwell so long with them that love not peace! I only enjoyne thee thy
Saviors Veruntamen, Yet not mine, but thy will, O Father, be done; That all
thy wishes may have relation to his purposes, and all thy prayers may be
inanimated with that, Lord manifest thy will unto me, and conform my will unto
thine. So shall thou not be afrighted, as though God aimed at thee, when he
shoots about the mark, and thou see a thousand fall at thy right hand, and
ten thousand at thy left; Nor discouraged as though God had left out thee, when
thou see him take others into garrison, and leave thee in the field, assume
others to Triumph, and leave thee in the Battle still. For as Christ Jesus
would have come down from heaven, to have dyed for thee, though there had been
no soul to have been saved but thine; So is he gone up to heaven, to prepare a
place for thee, though all the souls in this world were to be saved as well as
thine. Trouble not thy self with dignity, and priority, and precedence in
Heaven, for Consolation and Devotion consist not in that, and thou will be the
less troubled with dignity, and priority, and precedence in this world, for
Rest and Quietness consist not in that.

SERMON. LXXIV. Preached at White Hall, the 30. April 1620
PSALM. 144.15. Being the first Psalm for the day.

Blessed are the People that be so; Yea blessed are the People, whose God is
the Lord.


THe first part of this Text has relation to temporal blessings, Blessed is
the people that be so: The second part to spiritual, Yea blessed is the
people, whose God is the Lord. His left hand is under my head, says the
Spouse; Cant. 2.6.
That sustaines me from falling into murmuring, or diffidence of his
Providence, because out of his left hand he has given me a competency of his
temporal blessings; But his right hand does embrace me, says the Spouse
there; His spiritual blessings fill me, possess me, so that no rebellious
fire breaks out within me, no outward tentation breaks in upon me. So also
says Solomon again, Prove. 3.16.
In her left hand is riches and glory, (temporal blessings) and in her right
hand length of days, all that accomplishes and fulfils the eternal joys of
the Saints of heaven. The person to whom Solomon attributes this right and left
hand is Wisdom; And a wise man may reach out his right and left hand, to
receive the blessings of both sorts. And the person whom Solomon represents by
Wisdom there, is Christ himself. So that not only a worldly wiseman, but a
Christian wiseman may reach out both hands, to both kinds of blessings, right
and left, spiritual and temporal. And therefore, Interrogo vos, filios regni
coelorum, says S. Augustine, Let me ask you, who are sons and heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven, Progeniem Resurrectionis in aeternum, You that are the
offspring of the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, and have your resurrection in
his, Membra Christi, Templa Spiritus Sancti, You that are the very body of
Christ, you that are the very temples of the Holy Ghost, Interrogo vos, Let me
ask you, for all your great reversion hereafter, for all that present
possession which you have of it, in an apprehensive faith, and in a holy
conversation in this life, for all that blessedness, Non est isba saelicitas?
Is there not a blessedness in enjoying Gods temporal blessings here too? Sit
licet, sed sinistra, says that Father; It is certainly a blessedness, but a
left handed blessedness, a weaker, a more imperfect blessedness, then
spiritual blessings are.

As then there is dextra, and sinistrabeatitudo, a right handed, and a left
handed blessedness in the Text: so there is dextra and sinistra Interpretatio,
a right and a left Exposition of the Text. And as both these blessednesses,
temporal and spiritual, are seals and testimonies of Gods love, though not
both of equal strength, and equal evidence; so both the Interpretations of
these words are useful for our edification, though they be not both of equal
authority. That which we call Sinistram Interpreiationem, is that sense of
these words, which arises from the first Translators of the Bible, the
Septuagint, and those Fathers which followed them; which, though it be not an
ill way, is not the best, because it is not according to the letter; and then,
that which we call Dextram Interpretationem, is that sense which arises
pregnantly, and evidently, liquidly, and manifestly out of the Original Text
it self.

The Authors and followers of the first sense read not these words as we do,
Beatus populus, That people is blessed, but Beatum dixerunt populum, That
people was esteemed blessed; and so they refer this and all the temporal
blessings mentioned in the three former Verses to a popular error, to a
general mistaking, to the opinions, and words of wicked and worldly men, that
only they desire these temporal things, only they taste a sweetness, and
apprehend a blessedness in them; whereas they who have truly their
conversation in heaven, are swallowed up with the contemplation of that
blessedness, without any reflection upon earth or earthly things. But the
Author of the second sense, which is God himself, and his direct word,
presents it thus, Beatus populus, That people is truly blessed, there is a
true blessedness in temporal things; but yet, this is but sinistra beatitudo,
a less perfect blessedness; For the followers of both Interpretations, and
all Translators, and all Expositors meet in this, That the perfect, the
accomplishing, the consummatory blessedness is only in this, That our God be
the Lord.

First then, Interpretatio
to make our best use of the first sense, That temporal things conduce not at
all to blessedness, S. Cyprians wonder is just, Deum nobis solis contentum
esse, nobis non sufficere Deum; That God should think man enough for him, and
man should not be satisfied with God; That God should be content with Fili da
mihi cor, My son give me thy heart, and man should not be content with Pater
da mihi Spiritum, My God, my Father, grant me thy Spirit, but must have
temporal additions too. Non est castum cor, says S. Augustine, si Deum ad
mercedem colit; as he says in another place, Non est castauxor, quae amat quia
dives, She is never the honester woman, nor the lovinger wife, that loves her
husband in contemplation of her future jointure, or in fruition of her present
abundancies; so he says here, Nonest castum cor, That man has not a chaste, a
sincere heart toward God, that loves him by the measure end proportion of his
temporal blessings. The Devil had so much color for that argument, that in
prosperity there can be no trial, whether a man love God or no, as that he
presses it even to God himself, in Jobs case: Job 1
Does Job serve God for naught? have not thou hedged him in, and blessed the
works of his hands, and increased his substance? How can thou tell whether he
will love thee, or fear thee, if thou should take away all this from him?
thou have had no trial yet. And this argument descended from that father to
his children, from the Devil there, to those followers of his whom the Prophet
Malachy reprehends for saying, It is in vain to serve God, Mal. 3.14.
for what profit is it, that we have kept his commandments? When men are
willing to prefer their friends, we hear them often give these testimonies of
a man; He has good parts, and you need not be ashamed to speak for him; he
has money in his purse, and you need not be sorry to speak for him; he
understands the world, he knows how things pass, and he has a discreet, a
supple, and an appliable disposition, and he may make a fit instrument for all
your purposes, and you need not be afraid to speak for him. But who ever casts
into this scale and valuation of a man, that weight, that he has a religious
heart, that he fears God? what profit is there in that, if we consider this
world only?

But what profits it a man, if he get all the world, and lose his own soul?
And therefore that opinion, That there was no profit at all, no degree toward
blessedness in those temporal things, prevailed so far, as that it is easy
to observe in their Expositions upon the Lords Prayer, that the greatest part
of the Fathers do ever interpret that Petition, Da nobis hodie, Give us this
day our daily bread, to be intended only of spiritual blessings, and not of
temporal; So S. Hierome says, when we ask that bread, Illum petimus, qui
panis vivus est, and descendit de coelo; we make our petition for him, who is
the bread of life, and descended from the bosom of the Father; and so he
refers it to Christ, and in him, to the whole mystery of our Redemption. And
Athanasius and S. Augustine too (and not they two alone) refer it to the
Sacramental bread; That in that Petition, we desire such an application of
the bread of life, as we have in the participation of the body and blood of
Christ Jesus in that Communion. S. Cyprian insists upon the word Nostrum, Our
bread; For, says he, temporal blessings cannot properly be called Ours,
because they are common to the Saints, and to the reprobates; but in a prayer
ordained by Christ for the faithful, the petition is for such things as are
proper, and peculiar to the faithful, and that is for spiritual blessings
only. If any man shall say, Ideo quaerenda, quia necessaria, We must pray, and
we must labor for temporal things, because they are necessary for us, we
cannot be without them, Ideo non quaerenda quia necessaria, says S.
Chrysostom, so much of them, as is necessary for our best state, God will give
us, without this laborious anxiety, and without eating the bread of sorrow in
this life, Non speran dum de superfluis, non desperandum de necessariis, says
the same Father; It is a suspicious thing to doubt or distrust God in necessary
things, and it is an unmannerly thing to press him in superfluous things. They
are not necessary before, and they are not ours after: for those things only
are ours, which no body can take from us: and for temporal thing, Auferre
potest inimicus homo, invito: Let the inimicus homo be the devil, and remember
Jobs case, Let the inimicus homo be any envious and powerful man, who has a
mind to that that thou have, and remember Naboths case, and this envious man
can take any temporal thing from thee against thy will. But spiritual
blessings cannot be taken so, Fidem nemo perdidit, nisi qui spreverit, says
S. Augustine, No man ever lost his faith, but he that thought it not worth the
keeping.

But for Jobs temporal estate says S. Augustine, all was lost. And lest any
man should say, Vxor relicta erat, Job had not lost all, because his Wife was
left, Misericordem putatis diabolum, says that Father, qui ei reliquit Vxorem?
do you think that Job lighted upon a merciful and good natured devil, that
the devil did this out of pity and compassion to Job, or that Job was
beholding to the devil for this, that he left him his Wife? Noverat per quam
deceperat Adam, says he, The devil knew by what instrument he had deceived
the first man, and by the same instrument he practices upon Job; Suam reliquit
adjutricem, non mariti consolatricem, He left Job a helper, but a helper for
his own ends, but for her Husband a miserable comforter. Caro conjux, says
the same Father in another place, This flesh, this sensual part of ours, is
our wife: and when these temporal things by any occasion are taken from us,
that wife, that flesh, that sensuality is left to murmr and repine at Gods
corrections, and that is all the benefit we have by that wife, and all the
portion we have with that wife.

Though therefore S. Hierom, who understood the Original Language, the best of
his time, in his Translation of the Psalms, do give the true, the right sense
of this place, yet in his own Commentaries upon the Psalms, he takes this
first sense, and beats upon that doctrine, that it is but a popular error, a
general mistaking, to make worldly blessings any degree of happiness: he saw
so good use of that doctrine, as that he would not see the right interpretation
of the words: he saw well enough, that according to the letter of the text,
temporal things were blessings, yet because they were but left handed
blessings, remembering the story in the book of Judges, of 700. left handed
Benjamites, Judge. 20.10.
that would sling stones at a hairs breadth, and were better mark-men then the
right-handed, and considering the left handed men of this world, those who
pursue temporal blessings only, went with most earnestness, and best
success to their works, to correct that general distemper, that general
vehemence upon temporal things, S. Hierom, and so many of the Fathers as
accompany him in that interpretation, were content to embrace that sense, which
is not truly the literal sense of this place, that it should be only Beatum
dixerint, and not Beatus populus, a popular error, and not a truth, that any
man, for any people, were blessed in temporal things; and so we have done with
the first sense of these words, and the reason why so many follow it.

We are come now to the second Interpretation: where there is not Beatitudo
falsa and vera, for both are true, but there is dextra and sinistra, 2.
Interpretatio.
a right-handed and left handed blessedness; there is Inchoativa and
perfectiva, there is an introductory, and a consummatory blessedness: and in
the first of these, in the left handed, in the less perfect blessedness, we
must consider three things. First, Beatitudinem ipsam, That there is a
blessedness proposed: and secondly, In quibus, in what that blessedness is
placed in this text, Quibus sic, blessed are they that are so, that is, so, as
is mentioned in the three former verses: and thirdly, another In quibus, not in
what things, but in what persons this first blessedness is placed, Beatus
populus, It is when all the people, the whole body, and not some ranks of men,
nor some particular men in those ranks, but when all the people participate of
these blessings.

Now first, for this first blessedness, Beatitudo.
As no Philosophers could ever tell us amongst the Gentiles, what true
blessedness was, so no Grammarian amongst the Jews, amongst the Hebrews, could
ever tell us, what the right signification of this word is, in which David
expresses blessedness here; whether Asherei, which is the word, be a plural
Noune, and signify Beatitudines, Blessednesses in the plural, and intimate
thus much, that blessedness consists not in any one thing, but in a harmony and
consent of many; or whether this Asherei be an Adverbe, and signify beat, and
so be an acclamation, O how happily, how blessedly are such men provided for
that are so; they cannot tell. Whatsoever it be, it is the very first word,
with which David begins his book of Psalms; Beatus vir: as the last word of
that book is, Laudate Dominum; to show, that all that passes between God and
man, from first to last, is blessings from God to man, and praises from man to
God; and that the first degree of blessedness is, to find the print of the
hand of God, even in his temporal blessedness, and to praise and glorify him
for them, in the right use of them.

A man that has no land to hold by it, nor title to recover by it, is never
the better, for finding, or buying, or having a fair piece of evidence, a
fair instrument, fairly written, duly sealed, authentically testified; A man
that has not the grace of God, and spiritual blessings too, is never the
nearer happiness, for all his abundances of temporal blessedness. Evidences
are evidences to them who have title. Temporal blessings are evidences to
them, who have a testimony of Gods spiritual blessings in the temporal.
Otherwise as in his hands, who has no Title, it is a suspicious thing to find
evidences, and he will be thought to have embeazeled and purloyned them, he
will be thought to have forged and counterfaited them, and he will be called
to an account for them, how he came to them, and what he meant to do with
them: so to them, who have temporal blessings without spiritual, they are but
useless blessings, they are but counterfeit blessings, they shall not purchase
a minutes peace of conscience here, nor a minutes refreshing to the soul
hereafter; and there must be a heavy account made for them, both how they were
got, and how they were employed.

But when a man has a good title to Heaven, 1 Timothy 4.8.
then these are good evidences: for, Godliness has a promise of the life to
come, and of the life that now is; and if we spend any thing in maintenance of
that title, give, or lose any thing for his glory and making sure this
salvation, Mat. 19.29.
We shall inherit everlasting life, says the best surety in the world; but we
shall not stay so long for our bill of charge, we shall have A hundred fold in
this life. S. Augustine seems loath to take Christ at that large word, he
seems to think it too great usury, to take a hundred fold for that which we
have laid out for Christ: And therefore he reads that place, Accipiet septies
tantum, He shall receive seven times as much, in this life. But in both the
Evangelists, Matthew and Mark, the overflowing bounty and retribution of God
is so expressed, Centuplum accipiet. God repaired Job so, as he had been
impaired; God recompensed him in specie, in the same kind as he had been
damnified. And Christ testifies of himself, that his coming to us is not
only, Vt vitam habeatis, sed habeatis abundantius; More abundantly; that is,
as diverse of the Fathers interpret it, that you might have eternal life
sealed to you, in the prosperity and abundancies of this life. John 9.10.
I am the door, says Christ, in the same Chapter: we must not think to fly
over walls, by sudden and undeserved preferments, nor to sap and undermine, and
supplant others; we must enter at that door, by fair and Christian means:
And then, By me if any man enter, says Christ there, he shall be saved; there
is a rich and blessed inheritance; but before he come to that salvation, He
shall go in and out, and find pasture, says that text. Now, in Heaven there
is no going in and out; but in his way to Heaven, in this life, he shall find
his interest in the next, conveied and sealed to him in temporal blessings
here.

If Plato found and acknowledged a happiness in that, Quod natus homo, that he
was borne a man, and not a beast, ( Lactantius adds in Platoes behalf, when he
cites that place out of him, Quod natus vir, that he was borne a man and not a
woman) if he found a farther happiness, Quod Graecus, that he was borne a
Grecian, and not a Barbarian; quod Atheniensis, that he was borne in the Town
which was the receptacle, and dwelling of all wisdom; and quod tempore
Socratis, and that he was borne in Socrates his time, that so he might have a
good example, as well as a good rule for his life: As all we owe to God an
acknowledgement of blessedness, that we are borne in a Christian Church, in a
Reformed Church, in a Monarchy, in a Monarchy composed of Monarchies, and in
the time of such a Monarch, as is a Peacemaker, and a peace-preserver both at
home and abroad; so let all them who are borne of Nobility, or borne up to
Nobility upon the two fair wings of merit and of favor, all that are borne to
riches, and born up and born out by their riches, all whom their industry, and
wisdom, and usefulness to the State, has or may any way prefer, take heed
of separating the Author and the means; of separating God and the King, in the
ways of favor; of separating God and their riches, in the ways of purchase;
of separating God and their wisdom, in the ways of preferment; but let them
always discern, and always acknowledge, the hand of God, the Author, in
directing and prospering the hand of his instrument in all these temporal
things, and then, these temporal things are truly blessings unto them, and
they are truly blessed in them.

This was our first Consideration, our first branch in this part, In quibus.
that temporal things were seals and testimonies of blessedness; The second
is, to what particular evidence this seals is annexed in this text, upon what
things this blessedness is placed here; which are all involved in this one
little particle, this monasyllable So, Blessed are they that are so; that is,
so, as a prayer is made in the three former verses, that they might be. Now as
the maledictions which were threatened to David, were presented to him by the
Prophet in three forms, of war, of famine, of pestilence; so these blessings
which are comprised in those three verses, may well be reduced to three things
contrary to those three maledictions; To the blessing of peace, contrary to
David's war, Ver. 14.
That there may be no invasion; To the blessing of plenty, contrary to David's
famine, Ver. 13.
That our barnes may abound with all sorts of Corn; To the blessing of health,
contrary to David's destroying sickness, That our sons may grow up as plants
in their youth. Ver. 12.


For the first temporal blessing of peace, we may consider the loveliness,
Pax.
the amiablenesse of that, if we look upon the horror and gastlinesse of
war: either in Effigy, in that picture of war, which is drawn in every
leaf of our own Chronicles, in the blood of so many Princes, and noble
families, or if we look upon war it self, at that distance where it cannot
hurt us, as God had formerly kindled it amongst our neighbors, and as he has
transferred it now to remoter Nations, whilst we enjoy yet a Goshen in the
midst of all those Egypts. In all Cities, disorderly and facinorous men, covet
to draw themselves into the skirts and suburbs of those Cities, that so they
may be the nearer the spoil, which they make upon passengers. In all Kingdoms
that border upon other Kingdoms, and in Islands which have no other border but
the Sea, particular men, who by dwelling in those skirts and borders, may make
their profit of spoil, delight in hostility, and have an adversenesse and
detestation of peace: but it is not so within: they who till the earth, and
breed up cattle, and employ their industry upon Gods creatures, according to
Gods ordinance, feel the benefit and apprehend the sweetness, and pray for
the continuance of peace.

This is the blessing, in which God so very very often expresses his gracious
purpose upon his people, that he would give them peace; and peace with plenty;
Copia.
O that my people had hearkened unto me! says God, I would soon have humbled
their enemies, Psalm. 81.13. and ult.
(there is their peace) And I would have fed them with the fat of wheat, and
with the honey out of the Rock, and there is their plenty. Persons who are
preferred for service in the war, prove often suspicious to the Prince. Ioabs
confidence in his own merit and service, made him insolent toward the King,
and the King jealous of him. But no man was more suddenly nor more safely
preferred then Joseph, for his counsel to resist penury, and to preserve
plenty and abundance within the Land. See Basil in an Homily which he made in a
time of dearth and drought, in which he expresses himself with as much
elegancy, as any where, (and every where I think with as much as any man)
where he says, there was in the sky, Tristis severitas and ipsa puritate
molesta, That the air was the worse for being so good, and the fouler for
being so fair; and where he inverts the words of our Savior, Messis magna,
operarii pauci, says Christ, Here is a great harvest, Luke 10.2.
but few workmen; but Operarii multi, messis parva, says Basil, Here are
workmen enough, but no harvest to gather, in that Homily; He notes a barrenness
in that which used to be fruitful, and a fruitfulness in that which used to
be barren; Terra sterilis and aurum foecundum, He prophesied of our times; when
not only so many families have left the Country for the City, in their
persons, but have brought their lands into the City, they have brought all
their Evidences into Scriveners shops, and changed all their renewing of leases
every seven years, into renewing of bonds every six months: They have taken
a way to inflict a barrenness upon land, and to extort a fruitfulness from
gold by usury. Monsters may be got by unnatural mixtures, but there is no
race, no propagation of monsters: money may be raised by this kind of use;
but, Non haerebit, It is the sweat of other men, and it will not stick to thine
heir. Nay, commonly it brings not that outward blessing of plenty with it;
for, for the most part, we see no men live more penuriously, more sordidly,
then these men do.

The third of these temporal blessings is health, without which both the other
are no more to any man, then the Rainbow was to him who was ready to drown;
Quid mihi, si peream ego? says he, what am I the better, that God has past
his word, and set to his seal in the heavens, that he will drown the world no
more, if I be drowned my self? What is all the peace of the world to me, if I
have the rebellions and earthquakes of shaking and burning Fevers in my body?
What is all the plenty of the world to me, if I have a languishing consumption
in my blood, and in my marrow? The Heathens had a goddess, to whom they
attributed the care of the body, deam Carnam: And we that are Christians,
acknowledge, that Gods first care of man, was his body, he made that first; and
his last care is reserved for the body too, at the Resurrection, which is
principally for the benefit of the body. There is a care belongs to the health,
and comeliness of the body. When the Romans canonized Pallorem and Febrim,
Palenesse and Fevers, and made them gods, they would as feign have made them
Devils, if they durst; they worshipped them only, because they stood in fear
of them. Sickness is a sword of Gods, and health is his blessing. For when
Hezekias had assurance enough, that he should recover and live, yet he had
still a sense of misery, in that he should not have a perfect state of health.
Esaias 38.15.
What shall I say, says he, I shall walk weakly all my years, in the
bitterness of my soul. All temporal blessings are insipid and tastlesse,
without health.

Now the third branch of this part, Populus.
is the other In quibus, not the things, but the persons, in whom these three
blessings are here placed: And it is Beatus populus, when this blessedness
reaches to all, dilates it self over all. When David places blessedness in
one particular man, as he does in the beginning of the first Psalm, Beatus
vir, Blessed is that man, there he pronounces that man blessed, If he neither
walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit
in the seat of the scornful. If he do not all, walk, and stand, and sit in
the presence and fear of God, he is not blessed. So, if these temporal
blessings fall not upon all, in their proportions, the people is not blessed.
The City may be blessed in the increase of access; And the Lawyer may be
blessed in the increase of suits; and the Merchant may be blessed in the
increase of means of getting, if he be come to get as well by taking, as by
trading; but if all be not blessed, the people is not blessed: yea, if these
temporal blessings reach not to the Prince himself, the people is not
blessed. For in favorabilibus Princeps e populo, is a good rule in the Law; in
things beneficial, the King is one of the people. When God says by David, Let
all the people bless the Lord, God does not exempt Kings from that duty; and
when God says by him too, God shall bless all the people, God does not
exempt, not exclude Kings from that benefit; And therefore where such things as
conduce to the being, and the well-beeing, to the substance and state, to the
ceremony and majesty of the Prince, be not cheerfully supplied, and seasonably
administered, there that blessing is not fully fallen upon them, Blessed is that
people that are so; for the people are not so, if the Prince be not so.

Nay, the people are not blessed, if these blessings be not permanent; for, it
is not only they that are alive now, that are the people; but the people is
the succession. If we could imagine a blessing of health without permanency, we
might call an intermitting ague, a good day in a fever, health. If we could
imagine a blessing of plenty without permanency, we might call a full stomach,
and a surfeit, though in a time of dearth, plenty. If we could imagine a
blessing of peace without permanency, we might call a nights sleep, though in
the midst of an Army, peace; but it is only provision for the permanency and
continuance, that makes these blessings blessings. To think of, to provide
against famine, and sickness, and war, that is the blessing of plenty, and
health, and peace. One of Christ's principal titles was, Esaias 9.
that he was Princeps pacis, and yet this Prince of peace says, Non veni
mittere pacem, I came not to bring you peace, not such a peace as should bring
them security against all war. If a Ship take fire, though in the midst of
the Sea, it consumes sooner, and more irrecoverably, then a thatched house upon
Land: If God cast a firebrand of war, upon a State accustomed to peace, it
burns the more desperately, by their former security.

But here in our Text we have a religious King, David, that first prays for
these blessings, (for the three former Verses are a prayer) and then praises
God in the acknowledgement of them; for this Text is an acclamatory, a
gratulatory glorifying of God for them. And when these two meet in the
consideration of temporal blessings, a religious care for them, a religious
confessing of them, prayer to God for the getting, praise to God for the
having, Blessed is that people, that is, Head and members, Prince and subjects,
present and future people, that are so; So blessed, so thankful for their
blessings.

We come now, Ad dextram dextrae, to the right blessedness, 2 Part.
in the right sense and interpretation of these words, to spiritual
blessedness, to the blessedness of the soul. Estne Deo cura de bobus? is the
Apostles question, and his answer is pregnantly implied, 1 Cor. 9.9.
God has care of beasts: But yet God cared more for one soul then for those
two thousand hogs which he suffered to perish in the Sea, when that man was
dispossessed. Mar. 5.
A dram of spiritual is worth infinite talents of temporal. Here then in this
spiritual blessedness (as we did in the former) we shall look first, Quid
beatitudo, what it is; and then, In quibus, in what it is placed here, Vt Deus
eorum sit Dominus, That their God be the Lord; And lastly, the extent of it,
That all the people be made partakers of this spiritual blessedness.

This blessedness then, you see is placed last in the Text; Beatitudo.
not that it cannot be had till our end, till the next life; In this case, the
Nemo ante obitum fails, for it is in this life, that we must find our God to
be the Lord, or else, if we know not that here, we shall meet his Nescio vos,
he will not know us; But it is placed last, because it is the waightiest, and
the uttermost degree of blessendness, which can be had, To have the Lord for
our God. Consider the making up of a natural man, and you shall see that he
is a convenient Type of a spiritual man too.

First, in a natural man we conceive there is a soul of vegetation and of
growth; and secondly, a soul of motion and of sense; and then thirdly, a soul
of reason and understanding, an immortal soul. And the two first souls of
vegetation, and of sense, we conceive to arise out of the temperament, and
good disposition of the substance of which that man is made, they arise out of
man himself; But the last soul, the perfect and immortal soul, that is
immediately infused by God. Consider the blessedness of this Text, in such
degrees, in such proportions. First, God blesses a man with riches, there is
his soul of vegetation and growth, by that he grows in estimation, and in
one kind of true ability to produce good fruits, for he has wherewithal. And
then, God gives this rich man the blessing of understanding, his riches, how to
employ them according to those moral and civil duties, which appertain unto
him, and there is his soul of sense; for many rich men have not this sense,
many rich men understand their own riches no more then the Oaks of the Forest
do their own Akorns. But last of all, God gives him the blessing of
discerning the mercy, and the purpose of God in giving him these temporal
blessings, and there is his immortal soul. Now for the riches themselves,
(which is his first soul) he may have them ex traduce, by devolution from his
parents; and the civil wisdom, how to govern his riches, where to purchase,
where to sell, where to give, where to take, (which is his second soul) this
he may have by his own acquisition, and experience, and conversation; But the
immortal soul, that is, the discerning of Gods image in every piece, and of
the seal of Gods love in every temporal blessing, this is infused from God
alone, and arises neither from Parents, nor the wisdom of this world, how
worldly wise so ever we be in the governing of our estate.

And this the Prophet may very well seem to have intimated, when he says,
Psalm. 112.1.
The generation of the righteous shall be blessed; Here is a permanent
blessedness, to the generation. Wherein is it expressed? thus; Riches and
treasure shall be in his house, and his righteousness endures for ever. He
does not say, that Simony, or Usury, or Extortion shall be in his house; for
riches got so are not treasure; Nor he does not say, that Riches well got, and
which are truly a blessing, shall endure for ever, but his righteousness
shall endure for ever. The last soul, the immortal soul endures for ever.
The blessedness of having studied, and learnt, and practiced the knowledge of
Gods purpose in temporal blessings, this blessedness shall endure for ever;
When thou shall turn from the left to the right side, upon thy death bed, from
all the honors, and riches of this world, to breathe thy soul into his hands
that gave it, this righteousness, this good conscience shall endure then, and
then accompany thee: And when thine eyes are closed, and in the twinkling of
his eye that closed thine, thy soul shall be gone an infinite way from this
honor, and these riches, this righteousness, this good conscience shall endure
then, and meet thee in the gates of heaven. And this is so much of that
righteousness, as is expressed in this Text, (because this is the root of all)
That our God be the Lord.

In which, In quibus.
first we must propose a God, that there is one, and then appropriate this God
to our selves, that he be our God, and lastly, be sure that we have the right
God, that our God be the Lord. For, for the first, he that enterprises any
thing, seeks any thing, possesses any thing without recourse to God, without
acknowledging God in that action, he is, for that particular, an Atheist, he is
without God in that; and if he do so in most of his actions, he is for the
most part an Atheist. If he be an Atheist every where, but in his Catechism,
if only then he confess a God when he is asked, Do thou believe that
there is a God, and never confess him, never consider him in his actions, it
shall do him no good, to say at the last day, that he was no speculative
Atheist, he never thought in his heart, that there was no God, if he lived a
practique Atherst, proceeded in all his actions without any consideration of
him. But accustom thy self to find the presence of God in all thy gettings,
in all thy preferments, in all thy studies, and he will be abundantly
sufficient to thee for all. Quantumlibet sis avarus, says S. Augustine,
sufficit tibi Deus, Be as covetous as thou will, be as ambitious as thou
can, the more the better; God is treasure, God is honor enough for thee.
Avaritia terram quaerit, says the same Father, add and Coelum; would thou
have all this world? would thou have all the next world too? Plus est, qui
fecit coelum and terram, He that made heaven and earth is more then all that,
and thou may have all him.

And this appropriates him so near to us, Noster,
as that he is thereby Deus noster. For, it is not enough to find Deum, a
God; a great and incomprehensible power, that sits in luce, in light, but in
luce inaccessibili, in light that we cannot comprehend. A God that enjoyes his
own eternity, his own peace, his own blessedness, but respects not us,
reflects not upon us, communicates nothing to us. But it is a God, that is Deus
noster; Ours, as we are his creatures; ours, as we are like him, made to his
image; ours, as he is like us, in assuming our nature; ours, as he has
descended to us in his Incarnation; and ours, as we are ascended with him in
his glorification: So that we do not consider God, as our God, except we come
to the consideration of God in Christ, God and man. It is not enough to find
Deum, a God in general, nor to find Deum meum, a God so particularly my God,
as that he is a God of my making: That I should seek God by any other motions,
or know God by any other notions, or worship God in any other fashions, then
the true Church of God does, for there he is Deus noster, as he is received in
the unanime consent of the Catholic Church. Sects are not bodies, they are
but rotten boughs, gangrened limbs, fragmentary chips, blown off by their
own spirit of turbulency, fallen off by the weight of their own pride, or
hewn off by the Excommunications and censures of the Church. Sects are no
bodies, for there is Nihil nostrum, nothing in common amongst them, nothing
that goes through them all; all is singular, all is meum and tuum, my spirit
and thy spirit, my opinion and thy opinion, my God and thy God; no such
apprehension, no such worship of God, as the whole Church has evermore been
acquainted withal, and contented with.

It is true, that every man must appropriate God so narrowly, as to find him to
be Deum suum, his God; that all the promises of the Prophets, and all the
performances of the Gospel, all that Christ Jesus said, and did, and suffered,
belongs to him and his soul; but yet God is Deus meus, as he is Deus noster,
my God, as he is our God, as I am a part of that Church, with which he has
promised to be till the end of the world, and as I am an obedient son of that
Mother, who is the Spouse of Christ Jesus: For as S. Augustine says of that
Petition, Give us this day our daily bread, Vnde dicimus Da nostrum? How come
we to ask that which is ours, Quomodo nostrum, quomodo da? if we be put to ask
it, why do we call it ours? and then answers himself, Tuum confitendo, non
eris ingratus, It is a thankful part to confess that thou have some, that
thou have received some blessings; and then, Ab illo petendo, non eris vacuus,
It is a wise and a provident part, to ask more of him, whose store is
inexhaustible; So if I feel God, as he is Deus meus, as his Spirit works in
me, and thankfully acknowledge that, Non sum ingratus; But if I derive this
Pipe from the Cistern, this Deus meus, from Deus noster, my knowledge and sense
of God, from that knowledge which is communicated by his Church, in the
preaching of his Word, in the administration of his Sacraments, in those other
means which he has instituted in his Church, for the assistance and
reparation of my soul that way, Non er o vacuus, I shall have a fuller
satisfaction, a more abundant refection then if I rely upon my private
inspirations: for there he is Deus noster.

Now, as we are thus to acknowledge a God, and thus to appropriate that God;
Dominus.
so we must be sure to confer this honor upon the right God, upon him who is
the Lord. Now this name of God, which is translated the Lord here, is not the
name of God, which presents him with relation to his Creatures: for so it is a
problematicall, a disputable thing, Whether God could be called the Lord,
before there were any Creatures. Tertullian denies absolutely that he could be
called Lord till then; S. Augustine is more modest, he says, Non audeo dicere,
I dare not say that he was not; but he does not affirm that he was; Howsoever
the name here, is not the name of Relation, but it is the name of his Essence,
of his Eternity, that name, which of late has been ordinarily called Iebovah.
So that we are not to trust in those Lords, Whose breath is in their nostrils,
Esaias 2. ult.
as the Prophet says, For, wherein are they to be esteemed? says he; we are
less to trust in them, whose breath was never in their nostrils, such
imaginary Saints, as are so far from hearing us in Heaven, as that they are not
there: and so far from being there, as that they were never here: so far from
being Saints, as that they were never men, but are either fabulous illusions,
or at least, but symbolicall and allegorical allusions. Our Lord is the Lord
of life and being, who gave us not only a well-being in this life, (for that,
other Lords can pretend to do, and do indeed, by preferments here) nor a
beginning of a temporary being in this life, (for that our Parents pretend, and
pretend truly to have done) nor only an enlarging of our being in this life,
(for that the King can do by a Pardon, and the Physicians by a Cordial) but
he has given us an immortal being, which neither our Parents began in us, nor
great persons can advance for us, nor any Prince can take from us. This is the
Lord in this place, this is Iehova, and Germen Iehovae, The Lord, Esaias 4.2.
and the offspring of the Lord; and none is the offspring of God, but God,
that is, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. So that this perfect blessedness
consists in this, the true knowledge and worship of the Trinity.

And this blessing, that is, the true Religion and profession of Christ Jesus,
Populus.
is to be upon all the people; which is our last Confideration. Blessed is the
Nation, whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 33.12.
and the people whom he has chosen for his Inheritance. And here again (as in
the former Consideration of temporal blessedness) The people includes both
Prince and people; and then, the blessing consists in this, that both Prince
and people be sincerely affected to the true Religion; And then, the people
includes all the people; and so, the blessing consists in this, that there be
an unanimitie, a consent in all, in matter of Religion; And lastly, the people
includes the future people; and there, the blessing consists in this, that our
posterity may enjoy the same purity of Religion that we do. The first
tentation that fell amonst the Apostles carried away one of them: Judas was
transported with the tentation of money; and how much? For thirty pieces, and
in all likelihood he might have made more profit then that, out of the privy
purse; The first tentation carried one, but the first persecution carried away
nine, when Christ was apprehended, none was left but two, and of one of those
two, S. Hierom says, Vtinam fugisset and non negasset Christum, I would Peter
had fled too, and not scandalized the cause more by his stay, in denying his
Master: for, a man may stay in the outward profession of the true Religion,
with such purposes, and to such ends, as he may thereby damnifie the cause
more, and damnifie his own soul more, then if he went away to that Religion,
to which his conscience (though ill rectified) directs him. Now, though when
such tentations, and such persecutions do come, the words of our Savior
Christ will always be true, Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is Gods pleasure to give you the Kingdom,
though God can lay up his seedcorne in any little corner, yet the blessing
intended here, is not in that little seed-corne, nor in the corner, but in the
plenty, when all the people are blessed, and the blessed Spirit blows where he
will, and no door nor window is shut against him.

And therefore let all us bless God, for that great blessing to us, in giving
us such Princes, as make it their care, Nebona caducasint, ne mala recidiva,
That that blessedness which we enjoy by them, may never depart from us, that
those miseries which we felt before them, may never return to us. Almighty
God make always to us all, Prince and people, these temporal blessings which
we enjoy now, Peace, and Plenty, and Health, seals of his spiritual
blessings, and that spiritual blessedness which we enjoy now, the profession
of the only true Religion, a seal of it self, and a seal of those eternal
blessings, which the Lord the righteous Judge has laid up for his, in that
Kingdom which his Son, our Savior has purchased for us, with the inestimable
price of his incorruptible blood. In which glorious Son of God, etc.

SERMON. LXXV. Preached to the King at White Hall, April 15. 1628.
ESAIAS 32.8. But the liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal things
he shall stand.


BY two ways especially has the Gospel been propagated by men of letters,
by Epistles, and by Sermons. The Apostles pursued both ways; frequent in
Epistles, assiduous in Sermons. And, as they had the name of Apostles, from
Letters, from Epistles, from Missives, (for, the Certificates, and
Testimonials, and safe-conducts, and letters of Credit, which issued from
Princes Courts, or from Courts that held other Jurisdiction, were in the
formularies and terms of Law called Apostles, before Christ's Apostles were
called Apostles) so they executed the office of their Apostleship so too, by
Writing, and by Preaching. This succession in the Ministry of the Gospel did
so too. Chrysostom.
Therefore it is said of S. Chrysostom, Vbique praedicavit, quia ubique
lectus, He preached every where, because he was read every where. And, he that
is said to have been S. Pelusiota.
Chrysostomes disciple, Isidore, is said to have written ten thousand Epistles,
and in them to have delivered a just, and full Commentary upon all the
Scriptures. In the first age of all, they scarce went any other way, (for
writing) but this, by Epistles. Of Clement, of Ignatius, of Polycarpus, of
Martial, there is not much offered us, with any probability, but in the name of
Epistles.

When Christians gathered themselves with more freedom, and Churches were
established with more liberty, Preaching prevailed; And there is no exercise,
that is denoted by so many names, as Preaching. Origin began; for, (I think)
we have no Sermons, till Origens. And though he began early, (early, if we
consider the age of the Church, (a thousand four hundred years since) and
early, if we consider his own age, for, Origens. preached by the
commandment, and in the presence of Bishops, before he was a Churchman) yet he
suffered no Sermons of his to be copied, till he was sixty years old. Now,
Origin called his Homilies; And the first Gregory, of the same time with
Origin, that was Bishop of Neocesaria, has his called Sermons. And so names
multiplied; Homilies, Sermons, Conciones, Lectures, S. Augustins Enarrations,
Dictiones, that is, Speeches, Damascens and Cyrils Orations (nay, one exercise
of Caesareus, conveied in the form of a Dialogue) were all Sermons. Add to
these Church-exercises, (Homilies, Sermons, Lectures, Orations, Speeches, and
the rest) the Declamations of Civil men in Courts of Justice, the Tractates of
Moral men written in their Studies, nay go back to your our own times, when
you went to School, or to the University; and remember but your own, or your
fellows Themes, or Problemes, or Commonplaces, and in all these you may see
evidence of that, to which the Holy Ghost himself has set a Seal in this
text, that is, the recommendation of Bounty, of Munificence, of Liberality,
The Liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal things he shall stand.

That which makes me draw into consideration, Divisio.
the recommendation of this virtue, in civil Authors, and exercises, as well
as in Ecclesiastical, is this, That our Expositors, of all the three ranks,
and Classes (The Fathers and Ancients, The later men in the Roman Church, and
ours of the Reformation) are very near equally divided, in every of these three
ranks; whether this Text be intended of a moral and a civil, or of a
spiritual and Ecclesiastical liberality; whether this prophecy of Esaias, in
this Chapter, beginning thus, (Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness,
Ver. 1.
and Princes shall rule in judgment) be to be understood of an Hezekias, or a
Josias, or any other good King, which was to succeed, and to induce virtuous
times in the temporal State, and government, Or whether this were a prophecy
of Christ's time, and of the exaltation of all virtues in the Christian
Religion, has divided our Expositors in all those three Classes. In all three,
(though in all three some particular men are peremptory and vehement upon some
one side, absolutely excluding the other exposition, as, amongst our Authors in
the Reformation, one says, Dubium non est, It can admit no doubt, Calvin.
but that this is to be understood of Hezekias, and his reign, And yet another
of the same side, says too, Heshusius.
Qui Rabbinos secuti, They that adhere too much to the Jewish Rabbis, and will
needs interpret this prophecy of a temporal King, obscure the purpose of the
Holy Ghost, and accommodate many things to a secular Prince, which can hold in
none, but Christ himself) yet, I say, though there be some peremptory, there
are in all the three Classes, Ancients, Romans, Reformed, moderate men, that
apply the prophecy both ways, and find that it may very well subsist so, That
in a fair proportion, all these blessings shall be in the reigns of those
Hezekiasses, and those Iosiasses, those good Kings which God affords to his
people; But the multiplication, the exaltation of all these blessings, and
virtues, is with relation to the coming of Christ, and the establishing of his
Kingdom: And this puts us, if not to a necessity, yet with convenience, to
consider these words both ways; What this civil liberality is, that is here
made a blessing of a good Kings reign; And what this spiritual liberality is,
that is here made a testimony of Christ's reign, and of his Gospel. And
therefore, since we must pass twice thorough these words, it is time to begin;
The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things he shall
stand.

From these two arms of this tree, that is, from the civil, and from the
spiritual accommodation of these words, be pleased to gather, and lay up these
particular fruits. In each of these, you shall taste first, what this
Liberality thus recommended is; And secondly, what this devising, and studying
of liberal things is; And again, how this man is said to stand by liberal
things; The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things he
shall stand. And because in the course of this Prophecy, in this Chapter, we
have the King named, and then his Princes, and after, persons of lower quality
and condition, we shall consider these particulars; This Liberality, this
Devising, this Standing; First, in the first accommodation of the words, In the
King, in his Princes, or great persons, the Magistrate, and lastly, in his
people. And in the second accommodation, the spiritual sense, we shall
consider these three terms, (Liberality, Devising, Standing) First, in the
King of Kings, Christ Jesus, And then, in his Officers, the Ministers of his
Gospel, And lastly, in his people gathered by this Gospel; In all which
persons, in both sorts, Civil and Spiritual, we shall see how the liberal
man devises liberal things, and how by liberal things he stands.

First then, in our first part, In the civil consideration of this virtue,
Liberality, 1 Part. Liberality.
It is a communication of that which we have to other men; and it is the best
character of the best things, that they are communicable, diffusive. Light was
Gods first child; Light opened the womb of the Chaos; borne heir to the
world, and so does possess the world; and there is not so diffusive a thing,
nothing so communicative, and self-giving as light is. And then, Gold is not
only valued above all things, but is it self the value of all things; The
value of every thing is, Thus much gold it is worth; And no metal is so
extensive as gold; no metal enlarges it self to such an expansion, such an
attenuation as gold does, nor spreads so much, with so little substance. Sight
is the noblest, and the powerfullest of our Senses; All the rest, (Hearing
only excepted) are determined in a very narrow distance; And for Hearing,
Thunder is the farthest thing that we can hear, and Thunder is but in the
air; but we see the host of Heaven, the stars in the firmament. All the good
things that we can consider, Light, Sight, Gold, all are accompanied with a
liberality of themselves, and are so far good, as they are dispensed and
communicated to others; for their goodness is in their use. It is Virtus
prolifica, a generative, a productive virtue, a virtue that begets another
virtue; another virtue upon another man; Thy liberality begets my gratitude;
and if there be an unthankful barrenness in me, that thou have no children by
me, no thankfulness from me, God shall raise thee the more children for my
barrenness, Thy liberality shall be the more celebrated by all the world,
because I am unthankful. God has given me a being, and my liberal Benefactor
has given me such a better being, as that, without that, even my first being
had been but a pain, and a burden unto me. He that leaves treasure at his
death, left it in his life; Then, when he locked it up, and forbad himself the
use of it, be left it. He that locks up, may be a good Jailer; but he that
gives out, is his Steward: The saver may be Gods chest; The giver is Gods right
hand. But the matter of our Liberality (what we give) is but the body of this
virtue. The soul of this Liberality, that that inanimates it, is the manner,
intended more in the next word, He devises, He studieth, The liberal devises
liberal things.

Here the Holy Ghosts word is Iagnatz, Devises.
and Iagnatz carries evermore with it a denotation of Counsel, and
Deliberation, and Conclusions upon premises. He Devises, that is, Considers
what liberality is, discourses with himself, what liberal things are to be
done, And then, upon this, determines, concludes, that he will do it, and
really, actually does it. Therefore, in our first Translation, (the first since
the Reformation) we read this Text thus, The liberal man imagines honest
things; Though the Translator have varied the word, ( Liberal and Honest) the
Original has not. It is the same word in both places; Liberal man, Liberal
things; but the Translator was pleased to let us see, that if it be truly a
liberal, it is an honest action. Therefore the liberal man must give that
which is his own; for else, the receiver is but a receiver of stolen goods; And
the Curse of the oppressed may follow the gift, not only in his hands, through
which it passed, but into his hands, where it remains. We have a convenient
Emblem of Liberality in a Torch, that wastes it self to enlighten others; But
for a Torch to set another man's house on fire, to enlighten me, were no good
Emblem of Liberality. But Liberality being made up of the true body, and true
soul, true matter, and true form, that is, just possession for having, and
sober discretion for giving, then enters the word of our Text, literally, The
liberal man devises liberal things; He devises, studies, meditates, casts
about, where he may do a noble action, where he may place a benefit; He seeks
the man with as much earnestness, as another man seeks the money; And as God
comes with an earnestness (as though he thought it nothing, to have wrought
all the week) to his Faciamus hominem, Now let us make man; So comes the
liberal man to make a man, and to redeem him out of necessity and contempt;
(the upper and lower Millstone of poverty) And to return to our former
representations of Liberality, Light, and Sight; As light comes thorough the
glass, but we know not how, and our sight apprehends remote objects, but we
know not how; so the liberal man looks into dark corners, even upon such as
are loath to be looked upon, loath to have their wants come into knowledge, and
visits them by his liberality, when sometimes they know not from whence that
shower of refreshing comes, no more then we know, how light comes thorough the
glass, or how our sight apprehends remote objects. So the liberal man
devises liberal things; And then, (which is our third term, and
consideration in this civil and moral acceptance of the words) By liberal
things he shall stand.

Some of our later Expositors admit this phrase, (The liberal man shall stand)
to reach no further, Shall stand.
nor to signify no more, but that The liberal man shall stand, that is, will
stand, will continue his course, and proceed in liberal ways. And this is
truly a good sense; for many times men do some small actions, that have some
show and taste of some virtue, for collateral respects, and not out of a direct
and true virtuous habit. But these Expositors (with whose narrowness our
former Translators complied) will not let the Holy Ghost be as liberal as he
would be. His liberality here is, That the liberal man shall stand, that is,
Prosper and Multiply, and be the better established for his liberality; He
shall sow silver, and reap gold; he shall sow gold, and reap Diamonds; sow
benefits, and reap honor; not honor rooted in the opinion of men only, but
in the testimony of a cheerful conscience, that powers out Acclamations by
thousands; And that is a blessed and a loyal popularity, when I have a people
in mine own bosom, a thousand voices in mine own conscience, that justify
and applaud a good action. Therefore that Translation which we mentioned
before, reads this clause thus, The liberal man imagines honest things, and
comes up by honesty; still that which he calls Honesty, is in the Original
Liberality, and he comes up, he prospers, and thrives in the world, by those
noble, and virtuous actions. It is easy for a man of any largeness in
conversation, or in reading, to assign examples of men, that have therefore
lost all, because they were loath to part with any thing. When Nazianzen says,
That man cannot be so like God in any thing, as in giving, he means that he
shall be like him in this too, that he shall not be the poorer for giving. But
keeping the body, and soul of liberality, Giving his own, and giving
worthily, in soul and body too, (that is, in conscience and fortune both) By
liberal things he shall stand, that is, prosper.

Now these three terms, ( Liberality, the virtue it self, the studying of
Liberality, Rex.
this devising; and the advantage of this Liberality, this standing) (being yet
in this first part, still upon the consideration of civil, and moral
Liberality) we are to consider, (according to their Exposition, that bind
this Prophecy to an Hezckias, or a Josias, in which Prophecy we find mention
of all those persons) we are, I say, to consider them, in the King, in his
Officers, the Magistrate, and in his Subjects. For the King first, this virtue
of our Text, is so radical, so elementary, so essential to the King, as that
the vulgat Edition in the Roman Church reads this very Text thus, Princeps
vero ea quae principe digna sunt, cogitabit, The King shall exercise himself
in royal Meditations, and Actions; Him, whom we call a Liberal man, they call
a King, and those actions that we call Liberal, they call Royal. A
Translation herein excusable enough; for the very Original word, which we
translate, Liberal, is a Royal word, Nadib, and very often in the Scriptures
has so high, a Royal signification. The very word is in that place, where
David prays to God, to renew him spiritu Principali; And this, Psalm. 51.10.
(spiritus Principalis) as many Translators call a Principal, a Princely, a
Royal spirit, as a liberal, a free, a bountiful spirit; If it be Liberal,
it is Royal. For, when David would have bought a threshingfloore, 2 Samuel 24.23.
to erect an Altar upon, of Araunah, and Araunah offered so freely place, and
sacrifice, and instruments, and all, the Holy Ghost expresses it so, All these
things did Araunah, as a King, offer to the King; There was but this difference
between the Liberal man, and David, A King, and The King. Higher then a King,
for an example and comparison of Liberality, on this side of God, he could not
go. The very form of the Office of a King, is Liberality, that is Providence,
and Protection, and Possession, and Peace, and Justice shed upon all.

And then, this Prophecy (considered still the first way, morally, Principes.
civilly) carries this virtue, not only upon the King, but upon the Princes
too, upon those persons that are great, great in blood, great in power, great
in place, and office, They must be liberal of that, which is deposited in
them. The Sun does not enlighten the Stars of the Firmament, merely for an
Omament to the Firmament, (though even the glory, which God receives from that
Ornament, be one reason thereof) but that by the reflection of those Stars
his beams might be cast into some places, to which, by a direct Emanation from
himself, those beams would not have come. So do Kings transmit some beams
of power into their Officers, not only to dignifie and illustrate a Court,
(though that also be one just reason thereof, for outward dignity and splendour
must be preserved) but that by those subordinate Instruments, the royal
Liberality of the King, that is, Protection, and Justice might be transferred
upon all. And therefore, Epistol. ad Salvian.
S. Hierome speaking of Nebridius, who was so gracious with the Emperor, that
he denied him nothing, assigns that for the reason of his largeness toward
him, Quod sciebat, non uni, sed pluribus indulgeri, Because he knew, that in
giving him, he gave to the Public; He employed that which he received, for
the Public.

And lastly, our Prophecy places this Liberality upon the people. Now, Populus.
still this Liberality is, that it be diffusive, that the object of our
affections be the Public. To depart with nothing which we call our own,
Nothing in our goods, nothing in our opinions, nothing in the present exercise
of our liberty, is not to be liberal. To press too far the advancing of one
part, to the depressing of another, (especially where that other is the Head)
is not liberal dealing. Therefore said Christ to James, and John, Mat. 20.23.
August.
Non est meum dare vobis, It is not mine to give, to set you on my right, and
on my left hand; Non vobis, quia singuli separatim ab aliis rogatis, not to
you, because you consider but your selves, and petition for your selves, to the
prejudice, and exclusion of others. Joh. 4.16. Chrysostom.
Therefore Christ bad the Samaritan woman call her husband too, when she
desired the water of life, Ne sola gratiam acciperet, says S. Chrysostom,
That he might so do good to her, as that others might have good by it too.
For, Adpatriam quaitur? August.
Which way think you to go home, to the heavenly Jerusalem? Per ipsum mare,
sed in ligno, You must pass through Seas of difficulties, and therefore by
ship; and in a ship, you are not safe, except other passengers in the same ship
be safe too. Cant. 1.4.
The Spouse says, Trahe me post te, Draw me after thee. When it is but a Me,
in the singular, but one part considered, there is a violence, a difficulty, a
drawing; But presently after, when there is an uniting in a plural, there is
an alacrity, a concurrence, a willingness; Curremus post te, We, We will run
after thee; If we would join in public considerations, we should run
together. This is true Liberality in Gods people, to depart with some things of
their own, though in goods, though in opinions, though in present use of
liberty, for the public safety. These Liberal things, these Liberal men,
(King, Magistrate, and People) shall devise, and by Liberal things they shall
stand.

The King shall devise Liberal things, Cogitabit Rex.
that is, study, and propose Directions, and commit the execution thereof to
persons studious of the glory of God, and the public good; Magistratus.
And that is his Devising of Liberal things. The Princes, Magistrates,
Officers, shall study to execute aright those gracious Directions received from
their royal Master, and not retard his holy alacrity in the ways of Justice,
by any slacknesse of theirs, nor by casting a dampe, or blasting a good man, or
a good cause, in the eyes, or ears of the King; And that is their Devising of
Liberal things. The people shall divest all personal respects, and ill
affections toward other men, and all private respects of their own, and spend
all their faculties of mind, of body, of fortune, upon the Public; And that
is their Devising of Liberal things.

And by these Liberal things, Stabit Rex. Magistratus.
these Liberal men shall stand. The King shall stand; stand in safety at home,
and stand in triumph abroad. The Magistrate shall stand; stand in a due
reverence of his place from below, and in safe possession of his place from
above; neither be contemned by his Inferiors, nor suspiciously, and guiltily
inquired into by his Superiors; Populus.
neither fear petitions against him, nor commissions upon him. And the People
shall stand; stand upon their right Basis, that is, an inward feeling, and an
outward declaration, that they are safe only in the Public safety. And they
shall all stand in the Sunshine, and serenity of a clear conscience, which
serenity of conscience is one fair beam, even of the glory of God, and of the
joy of heaven, upon that soul that enjoyes it.

This is Esays Prophecy of the times of an Hezekias, of a Josias, the blessing
of this civil and moral Liberality, in all these persons. And it is time to
pass to our other general part, from the civil, to the spiritual, and from
applying these words, to the good times of a good King, to that, (which is
evidently the principal purpose of the Holy Ghost) That in the time of Christ
Jesus, and the reign of his Gospel, this, and all other virtues, should be in
a higher exaltation, then any civil, or moral respect can carry them to.

As an Hezekias, 2 Part. Liberalitas.
a Josias is a Type of Christ, but yet but a Type of Christ; so this civil
Liberality, which we have hitherto spoken of, is a Type, but yet but a Type of
our spiritual Liberality. For, here we do not only change terms, the
temporal, to spiritual, and to call that, which we called Liberality in the
former part, Charity in this part; nor do we only make the difference in the
proportion and measure, that that which was a Benefit in the other part, should
be an Alms in this. But we invest the whole consideration in a mere
spiritual nature; and so that Liberality, which was, in the former
acceptance, but a relieving, but a refreshing, but a repairing of defects, and
dilapidations in the body or fortune, is now, in this second part, in this
spiritual acceptance, the raising of a dejected spirit, the redintegration of
a broken heart, the resuscitation of a buried soul, the re-consolidation of a
scattered conscience, not with the glues, and cements of this world, mirth, and
inusique, and comedies, and conversation, and wine, and women, (miserable
comforters are they all) nor with that Meteor, that hangs between two worlds,
that is, Philosophy, and moral constancy, (which is somewhat above the carnal
man, but yet far below the man truly Christian and religious) But this is the
Liberality, of which the Holy Ghost himself is content to be the Steward, of
the holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, and to be notified, and qualified by
that distinctive notion, and specification, The Comforter.

To find a languishing wretch in a sordid corner, not only in a penurious
fortune, but in an oppressed conscience, His eyes under a diverse suffocation,
sinothered with smoke, and smothered with tears, His ears estranged from all
salutations, and visits, and all sounds, but his own sighs, and the storms
and thunders and earthquakes of his own despair, To enable this man to open
his eyes, and see that Christ Jesus stands before him, and says, Behold and
see, if ever there were any sorrow, like my sorrow, and my sorrow is overcome,
why is not thine? To open this man's ears, and make him hear that voice that
says, I was dead, and am alive, and behold, I live for evermore, Amen; Revel.
1.18.
and so may thou; To bow down those Heavens, and bring them into his sad
Chamber, To set Christ Jesus before him, to out-sigh him, out-weepe him,
out-bleed him, out-dye him, To transfer all the fasts, all the scorns, all
the scourges, all the nails, all the spears of Christ Jesus upon him, and so,
making him the Crucified man in the sight of the Father, because all the
actions, and passions of the Son, are appropriated to him, and made his so
entirely, as if there were never a soul created but his, To enrich this poor
soul, to comfort this sad soul so, as that he shall believe, and by believing
find all Christ to be his, this is that Liberality which we speak of now, in
dispensing whereof, The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal
things shall stand.

Now you may be pleased to remember, that when we considered this word,
Cogitabit.
in our former part, (he shall Devise) we found this Devising Originally to
signify a studying, a deliberation, a concluding upon premises; upon which,
we inferred pregnantly and justly, that as to support a man's expense, he must
Vivere de proprio, Live upon his own; so to relieve others, he must Dare de
suo, Be liberal of that which is his. Now, what is ours? Ours, that are
Ministers of the Gospel? As we are Christ's, so Christ is ours. Puer datus
nobis, filius natus nobis, There is a Child given unto us, a Son borne unto us;
Esaias 9.
Even in that sense, Christ is given to us, that we might give him to others.
So that in this kind of spiritual liberality, we can be liberal of no more
but our own; we can give nothing but Christ; we can minister comfort to none,
farther then he is capable, and willing to receive and embrace Christ Jesus.

When therefore some of the Fathers have said, Ratio pro fide Graecis and
Barbaris, Just. Mar.
Rectified reason was accepted at the hands of the Gentiles, as faith is of the
Christians; Philosophia per se justificavit Graecos, Philosophy alone (without
faith) justified the Grecians; Clemens.
Satis fuit Gentibus abstinuisse ab Idololatria, It was enough for the
Gentiles, Chrysostom.
if they did not worship false Gods, though they knew not the true truly;
Andrad.
when we hear Andradius in the Roman Church pour out falvation to all the
Gentiles, that lived a good moral life, and no more; when we hear their
Tostatus sweep away, Tostatus.
blow away Original sin so easily from all the Gentiles, In prima operatione
bona in charitate, In the first good Moral work that they do, Original sin
is as much extinguished in them by that, as by Baptism in us; When we see some
Authors in the Reformation afford Heaven to persons that never professed
Christ, this is spiritual prodigality, and beyond that liberality which we
consider now; for, Christ is ours; and where we can apply him, we can give all
comforts in him; But none to others. Not that we manacle the hands of God, or
say, God can save no man without the profession of Christ, But, that God has
put nothing else into his Churches hands to save men by, but Christ delivered
in his Scripture, applied in the preaching of the Gospel, and sealed in the
Sacraments. And therefore, if we should give this comfort, to any but those
that received him, and received him so, according to his Ordinance in his
Church, we should be over-liberall, for we should give more then our own. But
to all that would be comforted in Christ, we devise liberal things, that is,
we spend our studies, our lucubrations, our meditations, to bring Christ Jesus
home to their case, and their conscience, And, by these liberal things we
shall stand.

In our former part, in that Civil liberality, Stabit.
we did not content our selves with that narrow signification of the word,
which some gave, That the liberal man would stand to it, abide by it, that is,
continue liberal still habitually, but that he should stand by it, and prosper
the better for it. If this Liberality which we consider now in this second
Part, were but that branch of Charity, which is bodily relief by bountiful
Alms, and no more, yet, we might be so liberal in Gods behalf, as to
pronounce that the charitable man should stand by it, prosper for it, and have
a plentiful harvest for any sowing in that kind. The Holy Ghost in the 112.
Psalm, and 9. verse, has taken a word, which may almost seem to taste of a
little inconsideration in such a charitable person, a little indiscretion, in
giving, in flinging, in casting away; for it is, He has dispersed; Dispersed;
A word that implies a careless scattering. But that which follows, justifies
it; He has dispersed, he has given to the poor. Let the manner, or the
measure be how it will, so it be given to the poor, it will not be without
excuse, not without thanks. And therefore we have this liberal charity
expressed by S. Paul in the same word too, 2 Cor. 9 9.
He has dispersed; but dispersed as before, Dispersed by giving to the poor.
For there is more negligence, more inconsideration allowed us, in giving of
Alms, then in any other expense; Neither are we bound to examine the
condition, and worthiness of the person to whom we give too narrowly, too
severely. He that gives freely, shall stand by doing so; Prove. 17.19.
for, He that pitieth the poor, lends to the Lord; And the Lord is a good
Debtor, and never puts Creditor to sue. And, if that be not comfort enough, S.
Hicrom gives more, in his-translation of that place, foeneratur Domino, he that
pitieth the poor, puts his money to use to God, and shall receive the debt,
and more. But, the liberality which we consider here, in this part, is more
then that, more then any charity, how large soever, that is determined, or
conversant about bodily relief; for, (as you have heard) it is consolation
applied in Christ, to a distressed soul, to a disconsolate spirit. And how a
liberal man shall stand by this liberality, (by applying such consolation to
such a distressed soul) I better know in my self, then I can tell any other,
that is not of mine own profession; for this knowledge lies in the experience
of it.

For the most part, men are of one of these three sorts; Either inconsiderate
men; (and they that consider not themselves, consider not us, they ask not,
they expect not this liberality from us) or else they are over-confident, and
presume too much upon God; or diffident, and distrust him too much. And with
these two we meet often; but truly, with seven diffident, and dejected, for
one presuming soul. So that we have much exercise of this liberality, of
raising dejected spirits: And by this liberality we stand. For, when I have
given that man comfort, that man has given me a Sacrament, he has given me a
seal and evidence of Gods favor upon me; I have received from him, in his
receiving from me; I leave him comforted in Christ Jesus, and I go away
comforted in my self, that Christ Jesus has made me an instrument of the
dispensation of his mercy; And I argue to my self, and say, Lord, when I went,
I was sure, that thou who had received me to mercy, would also receive him,
who could not be so great a sinner as I; And now, when I come away, I am sure,
that thou who art returned to him, and have re-manifested thy self to him,
who, in the diffidence of his sad soul, thought thee gone for ever, wilt never
depart from me, nor hide thy self from me, who desire to dwell in thy
presence. And so, by this liberality I stand; by giving I receive comfort.

We follow our text, Rex Christus.
in the Context, our Prophet, as he places this liberality in the King, in the
Magistrate, in the People. Here, the King is Christ, The Magistrate the
Minister, The People the people, whether collectively, that is, the
Congregation, or distributively, every particular soul. Afford your devotions
a minute to each of these, and we have done. When we consider the liberality of
our King, the bounty of God, to man in Christ, it is Species ingratitudinis, It
is a degree of ingratitude, nay, it is a degree of forgetfulness, to pretend
to remember his benefits so, as to reckon them, for they are innumerable. Sicut
in visibilibus est Sol, Nazlan.
in intelligibilibus est Deus; As liberal as the Sun is in Nature, God is in
grace. Bonitas Dei ad extra, liberalitas est; It is the expressing of the
School, and of much use; That God is Essential Goodness, within doors, in
himself; But, Ad extra, when he comes abroad, when this interior Goodness is
produced into action, Barnard.
then all Gods Goodness is Liberality. Deus est voluntas Omnipotens, is
excellently said by S. Bernard; God is all Almightinesse, all Power; but he
might be so and we never the better. Therefore he is Voluntas omnipotens, A
Power digested into a Will, as Willing, as Able to do us all, all good. What
good? Receive some drops of it in S. Bernards own Manna, his own honey;
Creans mentes ad se participandum, So good, as that he has first given us
souls capable of him, and made us so, partakers of the Divine Nature;
Vivificans ad sentiendum, So good as that he has quickened those souls, and
made them sensible of having received him; for, Grace is not grace to me, till
it make me know that I have it Alliciens ad appetendum, So good as that he has
given that soul an appetite, and a holy hunger and thirst to take in more of
him; for I have no Grace, till I would have more; and then, Dilatans ad
capiendum, So good, as that he has dilated and enlarged that soul, to take in
as much of God as he will. And lest the soul should lose any of this by
unthankfulness, Luke 6.31.
God is kind even to the unthankful, says God himself; which is a degree of
goodness, in which God seldom is, nay, in which God scarce looks to be
imitated, To be kind to the unthankful.

But if the whole space to the Firmament were filled with sand, and we had
before us Clavius his number, how many thousands would be; If all that space
were filled with water, and so joined the waters above with the waters below
the Firmament, and we had the number of all those drops of water; And then had
every single sand, and every single drop multiplied by the whole number of
both, we were still short of numbering the benefits of God, as God; But then, of
God in Christ, infinitely, super-infinitely short. To have been once nothing,
and to be now co-heire with the Son of God, is such a Circle, such a Compass,
as that no revolutions in this world, to rise from the lowest to the highest,
or to fall from the highest to the lowest, can be called or thought any
Segment, any Arch, any Point in respect of this Circle; To have once been
nothing, and now to be co-heires with the Son of God: That Son of God; who if
there had been but one soul to have been saved, would have dyed for that; nay,
if all souls had been to be saved, but one, and that that only had sinned, he
would not have contented himself with all the rest, but would have dyed for
that. And there is the goodness, the liberality of our King, our God, our
Christ, our Jesus.

But we must look upon this liberality, as our Prophet leads us, in the
Magistrate too, Magistratus.
that is, in this part, The Minister. As I have received mercy, I am one of
them, as S. Paul speaks. And why should I deliver out this mercy to others, in
a scanter measure, then I have received it my self from God? Why should I
deliver out his Talents in single farthings? Or his Gomers in narrow and
shallow thimbles? Why should I defalke from his general propositions, and
against all Grammar, and all Dictionaries, call his Omnes, his All, a few? Why
should I lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.
(as S. Peter charges Ananias) Soldest thou the land for so much? Yea, for so
much. Did God make heaven for so few? yes, for so few. Why should I say so? If
we will constitute a place for heaven above, and a place for hell below, even
the capacity of the place will yield an argument, that God, (as we can consider
him in his first meaning) meant more should be saved then cast away. As often as
God tells us, of painful ways, and narrow gates, and of Camels, and needles,
all that is done to sharpen an industry in all, not to threaten an
impossibility to any. If God would not have all, why took he me? And if he
were sorry he had taken me, or were wearied with the sins of my youth, why did
he not let me slide away, in the change of sins in mine age, or in my sinful
memory of old sins, or in my sinful sorrow that I could not continue in those
sins, but still make his mercies new to me every morning? My King, my God in
Christ, is liberal to all; He bids us, his Officers, his Ministers, to be so
too; and I am; even thus far; If any man doubt his salvation, if any man think
himself too great a sinner to attain salvation, let him repent, and take mine
for his; with any true repentant sinner, I will change states; for, God knows
his repentance, (whether it be true or no) better then I know mine.

Therefore does the Prophet here, promise this liberality, as in the King, in
Christ, Populus.
and in the Magistrate, the Minister; so in the people too, in every particular
soul. He cries to us, his Ministers, Consolamini, Consolamini, Comfort, O
Comfort my people, Esaias 40.1.
and he cries to every one of you, Miscrere animae tuae. Have mercy upon thine
own soul, Ecclus. 30.24.
and I will commiserate it too; Be liberal to thy self, and I will bear thee
out in it. God asks, Quid potui, What could have been done more to my Vineyard?
Do but tell him, Esaias 5.4.
and he will do that. Tell him, that he can remove this dampe from thy heart;
Tell him, as though thou would have it done, and he will do it. Tell him,
that he can bring tears into thine eyes, and then, wipe all tears from thine
eyes; and he will do both. Tell him, that he did as much for David, as thou
need; That he came later to the Thief upon the Cross, then thou putst him
to; And David's Transtulit peccatum, shall be transferred upon thee, And that
thiefs Hodie mecum eris, shall waft, and guard, and convey thy soul thither.
Think not thy God a false God, that bids me call thee, and means not that
thou hear; nor an impotent God, that would save thee, but that there is a
Decree in the way; nor a cruel God, that made thee, to damn thee, that he
might laugh at thy destruction. Thy King, thy Christ, is a liberal God; His
Officers, his Ministers, by his instructions, declare plentiful redemption; Be
liberal to thy self, in the apprehension and application thereof, and by
these liberal things, we shall all stand.

The King himself stands by it, Stabit Rex Christus. Minister.
Christ himself. It destroys the nature, the office, the merit of Christ
himself, to make his redemption so penurious, so illiberall. We, his officers,
his Ministers stand by it. It overthrowes the credit, and evacuates the purpose
of our employment, and our Ministry, if we must offer salvation to the whole
Congregation, and must not be believed, that he that sends it, means it. The
people, every particular soul stands by it. For, if he cannot believe God, to
have been more liberal to him, then he has been to any other man, he is in an
ill case, because he knows more ill by himself, then he can know by any other
man. Believe therefore liberal purposes in thy God; Accept liberal
propositions from his Ministers; And apply them liberally, and cheerfully to
thine own soul; for, The liberal man devises liberal things, and by
liberal things he shall stand.

SERMON. LXXVI. Preached to the Earl of Carlisle, and his Company, at Sion.
MARK. 16.16. He that believes not, shall be damned.


THe first words that are recorded in the Scriptures, to have been spoken by
our Savior, are those which he spoke to his father and mother, then when they
had lost him at Jerusalem, Luke 2.49.
How is it that you sought me? knew ye not that I must be about my Fathers
business? And the last words, which are in this Evangelist recorded to have
been spoken by him, to his Apostles, are then also, when they were to lose him
in Jerusalem, when he was to depart out of their presence, and set himself in
the heavenly Jerusalem, at the right hand of his Father: of which last words of
his, this Text is a part. In his first words, those to his father and mother,
he does not rebuke their care in seeking him, nor their tenderness in seeking
him, (as they told him they did) with heavy hearts: But he lets them know,
that, if not the band of nature, nor the reverentiall respect due to parents,
then no respect in the world should hold him from a diligent proceeding in that
work which he came for, the advancing the kingdom of God in the salvation of
mankind. In his last words to his Apostles, he does not discomfort them by his
absence, Mat. 28.20.
for he says, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: But he
incourageth them to a cheerful undertaking of their great work, the preaching
of the Gospel to all Nations, by many arguments, many inducements, of which,
one of the waightiest is, That their preaching of the Gospel was not like to be
uneffectuall, because he had given them the sharpest spur, and the strongest
bridle upon mankind; Praemium and poenam, Authority to reward the obedient,
and authority to punish the rebellious and refractary man; he put into their
hands the double key of Heaven, and of Hell; power to convey to the believer
Salvation, and upon him that believed not, to inflict eternal condemnation; He
that believes not, shall be damned.

That then which man was to believe upon pain of damnation, Divisio.
if he did not, being this Commission which Christ gave to his Apostles, we
shall make it our first part of this Exercise, to consider the Commission it
self, the subject of every man's necessary belief; And our second part shall
be, The penalty, the inevitable, the irreparable, the intolerable, the
inexpressible penalty, everlasting condemnation, He that believes not, shall
be damned. In the first of these parts, we shall first consider some
circumstantiall, and then the substantial parts of the Commission; (for though
they be essential things, yet because they are not of the body of the
Commission, we call them branches circumstantiall) First, An sit, whether there
be such a Commission or no; secondly, the Vbi, where this Commission is; and
then the Vnde, from whence this Commission proceeds; And lastly the Quo, how
far it extends, and reaches; And having passed through these, we must look
back for the substance of the Commission; for in the Text, He that believes
not, is implied this particle, this, this word this, He that believes not
this, that is, that which Christ has said to his Apostles immediately before
the Text, which is indeed the substance of the Commission, consisting of three
parts, Ite praedicate, go and preach the Gospel, Ite Baptizate, go and
baptize them, Itedocete, go and teach them to do, and to practice all that I
have commanded; And after all these which do but make up the first part, we
shall descend to the second, which is the penalty; and as far as the
narrowness of the time, and the narrowness of your patience, and the
narrowness of my comprehension can reach, we shall show you the horror, the
terror of that fearful intermination, Damnabitur, He that believes not,
shall be damned.

First then, it is within this Credererit, that is, It is matter of faith to
believe, 1 Part. An sit.
that such a Commission there is, that God has established means of
salvation, and propagation of his Gospel here. If then this be matter of faith,
where is the root of this faith? from whence springs it? Is there any such
thing writ in the heart of man, that God has proceeded so? Certainly as it is
in Agendis, in those things which we are bound to do, which are all
comprehended in the Decalogue, in the Ten Commandments, that there is nothing
written there, in those stone Tables, which was not written before in the heart
of man, (exemplify it in that Commandment which seems most removed from
natural reason, which is the observing of the Sabbath, yet even for that, for
a Sabbath, man naturally finds this holy impression, and religious instinct in
his heart, That there must be an outward worship of that God, that has made,
and preserved him, and that is the substance, and moral part of that
Commandment of the Sabbath) And it is in Agendis, that all things, that all
men are bound to do, all men have means to know; And as it is in Sperandis, in
Petendis, of those things which man may hope for at Gods hand, or pray for,
from him, there is a knowledge imprinted in man's heart too; (for the Lords
Prayer is an abridgement of all those, and exemplify also this in that
Petition of the Lords Prayer, which may seem most removed from natural
reason, That we must forgive those who have trespassed against us, yet even in
that, every natural man may see, That there is no reason for him, to look for
forgiveness from God, who can, and may justly come to an immediate execution
of us, as soon as we have offended him, if we will not forgive another man,
whom we cannot execute our selves, but must implore the Law, and the Magistrate
to revenge our quarrel) As it is in Agendis, in all things which we are bound
to do; As it is in Petendis, in all things which we may pray for, so it is in
Credendis, all things that all men are bound to believe, all men have means to
know.

This then, that God has established means of salvation, being Inter
credenda, one of those things which he is bound to believe, (for he that
believes not this, shall be damned) Man has thus much evidence of this in
nature, that by natural reason we know, that that God which must be
worshipped, has surely declared how he will be worshipped, and so we are led
to seek his revealed and manifested will, and that is no where to be found
but in his Scriptures. So that when all is done, the Ten Commandments, which
is the sum of all that we are to do; The Lords Prayer, which is the sum of
all that we are to ask; and the Apostles Creed, which is the sum of all that
we are to believe, are but declaratory, not introductory things; The same
things are first written in man's heart, though dimly and sub-obscurely, and
then the same things are extended, shed in a brighter beam, in every leaf of
the Scripture; And the same things are recollected again, into the Ten
Commandments, into the Lords Prayer, and into the Apostles Creed, that we
might see them al together, and so take better view and hold of them. The
knowledge which we have in nature, is the substance of all, as all matter,
Heaven and earth were created at once, in the beginning; and then the further
knowledge which we have in Scripture, is as that light which God created after;
for as by that light, men distinguished particular creatures, so by this light
of the Scripture, we discern our particular duties. And after this, as in the
Creation, all the light was gathered into the body of the Sun, when that was
made; so all that is written in our hearts radically, and diffused in the
Scriptures more extensively, is reamassed, and reduced to the Ten
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and to the Creed.

The heart of man is hortus, it is a garden, a Paradise, where all that is
wholesome, Cant. 4.12.
and all that is delightful grows, but it is hortus conclusus, a garden that
we our selves have walled in; It is fons, a fountain, where all knowledge
springs, but fons signatus, a fountain that our corruption has sealed up. The
heart is a book, legible enough, and intelligible in it self; but we have so
interlined that book with impertinent knowledge, and so clasped up that book,
for fear of reading our own history, our own sins, as that we are the
greatest strangers, and the least conversant with the examination of our own
hearts. There is then Myrrh in this garden, but we cannot smell it; and
therefore, All thy garments smell of Myrrh, Psalm. 45.8.
says David, that is, Gods garments; those Scriptures in which God has
apparelled, and exhibited his will, they breathe the Balm of the East, the
savor of life, more discernably unto us. But after that too, there is
fasciculus Myrrhae, Cant. 1.13.
a bundle of Myrrh together, fasciculus Agendorum, a whole bundle of those
things which we are bound to do, in the Ten Commandments; fasciculus
Petendorum, a whole bundle of those things, which we are bound to pray for, in
the Lords Prayer; and fasciculus Credendorum, a whole bundle of those things,
which we are bound to believe, in the Apostles Creed; And in that last bundle
of Myrrh, in that Creed, is this particular, Vt credamus hoc, That we believe
this, this, that God has established means of salvation here, and He that
believes not this, that such a Commission there is, shall be damned.

In that bundle of Myrrh then, Vbi.
where lies this that must necessarily be believed, This Commission? In that
Article of that Creed, Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe the holy
Catholic Church; For till I come to that grain of Myrrh, to believe the
Catholic Church, I have not the savor of life; Let me take in the first
grain of this bundle of Myrrh, the first Article, Credo in Deum Patrem, I
believe in God the Father, by that I have a being, I am a creature, but so is a
contemptible worm, and so is a venomous spider as well as I, so is a stinking
weed, and so is a stinging nettle, as well as I; so is the earth it self, that
we tread under our feet, and so is the ambitious spirit, which would have been
as high as God, and is lower then the lowest, the devil himself is a creature
as well as I; I am but that, by the first Artiele, but a creature; and I were
better, if I were not that, if I were no creature, (considering how I have used
my creation) if there were no more Myrrh in this bundle then that first
grain, no more to be got by believing, but that I were a creature: But take a
great deal of this Myrrh together, consider more Articles, That Christ is
conceived, and borne, and crucified, and dead, and buried, and risen, and
ascended, there is some savor in this; But yet, if when we shall come to
Judgment, I must carry into his presence, a menstruous conscience, and an ugly
face, in which his Image, by which he should know me, is utterly defaced, all
this Myrrh of his Merits, and his Mercies, is but a savor of death unto death
unto me, since I, that knew the horror of my own guiltiness, must know too,
that whatsoever he be to others, he is a just Judge, and therefore a condemning
Judge to me; If I get farther then this in the Creed, to the Credo in Spiritum
Sanctum, I believe in the Holy Ghost, where shall I find the Holy Ghost? I
lock my door to my self, and I throw my self down in the presence of my
God, I divest my self of all worldly thoughts, and I bend all my powers, and
faculties upon God, as I think, and suddenly I find my self scattered,
melted, fallen into vain thoughts, into no thoughts; I am upon my knees, and I
talk, and think nothing; I deprehend my self in it, and I go about to mend
it, I gather new forces, new purposes to try again, and do better, and I do
the same thing again. I believe in the Holy Ghost, but do not find him, if I
seek him only in private prayer; But in Ecclesia, when I go to meet him in
the Church, when I seek him where he has promised to be found, when I seek
him in the execution of that Commission, which is proposed to our faith in this
Text, in his Ordinances, and means of salvation in his Church, instantly the
savor of this Myrrh is exalted, and multiplied to me; not a dew, but a shower
is powered out upon me, and presently follows Communio Sanctorum, The Communion
of Saints, the assistance of Militant and Triumphant Church in my behalf; And
presently follows Remissio peceatorum, The remission of sins, the purifying of
my conscience, in that water, which is his blood, Baptism, and in that wine,
which is his blood, the other Sacrament; and presently follows Carnis
resurrectio, A resurrection of my body; My body becomes no burden to me; my
body is better now, then my soul was before; and even here I have Goshen in my
Egypt, incorruption in the midst of my dunghill, spirit in the midst of my
flesh, heaven upon earth; and presently follows Vita aeterna, Life
everlasting; this life of my body shall not last ever, nay the life of my soul
in heaven is not such as it is at the first. For that soul there, even in
heaven, shall receive an addition, and access of Joy, and Glory in the
resurrection of our bodies in the consummation.

When a wind brings the River to any low part of the bank, instantly it
overflowes the whole Meadow; when that wind which blows where he will, The
Holy Ghost, leads an humble soul to the Article of the Church, to lay hold
upon God, as God has exhibited himself in his Ordinances, instantly he is
surrounded under the blood of Christ Jesus, and all the benefits thereof; The
communion of Saints, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, and
the life everlasting, are poured out upon him. And therefore of this great
work, which God has done for man, in applying himself to man, in the
Ordinances of his Church, S. Augustine says, Obscurius dixerunt Prophetae de
Christo, August.
quam de Ecclesia, The Prophets have not spoken so clearly of the person of
Christ, as they have of the Church of Christ; Hieron.
for though S. Hierom interpret aright those words of Adam and Eve, Erunt duo
in carnem unam, They two shall be one flesh, to be applyable to the union which
is between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.
(for so S. Paul himself applies them) that Christ and his Church are all one,
as man and wife are all one, yet the wife is (or at least, it had wont to be
so) easilier found at home, then the husband; we can come to Christ's Church,
but we cannot come to him; The Church is a Hill, and that is conspicuous
naturally; but the Church is such a Hill, as may be seen every where. August.
S. Augustine asks his Auditory in one of his Sermons, do any of you know the
Hill Olympus? and himself says in their behalf, none of you know it; no more
says he, do those that dwell at Olympus know Giddabam vestram, some Hill which
was about them; trouble not thy self to know the forms and fashions of
foreign particular Churches; neither of a Church in the lake, nor a Church
upon seven hills; but since God has planted thee in a Church, where all things
necessary for salvation are administered to thee, and where no erroneous
doctrine (even in the confession of our Adversaries) is affirmed and held, that
is the Hill, and that is the Catholic Church, and there is this Commission in
this text, means of salvation sincerely executed; So then, such a Commission
there is, and it is in the Article of the Creed, that is the ubi.

We are now come in our order, to the third circumstantiall branch, the Vnde,
Vnde.
from whence, and when this Commission issued, in which we consider, that since
we receive a deep impression from the words, which our friends spoke at the
time of their death, much more would it work upon us, if they could come and
speak to us after their death; You know what Dives said, Si quis ex mortuis,
Luke 16.
If one from the dead might go to my Brethren, he might bring them to any
thing. Now, Primitiae mortuorum, The Lord of life, and yet the first borne of
the dead, Christ Jesus, returns again after his death, to establish this
Commission upon his Apostles; It has therefore all the formalities of a strong
and valid Commission; Christ gives it, Ex mero motu, merely out of his own
goodness; He foresaw no merit in us that moved him; neither was he moved by
any man's solicitations; for could it ever have fallen into a man's heart, to
have prayed to the Father, that his Son might take our Nature and dye, and rise
again, and settle a course upon earth, for our salvation, if this had not first
risen in the purpose of God himself? Would any man ever have solicited or
prayed him to proceed thus? It was Ex mero motu, out of his own goodness, and
it was Ex certa scientia, He was not deceived in his grant, he knew what he
did, he knew this Commission should be executed, in despite of all Heretics,
and Tyrans that should oppose it; And as it was out of his own Will, and with
his own knowledge, so it was Ex plenitudine potestatis, He exceeded not his
Power; for Christ made this Commission then, Mat. 28.18.
when (as it is expressed in the other Evangelist) he produced that evidence,
Data est mihi, All power is given to me in Heaven and in earth; where Christ
speaks not of that Power, which he had by his eternal generation, (though
even that power were given him, for he was Deus de Deo, God of God) nor he
speaks not of that Power which was given him as Man, which was great, but all
that, he had in the first minute of his conception, in the first union of the
two Natures, Divine and Humane together; but that Power, from which he derives
this Commission, is that, which he had purchased by his blood, and came to by
conquest; Ego vici mundum, says Christ, I have conquered the world, and
coming in by conquest, I may establish what form of Government I will; and my
will is, to govern my Kingdom by this Commission; and by these Commissioners,
to the Worlds end; to establish these means upon earth, for the salvation of
the world.

And as it has all these formalities of a due Commission, made without suite,
made without error, made without defect of power: so had it this also, that it
was duly and authentically testified; for, though this Evangelist name but the
eleven Apostles to have been present, and they in this case might be thought
Testes domestici, Witnesses that witness to their own, or to their Masters
advantage; Yet, the opinion which is most embraced is, That this appearing of
Christ, which is intended here, is that appearing, which is spoken of by S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 15.6.
when he appeared to more then five hundred at once; Christ rests not in his
Test meipso, That himself was his witness, as Princes use to do, (and as he
might have done best of any, because there were always two more that testified
with him, the Father, and the Holy Ghost) he rests not in calling some of his
Council, and principal Officers, to witness, as Princes have used too; but
in a Parliament of all States, Upper and Common house, Spiritual and Temporal
Apostles, Disciples and five hundred Brethren, he testifies this Commission.

Who then can measure the infinite mercy of Christ Jesus to us? which mercy
became not when he began, by coming into this world; for we were elected in
him before the foundations of the world; nor ended it when he ended, by going
out of this world, for he returned to this world again, where he had suffered
so much contempt and torment, that he might establish this object of our faith,
this that we are therefore bound to believe, a Commission, a Church, an
outward means of Salvation here; such a Commission there is, it is grounded in
the Creed, and it was given after his Resurrection.

In which Commission (being now come to the last of the circumstantiall
Branches, Quo.
the extent and reach of this Commission) we find, that it is Omni Creaturae,
before the Text, Preach to every Creature, that is, Means of salvation offered
to every Creature; and that is large enough, without that wild extent that
their S. Francis gives it, in the Roman Church, whom they magnify so much for
that religious simplicity, as they call it, who thought himself bound
literally by this Commission, To preach to all Creatures, and so did, as we see
in his brutish Homilies, Frater Asine, and Frater Bos, Brother Ox, and brother
Ass, and the rest of his spiritual kindred; But in this Commission, Omnis
Creatura, Every Creature, is every man; and to every man this Commission
extends; Man is called Omnis Creatura, Genesis 3.20.
Every creature, as Eve is called Matter omnium viventium, though she were but
the Mother of men, she is called the Mother of all living, and yet all other
creatures live, as well as Man; Man is called Every creature, as it is said,
Omnis caro, Genesis 6.12.
All flesh had corrupted his ways upon earth, though this corruption were but
in man, and other creatures were flesh as well as man; Man is every creature,
says Origin, because in him, Origin.
Tanquam in officina, omnes Creaturae conflantur, Because all creatures were as
it were melted in one forge, and poured into one mold, when man was made. For,
these being all the distinctions which are in all creatures, first, a mere
being which stones and other inanimate creatures have; and then life and
growth, which trees and plants have; and after that, sense and feeling, which
beasts have; and lastly, reason and understanding, which Angels have, Gregor.
Man has them all; and so in that respect is every creature, says Origin: He
is so too, says Gregory, Quia omnis creaturae differentia in homine, Because
all the qualities and properties of all other creatures, how remote and
distant, how contrary soever in themselves, yet they all meet in man; In man,
if he be a flatterer, you shall find the grovelling and crawling of a Snake;
and in a man, if he be ambitious, you shall find the high flight and piercing
of the Eagle; in a voluptous sensual man, you shall find earthlinesse of the
Hog; and in a licentious man, the intemperance, and distemper of the Goat;
ever lustful, and ever in a fever; ever in sicknesses contracted by that sin,
and yet ever in a desire to proceed in that sin; and so man is every creature
in that respect, says Gregory. August.
But he is especially so, says S. Augustine, Quia omnis creatura propter
hominem, All creatures were made for man, man is the end of all, and therefore
man is all, says Augustine. So that the two Evangelists have expressed one
another well; for those whom this Evangelist S. Mark calls all creatures, Esaias
49.6.
S. Matthew calls Omnes Gentes, All Nations; And so, that which is attributed to
Christ by way of Prophecy, It is a small matter, that thou should be my
servant, to raise up the tribe of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
Israel, I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be
my salvation unto the end of the earth; That which is attributed to Christ
there, is fulfilled in this Commission, given by Christ here; That he should be
preached to all men; In which, we rather admire then go about to express his
unexpressible mercy, who had that tenderness in his care, that he would
provide man means of salvation in a Church, and then that largeness in his
care, as that he would in his time impart it to all men; for else, how had it
ever come to us? And so we pass from the Circumstances of the Commission, That
it is, And where it is, And whence it comes, And whither it goes, to the
Substance it self.

This is expressed in three actions; first, Ite praedicate, Go and preach the
Gospel; And then, Baptizate, Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; And Docete servare, Teach them to observe all those things which I have
commanded you; for that Hoc, Qui non crediderit hos, He that believes not this,
(which is implied in this Text) reaches to all that; as well, Qui non fecerit
hoc, He that does not do all this, as Qui non crediderit hoc, He that believes
not this, is within the penalty of this Text, Damnabitur: The first of these
three, is the ordinance and institution of preaching the Gospel; The second is
the administration of both Sacraments; (as we shall see anon) And the third is
the provocation to a good life, which is in example as well as in preaching;
first preach the Gospel, that is, plant the root, faith; then administer the
Sacraments, that is, water it, cherish it, fasten and settle it with that
seal; and then procure good works, that is, produce the blessed fruit of this
faith, and these Sacraments: Qui non crediderit hoc, He that does not believe
all this, shall be damned.

First then, Qui non crediderit, He that has this Apostleship, Praedicate.
this ministry of reconciliation, he that is a Commissioner for these new
buildings, to erect the kingdom of God by the Gospel, and does not believe,
and show by his practice that he does believe himself to be bound to preach,
he is under the penalty of this Text. When therefore the Jesuit Maldonat
pleases himself so well, that, as he says, he cannot choose but laugh, In
Matthew. 28.
when the Calvinists satisfy themselves in doing that duty, that they do
preach; for, says he, Docetis, sed nemo misit, You do preach, but you have no
calling; if it were not too serious a thing to laugh at, would he not allow us
to be as merry, and to say too, Missi estis, sed non docetis, Perchance you may
have a calling, but I am sure you do not preach? for if we consider their
practice, their secular Clergy, those which have the care of souls in
Parishes, they do not preach; and if we consider their Laws, and Canons,
their Regular Clergy, their Monks and Friars should not preach abroad, out of
their own Cloisters. And preaching was so far out of use amongst them, as that
in these later ages, Cheppinus de Jure Monast.
under Innocentius the third, they instituted Ordinem praedicantium, An order
of Preachers; as though there had been no order for preaching in the Church of
God, till within these four hundred years. And we see by their Patent for
preaching, what the cause of their institution was; It was because those who
only preached then, that is, the Humiliati, (which was another Order) were
unlearned, and therefore they thought it not amiss, to appoint some learned
men to preach: The Bishops took this ill at that time, that any should have
leave to preach within their Diocesses; and therefore they had new Patents, to
exempt them from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops; and they had liberty to
preach every where; Modo non vellicent Papam, As long as they said nothing
against the Pope, they might preach. It is therefore but of late years, and
indeed, especially since the Reformation began, that the example of others has
brought them in the Roman Church to a more ordinary preaching; whereas the
penalty of this Text lies upon all them who have that calling, and do it not;
and so it does upon them too, who do not believe, that they are bound to seek
their salvation from preaching, from that ordinance and institution.

I cannot remember that in any History, for matter of fact, nor in the framing
or institution of any State, for matter of Law, there has ever been such a
Law, or such a practice, as that of Preaching. Every where amongst the Gentiles,
(particularly amongst the Romans, where there was a public Office, to be
Conditor Precum, according to emergent occasions, to make Collects and Prayers
for the public use) we find some resemblance, some representation of our
common Prayer, our Liturgy; and in their ablutions, and expiations, we find
some resemblance of our Sacraments; but no where any resemblance of our
Preaching. Certain anniversary Panegyriques they had in Rome, which were
Coronation Sermons, or Adoption Sermons, or Triumph Sermons, but all those,
upon the matter, were but civil Commemorations. But this Institution, of
keeping the people in a continual knowledge of their religious duty, by
continual preaching, was only an ordinance of God himself, for Gods own
people; For, after that in the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.21.
the world by wisdom knew not God, It pleased God (says the Apostle) by the
foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.

What was this former wisdom of God, that that could not save man? it was
twofold; First, God in his wisdom manifests a way to man, to know the Creator
by the creature, Romans 1.20.
That the invisible things of him might be seen by the visible. And this
gracious and wise purpose of God took not effect, because man being brought to
the contemplation of the creature, rested and dwelt upon the beauty and dignity
of that, and did not pass by the creature to the Creator; and then, Gods
wisdom was farther expressed, in a second way, when God manifested himself
to man by his Word, in the Law, and in the Prophets; and then, man resting in
the letter of the Law, and going no farther, and resting in the outside of the
Prophets, and going no farther, not discerning the Sacrifices of the Law to be
Types of the death of Christ Jesus, nor the purpose of the Prophets to be, to
direct us upon that Messiah, that Redeemer, Ipsa, quae per Prophetas locuta
est, Clem. Alex.
sapientia, says Clement, the wisdom of God, in the mouth of the Prophets,
could not save man; and then, when the wisdom of Nature, and the wisdom of
the Law, the wisdom of the Philosophers, and the wisdom of the Scribes,
became defective and insufficient, by man's perverseness, God repaired, and
supplied it by a new way, but a strange way, by the foolishness of preaching;
for it is not only to the subject, to the matter, to the doctrine, which they
were to preach, that this foolishness is referred. To preach glory, by
adhering to an inglorious person, lately executed for sedition and blasphemy;
to preach salvation from a person, whom they saw unable to save himself from
the Gallows; to preach joy from a person whose soul was heavy unto death,
this was Scandalum Iudaeis, 1 Cor. 1.23.
says the Apostle, even to the Jews, who were formerly acquainted by their
Prophets, that some such things as these should befall their Messiah, yet for
all this preparation, it was Scandalum, the Jews themselves were scandalized
at it; it was a stumbling block to the Jews; but Graecis stultitia, says the
Apostle there, the Gentiles thought this doctrine mere foolishness. But not
only the matter, but the manner, not only the Gospel, but even preaching was
a foolishness in the eyes of man; For if such persons as the Apostles were,
heirs to no reputation in the State, by being derived from great families,
bred in no Universities, nor sought to for learning, persons not of the
civilest education, Seamen, Fishermen, not of the honestest professions, (
Matthew but a Publican) if such persons should come into our streets, and
porches, and preach, (I do not say, such doctrine as theirs seemed then) but
if they should preach at all, should not we think this a mere foolishness;
did they not mock the Apostles, and say they were drunk, Act. 2.13.
as early as it was in the morning? Did not those two sects of Philosophers,
who were as far distant in opinions, as any two could be, the Stoiques, and
the Epicureans, Acts 17.18.
concur in defaming S. Paul for preaching, when they called him
Seminiverbium, a babbling and prating fellow? But the foolishness of God is
wiser then men, said that Apostle; 1 Cor. 1.25.
and out of that wisdom, God has shut us all, under the penalty of this
Text, If we that are peachers, and you that are hearers, do not believe, that
this preaching is the ordinance of God, for the salvation of souls.

This then is matter of faith, Euangelium.
That preaching is the way, and this is matter of faith too, that that which is
preached, must be matter of faith; for the Commission is, Praedicate
Euangelium, Preach, but preach the Gospel; And that is, first, Euangelium
solum, Preach the Gospel only, add nothing to the Gospel, and then Euangelium
totum, Preach the Gospel entirely, defalke nothing, forbear nothing of that;
First then, we are to preach, you are to hear nothing but the Gospel; And we
may neither postdate our Commission, nor interline it; nothing is Gospel now,
which was not Gospel then, when Christ gave his Apostles their Commission; And
no man can serve God and Mammon; no man can preach those things, which belong
to the filling of Angels rooms in heaven, and those things which belong to the
filling of the Popes Coffers at Rome, with Angels upon earth: For that was not
Gospel, when Christ gave this commission. And did Christ create his Apostles,
as the Bishop of Rome creates his Cardinals, Cum clausura oris? He makes them
Cardinals, and shuts their mouths; they have mouths, but no tongues; tongues,
but no voice; they are Judges, but must give no Judgment; Cardinals, but have
no interest in the passages of businesses, till by a new favor he open their
mouths again: Did Christ make his Apostles his Ambassadors, and promise to
send their instructions after them? Did he give them a Commission, and
presently a Supersedeas upon it, that they should not execute it? Did he make a
Testament, a will, and refer all to future Schedules and Codicills? Did he
send them to preach the Gospel, and tell them, You shall know the Gospel in the
Epistles of the Popes and their Decretals hereafter? You shall know the Gospel
of deposing Princes, in the Council of Lateran hereafter; and the Gospel in
deluding Heretics, by safe conducts, in the Gospel of Constance hereafter;
and the Gospel of creating new Articles of the Creed, in the Council of Trent
hereafter? If so, then was some reason for Christ's Disciples to think, when
Christ said, Verily, I say unto you, there are some here, who shall not taste
death, Mat. 16. ultim.
till they see the Son of man come in glory; that he spoke and meant to be
understood literally, that neither John nor the rest of the Apostles should
ever die, if they must live to preach the Gospel, and the Gospel could not be
known by them, till the end of the world: And therefore it was wisely done in
the Roman Church, to give over preaching, since the preaching of the Gospel,
that is, nothing but the Gospel, would have done them no good to their ends:
When all their preaching was come to be nothing, but declamations of the virtue
of such an Indulgence, and then a better Indulgence then that, to morrow, and
every day a new market of fuller Indulgences, when all was but an extolling of
the tenderness, and the bowels of compassion in that mother Church, who was
content to set a price, and a small price upon every sin; So that if David
were upon the earth again, and then when the persecuting Angel had drawn his
sword, would but send an appeal to Rome, at that price, he might have an
inhibition against that Angel, and have leave to number his people, let God
take it as he list; Nay, if Sodom were upon the earth again, and the Angel
ready to set fire to that Town, if they could send to Rome, they might
purchase a Charter even for that sin (though perchance they would be loath to
let that sin pass over their hills:) But not to speak any thing, which may
savor of jest, or levity, in so serious a matter, and so deplorable a state,
as their preaching was come to, with humble thanks to God that we are
delivered from it, and humble prayers to God, that we never return to it, nor
toward it, let us cheerfully and constantly continue this duty of preaching
and hearing the Gospel; that is, first the Gospel only, and not Traditions of
men; And the next is, of all the Gospel, nothing but it, and yet all it, add
nothing, defalke nothing; for as the Law is, so the Gospel is, Res integra, a
whole piece; and as S. James says of the integrity of the Law, Whosoever keeps
the whole Law, James 2.10.
and offends in one point, he is guilty of all; So he that is afraid to preach
all, and he that is loath to hear all the Gospel, he preaches none, he hears
none. And therefore, if that imputation, which the Roman Church lays upon us,
were true, That we preach no falsehood, but do not teach all the truth, we did
lack one of the true marks of the true Church, that is, the preaching of the
Gospel; for it is not that, if it be not all that; take therefore the Gospel,
as we take it from the School, that it is historia, and usus, (the Gospel is
the history of the Gospel, the proposing to your understanding all that Christ
did, and it is the appropriation of the Gospel, the proposing to your faith,
that all that he did he did for you) and then, if you hearken to them who will
tell you, that Christ did that which he never did (that he came in, when the
doors were shut, so that his body passed thorough the very body of the Timber,
thereby to advance their doctrine of Transubstantiation) or that Christ did
that which he did, to another end then he did it, (that when he whipped the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, he exercised a secular power and
sovereignty over the world, and thereby established a sovereignty over Princes,
in his Vicar the Pope) These men do not preach the Gospel, because the Gospel
is Historia and usus, The truth of the History, and of the application; and
this is not the truth of the History; So also if you hearken to them, who tell
you, that though the blood of Christ be sufficient in value for you, and for
all, yet you have no means to be sure, that he meant his blood to you, but you
must pass in this world, and pass out of this world in doubt, and that it is
well if you come to Purgatory, and be sure there of getting to heaven at last;
these men preach not the Gospel, because the Gospel is the history, and the
use; and this is not the true use.

And thus it is, if we take the Gospel from the School; but if we take it
from the School master, from Christ himself, the Gospel is repentance, and
remission of sins; For he came, That repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his Name; Luke 24.47.
If then they will tell you, that you need no such repentance for a sin, as
amounts to a contrition, to a sorrow for having offended God, to a detestation
of the sin, to a resolution to commit it no more, but that it is enough to
have an attrition, (as they will needs call it) a servill fear, and sorrow,
that you have incurred the torments of hell; or if they will tell you, that
when you have had this attrition, that the clouds of sadness, and of dejection
of spirit have met, and beat in your conscience, and that the allision of those
clouds have brought forth a thunder, a fearful apprehension of Gods
Judgments upon you; And when you have had your contrition too, that you have
purged your soul in an humble confession, and have let your soul blood with a
true and sharp remorse, and compunction, for all sins past, and put that
bleeding soul into a bath of repentant tears, and into a bath of blood, the
blood of Christ Jesus in the Sacrament, and feel it faint and languish there,
and receive no assurance of remission of sins, so as that it can levy no fine
that can conclude God, but still are afraid that God will still incumber you
with yesterdayes sins again to morrow; If this be their way, they do not
preach the Gospel, because they do not preach all the Gospel; for the
Gospel is repentance and remission of sins; that is, the necessity of
repentance, and then the assuredness of remission, go together.

Thus far then the Crediderit is carried, Baptizate.
we must believe that there is a way upon earth to salvation, and that
Preaching is that way, that is, the manner, and the matter is the Gospel,
only the Gospel, and all the Gospel, and then the seal is the
administration of the Sacraments, as we said at first, of both Sacraments; of
the Sacrament of Baptism there can be no question, for that is literally and
directly within the Commission, Go and Baptize, and then Qui non crediderit,
He that believes not, not only he that believes not, when it is done, but he
that believes not that this ought to be done, shall be damned; we do not
join Baptism to faith, tanquam dimidiam solatii causam, as though Baptism
were equal to faith, in the matter of salvation, for salvation may be had in
diverse cases by faith without Baptism, but in no case by Baptism without
faith; neither do we say, that in this Commission to the Apostles, the
administration of Baptism is of equal obligation upon the Minister as
preaching, that he may be as well excusable if he never preach, as if he
never Baptize; We know S. Peter commanded Cornelius and his family to be
Baptized, Acts 10. ult.
we do not know if he Baptized any of them with his own hand; So S. Paul
says of himself, that Baptizing was not his principal function; 1 Cor. 1.17.
Christ sent not me to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, says he; In such a
sense as God said by Jeremy, Jer. 7.22.
I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them concerning burnt offerings,
but I said, obey my voice, so S. Paul says, he was not sent to Baptize; God
commanded our fathers obedience rather then sacrifice, but yet sacrifice too;
and he commands us preaching rather then Baptizing, but yet Baptizing too; For
as that is true, Hiero.
In adultis, in persons which are come to years of discretion, which S.
Hierome says, Fieri non potest, It is impossible to receive the Sacrament of
Baptism, except the soul have received Sacramentum fidei, the Sacrament of
faith, that is the Word preached, except he have been instructed and
chatechized before, so there is a necessity of Baptism after, for any other
ordinary means of salvation, that God has manifested to his Church; and
therefore Quos Deus conjunxit, those things which God has joined in this
Commission, Ioh. 3.5.
let no man separate; Except a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven; Let no man read that place
disjunctively, Of Water or the Spirit, for there must be both; S. Peter
himself knew not how to separate them, Acts 2.
Repent and be baptized every one of you, says he; for, for any one that
might have been, and was not Baptized, S. Peter had not that seal to plead
for his salvation.

The Sacrament of Baptism then, Eucharistia.
is within this Crediderit, it must necessarily be believed to be necessary for
salvation: But is the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper so too? Is that
within this Commission? Certainly it is, or at least within the equity, if not
within the letter, pregnantly employed, if not literally expressed: For thus it
stands, they are commanded, Matt. 28. ult. 1 Cor. 11.23.
To teach all things that Christ had commanded them; And then S. Paul says, I
have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord
Jesus took bread, etc. (and so he proceeds with the Institution of the
Sacrament) and then he adds, that Christ said, Do this in remembrance of me;
which is, not only remember me when you do it, but do it that you may
remember me; As well the receiving of the Sacrament, as the worthy receiving of
it, is upon commandment.

In the Primitive Church, there was an erroneous opinion of such an absolute
necessity in taking this Sacrament, as that they gave it to persons when they
were dead; a custom which was grown so common, as that it needed a Canon of a
Council, Carthag. 3. c. 6.
to restrain it. But the giving of this Sacrament to children newly baptized
was so general, even in pure times, as that we see so great men as Cyprian and
Augustine, scarce less then vehement for the use of it; Musculus.
and some learned men in the Reformed Church have not so far declined it, but
that they call it, Catholicam consuetudinem, a Catholic, an universal
custom of the Church. But there is a far greater strength both of natural
and spiritual faculties required for the receiving of this Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, then the other of Baptism. But for those who have those
faculties, that they are now, or now should be able, to discern the Lords
body, and their own souls, besides that inestimable and inexpressible
comfort, which a worthy receiver receives, as often as he receives that seal
of his reconciliation to God, since as Baptism is Tessera Christianorum, (I
know a Christian from a Turk by that Sacrament) so this Sacrament is Tessera
orthodoxoru^) I know a Protestant from a Papist by this Sacrament) it is a
service to God, and to his Church to come frequently to this Communion; for
truly (not to shake or afright any tender conscience) I scarce see, how any man
can satisfy himself, that he has said the Lords Prayer with a good
conscience, if at the same time he were not in such a disposition as that he
might have received the Sacrament too; for, if he be in charity, he might
receive, and if he be not, he mocked Almighty God, and deluded the
Congregation, in saying the Lords Prayer.

There remains one branch of that part, Docete servare, Preach the Gospel,
Docete servare.
administer the Sacraments, and teach them to practice and do all this: how
comes matter of fact to be matter of faith? Thus; Qui non crediderit, he that
does not believe, that he is bound to live aright, is within the penalty of
this text. It is so with us, and it is so with you too; Amongst us, he that
says well, presents a good text, but he that lives well, presents a good
Comment upon that text. As the best texts that we can take, to make Sermons
upon, are as this text is, some of the words of Christ's own Sermons: so the
best arguments we can prove our Sermons by, is our own life. The whole weeks
conversation, is a good paraphrase upon the Sundays Sermon; It is too soon to
ask when the clock stroke eleven, Is it a good Preacher? for I have but half
his Sermon then, his own life is the other half; and it is time enough to
ask the Saturday after, whether the Sundays Preacher preach well or no; for
he preaches poorly that makes an end of his Sermon upon Sunday; He preaches on
all the week, if he live well, to the edifying of others; If we say well, and
do ill, we are so far from the example of Gods children, which built with one
hand, and fought with the other, as that, if we do build with one hand, in our
preaching, we pull down with the other in our example, and not only our own,
but other men's buildings too; for the ill life of particular men reflects upon
the function and ministry in general.

And as it is with us, if we divorce our words and our works, so it is with
you, if you do divorce your faith and your works. God has given his
Commission under seal, Preach and Baptize; God looks for a return of this
Commission, under seal too; Believe, and bring forth fruits worthy of belief.
The way that Jacob saw to Heaven, was a ladder; It was not a fair and an easy
staire case, that a man might walk up without any holding. But manibus
innitendum, says S. Augustine, August.
in the way to salvation there is use of hands, of actions, of good works, of a
holy life; Servate omnia, do then all that is commanded, all that is within
the Commission: If that seem impossible, do what you can, and you have done
all; for then is all this done, Cum quod non fit ignoscitur, August.
When God forgives that which is left undone; But God forgives none of that
which is left undone, out of a wilful and vincible ignorance. And therefore
search thy conscience, and then Christ's commandment enters, Scrutamini
Scripturas, then search the Scriptures; for till then, as long as thy
conscience is foul, it is but an illusion to apprehend any peace, or any
comfort in any sentence of the Scripture, in any promise of the Gospel: search
thy conscience, empty that, and then search the Scriptures, and thou shall
find abundantly enough to fill it with peace and consolation; for this is the
sum of all the Scriptures, Qui non crediderit hoc, He that believes not this,
that he must be saved by hearing the word preached, by receiving the
Sacraments, and by working according to both, is within the penalty of this
text, Damnabitur, He shall be damned.

How know we that? many persons have power to condemn, 2 Part.
which have not power to pardon; but Gods word is evidence enough for our
pardon and absolution, whenever we repent we are pardoned, much more then for
our condemnation; and here we have Gods word for that; if that were not enough
we have his oath; for it is in another place, God has sworn, Heb. 4.3.
that there are some, which shall not enter into his rest, and to whom did he
swear that, says S. Paul, but to them that believed not? God cannot lie, much
less be forsworn, and God has said and sworn, Damnabitur, he that believes
not, shall be damned. He shall be; but when? does any man make have? though
that be enough that S. Chrysostom says, Chrysot.
It is all one, when that begins, which shall never end, yet the tense is
easily changed in this case, John 3.18.
from damnabitur to damnatur; for he that believes not, is condemned already.
But why should he be so? condemned for a negative? for a privative? here is no
opposition, no affirming the contrary, no seducing or dissuading other men that
have a mind to believe, 1 John 5.10.
that is not enough; for, He that believes not God, has made God a liar,
because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. Here is the
condemnation we speak of, John 1.
as S. John says, Light was presented, and they loved darkness; so that
howsoever God proceed in his unsearchable judgments with the Heathen, to whom
the light and name of Christ Jesus was never presented, certainly we, to whom
the Gospel has been so freely, and so fully preached, fall under the penalty
of this text, if we believe not, for we have made God a liar in not believing
the record he gives of his Son.

That then there is damnation, and why it is, and when it is, is clear enough;
but what this damnation is, neither the tongue of good Angels that know
damnation by the contrary, by fruition of salvation, nor the tongue of bad
Angels who know damnation by a lamentable experience, is able to express it; A
man may sail so at sea, as that he shall have laid the North Pole flat, that
shall be fallen out of sight, and yet he shall not have raised the South Pole,
he shall not see that; So there are things, in which a man may go beyond his
reason, and yet not meet with faith neither: of such a kind are those things
which concern the locality of hell, and the materiality of the torments
thereof; for that hell is a certain and limited place, beginning here and
ending there, and extending no farther, or that the torments of hell be
material, or elementary torments, which in natural consideration can have no
proportion, no affection, nor appliablenesse to the tormenting of a spirit,
these things neither settle my reason, nor bind my faith; neither opinion,
that it is, or is not so, does command our reason so, but that probable reasons
may be brought on the other side; neither opinion does so command our faith;
but that a man may be saved, though he think the contrary; for in such
points, it is always lawful to think so, as we find does most advance and
exalt our own devotion, and Gods glory in our estimation; but when we shall
have given to those words, by which hell is expressed in the Scriptures, the
heaviest significations, that either the nature of those words can admit, or as
they are types and representations of hell, as fire, and brimstone, and
weeping, and gnashing, and darkness, and the worm, and as they are laid
together in the Prophet, Esaias 30.33.
Tophet, (that is, hell) is deep and large, (there is the capacity and
content, room enough) It is a pile of fire and much wood, (there is the
durablenesse of it) and the breath of the Lord to kindle it, like a stream of
Brimstone, (there is the vehemence of it:) when all is done, the hell of hels,
the torment of torments is the everlasting absence of God, and the everlasting
impossibility of returning to his presen^^; Horrendum est, says the Apostle,
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31.
Yet there was a case, in which David found an ease, to fall into the hands of
God, to escape the hands of men: Horrendum est, when Gods hand is bent to
strike, it is a fearful thing, to fall into the hands of the living God; but
to fall out of the hands of the living God, is a horror beyond our expression,
beyond our imagination.

That God should let my soul fall out of his hand, into a bottomless pit, and
roll an unremoveable stone upon it, and leave it to that which it finds there,
(and it shall find that there, which it never imagined, till it came thither)
and never think more of that soul, never have more to do with it. That of
that providence of God, that studies the life of every weed, and worm, and
ant, and spider, and toad, and viper, there should never, never any beam flow
out upon me; that that God, who looked upon me, when I was nothing, and called
me when I was not, as though I had been, out of the womb and depth of
darkness, will not look upon me now, when, though a miserable, and a
banished, and a damned creature, yet I am his creature still, and contribute
something to his glory, even in my damnation; that that God, who has often
looked upon me in my foulest uncleanness, and when I had shut out the eye of
the day, the Sun, and the eye of the night, the Taper, and the eyes of all
the world, with curtains and windows and doors, did yet see me, and see me
in mercy, by making me see that he saw me, and sometimes brought me to a
present remorse, and (for that time) to a forbearing of that sin, should so
turn himself from me, to his glorious Saints and Angels, as that no Saint nor
Angel, nor Christ Jesus himself, should ever pray him to look toward me,
never remember him, that such a soul there is; that that God, who has so
often said to my soul, Quare morier is? Why will thou die? and so often sworn
to my soul, Vivit Dominus, As the Lord lives, I would not have thee dye, but
live, will nether let me dye, nor let me live, but dye an everlasting life, and
live an everlasting death; that that God, who, when he could not get into me,
by standing, and knocking, by his ordinary means of entering, by his Word, his
mercies, has applied his judgments, and has shaked the house, this body,
with agues and palsies, and set this house on fire, with fevers and calentures,
and frighted the Master of the house, my soul, with horrors, and heavy
apprehensions, and so made an entrance into me; That that God should frustrate
all his own purposes and practices upon me, and leave me, and cast me away, as
though I had cost him nothing, that this God at last, should let this soul go
away, as a smoke, as a vapor, as a bubble, and that then this soul cannot be
a smoke, a vapor, nor a bubble, but must lie in darkness, as long as the
Lord of light is light it self, and never spark of that light reach to my
soul; What Tophet is not Paradise, what Brimstone is not Amber, what gnashing
is not a comfort, what gnawing of the worm is not a tickling, what torment is
not a marriage bed to this damnation, to be secluded eternally, eternally,
eternally from the sight of God? Especially to us, for as the perpetual loss
of that is most heavy, with which we have been best acquainted, and to which
we have been most accustomed; so shall this damnation, which consists in the
loss of the sight and presence of God, be heavier to us then others, because
God has so graciously, and so evidently, and so diversely appeared to us, in
his pillar of fire, in the light of prosperity, and in the pillar of the Cloud,
in hiding himself for a while from us; we that have seen him in all the parts
of this Commission, in his Word, in his Sacraments, and in good example, and
not believed, shall be further removed from his sight, in the next world, then
they to whom he never appeared in this. But Vincenti and credenti, to him that
believes aright, and overcomes all tentations to a wrong belief, God shall
give the accomplishment of fullness, and fullness of joy, and joy rooted in
glory, and glory established in eternity, and this eternity is God; To him that
believes and overcomes, God shall give himself in an everlasting presence and
fruition, Amen.

SERMON. LXXVII. Preached at S. PAUL'S, May 21. 1626.
1 COR. 15.29. Else, what shall they do which are baptized for the dead? if
the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead?


I Entered into the handling of these words, upon Easter day; for, though the
words have received diverse Expositions, good and pervers, yet all agreed, that
the words were an argument for the Resurrection, and that invited me to apply
them to that Day. At that Day I entered into them, with Origens protestation,
Odit Dominus, qui festum ejus unum putat diem, God hates that man, that thinks
any holy day of his lasts but one day, that never thinks of the Resurrection,
but upon Easter day: And therefore I engaged my self willingly, according to
the invitation, and almost the necessity of the words, which could not
conveniently, (scarce possibly) be determined in one day, to return again and
again to the handling thereof. For, they are words of a great extent, a great
compass: The whole Circle of a Christian is designed and accomplished in them;
for, here is first the first point in that Circle, our Birth, our spiritual
birth, that is, Baptism, Why are these men thus baptized? says the Text; And
then here is the point, directly and diametrally opposed to that first point,
our Birth, that is, Death, Why are these men thus baptized for the dead? says
the Text; And then the Circle is carried up to the first point again, to our
Birth, in another Birth, in the Resurrection, Why are these men thus baptized
for the dead, if there be no Resurrection? So that if we consider the Militant
and the Triumphant Church, to be (as they are) all one House, and under one
roof, here is first Limen Ecclesiae, (as S. Augustine calls Baptism) The
Threshold of the Church, we are put over the Threshold, into the Body of the
Church, by Baptism, and here we are remembered of Baptism, Why are these men
thus baptized? And then here is Chorus Ecclesiae, The Quire, the Chancell of
the Church, in which all the service of God is officiated and executed; for we
are made not only hearers, and spectators, but actors in the service of God,
when we come to bear a part in the Hymns and Anthems of the Saints, by our
Death, and here we are remembered of Death, Why are these men thus baptized for
the Dead? And then, here is Sanctum Sanctorum, The innermost part of the
Church, The Holy of Holyes, that is, the manifestation of all the mysterious
salvation, belonging to soul and body, in the Resurrection, Why are these men
thus baptized for the dead, if there be no Resurrection?

Our first days work in handling these words, was to accept, and then to
apply that, in which all agreed, that these words were an argument for the
Resurrection; And we did both those offices; we did accept it, and so show you,
how the assurance of the Resurrection accrues to us, and what is the office of
Reason, and what is the office of Faith, in that affayre; And then we did apply
it, and so show you diverse resemblances, and conformities between natural
Death, and spiritual Death, and between the Resurrection of the body to glory
at last, and the Resurrection of the soul by grace, in the way; and wherein
they induced, and assisted, and illustrated one another; And those two miles
made up that Sabbath days journey. When we shall return to the handling of
them, the next day, (which will be the last) we shall consider how these words
have been misapplyed by our Adversaries of the Roman Church, and then the
several Expositions which they have received from sound and Orthodoxall men,
that thence we may draw a conclusion, and determination for our selves; And in
those two miles, we shall also make up that Sabbath Days journey, when God
shall be pleased to bring us to it. This days Exercise shall be, to consider
that very point, for the establishment whereof, they have so detorted, and
mis-applyed these words, which is their Purgatory, That this Baptism for the
Dead must necessarily prove Purgatory, and their Purgatory.

So then this Days Exercise will be merely Polemicall, the handling of a
Controversy; which though it be not always pertinent, yet neither is it
always unseasonable. There was a time but lately, when he who was in his
desire and intension, the Peacemaker of all the Christian world, as he had a
desire to have slumbred all Field-drums, so had he also to have slumbred all
Pulpit-drums, so far, as to pass over all impertinent handling of
Controversies, merely and professedly as Controversies, though never by way of
positive maintenance of Orthodoxall and fundamental Truths; That so there
might be no slackning in the defense of the truth of our Religion, and yet
there might be a discreet and temperate forbearing of personal, and
especially of National exasperations. And as this way had piety, and peace in
the work it self, so was it then occasionally exalted, by a great necessity;
He, who was then our hope, and is now the breath of our nostrils, and the
Anointed of the Lord, being then taken in their pits, and, in that great
respect, such exasperations the fitter to be forborne, especially since that
course might well be held, without any prevarication, or cooling the zeal of
the positive maintenance of the religion of our Church. But things standing now
in another state, and all peace, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, with these
men, being by themselves removed, and taken away, and he whom we feared,
returned in all kind of safety, safe in body, and safe in soul too, whom
though their Church could not, their Court has chatechised in their religion,
that is, brought him to a clear understanding of their Ambition, (for Ambition
is their Religion, and S. Peter's Ship must sail in their Fleets, and with
their winds, or it must sink, and the Catholic and Militant Church must march
in their Armies, though those Armies march against Rome it self, as heretofore
they have done, to the sacking of that Town, to the holding of the Pope
himself in so sordid a prison, for six months, as that some of his nearest
servants about him died of the plague, to the treading under foot Priests, and
Bishops, and Cardinals, to the dishonouring of Matrons, and the ravishing of
professed Virgins, and committing such insolences, Catholics upon
Catholics, as they would call us Heretics for believing them, but that they
are their own Catholic Authors that have written them) Things being now, I
say, in this state, with these men, since we hear that Drums beat in every
field abroad, it becomes us also to return to the brasing and beating of our
Drums in the Pulpit too, that so, as Adam did not only dress Paradise, but
keep Paradise; and as the children of God, did not only build, but build with
one hand, and fight with another; so we also may employ some of our
Meditations upon supplanting, and subverting of error, as well as upon the
planting, and watering of the Truth. To which purpose I shall prepare this day,
for the vindicating and redeeming of these words from the Adversary, (which
will be the work of the next day) by handling to day that point, for which
they have misapplied them, which is Purgatory, and the mother, and the
offspring of that; for what can that generation of vipers suck from this Text,
which is not, If there be no such Purgatory, but, If there be no such
Resurrection, why then are these men baptized for the dead? Heaven and earth
shall pass away, says Christ, but my word shall not pass away. Matt 24.35.
But rather then Purgatory shall pass away, his word must admit such an
Interpretation, as shall pass away, and evacuate the intention and purpose of
the Holy Ghost therein. How much of the earth is passed away from them, we
know, who acknowledge the mercy, and might, and miracle of Gods working, in
withdrawing so many Kingdoms, so many Nations of the earth, in so short time,
from the obedience, and superstition of Rome, as that if Controversies had been
to have been tried by number, they would have found as many against them, as
with them; so much of the earth is passed from them. How much of heaven is
passed from them, that is, how much less interest and claim to heaven they
can have now, when God has afforded them so much light, and they have resisted
it, then when they were in so great a part, under invincible ignorance, God
only, who is the only Judge in such causes, knows; and he, of his goodness,
enlarge their title to that place, by their conversion toward it. But how much
soever of earth or heaven pass away, they will not lose an acre, an inch of
Purgatory; For, as men are most delighted with things of their own making,
their own planting, their own purchasing, their own building, so are these
men therefore inamoured of Purgatory: Men that can make Articles of faith of
their own Traditions, (And as men to elude the law against new Buildings,
first build sheds, or stables, and after erect houses there, as upon old
foundations, so these men first put forth Traditions of their own, and then
erect those Traditions into Articles of faith, as ancient foundations of
Religion) Men that make God himself of a piece of bread, may easily make
Purgatory of a Dream, and of Apparitions, and imaginary visions of sick or
melancholic men.

It may then be of use to insist upon the survey of this building of theirs,
Divisio.
in these three considerations. First, to look upon the foundation, upon what
they raise it, and that is Prayer for the Dead, and that is the Grandmother
Error; And then upon the Building it self, Purgatory it self, and that is the
Mother; And lastly upon the outhouses, or the furniture of this Building, and
that is Indulgences, which are the children, the issue of this mother, and not
such children as draw their parents dry, but support and maintain their
parents; for, but for these Indulgences, their prayer for the Dead, and their
Purgatory would starve; And starve they must all, if they can draw their
maintenance from no other place but this, Why are these men baptized for the
dead?

First then for the first of these three parts, The foundation, the
Grandmother, 1 Part. Oration pro mortuis.
Prayer for the Dead; The most tender Mother, the most officious Nurse, cannot
have a more particular care, how a newborn child shall be washed, or swathed,
or fed, when they consider every drop of water, every clout, every pin that
belongs to it, then God had of his Infant Church, when he delivered it over to
her foster-fathers, her nursing-fathers, her godfathers, Moses and Aaron, and
bound them by his instructions, in every particular, as he prescribed them. How
many directions he gave, what they should eat, what they should wear, how
often they should wash, what they should do, in every religious, in every
civil action, and yet never, never any mention, any intimation, never any
approach, any inclination, never any light, no nor any shadow, never any
color, any colourablenesse of any command of prayer for the Dead. In all the
Law, no precept for it; And this might imply a weakness in Gods government, in
so particular a law no precept of so important a duty: In all the History no
example; And this might imply ill luck at least, in so large a story no
Precedent of an Office so necessary: In all the Gospel no promise annexed to
it; And this does not imply, but manifest a conclusion against it, an exclusion
of it. There being then no precept, no precedent, no promise for it, how came
it into use and practice amongst the Jews?

After the Jews had been a long time conversant amongst the Gentiles, Iudaei.
and that as fresh water approaching the Sea, contracts a saltish, a brackish
taste, so the Jews received impressions of the customs of the Gentiles, who
were ever naturally inclined to this mis-devotion, and left handed piety, of
praying for the Dead, In the faintness, and languishing of their Religion,
when they were much declined from the exact observation thereof, then, in the
time of the Maccabees entered that one example, which has raised such a dust,
and blinded so many eyes. We have mention of many funerals before that, and
after that of many too, even in the time when Christ was upon the earth, and
yet never mention of prayer for the dead, but in this one place of this book;
I do not say, in this one story, (for in this story reported by Josephus,
there is no mention of it) but in this one book. That is true that I have
read, that after Christ's time, the Rabbis laid hold upon it, and brought it
into custom; And that is true which I have seen, that the Jews at this day
continue it in practice; For when one dies, for some certain time after,
appointed by them, his son or some other near in blood or alliance, comes to
the Altar, and there says and does some thing in the behalf of his dead
father, or grandfather respectively. But all this they have drawn into
practice, from this one place, from this book, from which book the same
Rabbis draw a justification of a man's killing himself, because in this book
they find an example of that in Razis: 2 Macc. 14.37.
The Rabbis took no better a ground for their prayer for the dead, then for
selfe-homicide, only matter of fact, out of a Historical book, which
themselves did not believe to be Canonical. But how took this hold of
Christians?

That which wrought upon the Jews, Christiani.
prevailed upon the new Christians too; for the greatest part of them, by much,
being Gentiles, (for few amongst the Jews, in comparison, were converted to
the Christian religion) they which came from Gentilisme, retained still many
impressions of such things as they had been formerly accustomed unto. And as
the Fathers of the Church then, out of an indulgence to these new Convertits,
did suffer and tolerate the practice of many things, which these Gentiles
brought with them; (as indeed a great part of the ceremonies of the Christian
Church are of that nature, and of such an admission, Things, which rather then
avert their new Convertits from coming to them, by an utter abolishing of all
parts of their former religion, and worship of their gods, those blessed
Fathers thought fitter to retain, and turn to some good use, then altogether
to take them away) As in other things, so also in this prayer for the dead, to
which they, as Gentiles, had been formerly accustomed, the Fathers did not
oppose it with any peremptory earnestness, with any vehement diligence, partly
because the thing it self argued and testified a good, and tender, and pious
affection; (and though God do not ground his Decrees upon any disposition in
man's nature, yet in the execution of his Decrees, God as he works in his
Church, loves to work upon a good natured man) and partly also, because this
practice, being but a practice only, and no Dogmaticall constitution, might be
(as it was in the first practice thereof) without shaking any foundation, or
wounding any Article of the Christian Religion; And lastly, (that we may
speak truth, with that holy boldness which belongs to the truth) because it
was a long time before the Fathers came to a clear understanding of the state
of the soul, departed out of this life: for though they never doubted of the
certain performance of Gods promises, That all that die in him, do rest in
him, yet where, and how this rest was communicated to them, admitted more
clouds then they could at all times dispell and scatter, some arising from
Philosophers, some from Heretics, some from ignorance, some from heat of
Disputation.

So then, Tertul.
at first it was a weed that grew wild in the open field, amongst the Gentiles;
Then because it bore a pretty flower, the testimony of a good nature, it was
transplanted into some Gardens, and so became a private opinion, or at least a
practice amongst some Christians; And then it spread it self so far, as that
Tertullian, and he first of any takes knowledge of it, as of a custom of the
Church; And truly this of Tertullian is very early, within little more then two
hundred years after Christ. But as Tertullian shows us an early birth of it, so
he tells us enough, to show us, that it should not have been long lived, when
he acknowledges that it had no ground in Scripture, but was only a custom
popularly, and vulgarly taken up. But Tertullian speaks of more then Prayer; he
speaks of oblations and sacrifices for the dead; It is true, he does so; but it
is of oblations and sacrifices far from the propitiatory sacrifice of the
Mass, for Tertullian makes a woman the Priest in his sacrifice: Offert uxor,
says he, annuis diebus dormitionis mariti, The wife offers every year upon
the day of her husbands death; that is, every year upon that day, she gives a
dole and alms to the poor, as the custom was to do in memory of dead
friends.

This being then but such a custom, and but so induced, why did none oppose
it? Aerius. Epiphanius.
Why it was not sufficiently opposed, I have intimated some reasons before: The
affection of those that did it, who were (though mistaken in the way) piously
affected in the action, And then the harmlesnesse in the thing it self at
first, And then partly a loathnesse in the Fathers to deter the Gentiles from
becoming Christians, And partly a cloud and darkness of the state of the
soul after death. Yet some did oppose it; But some not early enough, and some
not earnestly enough; And some not with much success, because they were not
otherwise Integrae famae, They were not thought sound in all things, and
therefore they were believed in nothing; which was Aerius his case, who did
oppose it; but because Aerius did not come home to all truths, he was not
hearkened unto, in opposing any error. Otherwise at that time, Epiphanius had a
fair occasion offered, to have opposed this growing custom, and to have
rectified the Church in a good measure therein, about an hundred years after
Tertullian: For then Aerius opposed it directly; but because he proceeded upon
false grounds, That since it was come to that, That the most vicious man, the
most enormous sinner, might be saved after his death, by the prayers and
devotions of another man, there remained no more for a Christian to do, but to
provide such men in his life, to do those offices for him after his death, and
so he might deliver himself from all the disciplines, and mortifications, and
from the anguishes, and remorses, and vexations of conscience which the
Christian Religion induces and requires, Epiphanius discerning the advantage
that Aerius had given, by imputing things not thoroughly true, he places his
glory, and his triumph, only in overthrowing Aerius his ill grounded
arguments, and takes the question it self, and the danger of the Church, no
farther to heart then so. And therefore when Aerius asks, Can prayers for the
dead be of any use? Epiphanius says, Yes, they may be of use, to awaken and
exercise the piety and charity of the living; and never speaks to that which
was principally intended, whether they could be of any use to the dead. So when
Aerius asks, Is it not absurd to say, That all sins may be remitted after
death? Epiphanius says, No man in the Church ever said, That all sins may be
remitted after death, and never cleares the maine, whether any sin might. And
yet with all advantages, and modifications, Epiphanius lodges it at last, but
upon custom, Nec enim praeceptum Patris, sed institutum matris habemus, says
he, For this which we do, we have no commandment from God our Father, but
only an Institution, employed in this Custom, from the Church our Mother.

But then it grew to a farther height; from a wild flower in the field,
Chrysostom.
and a garden flower in private grounds, to be more generally planted, and to
be not only suffered by many Fathers, but cherished and watered by some, and
not above forty years after Epiphanius, to be so far advanced by S.
Chrysostom, as that he assigns, though no Scripture for it, yet that which is
nearest to Scripture, That it was an Apostolical Constitution. And truly, if
it did clearly appear to have been so, A thing practiced, and prescribed to
the Church, by the Apostles, the holy Ghost were as well to be believed in the
Apostles mouths, as in their pens; An Apostolical Tradition, that is truly
so, is good evidence. But because those things do hardly lie in proof, (for
that which has been given for a good Rule of Apostolical Traditions, is very
defective, that is, That whatsoever has been generally in use in the Church,
of which no Author is known, is to be accepted for an Apostolical Tradition,
for so that Ablutio pedum, The washing of one another feet after Christ's
example, was in so general use, that it had almost gained the dignity of being
a Sacrament; And so was also the giving of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood
to children newly baptized, and yet these, though in so general use, and
without any certain Author, are not Apostolical Traditions) Therefore we must
apply S. Augustines words to S. Chrysostom, Lege ex Lege, ex Prophetis, ex
Psalmis, ex Euangelio, ex Apostolicis literis, and credemus, Read us any thing
out of the Law, or Prophets, or Psalms, or Gospel, or Epistles, and we will
believe it. And we must have leave to return S. Augustines words upon S.
Augustine himself, who has much assisted this custom of praying for the
dead, Lege ex Lege, etc. Read it out of the Scriptures, and we will believe it;
for S. Augustine does not pretend any other place of Scripture, then this of
the Maccabees, and (not disputing now what credit that Book had with S.
Augustine) certainly it fell not within this enumeration of his, The Maccabees
are neither Law, nor Prophets, nor Psalms, nor Gospel, nor Epistle.

Beloved, it is a wanton thing for any Church, in spiritual matters, to play
with small errors; to tolerate, or wink at small abuses, as though it should be
always in her power to extinguish them when she would. It is Christ's counsel
to his Spouse, that is, the Church, Capite vulpes parvulas, Take us the little
foxes, for they destroy the Vine; though they seem but little, and able to do
little harm, yet they grow bigger and bigger every day; and therefore stop
errors before they become heresies, and erroneous men before they become
formal heretics. Capite, says Christ, Take them, suffer them not to go on;
but then, it is Capite nobis, Take us those foxes, Take them for us, The
bargain is between Christ and his Church. For it is not Capite vobis, Take
them to your selves, and make your selves Judges of such doctrinall matters, as
appertain not to your cognizance; Nor it is not Cape tibi, Take him to thy
self, spy out a Recusant, or a man otherwise not conformable, and take him for
thy labor, beg him, and spoil him, and, for his Religion, leave him as you
found him; Neither is it Cape sibi, Take him for his ease, that is, compound
with him easily, and continue him in his estate and errors, but Cape nobis,
Take him for us, so detect him, as he may thereby be reduced to Christ and his
Church.

Neither only this counsel of Christ to his Church, but that commandment of
God in Levit. Exodus 23.3. Lev. 19.15.
is also applyable to this, Non misereber is pauperis in judicio, Thou shall
not countenance a poor man in his cause, Thou shall not pity a poor man in
judgment. Though a new opinion may seem a poor opinion, able to do little
harm, though it may seem a pious and profitable opinion, and of good use, yet
in judicio, if it stand in judgment, and pretend to be an article of faith,
and of that holy obligation, matter necessary to salvation, Non misereberis,
Thou shall not spare, thou shall not countenance this opinion upon any
collateral respect, but bring it to the only trial of Doctrines, the
Scriptures. In the beginning of the Reformation in Germany, there arose a sect,
whom they called Intermists, and Adiaphorists, who, upon a good pretense, were
like to have done a great deal of mischief: They said, Since all the hope of
a Reformation that we can promise our selves, must come from a general
Council, and of such a Council we can have no hope but by the Pope, it were
impertinent, and dis-conducing to our own ends, to vex or exasperate the
Pope, in this Interim, till the Council be settled, and so the Reformation put
into a way; and in the Interim, for this short time till the Council, these
Adiaphora, the indifferent things, (in which mild word they involved all the
abuses, and all the grievances that were complained of) may be well enough
continued. But if they had continued so long, they had continued yet; If they
had spared their little foxes then, they had destroyed their vines; If they had
pitied the poor in judgment, the cause had been judged against them; If they
had reprieved those abuses for a time, they had got a pardon for ever: And
therefore blessed were they in taking those children, and dashing them against
the stones, In taking those newborn opinions, and bringing them to the true
touchstone of all Doctrines, An ab initio, whether they had been from the
beginning, or could consist with the Scriptures.

Neither does this counsel of Christ's, Take us these little foxes, nor this
commandment of God, Thou shall not pity the poor in judgment, determine it self
in the Church, or in the public only, but extends it self (rather contracts
it self) to every particular soul and conscience. Capite vulpeculas, Take your
little foxes, watch your first inclinatio^s to sins, for if you give them suck
at first, if you feed them with the milk and honey of the mercy of God, it
shall not be in your power to weane them when you would, but they will draw you
from one to another extreme, from a former presumption to a future desperation
in Gods mercy. So also Non misereberis; Thou shall not pity the poor in
judgment; now that thou call thy self to judgment, and thy conscience to
an examination, thou shall not pity any sin, because it pretends to be a poor
sin, either poor so, that it cannot much endanger thee, not much encumber
thee, or poor so, as that it threatens thee with poverty, with penury, with
disability to support thy state, or maintain thy family, if thou entertain it
not. Many times I have seen a suitor that comes in forma pauperis, more
trouble a Court, and more importune a Judge, then greater causes, or greater
persons: And so may such sins as come in forma pauperis, either way, That they
plead poverty, That they can do little harm, or threaten poverty if they be
not entertained. Those sins are the most dangerous sins, which pretend reason
why they should be entertained: for sins which are done merely out of
infirmity, or out of the surprisall of a tentation, are (in comparison of
others) done as sins in our sleep; but in sins upon deliberation, upon
counsel, upon pretense of reason, we do see the wisdom of God, but we set
our wisdom above his, we do see the law of God, but we insert and interline
non obstantes of our own, into Gods Law.

If therefore thou will corruptly and vitiously, and sinfully love another, out
of pity, because they love thee so; If thou will assist a poor man in a cause,
out of pretense of pity, with thy countenance and the power of thy place, that
that poor man may have something, and thou the rest that is recovered in his
right; If thou will embrace any particular sin out of pity, lest thy Wife and
Children should be left unprovided; If thou have not taken these little foxes,
that is, resisted these tentations at the beginning, yet Nunc in judicio, now
that they appear in judgment, in examination of thy conscience, Non
misereberis, Thou shall not pity them, but (as Moses speaks of false Prophets,
Deuteronomy. 13.
and by a fair accommodation of all bewitching sins, with pleasure or profit)
If a Dreamer of Dreams have given thee a sign, and that sign be come to
pass; If a sin have told thee, it would make thee rich, and it have made thee
rich; yet if this Dreamer draw thee to another God, If this profit draw thee to
an Idolatrous, that is, to an habitual love of that sin, (for Tot habemus
recentes Deos, quot vitiae, says S. Hierom, Hieron.
Every man has so many Idols in him, as he has habitual sins) yet, Though
this dreamer (as God proceeds there) be thy brother, or thy son, or thy friend
which is as thine own soul, How near, how dear, how necessary soever this
sin be unto thee, Non misereberis, says Moses, Thine eye shall not pity that
Dreamer, thou shall not keep him secret, but thine own hand shall be upon him
to kill him; And so of this pleasurable, or profitable sin, Non misereberis,
Thou shall not hide it, but pour it out in Confession; Non misereberis, Thou
shall not pardon it, no nor reprieve it, but destroy it, for the practice
presently; Non misereberis, Thou shall not turn out the Mother, and retain
the Daughter, not leave the sin, and retain that which was sinfully got, but
divest all, root, and body, and fruits, by confession to God, by contrition in
thy self, by restitution to men damnified; Elfe, that will fall upon thee and
thy soul, which fell upon the Church, That because they did not take their
little foxes, they endangered the whole vine; Because they did pity the poor
in judgment, that is, (as S. Augustine says) they were loath to wrestle with
the people, or force them from dangerous customs, they came from that supine
negligence, in tolerating prayer for the Dead, to establish a doctrinall point
of Purgatory; and for both, prayer for the Dead, and Purgatory, they detort
this text, Else, that is, if no Purgatory, why then are these men baptized for
the Dead?

As in the Old Testament there is no precept, no precedent, 2 Part
no promise for prayer for the Dead, So in the Old Testament they confess,
there was no Purgatory; no such place, as could purify a soul to that
cleanness, as to deliver it up to Heaven; For thither, to Heaven, no soul,
say they, had access, till after Christ's ascension. But as the first mention
of prayer for the dead was in time of the Maccabees, so much about the same
time was the first stone of Purgatory laid; and laid by the hands of Plato.
For, Plato. Tertul.
Hareticorum Patriarchae, Philosophi, says Tertullian, The Philosophers were
the Patriarchs of Heretics, evermore they had recourse to them. And then,
Plato being the Author of Purgatory, we cannot deny, but that the Greek Church
did acknowledge Purgatory, that is, that Greek Church, of which Plato is a
Patriarch; for, for the Christian Greek Church, that never acknowledged
Purgatory, so as the Roman, that is, A place of torment, from which our prayers
here, might deliver souls there. But yet Platoes invention, or his manner of
expressing it, Eusebius Anno 326.
took such root and such hold, as that Eusebius, when he comes to speak of
Purgatory, delivers it in the very words of Plato, and makes Platoes words his
words, and Plato his Patriarch, for the Greek Church. The Latin Church had
Patriarchs too for this Doctrine; though not Philosophers, yet Poets; for of
that which Virgil says of Purgatory, Virgil. Lactantius Anno 290.
Lactantius says, propemodum vera, Virgil was very near the truth, Virgil was
almost a Catholic, but then later men say, Haec prorsus vera, This is
absolutely true that Virgil says, and Virgil is a perfect, a downright
Catholic; for an upright Catholic, in the point of Purgatory, were hard to
find.

These then are the first Patriarchs of the Greek and Latin Church,
Philosophers, and Poets; And when it came farther, to Christians, it gained not
much at first; for the first mention of Purgatory amongst Christians has this
double ill luck, that first it is in a Book which no side believes, the Book
called Pastor, whose Author is said to be Hermes, Hermes.
and he fancied to be S. Paul's Disciple; And then that which is said of
Purgatory in that Book, is put into an old woman's mouth, and so made an old
wives tale; she tells that she had a vision, of stones fallen from a tower, and
then mended after they were fallen, and laid in the building again: And this
Tower must be the Church, and these fallen stones must be souls in Purgatory,
and then they must be made fit to be placed in the uppermost part of the
building, in the Triumphant Church.

But to consider this plant in better grounds, then Philosophers, or Poets, or
old wives tales, Clem. Alexan.
or supposititious books, amongst men of more weight and gravity; Clement of
Alexandria, within little more then two hundred years after Christ, spoke
doubtfully, uncertainly, suspiciously, disputably of Purgatory; And within
twenty years after him, Origin.
Origin, who was evermore transported beyond the letter, upon mysteries,
somewhat directly. But yet when all is done, Origens Purgatory is a purgatory,
that would do them no good; for it would bring them in no money; and they could
be as well content that there were none, as that it were nothing worth; except
they may have the letting and setting of Purgatory at their price, they care
not though it were pulled down. And Origens Purgatory is such a purgatory as
the best men must come into it, even Martyrs themselves, that are rebaptized
in their own blood, (and will this purgatory serve their turns?) And it is
such a purgatory, as the worst of all, even the Devil himself may, and shall
get out of it; And will this purgatory serve their turns? Neither is this an
error peculiar to Origin, That all souls must pass through Purgatory, but
common with others of the Fathers too; Sive Paulus, sive Petrus, says Origin,
whether it be S. Paul, or S. Peter, Ambrose.
thither he must come, And sive Petrus, sive Johannes, says S. Ambrose,
whether it be the Disciple that loved Christ, S. Peter, or the Disciple whom
Christ loved, S. John, thither he must come; And S. Hilary extends it farther,
he draws in the blessed Virgin Mary her self into purgatory. And that we may
see clearly, that that Purgatory which the Fathers intended, is not the
Purgatory now erected in the Roman Church, S. Ambrose consigns to his
Purgatory, even the Patriarchs and Prophets of the Old Testaments; Igne filii
Levi, igne Ezekiel, igne Daniel, The holiest generation, the Sons of Levi, and
the greatest of the Prophets must pass through this fire: And will such a
purgatory serve their turns, as was kindled in the Old Testament?

Well; Interrogant nos.
They are very loath to be put to their special plea, very loath to answer,
what Purgatory of the Fathers they will stand to; They would not be put to
answer; They choose rather to interrogate us; and they ask us, Since the Fathers
are so pregnant, so frequent in the name of Purgatory, one Purgatory or other,
will you believe none? None, upon the strength of that argument, that the
Fathers mention Purgatory, except they will assign us a Purgatory, in which
those Fathers agree, and agree it to be matter of faith, to believe it; for
from how many things, which pass through the Fathers, by way of opinion, and
of discourse, are they in the Roman Church departed, only upon that, That the
Fathers said it, but said it not Dogmatically, but by way of discourse, or
opinion. But then they ask us again, Since it is clear that they did use
prayer for the dead, what could they mean by those prayers, but a Purgatory, a
place of torment, where those souls needed help, and from whence those
prayers might help them? What could they mean else? Certainly, we cannot tell
them, what they meant; If they should ask them, who made those prayers, they
could hardly tell them. If a man should have surprised S. Ambrose at his
prayers, and stood behind him, and heard him say, Non dubitamus, Ambrose.
etiam Angelorum testimoniis credimus, Lord, I cannot doubt it, for thou by
thine Angels have revealed it unto me, Fide ablutum, aeterna voluptate perfrui,
That my dead Master the Emperor, was baptized in his faith, and is now in
possession of all the joys of heaven, and yet have heard S. Ambrose say,
sometimes to God, sometimes to his dead Master, Si quid preces, if my prayers
may prevail with thee O God, and then, Oblationibus vos frequentabo, I will
wait upon you daily with my Oblations, I will accompany you daily with my
Sacrifices; And for what? Vt des, Domine, requiem, That thou, O Lord, would
afford rest, and peace, and salvation to that soul, And if this man after all
this, should have asked S. Ambrose, What he meant to pray for him, of whose
present being in heaven he was already assured? surely S. Ambrose could have
given no such answer, as would have implied a confession, or an argument for
Purgatory; But S. Ambrose is likely to have said to him, as he does say there,
Est in piis affectibus quaedam stendi voluptas, In tender hearts, and in good
natures, there is a kind of satisfaction, and more then that, a holy
voluptuousness in weeping, in lamenting, in deploring the loss of a friend;
In commemoratione amissi acquiescimus, Let me alone, give me leave to think of
my lost Master some way, by speaking with him, by speaking of him, by speaking
for him, any way, I find some ease, some satisfaction in commemorating and
celebrating of him; But all this would not have amounted to an argument for
Purgatory. So also if a man should have found S. Augustine in his Meditations
after his Mothers death, August.
and heard him say, Pro peccatis Matris meae deprecor te, Lord, I am a suitor
now for my Mothers sins; Exaudi Domine, propter medicinam vulnerum tuorum,
Hear me, O Lord, who acknowledge no other Balsamum, then that which drops out
of thy wounds, Dimitte Domine, Domine obsecro, Pardon her, O Lord, O Lord
pardon her all her sins; And then should have heard S. Augustine, with the
same breath, and the same sigh, say, Credo quod jam feceris, quae rogo, Lord, I
am faithfully assured, that all this is already done, which I pray for; and
then should have asked S. Augustine, What he meant to pray for that which was
already done? S. Augustine could but have said to him, as he does to God there,
Voluntaria oris mei accipe Domine, Accept O Lord, this voluntary, though not
necessary Devotion. But if a man would have pressed either of them for a full
reason of those prayers, it would have been hard for him to have received it.
They prayed for the Dead, and they meant no ill, in doing so; but what
particular good they meant, they could hardly give any farther account, but
that it was, if not an inordinate, yet an inconsiderate piety, and a Devotion,
that did rather transport them, then direct them.

These then prayed for the dead, and yet confessed those whom they prayed for,
to be then in heaven; S. Chrysostom prays for others, and yet believes them
to be in Hell; Chrysostom.
Potest infideles de Gehenna dimittere, says he, sed forte non faciet, God can
deliver an unbeleeving soul out of hell, perchance he will not, says he, but
I cannot tell, and therefore I will try. And yet S. Gregory absolutely forbids
all prayer for the dead, Gregory.
where they dyed in notorious sin; As generally their whole School does at
this day, either for such sinners, as dying in impenitency, are presumed to be
already in Hell, or such as dyed so well, that they are already presumed to be
in possession of as much as can be asked in their behalf.

If then they will still press and pursue us with that question, What could
those Fathers mean by their prayer for the Dead, but Purgatory? We must send
them to those Fathers, (and I pray God they may get to them) to ask what they
meant. So much as any of those Fathers have told us, we can tell them; and
amongst those Fathers, Areopag.
S. Dionyse the Areopagite has told us most; He has told us the manner, and
the Ceremonies used at the funerals of Christians; and amongst them the
offices, and liturgies, and services said and read at such funerals; and
expressed them so, as that we may easily see, That first the Congregation made
a declaration of their religious and faithful assurance, that they that die in
the Lord, rest in him; And then a protestation in the behalf of that dead
brother, that he did die in that faith, and that expectation, and therefore was
then in possession of that rest, which was promised to them who dyed so. And
this testimony for themselves in general, and this application thereof to that
dead man, says he, the Church then expressed in the form of prayer, and so
seemed to ask and beg at Gods hands, that which indeed they did but
acknowledge to have received before; they gave that the form of a prayer, as
of a future thing, which was indeed but a recognition of that which was
present, and past, That they did then, and that that dead brother had before
embraced that belief.

This answer to their question, (What could they mean but Purgatory, by those
prayers?) they may have from those of those ancient times; And thus much more
from daily practice, That every man who prostrates himself in his chamber, and
powers out his soul in prayer to God; though he have said, O Lord, enter not
into judgment with thy servant; forgive me the sins of my youth, O Lord; O
Lord blot out all mine iniquities out of thy remembrance, though his faith
assure him, that God has granted all that he asked upon the first petition of
his prayer, yea before he made it, (for God put that petition into his heart
and mouth, and moved him to ask it, that thereby he might be moved to grant
it) yet as long as the Spirit enables him, he continues his prayer, and he
solicits, and he importunes God for that which his conscience assures him, God
has already granted: He has it, and yet he asks it; and that second asking it
implies and amounts but to a thankesgiving for that mercy, in which he has
granted it. So those Fathers prayed for that which they assured themselves was
done before, and therefore, though it had the form of a prayer, it might be a
commemoration of Gods former benefits; it might be a protestation of their
present faith, or an attestation in the behalf of their dead friend, whose
first obsequies, or yearly anniversary they did then celebrate.

Add to this the general disposition in the nature of every man, to wish well
to the dead, And the darkness in which men were then, in what kind of state
the dead were, and we shall the less wonder, that they declined to this
custom in those times, especially if we consider, Chemnicius Exam. De
purgator. fo. 92. b.
that even in the Reformation of Religion, in these clearer times, Luther
himself, and after him, (if perchance Luther may be thought not to have been
enough fined and drawn from his lees) The Apology for the Confession of
Auspourg, which was written after all things were sufficiently debated, and had
siftings, and cribrations, and alterations enough, allows of such a form of
prayer for the dead, as that of the primitive Fathers may justly seem to have
been. All ends in this, that neither those prayers of those Fathers, nor these
of these Lutherans, (though neither be in themselves to be justified) did
necessarily imply, or presuppose any such Purgatory, as the Roman Church has
gone about to evict or conclude out of them; Men might pray for the dead as
those Fathers did, and as the Lutherans do, safely enough without assisting
the doctrine of Purgatory, if that were all that were to be said against such
prayers.

Be then that thus settled, The Fathers did not intend any such building upon
that foundation, not a Purgatory, which should be a place of torment, upon
those prayers for the dead; but then, what did they mean by that Purgatory,
and that fire, which is so frequent amongst them? In the confession of our
Adversaries, the greatest part of the Fathers that mention a Purgatory fire,
intend it of the general fire of conflagration at the last day: They thought
the souls of the Dead to have been kept in Abditis, and in Receptaculis till
the day of Judgment, and that then that fire which was to take hold of all
creatures to the purifying of them, should also take hold of all souls, and
burn out all that might be unacceptable to God in those souls, and that this
was their Purgatory. Others of the Fathers have called that severe judgment,
and examination which every soul is to pass under, from the hand of God at
that time, (because it has much of the nature of fire, and many of the
properties and qualities of fire in it) a fire, a purging fire, and made that
their Purgatory. If others of the Fathers have spoken of a purging fire after
this life, so as it will not fall within these two acceptations, of the fire of
conflagration, or of the fire of examination, we must say in their behalf, as
Sextus Senensis does, That they are not the less holy, Sext. Senens.
nor the less reverend, for having straied into some of these mistakings,
because it is a fire without light.

In those sub-obscure times, August.
S. Augustine might be excusable, though he proceeded doubtfully and said, Non
incredibile, It is not incredible that some such thing there may be, and Quaeri
potest, It is not amiss to inquire, (where such things are to be inquired
after, that is, in the Scriptures) whether any such thing be or no, and Vtrum
latere, an inveniri, whether any such thing will be found there, or no, I
cannot tell: he may be excusable in his proceeding farther in his doubt, Sive
ibi tantum, whether all our Purgatory be reserved for the next world, Sive hic
and ibi, or whether God divide our Purgatory, some here, and some there, Sive
hic ut non ibi, or whether God exalt and multiply our Purgatory here, that we
may have none hereafter. Of these things, I say, howsoever S. Augustine might
be excusable for doubting in those dark times, we should be inexcusable, if we
should not deny them in these times, in which God has afforded us so much
light and clearenesse; And rest in that acknowledgement, that we have in this
life Purgationem, and purgatorium, A purging, and a Purgatory; A purging in
this, That Christ Jesus, Whom God has made the heir of all things, by whom
also he made the world, Heb. 1.3.
who was the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person;
That he, by himself has purged our sins: There is our purging; But then,
because after this general purging, which is wrapped up in the general
nature, as Christ dyed for mankind, for all men, and after that nearer
application thereof, as it is wrapped up in the Covenant, as he dyed more
effectually for all Christians, still our own clothes defile us, our own evil
habits, Job
our own flesh pollutes us, therefore God sends us a Purgatory too in this
life, Crosses, Afflictions, and Tribulations, and to burn out these infectious
stains and impressions in our flesh, Ipse sedet tanquam ignis conflans, God
sits as a fire, and with fullers soape, to wash us, Malac. 3.2.
and to burn us clean with afflictions from his own hand.

Let no man think himself sufficiently purified, that has not passed this
Purgatory; Irascaris mihi Domine, says S. Bernard, Lord let me see that thou
art angry with me; Bernar.
I know I have given thee just cause of anger; and if thou smother that anger,
and declare it not by corrections here, thou reservest thine anger to
undeterminable times, and to unsupportable proportions. Propitius fuisti, says
David, Thou wast a merciful God to thy people; for, says he, Thou did
punish all their Inventions; In this consisted his mercy, that he did punish;
for if he had been more merciful, he had been unmercifull; If he had begun
with no Judgments, they had ended in Judgments without end; Affliction is a
Christians daily bread, and therefore in that petition, Da nobis hodie, Give us
this day our daily bread, not only patience in affliction, but affliction it
self, so far as it conduces to our mortification is asked at Gods hand. It
is an over-presumptuous confidence, for which they glorify one in the Roman
Church, that he was put often to his Decede a me, Domine, O Lord, withdraw thy
self, and thy grace farther from me, for by mine own sanctity, or diligence, I
am able to wrestle with, and to overcome all the tentations, and tribulations
of this life, Decede a me, withdraw thy self, and thy grace, and put not thy
self to this trouble, nor this cost with me, but leave me to my self: This
was too much confidence; but that was more, which we find in another, That he
begged of God, by prayer, that he might be possessed with the Devil for some
months, because all the tentations of the flesh, and all the crosses of the
world, were not enough for his victory, and his triumph. But it is an humble
and a requisite prayer, to ask such a measure of affliction, as may ballast us,
and carry us steddily, through all the storms, and tempests of this life. As
he that has had no rub in his fortune, in his temporal state, is in most
danger to fall, (to fall into murmuring) at the first stumble he makes, As he
that has had no sickness till his age, hardly recovers then; So he that has
not borne his yoke in his youth, that has not been accustomed to crosses and
afflictions, has a wanton soul all the way, and a froward and impatient soul
toward the end.

This is our true Purgatory; And in this Purgatory, we do need the prayers of
others; and upon this Purgatory, we may build Indulgences, which are those
testimonies of the remission of sins, which God has enabled his Church to
imprint and confer upon us, in the absolution thereof; which are nothing of
kin to those Indulgences of the Roman Church, which are the children of this
mother of Purgatory, and to the maintenance of which, they have also detorted
our Text, Else, If there be no such Indulgences, If the works of Supererogation
done by other men, may not be applied to the souls that are in Purgatory, If
there be no such use of Indulgences, why are then these men baptized for the
dead?

Against the popular opinion of the Sphere, or Element of Fire, Indulgences.
some new Philosophers have made this an argument, that it is improbable, and
impertinent, to admit an Element that produces no Creatures; A matter more
subtle then all the rest, and yet work upon nothing in it; A region more
spacious then all the rest, and yet have nothing in it, to work upon. All the
other three Elements, Earth, and Water, and Air abound with inhabitants proper
to each of them, only the Fire produces nothing. Here is a fire that
recompenses that defect; The fire of the Roman Purgatory has produced
Indulgences, and Indulgences are multiplied to such a number, as that no herds
of Cattle upon earth can equal them, when they meet by millions at a Jubilee,
no shoales, no spawne of fish at Sea, can equal them, when they are
transported in whole Tuns to the West Indies, where of late years their best
Market has been; No flocks, no flights of birds in the Air can equal them,
when as they say of S. Francis, at every prayer that he made, a man might have
seen the Air as full of souls flying out of Purgatory, as sparkles from a
Smiths Anvill, beating a hot Iron. The Apostle complains of them, that made
Mercaturam animarum, Merchandise of men's souls; but these men make Ludibrium
animarum, a Jest of men's souls: For, if that sad and serious consideration,
that this doctrine concerns that part of man, which nothing but the
incorruptible blood of the Son of God could redeem, the soul, did not cast a
devout and a religious bridle upon it, it were impossible to speak of these
Indulgences, otherwise then merrily: They do make merchandise of souls, and
yet they make a jest of them too.

These then, these Indulgences, are the children, the generation of that Viper,
the Salamanders of that fire, Pliny.
Purgatory; And then, Inter omnia venenata, says Pliny, Of all the venomous
creatures in the world, the Salamander is Maximi sceleris, the most
mischievous; for whereas others, singulos feriunt, (as the same Author says)
they sting but one at once, the Salamander destroys whole families, whole
Cities together, for all that eat the fruit of any tree, that he has touched,
perish. We need not apply this; Our fathers did, and our neighbors do feel
the manifold mischiefs that these mercenary Indulgences work in the world, and
to what desperate and bloody actions men are induced, and animated by them;
what knives these Indulgences have whet in Courts, and what Armies they have
paid in the open field; A cheap discharge, and easy Subsidy; we have seen
Copper coined, and we have read of leather coined, but here they coin paper,
and in an Indulgence, which require but as much paper as a Ballad, they send a
man more salvation, then the whole Bible can give them. Men that will not see
light, or not watch by the light, will not see this; Men that delight to wallow
still in the mire, can digest this; Etiam Salamandra a suibus manditur, says
Pliny, As venomous as a Salamander is, a Sow will eat a Salamander; As the
citizens of the lowest fire, of hell it self, entered into the heard of swine,
so these children of this other fire, of Purgatory, these Indulgences, enter
into swinish men, that consider not their own foulness, but think themselves
clean when they have eaten a Salamander, that is, bought an Indulgence. But
though they have had a spurious generation, and yet have lasted longer then
spurious generations use to do, (for they have spread into three generations,
Prayer for the dead begot Purgatory, and Purgatory Indulgences) yet they have
had a viperous generation too, for they have eaten out the womb of their own
Mother, and these Salamanders, these Indulgences retain still the nature of
Plinies Salamanders, Non gignunt, They beget no more, they proceed no farther;
For in this enormous excess of Indulgences, the Roman Church took her deaths
wound; from this extreme abuse of Indulgences, arose the occasion of the
Reformation, which God advanced and prospered so miraculously in the hands of
Luther, upon the indignation that the world took upon these Indulgences.

How they rose, how they grew, how they fell, is a historical knowledge, and
not much necessary to be insisted upon here though indeed our danger be greater
from these Indulgences, then either from prayer for the Dead, or from
Purgatory; though all three be equally erroneous in matter of doctrine, yet for
matter of fact, and danger, Indulgences are the most pernicious, because that
opinion of an immediate passing to Heaven thereupon, animates men to any
undertakings. But as the Christians in abolishing the Idolatry of the Gentiles,
in some places, some times, left some of their Idols standing, lest the
Gentiles should come to deny, that ever they had worshipped such monsters: So
it has pleased the Holy Ghost to hover over the Authors and Writers in the
Roman Church, so as that they have left some impressions of the iniquity of
these Indulgences in their books. From them we are able to declare, That
Indulgencies in the Primitive Church were nothing but relaxations, moderations
of those severe penances, which the Canons, called Penitential, inflicted upon
particular sins, which Canons were for the most part the Rule of the whole
Church, and which penances, enjoined by those Canons, every Bishop in his own
Dioces, might according to his holy discretion moderate, according to the
bodily infirmity, or the spiritual amendment of the penitent sinner; That in
time, the Bishops of Rome drew into their hands all this power of remitting
penances, reserving to themselves, and shedding upon other Bishops, as much,
and as little as they were pleased; That after they had extended this
overflowing power over this world, they enlarged it farther to the next world
too, to Purgatory. And this, not long since, Postquam aliquandiu ad Purgatorium
trepidatum est, coepere indulgentiae, Roffens.
says a good Author of theirs, of our Nation, that Bishop of Rochester, whose
service they recompensed with a Cardinals Hat, (but somewhat late, for his head
was off before his hat came) After the vapors of Purgatory had blinded men's
eyes, after men had been made afraid of those fires, for a good while, says
that Bishop, then they began to set on foot their Indulgencies; This beginning
was not above three hundred years since, and within one hundred they came to
that height, that though in their Schools they make the pains of Purgatory to
be so violent, that they say no soul is likely to remain there above ten
years, yet they give Indulgencies for infinite thousands of years; They give
one day Plenam, and the next pleniorem, and after plenissimam, They forgive all
to day, and to morrow the rest, and then they find something beyond that,
which was beyond all: So that as Seneca says, of the excess in Libraries in
his time, That they had Bibliothecas pro Supellectile, No man thought his house
well furnished, if he had not a Library, though he understood never an Author,
So no man thought his house well furnished, if he had not Indulgencies for
every season, if he bought not all that came to market, if he had not
Indulgence upon Indulgencies, present and successive Indulgences, possessory
and reversionary Indulgences, total and supernumerary, current and concurrent
Indulgences, to delude the justice of God withal.

Well; to our true Purgatory which we spoke of before, Those crosses which God
is pleased to lay upon us, belong true Indulgencies, The constant promises of
our faithful God, that he will give us the issue with the tentation, and that
as the Apostle says, No tentation shall befall us, Si non humana, but that
which appertains to man: 1 Cor. 10.13.
Now for this Humana tentatio, tentation or affliction that appertains to man,
it is not only affliction that appertains to man so, as that other men do
inflict it, when wicked men revile and calumniate and oppress the godly; it is
not only that, Chrysostom.
though so S. Chrysostom interprets it; Nor is this affliction appertaining to
man, because man himself inflicts it upon himself, our own inherent
corruption being become Spontaneus Demon, a Devil in our own bosom; it is
not only that, though so S. Hierom interpret it; Hieron.
nor is this affliction appertaining to man, so called Humana, as humanum is
opposed Daemoniaco, That all torments falling upon the Devil, work in him
more and more obduration, but the corrections inflicted by God upon man, work
a reconciliation; it is not only this, though so S. Gregory interpret it; But
this affliction appertains so to a Christian man, Gregory.
as the soul it self, and as reason appertains to a natural man: He is not
a man, that is without a reasonable soul, he is not a Christian that is
without correction; It appertains unto man so, as that it is convenient, more,
that it is expedient, more then that, that it is necessary, and more then all
that, that it is essential to a Christian: As when the spirit returns to him
that gave it, there is a dissolution of the man, So when God withdrawes his
visitation, there is a dissolution of a Christian; for so God expresses the
spiritual Death, and the height of his anger, in the Prophet, I will make my
wrath toward thee to rest, Ezekiel. 15.42.
and my jealousy shall depart from thee; That is, I will look no more after
thee, I will study thy recovery and thine amendment no farther.

Have ye forgot the Consolation? says the Apostle; what is that Consolation?
Heb. 12.5. and 6.
Is it that you shall have no affliction? No; This is the Consolation, That
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son whom he
receives. It is general to all sons, for, If ye be without correction,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons; Ver. 8.
And then, to show us how this Purgatory and these Indulgencies accompany on
another, how Gods crosses, and his deliverances do ever concur together, we
see the Holy Ghost has so ordered and disposed these two, Mercy and
Correction, in this one verse, Ver. 6.
as that we cannot say which is first, the Correction or the Mercy, the
Purgatory or the Indulgence: For first the Indulgence is before the Purgatory,
The Mercy before the Correction, in one place, Whom he loves, he chasteneth,
first God loves, and then he chastneth; and then after, The Purgatory is before
the Indulgence, the Correction is before Mercy, He scourges every son whom he
receives; first he scourges him, and then he receives him; They are so
disposed, as that both are made first, and both last, we cannot tell whether
precede, or succeed, they are always both together, they are always all one;
As long as his love lasts, he corrects us, and as long as he corrects us, he
loves us.

And so we have a justifiable prayer for the Dead, that is, for our souls,
dead in their sins, Cor novum, O Lord create a new heart in me; And we have a
justifiable Purgatory, Purgabit aream, Luke 4.17. Esaias 26.15.
If we be Gods floor, he has his fan in his hand, and he will make us
clean; And we have justifiable Indulgences, Indulsisti genti Domine,
indulsisti genti, Thou have been indulgent to thy people, O Lord, thou have
been indulgent to us; We cannot complain, Ier. 4.10.
as they begin, rather to murmur, then to complain, Ah Lord God, surely thou
have deceived thy people, saying, you shall have peace, and the sword pierces
to the heart; For when this sword of Gods corrections shall pierce to the
heart, that very sword shall be but as a Probe to search the wound, nay that
very wound shall be but as an issue to draine, and preserve the whole body in
health; for his mercies are so above all his works, as that the very works of
his Justice are mercy.

And so, not the Prayer for the Dead, not the Purgatory, not the Indulgences of
the Roman Church, but we, who have them truly, do truly receive a benefit
from this Text, which Text is a proof of the Resurrection. Because we feel a
Resurrection by grace now, because we believe a Resurrection to glory
hereafter, therefore we can give an account of this Baptism for the dead in
our Text: The particular sense of which words, will be the Exercise of another
day. This day we end, both with our humble thanks, for all Indulgences which
God has given us in our Purgatories, for former deliverances in former
crosses, and with humble prayer also, that he ever afford us such a proportion
of his medicinal corrections, as may ever testify his presence and providence
upon us in the way, and bring us in the end, to the Kingdom of his Son Christ
Jesus. Amen.

SERMON. LXXVIII. Preached at S. PAUL'S, June 21. 1626.
1 COR. 15.29. Else, what shall they do which are baptized for the dead? if
the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead?


WE are now come at last, Divisio.
to that which was first in our intention, How these words have been detorted,
and misapplied by our Adversaries of the Roman Church, for the establishing of
those heresies, which we have formerly opposed, And then, the diverse ways,
which sounder and more Orthodoxall Divines have held in the Exposition thereof;
that so from the first Part, we may learn what to avoid and shun, and from
the second, what to embrace and follow.

Of all the places of Scripture which Bellarmine brings for the maintenance of
Purgatory (excepting only that one place of the Maccabees) (And of that place
we must say, as it was said of that jealous husband, which set a watch and spy
upon his Wife, Quis custodit custodes? Who shall watch them that watch her? So
when they prove matters of faith out of the Maccabees, we say Quis probat
probantem, who shall prove that book to be Scripture, by which they prove that
doctrine to be true?) But of all other places, there is scarce one, to which
Bellarmine himself does not, by way of objection against himself, give some
better sense and interpretation then that, which himself sticks to; and such a
sense, as when the matter of Purgatory is not in question, his fellows often
times in their writings, and himself sometimes in his writings does accept,
and adhere to.

I offer it for a note of good use, and in the observing whereof, I have used a
constant diligence in reading the Roman Writers, That those Writers which write
by way of Exposition, and Commentaries upon the Scriptures, and are not engaged
in the professed handling of Controversies, do very often content themselves
with the true sense of those places which they handle, and hunt after no
curious, nor forced, nor foreign, nor unnatural senses: But if the same
Authors come to handle Controversies, they depart from that singleness of
heart, and that holy ingenuity, and stray aside, or soar up into other senses
of the same places. I look no farther for a reason of this, then this, That
almost all the Controversies, between Rome, and the rest of the Christian
world, are matters of profit to them, and raise money, and advance their
Revenue: So that, as they are but Expositors, they may have leave to be good
Divines, and then, and in that capacity, they may give the true sense of that
Scripture; But as they are Controverters, they must be good Subjects, good
Statesmen, good Exchequer men, and then, and in that capacity, they must give
such senses as may establish and advance their profit: As an Expositor, he may
interpret this place of the Resurrection, as it should be; but as a
Controverter, he must interpret it of Purgatory, for so it must be, when profit
is their end: And as our Alchymists can find their whole art and work of
Alchymy, not only in Virgil and Ovid, but in Moses and Solomon; so these men
can find such a transmutation into gold, such a foundation of profit, in
extorting a sense for Purgatory, or other profitable Doctrines, out of any
Scripture.

So Bellarmine does upon this place, and upon this place principally he relyes,
De purg. l. 1. c. 6.
in this he triumphs, when he says, Hic locus aperte convincit quod volumus,
Here needs no wresting, no disguising, here Purgatory is clearly and manifestly
discovered. Now certainly, if we take the words as they are, and as the Holy
Ghost has left them to us, we find no such manifestation of this Doctrine, no
such clear light, no such bonfire, no such beacon, no beam at all, no spark
of any such fire of Purgatory: That because S. Paul says, That no man would be
baptized Pro mortuis, for Dead, or, for the Dead, except he did assure himself
of a Resurrection, that this should be Aperta convictio, an evident Conviction
of Purgatory, is, if it be not a new Divinity, certainly a new Logique.

But it is not the word, but the sense that they ground their assurance upon.
Now, the sense which should ground an assurance in Doctrinall things, should be
the literal sense: And yet here, in so important a matter of faith as
Purgatory, it must not be a literal, a proper, a natural and genuine sense,
but figurative, and metaphorical; for, in this place, Baptism must not
signify literally the Sacrament of Baptism, but it must signify, in a
figurative sense, a Baptism of tears. And then that figure must be a pregnant
figure, a figure with child of another figure, for as this Baptism must
signify tears, so these tears must signify all that they use to express by
the name of Penance, and discipline, and mortification; Weeping, and fasting,
and alms, and whipping, all must be comprehended in these tears; And then, as
there was a mother figure, and a daughter figure, so there is a grandchild
too; for here is a Prosopopoeia, an imagining, a raising up of a person that is
not; That all this must be done by some man alive, with relation, and in the
behalf of a dead person, that these afflictions which he takes upon himself
in this world, may accrue, in the benefit thereof, to a man in another world.
Now if any of this Evidence be defective, if it be not evident, that this is a
figurative speech, but that the literal sense is very proper to the place, if
it be not evident, that this figure of Baptism is meant for tears, and other
penances; If it be not evident, that this penance is more then that man needed
to have undergone for his own salvation, but that God became indebted to him
for that penance so sustained, and if it be not evident, that this penance and
supererogation may be applied and communicated to a dead man, it is a little
too forwardly, and too courageously pronounced, Hic locus aperte convincit quod
volu mus, We desire no more then this place, for the proof of Purgatory.

Yet he pursues his triumph, Vera and genuina interpretatio, says he; As
though he might waive the benefit, of making it a figurative sense, and have
his ends, by maintaining it to be the literal sense; This is, says he, the
true and natural sense of the place. But it will be hard for him, to persuade
us, either that this is the literal sense of the place, or that this place
needs any other, then a literal sense. Since he will not allow us a figurative
sense, in that great mystery, in the Sacrament, in the Hoc est Corpus meum, but
bind us punctually in the letter, without any figure, not only in the thing,
(for in the thing, in the matter, we require no figure, we believe the body of
Christ to be in the Sacrament as literally, as really as they do) but even in
the words, and phrase of speech, He should not look that we should allow him a
figurative sense in that place, which must be Apertissimus locus, his most
evident place for the proof of so great an article of faith, as Purgatory is
with them. We have a Rule, by which that sense will be suspicious to us, which
is, Not to admit figurative senses in interpretation of Scriptures, where the
literal sense may well stand; And he himself has a Rule, (if he remember the
Council of Trent) by which that sense cannot be admitted by himself, which
is, That they must interpret Scriptures according to the unanime consent of the
Fathers; and he knows in his conscience, that he has not done so, as we shall
remember him anon.

Not to founder by standing long in this puddle, he makes no other argument,
that Baptism must here be understood of afflictions voluntarily sustained, but
that that word Baptism is twice used, and accepted so in the Scriptures by
Christ himself; It is taken so there, therefore it must be taken so here. But
not to speak at all, of the weakness of that Consequence, (the word has been
taken figuratively, therefore it must never return to a literal sense) which
will hold as well, that because Christ is called Porta, A Gate, therefore when
Samson is said to have carried a Gate, Samson must be a Christopher, and carry
Christ; And because Christ is a vine, and a way, and water, and bread,
wheresoever any of these words are, they must be intended of Christ; not to
stand upon the argument and inconsequence, I say, this word Baptism, has not
that signification, which he would have it have here, in any of those other
places of Scripture, which he cites to this purpose.

They are but two, and may quickly be considered; The first is, when Christ
asks the ambitious Apostles, Mat. 20.20. Luke 12.50.
Are ye able to drink of the Cup, that I shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the baptism, that I shall be baptized with? The second is in S. Luke, I
must be baptized with a Baptism, and how am I grieved, till it be ended? In
both which places, Christ does understand by this word Baptism, his Passion;
That is true: And so ordinarily in the Christian Church, as the days of the
death of the Martyrs were called Natalitia Martyrum, The Birth-dayes of the
Martyrs; so Martyrdom it self, was called a Baptism, Baptisma sanguinis, The
Baptism of Blood; That is also true; but what then? was the Passion of Christ
himself, such an affliction, as Bellarmine speaks of here, and argues from in
this place, that is, an affliction so inflicted upon himself, and undertaken
by himself, as that then when he did bear it, he might have forborne it, and
refused to bear it? Though nothing were more voluntary then Christ's submitting
himself to that Decree of dying for man, yet when that Decree was passed, to
which he had a privity, nothing was more necessary, nor unavoydable to any man,
then the Death of the Cross was to Christ, neither could he not only not have
saved us, but not have been exalted in his humane nature himself, if he had
not dyed that death; for all that was wrapped up in the Decree, and from that
grew out, the propterea exaltatus, and the oportuit pati, That all those things
Christ ought to suffer, And therefore, therefore because he did suffer all
that, he was exalted. And will Bellarmine say, that the Martyrdom of the
Martyrs in the primitive Church was so voluntarily sustained, as that they
might have forsaken the cause of Christ, and refused Martyrdom, and yet have
been saved, and satisfied the purpose, or the commandment of God upon them?

If from us Bellarmine will not hear it, let him hear a man of his own
profession; not only of his own Religion, but so narrowly of his own
profession, as to have been a public Reader of Divinity in a great University
as well as he; Estius.
And he says, Sunt aliqui recentiores, qui baptizari interpretantur affligi;
There are some, says he, not all, nor the most, and therefore it is not so
manifest a place; Sunt aliqui recentiores, There are some of the later men,
says he, not of the Fathers, or Expositors in the primitive Church, and
therefore it is not so reverend, and uncontrolable an opinion; But only some
few later men there are, says he, that think that Baptism in this place is
to be understood of Affliction. But, says the same Doctor, It is an
Interpretation valde figurata, and rara, wholly relying upon a figure, and a
figure very rarely used; so rarely, says he, Vt non ab alio, quam a Christo
usurpetur, That never any but Christ, in the Scriptures, called Affliction,
Baptism.

So that it lacks thus much of being a manifest proof for Purgatory, as
Bellarmine pretends, That it is neither the common sense, but of a few; nor the
ancient sense, but of a few later men; nor a sense obvious, and ordinary, and
literal, but figurative, and that figure not communicated to others, but only
applied by Christ, and appropriated to his Passion, which was not a passion so
undergone, as that then when he suffered it, he might have refused it, which is
necessary for that Doctrine, which Bellarmine would evict from it.

But because Bellarmine, in whom, perchance, the Spirit of a Cardinal has not
overcome the Spirit of a Jesuit, will admit no competition, nor diversity of
opinion, except it be from one of his own Order, we have Justinian, a man
refined in that Order, Justinian.
a Jesuit as well as he, an Italian, and so has his natural and national
refining as well as he, and one, whose books are dedicated to the Pope as well
as his, and so has had an Oraculous refining, by an allowance Oraculo vivae
vocis, by the breath of life, the Oracle of truth, the Popes approbation, as
well as he, and thus much better, That Justinians never were, but Bellarmines
books have been threatened by the Inquisition, And Justinian never was, but
Bellarmine has been put to his Retractations; And he says only this of this
place, Aliqui referunt ad corporis vexationes, pro Mortuis, Some men refer
these words to bodily afflictions, sustained by men alive, for the Dead; Et
haec sententia multis vehementer probatur, says he, This interpretation has
much delighted, and satisfied many men: Sed potest dici, says he, By their
leaves, this may be said, If S. Paul ask, Why do men afflict themselves, in
the behalf of them that are dead? it may be answered, says he, That if they
do so, they are fools in doing so. S. Paul intends certainly, to prove the
Resurrection by these words; neither, says he, could the Resurrection of the
body be proved by all S. Paul's argument, if that were admitted to be the right
sense of the place; for what were all this to the Resurrection of the body,
which is S. Paul's scope, and purpose in the place, If men were baptized, that
is, (as Bellarmine would have it) if they did suffer voluntarily, and
unnecessarily affliction for the Dead, that is, to deliver their souls out of
Purgatory; what would all this conduce to the proof of the Resurrection of the
body?

But that we may have a witness against him, in all his capacities, as we
have produced one, as he is a Jesuit, and another equal to him, as he was
public Professor, so to consider him as a Cardinal, (for, as a Cardinal,
Bellarmine has changed his opinion in some things that he held, before he was
hood-wincked with his Hat) to consider him therefore so, we have a witness
against him, in the Consistory, Cardinal Cajetan, Cajetan.
who finds no baptism of tears, nor penance in these words, no application of
any affliction sustained voluntarily by the living, in the behalf and
contemplation of the dead, but adhering to that, which is truly the purpose of
the Apostle, to prove the resurrection of the body, he says, In hoc quod
merguntur sub aqua, mortuos gerunt, When in Baptism, they are, as it were,
buried under the water, (as the form of Baptizing was then by Immersion of the
whole body, and not only by Aspersion upon the face) they are, says he,
buried for dead, presented by the Church, as dead in Christ; Et in hoc, quod ad
hoc merguntur, ut emergant, agunt mortuorum resurrectionem; In this, that they
are therefore buried under water, because they may be raised above water
again, in this they represent the resurrection of the dead. So in the act of
Baptism literally, and Sacramentally taken, that Cardinal has found an
evident argument, and proof of the Resurrection. And then, in the next words,
he has found, that that which is done in this action, is done for him, that
does it, and not with relation to any other; In hoc quod se profitentur mortuos
mundo, agunt mortuos, In this, that in the act of Baptism, they profess
themselves to be dead to the world, they are baptized for dead, And in this,
says he, that they profess themselves to be dead to the world in Baptism,
therefore that by that Baptism they may rise to a newness of life,
Profitentur resurrectionem mortuorum, They profess the Resurrection of the
dead: And this destroys utterly the purpose of Bellarmine in these words,
because the Baptism spoken of here, be it a Sacramental Baptism literally,
or a Disciplinary Baptism, metaphysically, yet is a Baptism determined, for
the benefit thereof, upon him that is baptized, and not extended to the dead in
Purgatory.

Since then it is the Exposition of a few only, Alii dicunt, Aliqui dicunt,
Others have said so, Some few have said so, and those few are late men, new
men, and of those new men, Jesuits, and Readers, and Cardinals have differed
from that opinion, this Jesuit, and Reader, and Cardinal Bellarmine needed not
to have made that victorious acclamation, Hic locus, we desire no more then
this place, for the evident proof of Purgatory. Much less did it become that
lesser man, that Minorite Friar, Feuardentius, who for names sake, (it seems,
for his name is Burning fire) is so over-vehement for this place, in defense of
Purgatory, to pronounce so peremptorily, for this interpretation of this Text,
Qui huic sententiae concordat, Catholicus, qui discordat, Haereticus est; He
that interprets these words thus, is a Catholic, and he is an Heretic that
interprets them otherwise. For thus, he leaves out the Fathers themselves out
of the Arc, and makes them Heretics; And howsoever they pretend peace
amongst themselves, he proclaims, at least discovers a war amongst
themselves, for they are of themselves, whom he calls Heretics. Job 9.4.
Indeed, Quis restitit Domino, and pacem habuit? who ever resisted the truth of
Gods word, and brought in Expositions to serve turns, and had peace amongst
themselves? When they went about this building of Purgatory, they thought not
of that counsel, Luke 14.28.
When you build, sit down before, and count the cost, lest men mock you; They
never considered how they were provided of Materials, what they had from the
Prophets, what from the Evangelists, what from the Apostles, for the building
of this Purgatory: They had the disease of our times; If they might build, they
thought it a profitable course; If they could raise a Purgatory, they were sure
they should gain by it; but neither had they leave to build, that is, to erect
new Articles of faith, neither had they wherewithal; And therefore being
destitute of the foundation of all, the Scriptures of God, and having raked
together some strawes, and sticks, ends of Poetry, and Philosophy, and some
rubbish of the Manichees, they have made such a work under ground, as their
Predecessors made above ground, in the Tower of Babell, in which they
understand not one another, but are in a confusion amongst themselves, Quia
restiterunt Domino, And who ever resisted the Lord, and had peace?

Thus far we have proceeded in rescuing these words, Patres.
from their captivity, from the enemy, that enforced them to testify for
Purgatory. And, according to my understanding of S. Hieromes rule, who says,
That in interpreting of Scriptures, he ever proposed to himself Necessitatem,
and perspicuitatem, The necessity being (as I take it) the redeeming of the
words from the ill interpretation of Heretics, which we have now done; For
the perspicuity, and cleernesse, you shall see first, how the Ancients, before
they suspected any ill use of them for Purgatory, received them, and then how
the later men, after they had been mis-applied for Purgatory, interpret them:
All which I shall propose with as much cleernesse as I can, as taking my self
bound thereunto, by that other rule of the same Father, Qui per me
intellecturus est Apostolum, nolo ut ad Interpretem cognoscendum, alium quaerat
Interpretem, I would not have them, who come hither to understand the Apostle
from me, be put to seek help from others, to understand me; when I must tell
them what S. Paul meant, I would not have them put to ask what I meant; and
therefore as far as the matter will bear it, I would speak plainly to every
capacity.

First then, Tertul.
for Tertullian, he seems to understand this Baptism for the dead, De vicario
baptismate, of Baptism by an Attorney, by a Proxy, which should not be such a
Godfather, as should be a witness or surety for me, when I am baptized
alive, but such a Godfather, as should be baptized for me when I am dead. For,
that perverse and heretical custom was then come into practice, that out of a
false opinion, (though grounded, or colored with a zeal of reverence to the
Sacrament) that Baptism was so absolutely necessary, as that none could
possibly be saved, that were not actually baptized; When any man died without
Baptism, his friends used to baptize another in his name; The dead body was
laid under the bed, and another man that was laid in the bed, to represent him,
answered to all those questions which the Priest should ask, concerning
Baptism, in the behalf of him that lay under the bed, (as the Sureties do
now in the Church for a child, that perchance understands no more then that
dead man did) and then that person in the bed, was baptized for him who lay
under the bed. Now Tertullian thinks, that the Apostle argues out of that
custom, and disputes thus, If there were no Resurrection, why do you thus
provide for them that are dead, by baptizing others for them? To what purpose
do ye this, if they for whom you do it have no Resurrection? But, besides
that it is not much probable, that S. Paul would take an Heretical action, and
practice, for the ground of his Argument, to prove so great a mystery of our
faith, as the Resurrection is, and besides that, it does not appear that this
Heretical practice (which is attributed to the Marcionits) was entered into the
Church in S. Paul's time, and therefore he could not take knowledge of it;
Besides all this, all this, if it were granted, did nothing at all conduce to
S. Paul's ends, who had undertaken the proof of the Resurrection of the body,
and the answer was easy, and obvious, We do not baptize living men in the
name, and in the behalf of the dead, for any other respect, then for the
salvation of their souls, and what is that to the resurrection of the body? So
that this sense of Tertullians, of Baptism by a Proxy, by an Attorney, seems
not to be the sense of this place; and yet because it savours of charity to the
dead, though it were an heretical custom, Bellarmine prefers this
interpretation of Tertullian, before any other but his own, which we handled
before.

Theodoret interprets this Baptism for the dead to be a baptism of
Representation; Theodoret.
That in baptism, by being put under the water, and raised up again, we
represent the death and resurrection of Christ; for the dead, is for Christ,
for the testimony of Christ: And therefore that baptizing by immersion, by
covering the party with water, was so exactly observed in those times, as it
came to be thought, that no man was well baptized, except he had received it
so, by Immersion, as by many Treatises, and many Consultations amongst the
Fathers, by way of Letters, and the Acts of some Councels, we perceive. And of
this representation of the death of Christ, in our Baptism, administered in
that manner, by Immersion, S. Paul is thought by some to have spoken, when he
says, Know ye not that all we that have been baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans
6.3.
have been baptized into his death? That is, say they, by that representation
of his death, in Immersion. Neither is any thing more evident, then that
Theodoret was so far in the right, that our baptism (and the rather in that
form of Immersion) is a representation of the death, and burial, and
resurrection of Christ; but yet to call this Baptism therefore, because it was
a representation of Christ, who was dead, a Baptism for the dead, is a phrase
somewhat more hard and unusual, then may be easily admitted, in such a matter
of faith as this is. And besides, that Baptism, which is this Representation,
is a Baptism common to all; all that are baptized, are baptized so; But the
Apostle in this place makes his argument from a particular kind of Baptism,
which some did, and some did not use, Quid de illis, says he, what shall
become of them? and Quid illi, what do they mean that are baptized in this
peculiar manner? So that, as not Tertullians baptism by an Attorney, so
neither Theodorets baptism by Representation, seems to be the sense of this
place.

S. Chrysostom, much about the same time with Theodoret, and long after them
both, Chrysostom. Theophylact.
(at least six hundred years) Theophylact, meet in a third sense; That because
at the taking of Baptism, they did usually rehearse the Creed, which Creed
concluded with those articles, The resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting, therefore this baptism for the dead should only signify a
baptism for the hope of the Resurrection. But since they rehearsed all the
articles of the Christian belief, as well as that, at Baptism, it might as
properly be said, that they were baptized for Christ; baptized for the holy
Ghost, baptized for the descent into hell, as for the dead: And besides that,
this was also a baptism common to all, all rehearsed the Articles of the
Creed; it was not such a peculiar baptism, as the Apostle has respect to
here, in his Quid de illis, and Quid illi, what shall become of them, and what
do they mean by this their Baptism? And therefore this seems not to be the
sense. That this Baptism for the dead should only be a profession of that
article of the Resurrection of the dead, though S. Chrysostom, and Theophylact
concur in, or derive from, or upon one other that interpretation.

To come lower, and to a lower rank of witnesses, from the Fathers to the
School, Aquinas.
Aquinas has another sense; and certainly an useful, a devout, and an
appliable interpretation; which is, That Mortui here are peccata, Those that
are called Dead here, are Dead works, sins, and so to be baptized for the dead,
is to be baptized for our sins, for the washing away our sins, in an
acknowledgement, That although we did contract a leprous sin, even in our
conception, That we were subject to the wrath and indignation of God, before we
were able to conceive that there was a God, That before our bones were hardened,
the canker and rust of Adams sin was in our bones, That before we were a minute
old, we have a sin in us that is six thousand years old, That though we be as
blind after we come out of our mothers bellies, as we were there, Though we
pass over our time, without ever asking our own consciences, why we were sent
hither, Though our sins have hardened us against God, and done a harder work
then that, in hardening God against us, yet though we have turned God into a
Rock, there is water in that rock, Number. 20.
if we strike it, if we solicit it, affect it with our repentance. As in the
stone font in the Church, there is water of Baptism, so in the Corner stone of
the Church, Christ Jesus, whom we have hardened against us, there is a
tenderness, there is a Well of water springing up into everlasting life. As we
have changed this water into stone, petrified Gods tenderness toward us,
Psalm. 114.8.
so convertit petram in stagna aquarum, says David, He has turned that rock
into a standing water, (water, and water that stays with us, in his Church)
and the flint into a fountain of waters; that is, says S. Augustine, seipsum,
and suam quandam duritiam liquefecit, ad irrigandos fideles, At the beams of
his own mercy, God has thawed that ice, and dissolved that stone, into which
we had hardened him, and he has let in a River of Jordan into his Church, the
Sacrament of Baptism, in the present act, and subsequent efficacy whereof, we
are washed from original, and from actual sins. All these sins are the fruits
of death, as they are opposed against the Lord of life, and pro hisce mortuis
baptizamur, says Aquinas; for the dead, that is, for these dead works, we are
baptized.

And certainly, for a second sense, to exalt our devotion by, I should prefer
this before any other; But the principal and literal sense of this place,
this cannot be, because it is a figurative sense; and though the figure be not
in the word Baptism, where Bellarmine places it, (for Aquinas speaks literally
of a Sacramental Baptism) yet it is in the other word In mortuis, ( Aquinas
does not speak literally, but metaphorically of the Dead) and that may as ill
be admitted, in a matter of faith, of so great importance, as the other. And
besides, this seems to conclude nothing necessarily for the resurrection of the
body, that we are washed from our sins; And lastly, this is still a Baptism
common to all, all that are baptized, are baptized from their sins; And
therefore this of Aquinas, not reaching to S. Paul's Quid de illis, and Quid
illi, to these men thus baptized, is not that sense neither, which we seek.

But the time will not permit us to pursue the several interpretations of
those, Moderni.
whom directly, or comparatively we call Ancients; Neither truly, though there
be many other Interpreters then we have named, are there many other
interpretations then we have touched upon, or then may be reduced to them. And
therefore to end here this consideration of the Fathers, and those whom they
esteem Pillars of their Church, we are thus much at our liberty for all them,
That first there is no unanime consent in the interpretation of this place, and
that which they bind themselves to follow, is the unanime consent of the
Fathers; And then though the Fathers had unanimely consented in one, and that
one had been the exposition which Bellarmine pursues, yet we might, by their
example, have departed from it; for in the Roman Church, Fathers, and Fathers
Fathers, Popes themselves, (And howsoever the Fathers may be Fathers, in
respect of us, yet in respect of the Pope, who is S. Peter himself, and
always sits in his person, the Fathers are but children, says Bellarmine)
were of opinion, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was absolutely
necessary for children, to their salvation, and this opinion lasted in force
and in use for diverse hundreds of years, neither was it ever repressed by
Authority, till the other day, in the Council of Trent, but wore out of it
self long before, because it had no foundation; So the opinion of the
Millenarians, That Christ with his Saints should have a thousand years of a
temporal reign here upon earth, after his second coming, had possessed the
Fathers, in a very great party. The Fathers, in a great party denied, that
the souls of good men departed were to enjoy the sight of God, till the
Resurrection. And the Fathers affirmed, That the cause of Gods election was the
foresight of the faith and obedience of the Elect. These errors are so noted,
even by the Authors of the Roman Church, (for I depart not herein from their
own words, and observations) as that they still present them so, Omnes,
plurimi, All the Fathers, Most of the Fathers, were of this and this opinion;
And yet for all these Fathers, no man in the Roman Church is so childish now,
as to give his child that Sacrament, or to accompany those Fathers in those
other mistakings.

This has been done in fact, they have departed from the Fathers; And then for
a Rule, Cardinal Cajetan tells us, That if a new sense of any place of
Scripture, agreeable to other places, and to the analogy of faith, arise to us,
it is not to be refused, Quia torrens patrum, because the stream of the
Fathers is against it. For they themselves have told us, why we may suspect the
Fathers, and by what means the Fathers have fallen into many
mis-interpretations. First they say, Quia glaciem sciderunt, because the
Fathers broke the Ice, and undertook the interpretation of many places, in
which they had no light, no assistance from others, and so might easily turn
into a sinister way: And then Rhetoricati sunt, say they, The Fathers often
applied themselves in figurative, and Hyberbolicall speeches, to exalt the
devotions, and stir up the affections of their auditory, and therefore must not
be called to too severe, and literal an account, for all that they uttered in
that manner: And again, Plebi indulserunt, as S. Augustine says of himself,
sometimes out of a loathnesse to offend the ignorant, and sometimes the holy
and devout, and that he might hold his auditory together, and avert none from
coming to him, he was unwilling to come to such an exact truth, in the
explication and application of some places, as that for the sharpness and
bitterness thereof, weaker stomachs might forbear. So also, they confess
too, that ex vehementia declinarunt, In heat of disputation, and argument, and
to make things straight, they bent them too much on the other hand, and to
oppose one Heresy, they endangered the inducing of another, as in S.
Augustines disputations against the Pelagians, who over-advanced the free will
of man, and the Manicheans, who by admitting Duo principia, two Caufes, an
extrinsique cause of our evil actions, as well as of our good, annihilated the
free will of man, we shall find sometimes occasions to doubt whether S.
Augustine were constant in his own opinion, and not transported sometimes with
vehemence against his present adversary, whether Pelagian, or Manichean.

Which is a disease that even some great Councels in the Church, and
Church-affaires have felt, that for collateral and occasional, and personal
respects, which were risen after they were met, the maine doctrinall points,
and such as have principally concerned the glory of God, and the salvation of
souls, and were indeed the principal and only. cause of their then meeting
there, have been neglected. Men that came thither with a fervent zeal to the
glory of God, have taken in a new fire of displeasure against particular
Heretics, or Schismatiques, and discontinued their holy zeal toward God,
till their occasional displeasure toward those persons might be satisfied,
and so those Heresies, and Heretics against whom they met, have got advantage
by that passion, which has overtaken and overswayed them, after they were met.
And whatsoever has fallen into Councels of that kind, Ecclesiastical
Councels, may possibly be imagined, or justly be feared, or at least, without
offense be pre-disswaded, and deprecated, in all Civil Consultations, and
Councels of State, That Occasional things may not divert the Principal: for
as in the Natural body, the spleen may suffocate the heart, and yet the
spleen is but the sewar of the body, and the heart is the strength and the
Palais thereof; so in politic bodies, and Councels of State, an immature and
indigested, an intempestive and unseasonable pressing of present remedies
against all inconveniences, may suffocate the heart of the business, and
frustrate and evacuate the blessed and glorious purpose of the whole Council.
The Basiliske is very sharpe-sighted, but he sees therefore, and to that end,
that he may kill: So is, so does passion. Who would wish to be sharper sighted
then the Eagle? And his strength of sight is in this, that he looks to the
Sun; To look to things that are evident, The evident danger of the State and
the Church, The evident malice and power of the enemy, The evident storm upon
our peace and Religion, To look that God be not tempted by us, nor his
Lieutenant and Vicegerent wearied, and hardened toward us, This is the object
of the Eagles eye, and this is wisdom high enough. Where men see a great
foundation laid, they will think, that all that is not only to raise a
Spittle to cure, or a Churchyard to bury a few diseased persons. Great
Councels are great foundations; and the super-edifications fit for them, are
the safety of the State, and the good of the Church: And, as in coming to such
Councels, every man puts off his own person, and leaves himself at home, so
neither when he is there, should he so seek out, or hunt after any particular
person, as that that should retard public business. God forbid that my
praying that things may not be so, should be interpreted for a suspicion in me,
that things are so; God forbid, that invocation upon God, should imply a
crimination upon men; The Spirit of God, in sense of whom, and in whose
presence I speak, knows that my prayer is but a prayer, and not an
Increpation, not an Insimulation; And therefore may God be pleased to hear,
and good men be pleased to join in this prayer, That God will so be satisfied,
with having laid his own hand upon us, in the late pestilence, as neither to
make any foreign hand, nor one another hand, his instrument to destroy, or
farther to punish us. And so, having been invited by this Consideration, that
Fathers and Councels have deflected into error, to say so much of Civil
Councels too, we depart from this Point thus, that though the Fathers had
consented in Bellarmines Exposition, that had laid no obligation upon us; how
much less, when we find scarce any of them to agree with one another, nor any
one of them to agree with him; and therefore we pass to the Consideration of
the later men.

And amongst the later men, we will give the first place to a Jesuit, because
they love Primos accubitus, as our Savior says of the Pharisees, To be placed
highest, and they love to be called, if not Rabbi, Master, yet Abba, Father;
(for that is a name which the youngest Jesuit will challenge to himsellfe, to
be called Father; and amongst us, I am afraid, they come to that name, the name
of Father, a little too literally, they are fathers indeed, where they should
not be so) Next to the true Fathers, we place then a imaginary Father,
Maldonat.
the Jesuit Maldonate, who interprets this place thus, That to be baptized for
the dead, when the Apostle spoke, was to suffer Martyrdom, or affliction for
the testimony of the resurrection of the Dead: for we see, that the doctrine of
the Resurrection especially was inquired upon, and given in charge, and made
criminal and odious, Acts 23.6.
by that which the Apostle says in the Acts, Of the hope, and resurrection of
the dead, I am called in question. Now, I will not say of Maldonat, as Maldonat
does of us, who, when sometimes he cites the interpretation of our Authors,
will say, This is the likeliest and the probablest sense, and I should believe
it to be the true sense, but that an Heretic said it; I will not say, I would
admit Maldonats sense, but that a Jesuit says it; for, for all that, I would
receive it, so far as it may stand, but yet not for the primary and principal
sense; for so, we cannot receive it, because it is grounded upon a figure, for
he takes not Baptism, for the Sacrament of Baptism, but for the Metaphorical
Baptism, the Baptism of blood. And then Bellarmine will not accept his sense,
because though they agree in the figure, that Baptism signifies affliction,
yet they differ in these two important points, That first Bellarmin takes it
for affliction voluntarily sustained, (for that only constitutes
Supererogation, which is necessary to Bellarmines sense) and Maldonate takes it
for affliction inflicted by a Persecutor, for a testimony of his faith, in
which case to decline the penalty, were to deny the faith, and therefore is no
more then, being so called by God, he is bound to suffer: And then Bellarmine
takes it for affliction sustained in the behalf, and for the benefit of
another dead friend, and Maldonat determines it in him that does it, for an
outward testimony of his constancy in the faith of the Resurrection. So that
this Jesuit has brought no stone to Bellarmines building from this place, he
works not in his harvest, he conduces not to his end, he goes not his way.

But to contract our selves in this last Part, we find amongst our own men
(Expositors since the Reformation) two senses of these words, of which either
may be taken, for both come home to the purpose and intention of the Apostle,
which is, to prove the Resurrection, and to all the other circumstances, in
which we have observed the other Interpretations to be deficient. The first is,
that this was a Baptism of those men, Qui ad testandam certissiman spem de
Resurrectione, which for a more especial testimony of their faith in the
Resurrection, did (according to the use of many, in those first times)
administer, or receive Baptism, upon the tombs and graves of other Christians,
formerly departed this life, and thereby declared both their charitable
opinion, that those who were there buried, should receive a resurrection, And
that themselves were baptized into the same faith, and so made up the Communion
of Saints. And in this sense is the Original best preserved, which seems not
to be so properly translated, Pro mortuis, as Super mortuos, not for the Dead,
but upon the Dead, upon the graves of the Dead: If there be no resurrection of
the Dead, why do some of you choose to be baptized upon the Dead, upon the
graves of the Dead, rather then in other places?

And this is the Exposition of him, Luther. Melancton.
who is evermore powerful in the Exposition of those Scriptures which he
undertakes, Luther. And Melancton, a man of more learning and temperance then
perchance have met in any one, in our perverse and froward times, follows the
same Interpretation, and adds, That he that was to be Baptized, was brought to
the bones of them that were buried there, and that there he was asked, whether
he did believe that that body which lay so scattered there, should be restored
again, and made capable of a glorious Resurrection, and upon confession of that
faith he received his Baptism: And this, says Melancton (a man freest of any
from contention) is Interpretatio simplex, nativa, and vera, The plain, the
natural, and the true signification of the place. Neither is this
Interpretation subject to that calumny, which our Adversaries use to object,
that in any Interpretation of Luthers, or Melanctons, the rest who profess
them their Disciples, follow as Sheep, but others, though of the Reformation
too, do not so: for we have another, esteemed in his Division, Piscator.
a learned and narrow searcher into the literal sense of Scripture, who though
he be very far from communion (in opinion) with them, whom, for distinction,
the world calls Lutherans, though he be none of those sheep, which run after
Luther, yet out of a holy ingenuity, and inclination to truth, he professes
this interpretation of the place, to be Omnium simplicissimam, the most sincere
and natural interpretation, and that it does not wound, nor violate the
purpose and intention of the Apostle, as, says he, all the other
interpretations, which Beza produces, do. And yet Beza himself, as well as
Piscator, in their translatitions, retain the Super, which is in Luther, and
make it so, a baptism upon the dead, and not for the dead.

To be baptized then for the dead, or upon the dead, is, in their
understanding, an expectation of a Resurrection for themselves, together with
them, in sight of whose dead bodies they were baptized. Here is no figurative
speech, but the words taken in their proper, and present, and first
signification. And this is not of a general baptism, common to all, but of a
custom taken up by some in the Church of Corinth, out of special devotion,
and testification of the Resurrection. And lastly, this had reference, not
only to the immortality of the soul, but to the resurrection of the body
also, which was then in their contemplation, in which Circumstance, most of the
former interpretations of the Ancients were defective, for still it might have
been answered to S. Paul's question, Quid illi, Quid de illis? What mean they,
and what becomes of them? We do all this for the salvation of souls, though
we do not bind our selves to believe a resurrection of bodies; So that all
the particulars that S. Paul proposed to himself, meet fully, and strongly, in
this interpretation. Nothing can be opposed against it, if the history be true;
if the matter of fact be clear and evident, if it appear fully, that this was
a custom in the Apostles time, that those Christians did use to receive
baptism upon the graves of the dead. I doubt not but Luther had ground for it;
I doubt not but Melancton had Authors; for he says, Aliqui scribunt, some have
written it. They may have seen Authors, whom I have not; for my part, I
confess, I never found this Custom in the Ecclesiastique Story, to my
remembrance. And when the Centuriators, who gathered the Story of the Church,
with some diligence, and who were of the persuasion whom the world calls
Lutherans, when they say, Constat, It is manifest, that in the Church of
Corinth, Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 6.
they did baptize in that manner, upon the graves of the dead, they never cite
any testimony of History for their Constat, nor for their evidence of this
matter of fact, but only this very place of Scripture, this text; and the
directer and the fuller way had been, to have proved the text from the story,
then the story from the text. The Exposition is very fair, and very likely, if
the matter of fact be proved; and the fact may be proved by some, whom those
reverend persons have read, and I have not.

There is one Interpretation more, which is open to no imputation, spotted with
no aspersion, subject to no objection, and therefore fittest to be embraced,
which is also grounded upon a Custom, which came very early into the Church of
God, (so early as that we can assign no beginning) and of which Custom for
the matter of fact, we are sure it was in practice: which was, that upon an
opinion, that at the time of Baptism, there was an absolute washing away, and
a deliverance from all sins, men did ordinarily, or very often, defer their
baptism till their deathbed, that so they might have their transmigration,
and passage out of this world, in that purity, that baptism restored them to,
without contracting any more sins after baptism. This we are too sure was in
use; for we see the Ecclesiastical Story full of Examples of it, in great
persons; great in power and authority, for Constantine the Emperor deferred
his baptism, long after his resolution to be a Christian; And great in
estimation, and merit, and knowledge; for S. Augustine remembers it with much
compunction, That in an extreme sickness, Conf. l. 1. c. 11.
Flagitavi baptismum a Matre, he begged at his Mothers hands, that he might be
baptized, and obtained it not, because he was a person, (in her observation)
like enough to fall into more sins, after he had been delivered of those by
baptism. He notes the general disposition of his time, Sonat undique, It is
every man's voice, every man's saying, Sine eum, faciat quid vult, nondum
baptizatus est, Let him alone yet, let him do what he will yet, for yet he is
not baptized: But, says that blessed Father there, would they say to a man
that lay wounded and weltring in his blood, Sine eum, vulneretur amplius,
nondum enim sanatus est, Let him lie, or give him two or three wounds more, for
the Surgeon is not come yet to cure him? And yet, says he, his and my case is
all one.

Before his time, which was after four hundred years, we may see, that this
custom of late baptizing, was not only tolerated, but advised and counseled
in the Church, when Tertullian, two hundred years before S. Augustine, chides
away young children, from coming to Baptism, so soon, before, says he, they
need it; Quid festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? Why are they
brought to the washing away of sins, which as yet have committed no sin?
And he makes Baptism so occasional a thing, and subject to so many
Circumstances, that very many other occasions might put off Baptism. Innuptis
procrastinandus baptismus, says Tertullian, quia eis praeparata tentatio; He
would not have them baptized, that meant to marry soon after, because they
were to wrestle with a great tentation, as long as their fancy and imagination
was full of their future marriage. So soon, and so deeply was this opinion
rooted, (that it was to little purpose to baptize till toward our death) that
S. Basil was feign to oppose it expressly in the Eastern Church, And both the
Gregory's, Nazianzen and Nyssen, and then S. Ambrose, and others, in the
Western, all arguing against it, as a custom long before in use, and none
assigning any beginning of it.

Upon this custom then S. Paul argues; If men upon their deathbed, when they
are esteemed pro Mortuis, as good as dead, no better then dead, (for so the
phrase is ordinarily used, pro derelicto, pro perdito, when we esteem a man
forsaken, or a thing lost) If men desire baptism, when they are held pro
mortuis, no other then dead, given over for dead, and are to have no fellowship
with themilitant Church here in this life, do they not in this care of this
act to be done upon their bodies, imply a confession of the Resurrection? These
were they, whom those times called Clinicos, Bed-baptists, Bed-Christians,
which either deferred their baptism, upon the reasons mentioned before, that
they might be sure to have a pure transmigration, presently after Baptism; Or
else they were Catechumeni, such Convertits to the Christian faith, as the
Church had undertaken to instruct and catechize, but did not baptize till a
certain time, (Easter, and Whitsontyde) except they were surprised with sudden
sickness, and then they were baptized in their deathbed: And both ways the
sense stands well, That they were baptized pro Mortuis, that is, pro
Derelictis, where they were given over for dead, when there was no hope of
life, Or else pro Mortuis, that is, pro statu Mortuorum, only with respect to
their state after this life, because they were going to the dead. And these be
Divina Compendia, as S. Cyprian calls them, Gods Abridgements, who can give his
grace in a minute; for, 7. l. 4. 2d Magnum.
as he says in the end of that Epistle, Clinici, an peripatetici, whether they
be walking, or bedridden Christians, Sacramenti majestas and sanctitas non
derogetur, The Sacrament has the same power, whether they be baptized for the
living, or for the dead, that is, to remain with us in this world, or to
depart to them of the next.

And this Exposition is not so much the Exposition of later men, as that it is
destitute of the honor of Antiquity; Haeres. 28.
for Epiphanius, the eldest whom we have named yet, but Tertullian, opposes
this sense and interpretation of these words, to that sense which Tertullian
laid hold of, De baptismate vicario, of his Baptism, by Proxy, and Attorney.
It is so reasonable, that we need no better approbation of it, but that,
(though it be especially pursued by Calvin) that great professor, Estius.
and reader in Divinity, whom we spoke of before, has given of it, that it is
Sensus apertus, and simplicissimus, omnibus aliis anteponendus, and ad
probandum id quod Apostolus instituit aptissimus, It is the directest sense,
and the plainest, a sense to be preferred before all the rest, as being fittest
to establish all that the Apostle proposed in this place; To be baptized, says
he, jamjam moriturus, when he is ready to die, is to be baptized pro mortuis,
for the dead, with respect only to the state of the dead; and therefore in
this interpretation which even the adversary has approved, and justified for
us, we may safely rest our selves, and the rather, because our translations
have relation to this sense, either as it is in our first Edition, pro Mortuis,
for Dead, that is, as good as dead, or as it is in the second, pro Mortuis, for
the Dead, for the state of the dead, and the hope of the resurrection.

Thus, beloved, S. Paul has made an argument here, to prove the Resurrection
of the body; One of the hardest bones in the body, one of the darkest corners
in the mysteries of our Religion, and yet all the Religions of the Heathens had
ever some impressions of it: Seculum, resurrectionem mortuorum, nec cum errat,
ignorant, says Tertullian, The world knew that there was some resurrection,
though they were not come to know, what it was; For he remembers, that at their
funerals, they prepared great feasts upon the graves of the dead, and cried
out to them, Resurgite, comedite, bibite, Arise, and come to us, and eat and
drink with us, They imagined some bodily being, and some possibility of
conversation with the living, in the Dead. You have understood S. Paul's
Argument, and yet perchance, you have not understood S. Paul. Quocumque
respexer is fulmina sunt, says, S. Chrysostom. All S. Paul's words work as
lightning, Et capit omne quod tetigerit, It affects, and it leaves some mark
upon every thing that it touches; And if he have touched thee now, his effect
is not only to make thee believe a future resurrection of thy body, but to
feel a present resurrection in thy soul, and to make me believe that thou
feel it, by expressing it in thy life and conversation: Ad intelligendum
Paulum vita pura opus est; To understand S. Paul, a man must be an honest man;
Chrysostom.
he must mend his life, that will be believed to have comprehended S. Paul;
For if he be only the wiser, and the learneder, and not the better, and the
honester, he has but half understood S. Paul. S. Paul condemns Hymenaeus, 2 Timothy 2.17.
and Philetus for saying The Resurrection was past already; That is, as S.
Augustine interprets it, that all the Resurrection which we are to have, is
nothing but a resurrection from sin.

If S. Paul say so bitterly, that this doctrine does fret as a canker, because
it is not enough, what will he say, if thou be not come so far, as to a
Resurrection from sin? We fall away into manifold, and miserable dejections,
but Qui cadit, non resurget? Jer. 8.4.
Shall we fall, and not arise? shall we turn away, and not turn again? Shall
not God be able to multiply our resurrections as well as the Devil our falls
from God? We are dejected when we see the wicked prosper; when God seems to
behave himself, as a Prince that were not well settled in his government, and
durst not offend nor displease any party, nor take knowledge of their insolent
and rebellious proceedings. When men that tempt God, and never pray for any
thing before hand, nor thank him for it, when they have it, and yet sweat in
their abundances, when the children of God starve for their crummes, we are
dejected. But David found a resurrection in this cafe, and a strange one, which
was, that he could bie down and steep in peace; his resurrection was, Psalm.
4.8.
Dedisti laetitiam in cord, Thou have put gladness into my heart, more then
in the time that their corn, and their wine increased. If all Gods promifes be
not presently performed unto us, temporal supplies in all temporal wants,
spiritual supplies in all spiritual distresses presently administered, we are
dejected. But Abraham had a resurrection in this case; when God had said to
him, In Isaac vocabitur semen tuum, In Isaac shall all Nations be blessed, and
then had commanded him to stop up that fountain, to dig up that foundation, to
pull up that root of all this universal blessing, to sacrifice that very
Isaac, yet Abraham erected himself, Heb. 11.19.
only with considering, That God was able to raise Isaac from the dead. He
left God to his own will when he would do it, it was resurrection enough to
him, to establish himself in the assurance that God could do it.

If thou be dejected and depressed with the weight of thy sins, if the
malediction, and curses, and denunciations of Gods judgments against sinners
lie heavy upon thee, make have to thy resurrection, raise thy self from it as
fast as thou can, for it is a grave that putrifies, and corrupts, and molders
away a soul apace. Laetetur cor quaerentium Dominum, Psalm. 105.3.
says David; Thou art not in the right way of finding the Lord, if thou do
not find a joy in the seeking of him; Though thou can not setle thy self in
a sense that thou have found him, yet thou have, if thou can find a holy
melting, and joy in thy seeking of him. If the Angels be come down to destroy
Sodom, If Jonas be come to proclaim destruction to Nineveh, will thou make
thy self believe that thou art a Citizen of Sodom, an inhabitant of Nineveh,
and must necessarily be wrapped up in that destruction? If David say, Non sic
impii, non sic, The wicked shall not stand in judgment, will thou needs be one
of them? As a wise, and a discreet man will never believe that he that writes a
Satyr, means him, though he touch upon his vices, so whatsoever the Prophets
say, of an aversion, and obduration in God, against sinners, yet they mean not
thee, nor do thou assume it, in an inevitableness upon thy self. The Angel
of God, the Spirit of God shall deal with thee, as he did with Lot in Sodom;
He told Lot overnight, Genesis 19.12.
that he would burn the City, and bad him prepare; God shall give thee some
grudgings, before he exalt thy fever, and warn thee to consider thy state, and
consult with thy spiritual Physician; The Angel called him up in the morning,
and then hastened him, and when he prolonged, says the Text, The Angel caught
him, and carried him forth, and set him without the City. Because, though there
was no cooperation in Lot, yet there was no resisting neither, God was pleased
to do all; So in this death of diffidence, and sense of Gods fearful
judgments, God opens thy grave now, and now he calls to thee, Lazare veni for
as, Come forth Lazarus, and he offers his hand to pull thee out now, Josh. 1.6.
Only Comfortare and esto robustus, as God said to Ioshuah, Be strong and
have a good courage, and as God adds there, Comfortare and esto robustus
valde, Multiply thy courage, and God shall multiply thy strength, in all
dejections have a cheerful apprehension of thy resurrection, and thou shall
have it, nay thou have it.

But this death of desperation, or diffidence in Gods mercy, by Gods mercy has
swallowed none of us, but the death of sin has swallowed us all, and for our
own customary sins we all need a resurrection: And what is that? Resurrectio
a peccato, and cessatio a peccato, Durand.
non est idem; Every cessation from sin, is not a resurrection from sin. A
man may discontinue a sin, intermit the practice of a sin, by infirmity of
the body, or by satiety in the sin, or by the absence of that person, with
whom he has used to communicate in that sin. Damasc.
But Resurrectio, est secunda ejus, quod interiit, statio. A Resurrection is
such an abstinence from the practice of the sin, as is grounded upon a
repentance, and a detestation of the sin, and then it is a settling, and an
establishing of the soul in that state, and disposition: It is not a sudden
and transitory remorse, nor only a reparation of that which was ruined, and
demolished, but it is a building up of habits contrary to former habits, and
customs, in actions contrary to that sin, that we have been accustomed to.
Else it is but an Intermission, not a Resurrection; but a starting, not a
waking; but an apparition, not a living body; but a cessation, not a peace of
conscience.

Now this Resurrection is begun, and well advanced in Baptismate lachrymarum,
In the baptism of true and repentant tears. But, Beloved, as S. Paul in this
place, has a relation Ad baptismum clinicorum, to death-bed-baptists,
death-bed-Christians, to them that defer their Baptism to their death, but he
gives no allowance of it; So this Baptisma clinicorum, this repentance upon the
deathbed, is a dangerous delay. Even of them, I will say with S. Paul here, If
there were no Resurrection, no need to rise from sin by repentance, why are
they then thus baptized, pro mortuis? why do they repent, when they are as
good as dead, and have no more to suffer in this world? But if there be such a
resurrection, a necessity of such a Baptism by repentance, why come they no
sooner to it? For is any man sure to have it, or sure to have a desire to it
then? It is never impertinent to repeat S. Augustines words in this case, Etiam
hac animadversione percutitur peccator, ut moriens obliviscatur sui, qui dum
viveret, oblitus est Dei; God begins a dying man's condemnation at this, That as
he forgot God in his life, so he shall forget himself at his death. Compare
thy temporal, and thy spiritual state together, and consider how they may
both stand well at that day. If thou have set thy state in order, and made a
Will before, and have nothing to do at last, but to add a Codicil, this is
soon dispatched at last; But if thou leave all till then, it may prove a heavy
business. So if thou have repented before, and settled thy self in a religious
course before, and have nothing to do then, but to wrestle with the power of
the disease, and the agonies of death, God shall fight for thee in that weak
estate; God shall imprint in thee a Cupio dissolvi, S. Paul's, not only
contentedness, but desire to be dissolved; And God shall give thee a glorious
Resurrection, yea an Ascension into Heaven before thy death, and thou shall see
thy self in possession of his eternal Kingdom, before thy bodily eyes be
shut. Be therefore S. Cyprians Peripatetique, and not his Clinique Christian; A
walking, and not a bedridden Christian; That when thou have walked with God, as
Henoch did, thou may be taken with God, as Henoch was, and so walk with the
Lamb, as the Saints do in Jerusalem, and follow him whithersoever he goes;
That even thy deathbed may be as Elias Chariot, to carry thee to heaven; And
as the bed of the Spouse in the Canticles, which was Lectus floridus, a green
and flourishing bed, where thou may find by a faithful apprehension, that
thy sickness has crowned thee with a crown of thorns, by participation of
the sufferings of thy Savior, and that thy patience has crowned thee with
that crown of glory, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall impart to thee
that day.

SERMON. LXXIX. Preached at S. PAUL'S.
PSALM. 90.14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be
glad all our days.


THey have made a Rule in the Council of Trent, that no Scripture shall be
expounded, but according to the unanime consent of the Fathers: But in this
Book of the Psalms, it would trouble them to give many examples of that Rule,
that is, of an unanime consent of the Fathers, in the interpretation thereof.
In this Psalm, Bellarmine in his Exposition of the Psalms, finds himself
perplexed; He says (and says truly) Hieronymus constanter affirmat,
Augustinus constanter negat, S. Hierome does confidently and constantly
affirm, and S. Augustine with as much confidence, and constancy deny, that
this Psalm, and all that follow to the hundredth Psalm, are Moses Psalms, and
written by him. And this diverse constancy in these two Fathers, S. Hierome and
S. Augustine, shake the constancy of that Canon, which binds to a following of
an unanime consent, for that cannot be found. Bellarmine expedites himself
herein, that way, which is indeed their most ordinary way amongst their
Expositors, which is, where the Fathers differ, to adhere to S. Augustine. So
he does in this point; though most of the Ancients of the Christian Church,
most of the Rabbis of the Jews, most of the Writers in the Reformation, take
it to be Moses Psalm, and that way runs the greatest stream, and nearest to a
concurrence. And thus far I have stopped upon this consideration, Whether this
be Moses Psalm or no, That when it appears to be his Psalm, and that we see,
that in the tenth verse of this Psalm, man's life is limited to seventy years,
or at most to eighty, and then remember, that Moses himself, then when he said
so, was above eighty, and in a good habitude long after that, we might hereby
take occasion to consider, that God does not so limit, and measure himself in
his blessings to his servants, but that for their good and his glory he
enlarges those measures. God has determined a day, from Sun to Sun, yet when
God has use of a longer day, for his glory, he commands the Sun to stand
still, till Joshua have pursued his victory. So God has given the life of man,
into the hand of sickness; and yet for all that deadly sickness, God enlarges
Hezekiah's years: Moses was more then fourscore, when he told us, that our
longest term was fourscore.

If we require exactly an unanime consent, that all agree in the Author of this
Psalm, we can get no farther, then that the holy Ghost is the Author. All
agree the words to be Canonical Scripture, and so from the holy Ghost; and we
seek no farther. The words are his, and they offer us these considerations;
First, That the whole Psalm being in the Title thereof called a Prayer, A
Prayer of Moses the man of God, it puts us justly, and pertinently upon the
consideration of the many dignities and prerogatives of that part of our
worship of God, Prayer; for there we shall see, That though the whole Psalm me
be not a Prayer, yet because there is a Prayer in the Psalm, that denominates
the whole Psalm, the whole Psalm is a Prayer. When the Psalm grows formally
to be a Prayer, our Text enters, O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we
may rejoice and be glad all our days: And in that there will be two Parts
more, The Prayer it self, O satisfy us early with thy mercy, And the effect
thereof, That we may rejoice and be glad all our days. So that our Parts are
three; First Prayer, Then this Prayer, And lastly the benefit of all Prayer.

For the first, which is Prayer in general, 1 Part. Prayer.
I will thrust no farther then the Text leads me in, that is, That Prayer is so
essential a part of Gods worship, as that all is called Prayer. S. Hierome
upon this Psalm says, Difficillimum Psalmum aggredior, I undertake the
exposition of a very hard Psalm, and yet, says he, I would proceed so in the
exposition thereof, ut interpretatio nostra aliena non egeat interpretatione,
That there should not need another Comment upon my Comment, that when I pretend
to interpret the Psalm, they that hear me, should not need another to
interpret me: which is a frequent infirmity amongst Expositors of Scriptures,
by writing, or preaching, either when men will raise doubts in places of
Scripture, which are plain enough in themselves, (for this creates a
jealousy, that if the Scriptures be every where so difficult, they cannot be
our evidences, and guides to salvation) Or when men will insist too vehemently,
and curiously, and tediously in proving of such things as no man denies; for
this also induces a suspicion, that that is not so absolutely, so undeniably
true, that needs so much art, and curiosity, and vehemence to prove it. I shall
therefore avoid these errors; and because I presume you are full of an
acknowledgment of the duties, and dignities of Prayer, only remember you of
thus much of the method, or elements of Prayer, That whereas the whole Book of
Psalms is called Sepher Tehillim, that is, Liber Laudationum, The Book of
Praise, yet this Psalm, and all that follow to the hundredth Psalm, and
diverse others besides these, (which make up a fair limme of this body, and a
considerable part of the Book) are called Prayers; The Book is Praise, the
parts are Prayer. The name changes not the nature; Prayer and Praise is the
same thing: The name scarce changes the name; Prayer and Praise is almost the
same word; As the duties agree in the heart and mouth of a man, so the names
agree in our ears; and not only in the language of our Translation, but in
the language of the holy Ghost himself, for that which with us differs but so,
Prayer, and Praise, in the Original differs no more then so, Tehillim, and
Tephilloth.

And this concurrence of these two parts of our devotion, Prayer and Praise,
that they accompany one another, nay this co-incidence, that they meet like two
waters, and make the stream of devotion the fuller; nay more then that, this
identity, that they do not only consist together, but constitute one another,
is happily expressed in this part of the Prayer, which is our Text; for that
which in the Original language is expressed in the voice of Prayer, O satisfy
us, etc. in the first Translation, that of the Septuagint, is expressed in the
voice of praise, Saturasti, Thou have satisfied us; The Original makes it a
Prayer, the Translation a Praise. And not to compare Original with Translation,
but Translation with Translation, and both from one man, we have in S. Hieroms
works two Translations of the Psalms; one, in which he gives us the Psalms
alone; another, in which he gives them illustrated with his notes and
Commentaries. And in one of these Translations he reads this as a Prayer, Reple
nos, O fill us early with thy mercy, and in the other he reads it as a Praise,
Repleti sumus, Thou have filled us, etc. Nay, not to compare Original with
Translation, nor Translation with Translation, but Original with Original,
the holy Ghost with himself, In the Title of this Psalm, (and the Titles of
the Psalms are Canonical Scripture) the holy Ghost calls this Psalm a Prayer,
and yet enters the Psalm, in the very first verse thereof, with praise and
thanksgiving, Lord, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations. And
such is the constitution and frame of that Prayer of Prayers, That which is the
extraction of all prayers, and draws into a sum all that is in all others,
That which is the infusion into all others, sheds and showers whatsoever is
acceptable to God, in any other prayer, That Prayer which our Savior gave us,
(for as he meant to give us all for asking, so he meant to give us the words by
which we should ask) As that Prayer consists of seven petitions, and seven is
infinite, so by being at first begun with glory and acknowledgement of his
reigning in heaven, and then shut up in the same manner, with acclamations of
power and glory, it is made a circle of praise, and a circle is infinite too,
The Prayer, and the Praise is equally infinite. Infinitely poor and needy man,
that ever needst infinite things to pray for; Infinitely rich and abundant man,
that ever have infinite blessings to praise God for.

Gods house in this world is called the house of Prayer; but in heaven it is
the house of Praise: No surprisall with any new necessities there, but one
even, incessant, and everlasting tenor of thanksgiving; And it is a blessed
inchoation of that state here, here to be continually exercised in the
commemoration of Gods former goodness toward us. My voice shall thou hear in
the morning, Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 55.17.
O Lord, says David. What voice? the voice of his prayer; it is true; In the
morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, says David there. And not only
then, but at noone and at night he vows that Sacrifice; Evening and morning,
and at noone will I pray, and cry unto thee. But David's devotion began not,
when his prayers began; one part of his devotion was before morning; Psalm.
119.62.
At midnight will I rise, to give thanks unto thee O Lord, says he. Doubtless
when he lay down and closed his eyes, he had made up his account with God, and
had received his Quietus est then: And then the first thing that he does when
he wakes again, is not to importune God for more, but to bless God for his
former blessings. And as this part of his devotion, Praise, began all, so it
passes through all, I will bless the Lord at all times, Psalm. 34.11.
and his praise shall be continually in my mouth. He extends it through all
times, and all places, and would feign do so through all persons too, as we see
by that adprecation which is so frequent with him, O that men would therefore
praise the Lord, and declare the wondrous works that he does for the children
of men!

If we compare these two incomparable duties, Prayer, and Praise, it will stand
thus, Our Prayers besiege God, (as Tertullian speaks, especially of public
Prayer in the Congregation, Agmine facto obsidemus Deum) but our praises
prescribe in God, we urge him, and press him with his ancient mercies, his
mercies of old: By Prayer we incline him, we bend him, but by Praise we bind
him; our thanks for former benefits, is a producing of a specialty, by which he
has contracted with us for more. In Prayer we sue to him, but in our Praise we
sue him himself; Prayer is as our petition, but Praise is as our Evidence; In
that we beg, in this we plead. God has no law upon himself, but yet God
himself proceeds by precedent: And whenever we present to him with
thanksgiving, what he has done, he does the same, and more again. Neither
certainly can the Church institute any prayers, more effectual for the
preservation of Religion, or of the State, then the Collects for our
deliverances, in the like cases before: And when he hears them, though they
have the nature of Praise only, yet he translates them into Prayers, and when
we our selves know not, how much we stand in need of new deliverances, he
delivers us from dangers which we never suspected, from Armies and Navies which
we never knew were prepared, and from plots and machinations which we never
knew were brought into Consultation, and diverts their forces, and dissipates
their counsels with an untimely abortion. And farther I extend not this first
part of Prayer in general, in which, to that which you may have heard often,
and usefully of the duty and dignity of Prayer, I have only added this, of the
method and elements thereof, that prayer consists as much of praise for the
past, as of supplication for the future.

We pass now to our second Part, To this particular Prayer, 2 Part.
and those limbs that make up this body, those pieces that constitute this
Part. They are many; as many as words in it: Satisfy, and satisfy Us, and do
that early, and do that with that which is thine, and let that be mercy. So
that first it is a prayer for fullness and satisfaction, Satura, satisfy; And
then it is a prayer not only of appropriation to our selves, Satisfy me, But
of a charitable dilatation and extension to others, Satisfy us, all us, all
thy servants, all thy Church; And then thirdly, it is a prayer of dispatch and
expedition, Satura nos mane, Satisfy us early; and after that, it is a prayer
of evidence and manifestation, Satisfy us with that which is, and which we may
discern to be thine; And then lastly, it is a prayer of limitation even upon
God himself, that God will take no other way herein, but the way of mercy,
Satisfy us early with thy mercy.

And because these are the land-markes that must guide you in this voyage, and
the places to which you must resort to assist your memory, be pleased to take
another survay and impression of them. I may have an apprehension of a
conditional promise of God, and I may have some fair credulity and testimony
of conscience, of an endeavor to perform those conditions, and so some
inchoations of thoses promises, but yet this is not a fullness, a satisfaction,
and this is a prayer for that, Satura, satisfy: I may have a full measure in
my self, find no want of temporal conveniences, or spiritual consolation
even in inconveniences, and so hold up a holy alacrity and cheerfulness for
all concerning my self, and yet see God abandon greater persons, and desert
some whole Churches, and States, upon whom his glory and Gospel depends much
more then upon me, but this is a prayer of charitable extension, Satura nos,
not me, but us, all us that profess thee aright: This also I may be sure that
God will do at last, he will rescue his own honor in rescuing or
establishing his Servants, he will bring Israel out of Egypt, and out of
Babylon, but yet his Israel may lie long under the scourge and scorn of his
and their enemies, 300. years before they get out of Egypt, seventy years
before they get out of Babylon, and so fall into tentations of conceiving a
jealousy, and suspicion of Gods good purpose toward them, and this is a
Prayer of Dispatch and Expedition, Satura nos mane, Satisfy us early, O God
make speed to save us, O Lord make have to help us: But he may derive help upon
us, by means that are not his, not avowed by him, He may quicken our Counsels
by bringing in an Achitophell, he may strengthen our Armies by calling in the
Turk, he may establish our peace and friendships, by remitting or departing
with some parts of our Religion; at such a dear price we may be helped, but
these are not his helps, and this is a prayer of manifestation, that all the
way to our end he will be pleased to let us see, that the means are from
him, Satura nos tua, Satisfy us with that, which is thine, and comes from
thee, and so directs us to thee: All this may be done too, and yet not that
done which we pray for here; God may send that which is his, and yet without
present comfort therein; God may multiply corrections, and judgments, and
tribulations upon us, and intend to help us that way, by whipping and beating
us into the way, and this is his way; but this is a Prayer of limitation even
upon God himself, That our way may be his, and that his way may be the way of
mercy, Satisfy us early with thy mercy.

First then, Saturae.
the first word Satura, implies a fullness, and it implies a satisfaction, A
quietness, a contentedness, an acquiescence in that fullness; Satisfy is,
let us be full, and let us feel it, and rest in that fullness. These two make
up all Heaven, all the joy, and all the glory of Heaven, fullness and
satisfaction in it. And therefore S. Hierom refers this Prayer of our Text, to
the Resurrection, and to that fullness, and that satisfaction which we shall
have then, and not till then. For though we shall have a fullness in Heaven, as
soon as we come thither, yet that is not fully a satisfaction, because we
shall desire, and expect a fuller satisfaction in the reunion of body and
soul. And when Heaven it self cannot give us this full satisfaction till
then, in what can we look for it in this world, where there is no true
fullness, nor any satisfaction, in that kind of fullness which we seem to
have? Pleasure and sensuality, and the giving to our selves all that we desire,
Ezekiel. 16.
cannot give this; you hear God reproaches Israel so, You have multiplied your
fornications, and yet are not satisfied. Labor for profit, or for preferment,
cannot do it; Hagg. 1.
you see God reproaches Israel for that too, Ye have sown much, and bring in
little, ye eat, but have not enough, ye drink, but are not filled, ye cloth
you, but are not warm, and he that earneth wages, puts it into a broken
bag; that is, it runs out as fast as it comes in, he finds nothing at the
years end, his Midsommer will scarce fetch up Michaelmas, and if he have
brought about his year, and made up his Circle, yet he has raised up nothing,
nothing appears in his circle. If these things could fill us, yet they could
not satisfy us, Job 20.
because they cannot stay with us, or not we with them: He has devoured
substance, and he shall vomit it. He devoured it by bribery, and he shall vomit
it by a fine; He devoured it by extortion, and he shall vomit it by
confiscation; He devoured it in other Courts, and shall vomit it in a
Star Chamber. If it stay some time, it shall be with an anguish and vexation;
When he shall be filled with abundance, it shall be a pain to him, as it is in
the same place. Still his riches shall have the nature of a vomit, hard to get
down, and hard to keep in the stomach when it is there; hardly got, hardly
kept when they are got. Luke 6.
If all these could be overcome, yet it is clogged with a heavy curse, Woe be
unto you that are full, for ye shall be hungry: Where, if the curse were only
from them, who are poor by their own sloth, or wastfulnesse, who for the most
part delight to curse and malign the rich, the curse might be contemned by us,
and would be thrown back by God into their own bosoms; but Os Domini
locutum, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Christ himself has denounced
this curse upon worldly men, That they shall be hungry, not only suffer
impairement and diminution, but be reduced to hunger.

There is a spiritual fullness in this life, of which S. Hierom speaks,
Ebrietas foelix, satietas salutaris, A happy excess, and a wholesome surfeit;
quae quanto copiosius sumitur, majorem donat sobrietatem, In which the more we
eat, the more temperate we are, and the more we drink, the more sober. In
which, (as S. Bernard also expresses it, in his mellifluence) Mutua,
interminabili, inexplicabili generatione, By a mutual and reciprocal, by an
undeterminable and unexpressible generation of one another, Desiderium generat
satietatem, and satietas parit desiderium, The desire of spiritual graces
begets a satiety, if I would be, I am full of them, And then this satiety
begets a farther desire, still we have a new appetite to those spiritual
graces: This is a holy ambition, a sacred covetousness, Deuteronomy. 32.23.
and a wholesome Dropsy. Napthalies blessing, O Napthali satisfied with favor,
and full with the blessing of the Lord; S. Stephens blessing, Act. 6.5.
Full of faith and of the Holy Ghost; The blessed Virgins blessing, Full of
Grace; Dorcas blessing, Act. 9.37.
Full of good works, and of Almsdeeds; The blessing of him, who is blessed
above all, and who blesses all, Christ Jesus, Luke 2.4.
Full of wisdom, Luke 4.1.
Full of the Holy Ghost, Joh. 1.14.
Full of grace and truth. But so far are all temporal things from giving this
fullness or satisfaction, as that even in spiritual things, there may be,
there is often an error, or mistaking.

Even in spiritual things, there may be a fullness, and no satisfaction, And
there may be a satisfaction, and no fullness; I may have as much knowledge, as
is presently necessary for my salvation, and yet have a restless and
unsatisfied desire, to search into unprofitable curiosities, unrevealed
mysteries, and inextricable perplexities: And, on the other side, a man may be
satisfied, and think he knows all, when, God knows, he knows nothing at
all; for, I know nothing, if I know not Christ crucified, And I know not that,
if I know not how to apply him to my self, Nor do I know that, if I embrace
him not in those means, which he has afforded me in his Church, in his Word,
and Sacraments; If I neglect this means, this place, these exercises,
howsoever I may satisfy my self, with an over-valuing mine own knowledge at
home, I am so far from fullness, as that vanity it self is not more empty. In
the Wilderness, every man had one and the same measure of Manna; The same
Gomer went through all; for Manna was a Meat, that would melt in their mouths,
and of easy digestion. But then for their Quails, birds of a higher flight,
meat of a stronger digestion, it is not said, that every man had an equal
number: some might have more, some less, and yet all their fullness.
Catechisticall divinity, and instructions in fundamental things, is our Manna;
Every man is bound to take in his Gomer, his explicit knowledge of Articles
absolutely necessary to salvation; The simplest man, as well as the greatest
Doctor, is bound to know, that there is one God in three persons, That the
second of those, the Son of God, took our nature, and dyed for mankind; And
that there is a Holy Ghost, which in the Communion of Saints, the Church
established by Christ, applies to every particular soul the benefit of Christ's
universal redemption. But then for our Quails, birds of higher pitch, meat of
a stronger digestion, which is the knowledge how to rectify every straying
conscience, how to extricate every entangled, and scrupulous, and perplexed
soul, in all emergent doubts, how to defend our Church, and our Religion, from
all the mines, and all the batteries of our Adversaries, and to deliver her
from all imputations of Heresy, and Schism, which they impute to us, this
knowledge is not equally necessary in all; In many cases a Master of servants,
and a Father of children is bound to know more, then those children and
servants, and the Pastor of the parish more then parishioners: They may have
their fullness, though he have more, but he has not his, except he be able to
give them satisfaction.

This fullness then is not an equality in the measure; our fullness in heaven
shall not be so; Abraham dyed, says the text, Plenus dierum, full of years;
Genesis 25.8.
It is not said so in the text of Methusalem, that he dyed full of years, and
yet he had another manner of Gomer, another measure of life then Abraham, for
he lived almost eight hundred years more then he; But he that is best disposed
to die, is fullest of years; One man may be fuller at twenty, then another at
seaventy. David lived not the tithe of Methusalems years, not ten to his
hundred, he lived less then Abraham, and yet David is said to have dyed Plenus
dierum, full of years; he had made himself agreeable to God, 1 Chro. 29.28.
and so was ripe for him. So David is said there to have dyed full of honor;
God knows David had cast shroud aspersions upon his own, and others honor;
but, as God says of Israel, Because I loved thee, thou wast honorable in my
sight; so because God loved David, and he persevered in that love to the end,
he dyed full of honor. So also it is said of David, that he dyed full of
Riches; for, though they were very great additions, which Solomon made, yet
because David intended that which he left, for Gods service, and for pious
uses, he dyed full of Riches; fullness of riches is in the good purpose, and
the good employment, not in the possession. In a word, the fullness that is
inquired after, and required by this prayer, carry it upon temporal, carry it
upon spiritual things, is such a proportion of either, as is fit for that
calling, in which God has put us; And then, the satisfaction in this fullness
is not to hunt and pant after more worldly possessions, by undue means, or by
macerating labor, as though we could not be good, or could do no good in the
world, except all the goods of the world passed our hands, nor to hunt and pant
after the knowledge of such things, as God by his Scriptures has not revealed
to his Church, nor to wrangle contentiously and uncharitably about such points,
as do rather shake others consciences, then establish our own, as though we
could not possibly come to heaven, except we knew what God meant to do with
us, before he meant to make us. S. Paul expresses fully what this fullness is,
Colos. 4.12.
and satisfies us in this satisfaction, Vt sitis pleni in omni voluntate Dei,
That ye may be filled according to the will of God: What is the will of God?
How shall I know the will of God upon me? God has manifested his will in my
Calling; and a proportion, competent to this Calling, is my fullness, and
should be my satisfaction, Genesis 8.21.
that so God may have Odorem quietis, (as it is said in Noah's sacrifice, after
he came out of the Arc, that God smelt a savor of rest) a sacrifice, in which
he might rest himself; for God has a Sabbath in the Sabbaths of his servants,
a fullness in their fullness, a satisfaction when they are satisfied, and is
well pleased when they are so.

So then this Prayer is for fullness, Nos.
and fullness is a competency in our calling, And a prayer for satisfaction,
and satisfaction is a contentment in that competency; And then this prayer is
not only a prayer of appropriation to our selves, but of a charitable
extention to others too, Satura nos, Satisfy us, All us, all thy Church.
Charity begins in our selves, but it does not end there, but dilates it self
to others; The Saints in heaven are full, as full as they can hold, and yet
they pray; Though they want nothing, they pray that God would power down upon
us graces necessary for our peregrination here, as he has done upon them, in
their station there. We are full; full of the Gospel; present peace and plenty
in the preaching thereof, and fair apparances of a perpetual succession; we
are full, and yet we pray; we pray that God would continue the Gospel where it
is, restore the Gospel where it was, and transfer the Gospel where it has not
yet been preached. Charity desires not her own, says the Apostle; but much
less does charity desire no more then her own, so as not to desire the good of
others too. True love and charity is to do the most that we can, all that we
can for the good of others; So God himself proceeds, when he says, What could
I do, that I have not done? And so he seems to have begun at first; when God
bestowed upon man, his first and greatest benefit, his making, it is expressed
so, Faciamus hominem, Let us, All us, make man; God seems to summon himself,
to assemble himself, to muster himself, all himself, all the persons of the
Trinity, to do what he could in the favor of man. So also when he is drawn
to a necessity of executing judgment, and for his own honor, and consolidation
of his servants, puts himself upon a revenge, he proceeds so too; when man had
rebelled, and began to fortify in Babel, Genesis 11.7.
then God says, Venite, Let us, All us come together, And Descendamus, and
confundamus, Let us, all us, go down, and confound their language, and their
machinations, and fortifications. God does not give patterns, God does not
accept from us acts of half-devotion, and half-charities; God does all that he
can for us; And therefore when we see others in distress, whether national,
or personal calamities, whether Princes be dispossessed of their natural
patrimony, and inheritance, or private persons afflicted with sickness, or
penury, or banishment, let us go Gods way, all the way; First, Faciamus
hominem ad imaginem nostram, Let us make that Man according unto our image, let
us consider our selves in him, and make our case his, and remember how lately
he was as well as we, and how soon we may be as ill as he, and then
Descendamus and confundamus, Let us, us, with all the power we have, remove or
slacken those calamities that lie upon them.

This only is charity, to do all, all that we can. And something there is
which every man may do; There are Armies, in the levying whereof, every man is
an absolute Prince, and needs no Commission, there are Forces, in which every
man is his own Muster-master, The force which we spoke of before, out of
Tertullian, the force of prayer; In public actions, we obey God, when we obey
them to whom God has committed the public; In those things which are in our
own power, the subfidies and contributions of prayer, God looks that we should
second his Faciamus, with our Dicamus, That since he must do all, we would
pray him that he would do it, And his Descendamus, with our Ascendamus, That
if we would have him come down, and fight our battayls, or remove our
calamities, we should first go up to him, in humble and fervent prayer, That
he would continue the Gospel where it is, and restore it where it was, and
transfer it where it was never as yet heard; Charity is to do all to all; and
the poorest of us all can do this to any.

I may then, I must pray for this fullness, (and fullness is sufficiency) And
for this satisfaction, Mane.
(and satisfaction is contentment) And that God would extend this, and other his
blessings, upon others too, And if God do leave us in an Egypt, in a Babylon,
without relief, for sometime I may proceed to this holy importunity, which
David intimates here, Satura nos mane, O Lord, make haste to help us, Satisfy
us early with thy mercy, and God will do so. Weeping may endure for a night,
says David. Psalm. 30.5.
David does not say, It must endure for a night, that God will by no means
shorten the time; perchance God will wipe all tears from thine eyes, at
midnight, if thou pray; Try him that way then. If he do not, If weeping do
endure for a night, all night, yet joy comes in the morning, faith David; And
then he does not say, Joy may come in the morning, but it comes certainly,
infallibly it comes, and comes in the morning. God is an early riser; In the
Marning-watch, God la^ked upon the h^st of the Egyptians. Exodus 14.24.
He looked upon their counsels to see what they would do, and upon their
forces to see what they could do. He is not early up, and never the nearer;
His going forth is prepared as the Morning, Hos. 6.3.
(there is his general Providence, in which he visits every creature) And he
shall come to us, in the former, and later rain upon the earth; He makes
haste to us in the former, and seconds his former mercies to us, in more
mercies. And as he makes have to refresh his servants, so goes he the same
pace, to the ruin of his enemies, In matutina inters^oiam, Psalm. 101.8.
I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: It is not a weakening of them,
It is a destruction; It is not of a squadron or regiment, It is all; It is not
only upon the Land, but the wicked of any band, he will destroy upon the Sea
too. This is his promise, this is his practice, this is his pace. Thus he did
in Sennacheri^s Army, When they arose early in the Morning, 2 King. 19.35.
behold they were all dead carcasses; They rose early that saw it, but God had
been up earlier, that had done it. And that story, God seems to have had care
to have recorded almost in all the divisions of the Bible, for it is in the
Historical part, and it is in the Prophetical part too; and because God
foresaw, that men's curiosities would carry them upon Apocryphal Books also, it
is repeated almost in every Book of that kind, in Ecclesiasticus, in Tobit, in
the Maceabees in both Books, That every where our eye might light upon that,
and every soul might make that Syllogism, and produce that conclusion to it
self, If God be thus forward, thus early in the ways of Judgment, much more
is he so in the ways of mercy; with that he will satisfy us Mane, early, and
as Tremellius reads this very Text, unoquoque mane, betimes in the morning, and
every morning.

Now if we look for this early mercy from God, we must rise betimes too, and
meet God early. God has promised to give Matutinam stellam; the Morning Star;
Revel. 2 28.
but they must be up betimes in the morning, that will take the Morning Star.
He himself who is it, has told us who is this Morning star; I Jesus am the
bright and Morning star. Revel. 2^.^^.
God will give us Jesus; Him, and all his, all his tears, all his blood, all
his merits; But to whom, and upon what conditions? That is expressed there,
Vincenti dabe, To hin^ that overcommeth I will give the Morning Star. Our life
is a warfare, our whole life; It is not only with lusts in our youth, and
ambitions in our middle years, and indevotions in our age, but with agonies in
our body, and tentations in our spirit upon our deathbed, that we are to
fight; and he cannot be said to overcome, that fights not out the whole
battle. If he enter not the field in the morning, that is, apply not himself
to Gods service in his youth, If he continue not to the Evening, If he faint
in the way, and grow remiss in Gods service, for collateral respects, God
will overcome his cause, and his glory shall stand fast, but that man can
scarce be said to have overcome.

It is the counsel of the Wise man, Prevent the Sun to give thanks to God,
Wisd. 16.28.
and at the dayspring pray unto him. You see still, how these two duties are
marshalled, and disposed; First Praise, and then Prayer, but both early: And it
is placed in the Lamentations, as though it were a lamentable negligence to
have omitted it, It is good for a man, Lament. 3.27.
that he bear his yoke in his youth. Rise as early as you can, you cannot be
up before God; no, nor before God raise you: Howsoever you prevent this Sun,
the Sun of the Firmament, yet the Son of Heaven has prevented you, for
without his preventing Grace you could not stir. Have any of you slept out
their Morning, resisted his private motions to private Prayer at home,
neglected his callings so? Though a man do sleep out his forenoone, the Sun
goes on his course, and comes to his Meridionall splendour, though that man have
not looked toward it. That Son which has risen to you at home, in those
private motions, has gone on his course, and has shined out here, in this
house of God, upon Wednesday, and upon Friday, and upon every day of holy
Convocation; All this, at home, and here, ye have slept out and neglected.
Now, upon the Sabbath, and in these holy Exercises, this Son shines out as at
noone, the Grace of God is in the Exaltation, exhibited in the powerfullest and
effectuallest way of his Ordinance, and if you will but awake now, rise now,
meet God now, now at noone, God will call even this early. Have any of you
slept out the whole day, and are come in that drowsinesse to your evening, to
the closing of your eyes, to the end of your days? Yet rise now, and God shall
call even this an early rising; If you can make shift to deceive your own
souls and say, We never heard God call us; If you neglected your former
callings so, as that you have forgot that you have been called; yet, is there
one amongst you, that denies that God calls him now? If he neglect this calling
now, to morrow he may forget that he was called to day, or remember it with
such a terror, as shall blow a dampe, and a consternation upon his soul, and a
lethargy worse then his former sleep; but if he will wake now, and rise now,
though this be late in his evening, in his age, yet God shall call this early.
Isai. 26.9.
Be but able to say with Esaias this night, My soul has desired thee in the
night, and thou may be bold to say with David to morrow morning, Satura nos
mane, Satisfy us early with thy mercy, and he shall do it.

But yet no prayer of ours, howsoever made in the best disposition, in the best
testimony of a rectified conscience, must limit God his time, or appoint him,
in what morning, or what hour in the morning, God shall come to our
deliverance. The Son of man was not the less the Son of God, nor the less
a beloved Son, though God hid from him the knowledge of the day of the
general Judgment. Thou art not the less the servant of God, nor the less
rewarded by him, though he keep from thee the knowledge of thy deliverance
from any particular calamity. All Gods deliverances are in the morning, because
there is a perpetual night, and an invincible darkness upon us, till he
deliver us. God is the God of that Climate, where the night is six Months
long, as well as of this, where it is but half so many hours. The highest
Hill hinders not the roundnesse of the earth, the earth is round for all that
hill; The lowest vaults, and mines hinder not the solidnesse of the earth, the
earth is solid for all that; Much less has a year, or ten years, or all our
threescore and ten, any proportion at all to eternity; And therefore God comes
early in a sort to me, though I lose abundance of my reward by so long
lingering, if he come not till he open me the gate of heaven, by the key of
death. There are Indies at my right hand, in the East; but there are Indies at
my left hand too, in the West. There are testimonies of Gods love to us, in our
East, in our beginnings; but if God continue tribulation upon us to our West,
to our ends, and give us the light of his presence then, if he appear to us at
our transmigration, certainly he was favorable to us all our peregrination,
and though he show himself late, he was our friend early. The Prayer is, that
he would come early, but it is, if it be rightly formed, upon both these
conditions; first, that I rise early to meet him, and then that I magnify his
hour as early, whenever he shall be pleased to come.

All this I shall do the better, Tu^.
if I limit my prayer, and my practice, with the next circumstance in David's
prayer, Tua, Satisfy us early with that which is thine, Thy mercy: For there
are mercies, (in a fair extent and accommodation of the word, that is
Refreshings, Eases, Deliverances) that are not his mercies, nor his
satisfactions. How many men are satisfied with Riches (I correct my self, few
are satisfied; but how many have enough to satisfy many?) and yet have never a
penny of his money? Nothing is his, that comes not from him, that comes not by
good means. How many are there, that are easy to admit scruples, and
jealousies, and suspicions in matter of Religion: Easy to think, that that
Religion, and that Church, in which they have lived ill, cannot be a good
Religion, nor a true Church; In a troubled, and distempered conscience, they
grow easy to admit scruples, and then as over-easie to admit false
satisfactions, with a word whispered on one side in a Conventicle, or a word
whispered on the other side in a Confession, and yet have never a dram of
satisfaction from his word, whose word is preached upon the house top, and
avowed, and not in corners? How many men are anguished with torturing Diseases,
racked with the conscience of ill-spent estates, oppressed with inordinate
melancholies, and irreligious dejections of spirit, and then repair, and
satisfy themselves with wine, with women, with fools, with comedies, with
mirth, and music, and with all Jobs miserable comforters, and all this while
have no beams of his satisfaction, it is not Misericordia ejus, his mercy, his
satisfaction? In losses of worldly goods, in sicknesses of children, or
servants, or cattle, to receive light or ease from Witches, this is not his
mercy. It is not his mercy, except we go by good ways to good ends; except
our safety be established by alliance with his friends, except our peace may
be had with the perfect continuance of our Religion, there is no safety, there
is no peace. But let me feel the effect of this Prayer, as it is a Prayer of
manifestation, Let me discern that, that that is done upon me, is done by
the hand of God, and I care not what it be: I had rather have Gods Vinegar,
then man's Oil, Gods Wormwood, then man's Manna, Gods Justice, then any man's
Mercy; for, therefore did Gregory Nyssen call S. Basil in a holy sense,
Ambidextrum, because he took every thing that came, by the right handle, and
with the right hand, because he saw it to come from God. Even afflictions are
welcome, when we see them to be his: Though the way that he would choose, and
the way that this Prayer entreats, be only mercy, Satisfy us early with thy
mercy.

That rod and that staff with which we are at any time corrected, is his.
Mis^ricordia Esaias 10.5.
So God calls the Assyrians, The rod of his anger, and he says, That the staff
that is in their hand, is his Indignation. He comes to a sharper execution,
from the rod, and the staff to the sword, and that also is his, It is my
sword, that is put into the hands of the King of Babylon, Ezekiel. 30.24.
and he shall stretch out my sword upon the whole land; God will beat down,
and cut off, and blow up, and blow out at his pleasure; which is expressed in a
phrase very remarkable by David, He brings the wind out of his Treasuries;
And then follow in that place, Psalm. 135.7.
all the Plagues of Egypt: storms and tempests, ruins and devastations, are
not only in Gods Armories, but they are in his Treasuries; as he is the Lord
of Hosts, he fetches his judgments from his Armories, and casts confusion
upon his enemies, but as he is the God of mercy, and of plentiful redemption,
he fetches these judgments, these corrections out of his treasuries, and they
are the Money, the Jewels, by which he redeemes and buys us again; God does
nothing, God can do nothing, no not in the way of ruin and destruction, but
there is mercy in it; he cannot open a door in his Armory, but a window into
his Treasury opens too, and he must look into that.

But then Gods corrections are his Acts, as the Physician is his Creature, God
created him for necessity. When God made man, his first intention was not that
man should fall, and so need a Messiah, nor that man should fall sick, and so
need a Physician, nor that man should fall into rebellion by sin, and so need
his rod, his staff, his scourge of afflictions, to whip him into the way
again. But yet says the Wiseman, Ecclus. 38.1.
Honor the Physician for the use you may have of him; slight him not, because
thou have no need of him yet. So though Gods corrections were not from a
primary, but a secondary intention, yet, when you see those corrections fall
upon another, give a good interpretation of them, and believe Gods purpose to
be not to destroy, but to recover that man: Do not thou make Gods Rheubarbe thy
Ratsbane, and poison thine own soul with an uncharitable misinterpretation of
that correction, which God has sent to cure his. And then, in thine own
afflictions, fly evermore to this Prayer, Satisfy us with thy mercy; first,
Satisfy us, make it appear to us that thine intention is mercy, though thou
enwrap it in temporal afflictions, in this dark cloud let us discern thy
Son, and though in an act of displeasure, see that thou art well pleased with
us; Satisfy us, that there is mercy in thy judgments, and then satisfy us,
that thy mercy is mercy; for such is the stupidity of sinful man, That as in
temporal blessings, we discern them best by wanting them, so do we the
mercies of God too; we call it not a mercy, to have the same blessings still:
but, as every man conceives a greater degree of joy, in recovering from a
sickness, then in his former established health; so without doubt, our
Ancestors who endured many years Civil and foreign wars, were more affected
with their first peace, then we are with our continual enjoying thereof, And
our Fathers more thankful, for the beginning of Reformation of Religion, then
we for so long enjoying the continuance thereof. Satisfy us with thy mercy,
Let us still be able to see mercy in thy judgments, lest they deject us, and
confound us; Satisfy us with thy mercy, let us be able to see, that our
deliverance is a mercy, and not a natural thing that might have happened so, or
a necessary thing that must have happened so, though there had been no God in
Heaven, nor providence upon earth. But especially since the way that thou
choosest, is to go all by mercy, and not to be put to this way of correction,
so dispose, so compose our minds, and so transpose all our affections, that we
may live upon thy food, and not put thee to thy physic, that we may embrace
thee in the light, and not be put to seek thee in the dark, that we come to
thee in thy Mercy, and not be whipped to thee by thy Corrections. And so we
have done also with our second Part, The pieces and petitions that constitute
this Prayer, as it is a Prayer for Fullness and Satisfaction, a Prayer of
Extent and Dilatation, a Prayer of Dispatch and Expedition, and then a Prayer
of Evidence and Declaration, and lastly, a Prayer of Limitation even upon God
himself, Satisfy, and satisfy us, and us early, with that which we may
discern to be thine, and let that way be mercy.

There remains yet a third Part, 3 Part. Gaudium.
what this Prayer produces, and it is joy, and continual joy, That we may
rejoice and be glad all our days. The words are the Parts, and we invert not,
we trouble not the Order; the Holy Ghost has laid them fitliest for our use,
in the Text it self, and so we take them. First then, the gain is joy. Joy is
Gods own Seal, and his keeper is the Holy Ghost; we have many sudden
ejaculations in the form of Prayer, sometimes inconsiderately made, and they
vanish so; but if I can reflect upon my prayer, ruminate, and return again
with joy to the same prayer, I have Gods Seal upon it. And therefore it is not
so very an idle thing, as some have mis-imagined it, to repeat often the same
prayer in the same words; Our Savior did so; he prayed a third time, and in
the same words; This reflecting upon a former prayer, is that that sets to this
Seal, this joy, and if I have joy in my prayer, it is granted so far as
concerns my good, and Gods glory. It has been disputed by many, both of the
Gentiles, with whom the Fathers disputed, and of the Schoolmen, who dispute
with one another, An sit gaudium in Deo, de semet, Whether God rejoice in
himself, in contemplation of himself, whether God be glad that he is God: But
it is disputed by them, only to establish it, and to illustrate it, for I do
not remember that any one of them denies it. It is true, that Plato dislikes,
and justly, that salutation of Dionysius the Tyran to God, Gaude, and servato
vitam Tyranni jucundam; that he should say to God, Live merrily, as merrily as
a King, as merrily as I do, and then you are God enough; to imagine such a joy
in God, as is only a transitory delight in deceivable things, is an impious
conceit. But when, as another Platonique says, Plotinus.
Deus est quod ipse semper voluit, God is that which he would be, If there be
something that God would be, and he be that, If Plato should deny, that God
joyed in himself, we must say of Plato as Lactantius does, Deum potius
somniaver at, quam cognoverat, Plato had rather dreamed that there was a God,
then understood what that God was. Bonum simplex, says S. Augustine, To be
sincere Goodness, Goodness it self, Ipsa est delectatio Dei, This is the joy
that God has in himself, of himself; And therefore says Philo Iudaeus, Hoc
necessarium Philosophiae sodalibus, This is the tenent of all Philosophers,
(And by that title of Philosophers, Philo always means them that know and
study God) Solum Deum vere festum agere, That only God can be truly said to
keep holy day, and to rejoice.

This joy we shall see, when we see him, who is so in it, as that he is this
joy it self. But here in this world, so far as I can enter into my Masters
sight, I can enter into my Masters joy. I can see God in his Creatures, in his
Church, in his Word and Sacraments, and Ordinances; Since I am not without this
sight, I am not without this joy. Here a man may Transilire mortalitatem,
Seneca.
says that Divine Moral man; I cannot put off mortality, but I can look upon
immortality; I cannot depart from this earth, but I can look into Heaven. So I
cannot possess that final and accomplished joy here, but as my body can lay
down a burden or a heavy garment, and joy in that ease, so my soul can put
off my body so far, as that the concupiscencies thereof, and the manifold and
miserable en^ cumbrances of this world, cannot extinguish this holy joy. And
this inchoative joy, David derives into two branches, To rejoice, and to be
glad.

The Holy Ghost is an eloquent Author, Exultatio.
a vehement, and an abundant Author, but yet not luxuriant; he is far from a
penurious, but as far from a superfluous style too. And therefore we do not
take these two words in the Text, To rejoice, and to be glad, to signify
merely one and the same thing, but to be two beams, two branches, two
effects, two expressings of this joy. We take them therefore, as they offer
themselves in their roots, and first natural propriety of the words. The
first, which we translate To rejoice, is Ranan; and Ranan denotes the external
declaration of internal joy; for the word signifies Cantare, To sing, and that
with an extended and loud voice, for it is the word, which is oftnest used for
the music of the Church, and the singing of Psalms; which was such a
declaration of their zealous alacrity in the primitive Church, as that, when to
avoid discovery in the times of persecution, they were forced to make their
meetings in the night, they were also forced to put out their Candles, because
by that light in the windows they were discovered; After that this meeting in
the dark occasioned a scandal and ill report upon those Christians, that
their meetings were not upon so holy purposes, as they pretended, they
discontinued their vigils, and night-meetings, yet their singing of Psalms,
when they did meet, they never discontinued, though that, many times, exposed
them to dangers, and to death it self, as some of the Authors of the secular
story of the Romans have observed and testified unto us. And some ancient
Decrees and Constitutions we have, in which such are forbidden to be made
Priests, as were not perfect in the Psalms. And though S. Hierome tell us
this, with some admiration, and note of singularity, That Paula could say the
whole book of Psalms without book, in Hebrew; yet he presents it as a thing
well known to be their ordinary practice; In villula Christi Bethlem,
extrapsalmos silentium est, In the village where I dwell, says he, where
Christ was borne, in Bethlem, if you cannot sing Psalms, you must be silent,
here you shall hear nothing but Psalms; for, (as he pursues it) Arator stivam
tenens, The husbandman that follows the plough, he that sowes, that reapes,
that carries home, all begin and proceed in all their labors with singing of
Psalms. Therefore he calls them there, Cantiones amatorias, Those that make or
entertain love, that seek in the holy and honorable way of marriage, to make
themselves acceptable and agreeable to one another, by no other good parts, nor
conversation, but by singing of Psalms. So he calls them, Pastorum sibilum,
and Arma culturae, Our shepherds, says S. Hierome, here, have no other
Eclogues, no other Pastoralls; Our laborers, our children, our servants no
other songs, nor Ballads, to recreate themselves withal, then the Psalms.

And this universal use of the Psalms, that they served all for all, gives
occasion to one Author, in the title of the Book of Psalms, to depart from
the ordinary reading, which is, Sepher Tehillim, The book of Praise, and to
read it, Sepher Telim, which is Acervorum, The book of Heaps, where all
assistances to our salvation are heaped and treasured up. And our Countryman
Bid found another Title, in some Copies of this book, Liber Soliloquiorum de
Christo, The Book of Meditations upon Christ; Because this book is (as
Gregory Nyssen calls it) Clavis David, that key of David, which lets us in to
all the mysteries of our Religion; which gave the ground to that which S. Basil
says, that if all the other Books of Scripture could be lost, he would ask no
more then the Book of Psalms, to catechize children, to edify Congregations,
to convert Gentiles, and to convince Heretics.

But we are launched into too large a Sea, the consideration of this Book of
Psalms. I mean but this, in this, That if we take that way with God, The way
of prayer, prayer so elemented and constituted, as we have said, that consists
rather of praise and thankesgiving, then supplication for future benefits, God
shall infuse into us, a zeal of expressing our consolation in him, by outward
actions, to the establishing of others; we shall not disavow, nor grow slack
in our Religion, nor in any parts thereof; God shall neither take from us, The
Candle and the Candlestick, The truth of the Gospel, which is the light, And
the cheerful, and authorized, and countenanced, and rewarded Preaching of the
Gospel, which is the Candlestick that exalts the light; nor take from us our
zeal to this outward service of God, that we come to an indifferency, whether
the service of God be private or public, sordid or glorious, allowed and
suffered, by way of connivency, or commanded and enjoined by way of authority.
God shall give us this Ranan, this rejoicing, this extern all joy, we shall
have the public preaching of the Gospel continued to us, and we shall show
that we rejoice in it, by frequenting it, and by instituting our lives
according unto it.

But yet this Ranan, this Rejoicing, this outward expressing of our inward
zeal, Delectabimur.
may admit interruptions, receive interceptions, intermissions, and
discontinuances; for, without doubt, in many places there live many persons,
well affected to the truth of Religion, that dare not avow it, express it,
declare it, especially where that fearful Vulture, the Inquisition, hovers
over them. And therefore the Holy Ghost has added here another degree of joy,
which no law, no severe execution of law, can take from us, in another word of
less extent, Shamach, which is an inward joy, only in the heart, which we
translate here, to be Glad. How far we are bound to proceed in outward
declarations of Religion, requires a serious and various consideration of
Circumstances. Dan. 6.10.
You know how far Daniel proceeded; The Lords had extorted a Proclamation from
the King, That no man should pray to any other God, then the King, for certain
days; Daniel would not only not be bound by this Proclamation, and so
continue his set and stationary hours of private prayer in his chamber, but he
would declare it to all the world; He would set open his chamber windows, that
he might be seen to pray; for, though some determine that act of Daniel, in
setting open his windows at prayer, in this, That because the Jews were bound
by their law, wheresoever they were, in war, in captivity, upon the way, or in
their sick beds, to turn toward Jerusalem, and so toward the Temple,
whenever they prayed, according to that stipulation, which had passed between
God and Solomon, at the Dedication of the Temple, When thy servants pray
toward this house, hear them in it; Therefore as Hezekias, in his sick bed,
when he turned toward the wall to pray, is justly thought, to have done so,
therefore that he might pray toward the Temple, which stood that way; so
Daniel is thought to have opened his windows to that purpose too, that he might
have the more free prospect toward Jerusalem from Babylon; though some, I say,
determine Daniels act in that, yet it is by more, and more usefully extended,
to an expressing of such a zeal, as, in so apparent a dishonor to his God,
could not be suffocated nor extinguished with a Proclamation.

In which act of his, which was a direct and evident opposing and affronting of
the State, though I dare not join with them, who absolutely and peremptorily
condemn this act of Daniel, because Gods subsequent act in a miraculous
deliverance of Daniel seems to imply some former particular revelation from God
to Daniel, that he should proceed in that confident manner, yet dare I much
less draw this act of Daniels into consequence, and propose it for an Example
and precedent to private men, least of all, to animate seditious men, who upon
pretense of a necessity, that God must be served in this, and this, and no
other manner, provoke and exasperate the Magistrate with their schismatic
conventicles and separations. But howsoever that may stand, and howsoever there
may be Circumstances which may prevail either upon humane infirmity, or upon a
rectified Conscience, or howsoever God in his Judgments, may cast a cloud upon
his own Sun, and darken the glory of the Gospel, in some place, for some
time, yet, though we lose our Ranan, our public Rejoicing, we shall never
lose our Shamach, our inward gladness, that God is our God, and we his
servants for all this. God will never leave his servants without this internal
joy, which shall preserve them from suspicions of Gods power, that he cannot
maintain, or not restore his cause, and from jealousies, that he has
abandoned or deserted them in particular. God shall never give them over to an
indifferency, nor to a stupidity, nor to an absence of tenderness, and holy
affections, that it shall become all one to them, how Gods cause prospers, or
suffers. But if I continue that way, prayer, and prayer so qualified, if I lose
my Ranan, my outward declarations of Rejoicing; If I be tied to a deathbed in
a Consumption, and cannot rejoice in coming to these public Congregations,
to participate of their prayers, and to impart to them my Meditations; If I be
ruined in my fortune, and cannot rejoice in an open distribution to the relief
of the poor, and a preaching to others, in that way, by example of doing good
works; If at my last minute, I be not able to edify my friends, nor Catechize
my children, with any thing that I can do or say; if I be not able so much, as
with hand or eye to make a sign, though I have lost my Ranan, all the
Eloquence of outward declaration, yet God shall never take from me, my Shamach,
my internal gladness and consolation, in his undeceivable and undeceiving
Spirit, that he is mine, and I am his; And this joy, this gladness, in my way,
and in my end, shall establish me; for that is that which is intended in the
next, and last word, Omnibus diebus, we shall Rejoice and be Glad all our days.

Nothing but this testimony, Omnibus diebus.
That the Spirit bears witness with my spirit, that upon my prayer, so
conditioned, of praise, and prayer, I shall still prevail with God, could
imprint in me, this joy, all my days. The seals of his favor, in outward
blessings, fail me in the days of shipwreck, in the days of fire, in the
days of displacing my potent friends, or raising mine adversaries; In such
days I cannot rejoice, and be glad. The seals of his favor, in inward
blessings, and holy cheerfulness, fail me in a present remorse after a sin
newly committed. But yet in the strength of a Christian hope, as I can
pronounce out of the grounds of Nature, in an Eclipse of the Sun, that the
Sun shall return to his splendour again, I can pronounce out of the grounds
of Gods Word, (and Gods Word is much better assurance, then the grounds of
Nature, for God can and does shake the grounds of Nature by Miracles, but no
Jod of his Word shall ever perish) that I shall return again on my hearty
penitence, if I delay it not, and rejoice and be glad all my days, that is,
what kind of day soever overtake me. In the days of our youth, when the joys
of this world take up all the room, there shall be room for this holy Joy,
that my recreations were harmless, and my conversation innocent; and
certainly to be able to say, that in my recreations, in my conversation, I
neither ministered occasion of tentation to another, nor exposed my self to
tentations from another, is a fair beam of this rejoicing in the days of my
youth. In the days of our Age, when we become incapable, insensible of the
joys of this world, yet this holy joy shall season us, not with a sinful
delight in the memory of our former sins, but with a re-juveniscence, a new
and a fresh youth, in being come so near to another, to an immortal life. In
the days of our mirth, and of laughter, this holy joy shall enter; And as the
Sun may say to the stars at Noone, How frivoulous and impertinent a thing
is your light now? So this joy shall say unto laughter, Thou art mad, and unto
mirth, Eccles. 2.2.
what do thou? And in the midnight of sadness, and dejection of spirit,
this joy shall shine out, and chide away that sadness, with David's holy
charm, My soul, why art thou cast down, why art thou disquieted within me?
In those days, which Job speaks of, Job 30.27.
Praevenerunt me dies afflictionis meae, Miseries are come upon me before their
time; My intemperances have hastened age, my riotousnesse has hastened poverty,
my neglecting of due officiousness and respect toward great persons has
hastened contempt upon me, Afflictions which I suspected not, thought not of,
have prevented my fears; and then in those days, which Job speaks of again,
Possident me dies afflictionis, Verse 16.
Studied and premeditated plots and practices swallowe me, possess me
entirely, In all these days, I shall not only have a Zoar to fly to, if I
can get out of Sodom, joy, if I can overcome my sorrow; There shall not be a
Goshen bordering upon my Egypt, joy, if I can pass beyond, or besides my
sorrow, but I shall have a Goshen in my Egypt, nay my very Egypt shall be my
Goshen, I shall not only have joy, though I have sorrow, but therefore; my
very sorrow shall be the occasion of joy; I shall not only have a Sabbath
after my six days labor, but Omnibus diebus, a Sabbath shall enlighten every
day, and inanimate every minute of every day: And as my soul is as well in my
foot, as in my hand, though all the weight and oppression lie upon the foot,
and all action upon the hand, so these beams of joy shall appear as well in
my pillar of cloud, as in theirs of fire; in my adversity, as well as in their
prosperity; And when their Sun shall set at Noone, mine shall rise at midnight;
they shall have damps in their glory, and I joyful exaltions in my dejections.

And to end with the end of all, In die mortis, In the day of my death, and
that which is beyond the end of all, and without end in it self, The day of
Judgment, If I have the testimony of a rectified conscience, that I have
accustomed my self to that access to God, by prayer, and such prayer, as
though it have had a body of supplication, and desire of future things, yet the
soul and spirit of that prayer, that is, my principal intention in that
prayer, has been praise and thanksgiving, If I be involved in S. Chrysostoms
Patent, Orantes, non natura, sed dispensatione Angeli fiunt, That those who
pray so, that is, pray by way of praise, (which is the most proper office of
Angels) as they shall be better then Angels in the next world, (for they shall
be glorifying spirits, as the Angels are, but they shall also be glorified
bodies, which the Angels shall never be) so in this world they they shall be
as Angels, because they are employed in the office of Angels, to pray by way of
praise, If, as S. Basil reads those words of that Psalm, not spiritus meus,
but respiratio mea laudet Dominum, Not only my spirit, but my very breath, not
my heart only, but my tongue, and my hands be accustomed to glorify God, In
die mortis, in the day of my death, when a mist of sorrow, and of sighs shall
fill my chamber, and a cloud exhaled and condensed from tears, shall be the
curtains of my bed, when those that love me, shall be sorry to see me die,
and the devil himself that hates me, sorry to see me die so, in the favor of
God; And In die Iudicii, In the day of Judgment, when as all Time shall cease,
so all measures shall cease; The joy, and the sorrow that shall be then, shall
be eternal, no end, and infinite, no measure, no limitation, when every
circumstance of sin shall aggravate the condemnation of the unrepentant
sinner, and the very substance of my sin shall be washed away, in the blood
of my Savior, when I shall see them, who sinned for my sake, perish eternally,
because they proceeded in that sin, and I my self, who occasioned their sin
received into glory, because God upon my prayer, and repentance had satisfied
me early with his mercy, early, that is, before my transmigration, In omnibus
diebus, In all these days, the days of youth, and the wantonnesses of that,
the days of age, and the tastlesnesse of that, the days of mirth, and the
sportfulness of that, and of inordinate melancholy, and the disconsolatenesse
of that, the days of such miseries, as astonish us with their suddenness, and
of such as aggravate their own weight with a heavy expectation; In the day of
Death, which pieces up that circle, and in that day which enters another circle
that has no pieces, but is one equal everlastingnesse, the day of Judgment,
Either I shall rejoice, be able to declare my faith, and zeal to the
assistance of others, or at least be glad in mine own heart, in a firm hope
of mine own salvation.

And therefore, beloved, as they, whom lighter affections carry to Shows, and
Masks, and Comedies; As you your selves, whom better dispositions bring to
these Exercises, conceive some contentment, and some kind of Joy, in that you
are well and commodiously placed, they to see the Show, you to hear the
Sermon, when the time comes, though your greater Joy be reserved to the
coming of that time; So though the fullness of Joy be reserved to the last
times in heaven, yet rejoice and be glad that you are well and commodiously
placed in the mean time, and that you sit but in expectation of the fullness
of those future Joys: Return to God, with a joyful thankfulness that he
has placed you in a Church, which withholds nothing from you, that is
necessary to salvation, whereas in another Church they lack a great part of the
Word, and half the Sacrament; And which obtrudes nothing to you, that is not
necessary to salvation, whereas in another Church, the Additionall things
exceed the Fundamental; the Occasional, the Original; the Collateral, the
Direct; And the Traditions of men, the Commandments of God. Maintain and hold
up this holy alacrity, this religious cheerfulness; For inordinate sadness is
a great degree and evidence of unthankfulness, and the departing from Joy in
this world, is a departing with one piece of our Evidence, for the Joys of the
world to come.

SERMON. LXXX. Preached at the funerals of Sir William Cokayne Knight, Alderman
of London, December 12. 1626.
JOH. 11.21. Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died.


GOd made the first Marriage, and man made the first Divorce; God married the
Body and Soul in the Creation, and man divorced the Body and Soul by death
through sin, in his fall. God does not admit, not justify, not authorize
such Super-inductions upon such Divorces, as some have imagined; That the soul
departing from one body, should become the soul of another body, in a
perpetual revolution and transmigration of souls through bodies, which has
been the giddiness of some Philosophers to think; Or that the body of the dead
should become the body of an evil spirit, that that spirit might at his will,
and to his purposes inform, and inanimate that dead body; God allows no such
Super-inductions, no such second Marriages upon such divorces by death, no such
disposition of soul or body, after their dissolution by death. But because God
has made the band of Marriage indissoluble but by death, farther then man can
die, this divorce cannot fall upon man; As far as man is immortal, man is a
married man still, still in possession of a soul, and a body too; And man is
for ever immortal in both; Immortal in his soul by Preservation, and
immortal in his body by Reparation in the Resurrection. For, though they be
separated a Thoro and Mensa, from Bed and Board, they are not divorced; Though
the soul be at the Table of the Lamb, in Glory, and the body but at the table
of the Serpent, in dust; Though the soul be in lecto florido, Cant. 1.16.
in that bed which is always green, in an everlasting spring, in Abraham's
Bosom; And the body but in that green-bed, whose covering is but a yard and a
half of Turfe, and a Rugge of grass, and the sheet but a winding sheet, yet
they are not divorced; they shall return to one another again, in an
inseparable reunion in the Resurrection. To establish this assurance of a
Resurrection in us, God does sometimes in this life, that which he has
promised for the next; that is, he gives a Resurrection to life, after a bodily
death here. God has made two Testaments, two Wills; And in both, he has
declared his Power, and his Will, to give this new life after death, in this
world. To the Widows son of Zarephtha, 1. King. 17.
he bequeaths new life; and to the Shunamites son, he gives the same legacy,
2 King. 4.
in the Old Testament. In the New Testament, to the widow of Naims son, Luke
7.8.
he bequeaths new life; And to Iairus daughter he gives the same legacy: And
out of the surplusage of his inexhaustible estate, out of the overflowing of
his Power, he enables his Executors to do as he did; for Peter gives Dorcas
this Resurrection too. Act. 9.40.
Diverse examples has he given us, of the Resurrection of every particular man,
in particular Resurrections; such as we have named; And one of the general
Resurrection, in the Resurrection of Christ himself; for, in him, we all rose;
for, he was All in All; Con-vivificavit, Ephesians. 2.5.
says the Apostle; and Considere nos fecit, God has quickened us, (all us; not
only S. Paul, and his Ephesians, but all) and God has raised us, and God has
made us to sit together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. They that are not
fallen yet by any actual sin, (children newly baptized) are risen already in
him; And they that are not dead yet, nay, not alive yet, not yet borne, have a
Resurrection in him, who was not only the Lamb slain from the beginning, but
from before all beginnings was risen too; and all that shall ever have part in
the second Resurrection, are risen with him from that time. Now, next to that
great Prophetical action, that type of the general Resurrection, in the
Resurrection of Christ, the most illustrious Evidence, of the Resurrection of
particular men, is this Resuscitation of Lazarus; whose sister Martha, directed
by faith, and yet transported by passion, seeks to entender and mollify, and
supple him to impressions of mercy and compassion, who was himself the Mold,
in which all mercy was cast, nay, the substance, of which all mercy does
consist, Christ Jesus, with this imperfect piece of Devotion, which has a
tincture of Faith, but is deeper dyed in Passion, Lord, if thou had been
here, my brother had not dyed.

This Text which you Hear, Martha's single words, Divisio.
complicated with this Text which you See, The dead body of this our Brother,
makes up between them this body of Instruction for the soul; first, That there
is nothing in this world perfect; And then, That such as it is, there is
nothing constant, nothing permanent. We consider the first, That there is
nothing perfect, in the best things, in spiritual things; Even Martha's
devotion and faith has imperfections in it; And we consider the other, That
nothing is permanent in temporal things; Riches prosperously multiplied,
Children honorably bestowed, Additions of Honor and Titles, fairly acquired,
Places of Command and Government, justly received, and duly executed; All
testimonies, all evidences of worldly happiness, have a Dissolution, a
Determination in the death of this, and of every such Man: There is nothing, no
spiritual thing, perfect in this world; Nothing, no temporal thing, permanent
and durable; And these two Considerations shall be our two parts; And then,
these the branches from these two roots; First, in the first, we shall see in
general, The weakness of Man's best actions; And secondly, more particularly,
The weaknesses in Martha's Action; And yet, in a third place, the easiness,
the propensnesse, the largeness of Gods goodness toward us, in the
acceptance of our imperfect Sacrifices; for, Christ does not refuse, nor
discourage Martha, though her action have these imperfections; And in this
largeness of his Mercy, which is the end of all, we shall end this part. And
in our second, That as in spiritual things nothing is perfect, so in
tempoporall things nothing is permanent, we shall, by the same three steps, as
in the former, look first upon the general consideration, the fluidnesse, the
transitorinesse of all such temporal things; And then, consider it more
particularly, in Gods Masterpiece, amongst mortal things, the body of man,
That even that flows into putrefaction; And then lastly, return to that, in
which we determined the former part, The largeness of Gods goodness to us, in
affording even to man's body, so dissolved into putrefaction, an incorruptible
and a glorious state. So have you the frame set up, and the rooms divided; The
two parts, and the three branches of each; And to the furnishing of them, with
meditations fit for this Occasion, we pass now.

In entering upon the first branch of our first part, 1. Part. In spiritualibus,
nihil perfectum. Scientia.
That in spiritual things nothing is perfect, we may well afford a kind of
spiritual nature to knowledge; And how imperfect is all our knowledge? What
one thing do we know perfectly? Whether we consider Arts, or Sciences, the
servant knows but according to the proportion of his Masters knowledge in that
Art, and the Scholar knows but according to the proportion of his Masters
knowledge in that Science; Young men mend not their sight by using old men's
Spectacles; and yet we look upon Nature, but with Aristotle's Spectacles, and
upon the body of man, but with Galens, and upon the frame of the world, but
with Ptolomies Spectacles. Almost all knowledge is rather like a child that is
embalmed to make Mummy, then that is nursed to make a Man; rather conserved in
the stature of the first age, then grown to be greater; And if there be any
addition to knowledge, it is rather a new knowledge, then a greater knowledge;
rather a singularity in a desire of proposing something that was not known at
all before, then an emproving, an advancing, a multiplying of former
inceptions; and by that means, no knowledge comes to be perfect. One
Philosopher thinks he is dived to the bottom, when he says, he knows nothing
but this, That he knows nothing; and yet another thinks, that he has expressed
more knowledge then he, in saying, That he knows not so much as that, That he
knows nothing. S. Paul found that to be all knowledge, To know Christ; And
Mahomet thinks himself wise therefore, because he knows not, acknowledges not
Christ, as S. Paul does. Though a man knew not, that every sin casts another
shovell of Brimstone upon him in Hell, yet if he knew that every riotous feast
cuts off a year, and every wanton night seven years of his seventy in this
world, it were some degree toward perfection in knowledge. He that purchases a
Manor, will think to have an exact Survey of the Land: But who thinks of
taking so exact a survey of his Conscience, how that money was got, that
purchased that Manor? We call that a man's means, which he has; But that is
truly his means, what way he came by it. And yet how few are there, (when a
state comes to any great proportion) that know that; that know what they have,
what they are worth? We have seen great Wills, dilated into glorious uses, and
into pious uses, and then too narrow an estate to reach to it; And we have seen
Wills, where the Testator thinks he has bequeathed all, and he has not known
half his own worth. When thou know a wife, a son, a servant, a friend no
better, but that that wife betrays thy bed, and that son thine estate, and
that servant thy credit, and that friend thy secret, what can thou say thou
know? But we must not insist upon this Consideration of knowledge; for,
though knowledge be of a spiritual nature, yet it is but as a terrestrial
Spirit, conversant upon Earth; Spiritual things, of a more rarefied nature
then knowledge, even faith it self, and all that grows from that in us, falls
within this Rule, which we have in hand, That even in spiritual things,
nothing is perfect.

We consider this therefore in Credendis, Fides.
In things that we are bound to Believe, there works our faith; And then, in
Petendis, In things that we are bound to pray for, there works our hope; And
lastly, in Agendis, In things that we are bound to do, and there works our
charity; And there is nothing in any of these three perfect. When you remember
who they were, Luke 17.5.
that made that prayer, Domine adauge, That the Apostles themselves prayed,
that their faith might receive an increase, Lord increase our faith, you must
necessarily second that consideration with a confession, That no man's faith is
perfect. When you hear Christ so often upbraid, sometimes whole Congregations,
with that, Mat. 6.30.
Modicae fidei, O ye of little faith; And sometimes his Disciples alone, with
the same reproach, Mat. 8.26.
Modicae fidei, O ye of little faith; when you may be perplexed with the
variety of opinions amongst the ancient Interpreters, whether Christ spoke but
to the incredulous Jews, Mat. 17.17.
or to his own Disciples, when he said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? (for many
Interpreters go one way, and many the other) And when you may be cleared
without any color of perplexity, that to whom soever Christ spoke in that
place, he spoke plainly to his own Disciples, Verse. 20.
when he said, Because of your unbelief you cannot do this; In which
Disciples of his, he denies also, that there is such a proportion of faith, as
a grain of Mustardseed, can ye place a perfectness of faith in any? When the
Apostle takes knowledge of the good estate and condition of the Thessalonians,
and gave God thanks for their Works of faith, for their labors of love, for
their patience of hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ: 1 These. 1.2.3.10.
does he conclude them to be perfect? No; for after this he says, Night and
day we pray exceedingly, that we may perfect that which is lacking in your
faith. And after this, he sees the fruit of those prayers, We are bound to
thank God always, 2 These. 1.3.
because your faith grows exceedingly; still, at the best, it is but a
growing faith, and it may be better. There are men that are said to be Rich in
faith; James 2.5.
men that are come from the weak and beggarly elements of Nature, or of the
Law, to the knowledge of the precious and glorious Gospel, Galat. 4.9.
and so are Rich in faith, enriched, emproved by faith. 2 Cor. 8.7.
There are men that Abound in faith; that is, in comparison of the emptiness
of other men, or of their own emptiness before they embraced the Gospel,
they abound now; But still it is, Romans 12.3.
As God has given the measure of faith to every man; Not as of his Manna, a
certain measure, and an equal measure, and a full measure to every man; no
man has such a measure of faith, as that he needs no more, or that he may not
lose at least some of that. When Christ speaks so doubtfully, When the Son of
man comes, shall he find faith upon earth? Luke 18.^.
Any faith in any man? If the Holy Ghost be come into this presence, into this
Congregation, does he find faith in any? A perfect faith he does not.

Deceive not your selves then, with that new charm and flattery of the soul,
That if once you can say to your selves you have faith, you need no more, or
that you shall always keep that alive; The Apostle says, All boasting, that
is, all confidence, Romans 3.27.
is excluded; By what Law? says he, by the Law of faith, Not by faith, but by
the Law of faith; There is a Law of faith; a rule that ordinates, and regulates
our faith; by which law and rule, the Apostle calls upon us, To examine our
selves whether we be in the faith, or no; 2 Cor. 13.5.
not only by the internal motions, and private inspirations of his blessed
Spirit, but by the Law and the Rule, which he has delivered to us in the
Gospel. The Kings pardon flows from his mere grace, and from his breast; but
we must have the writing and the Seal, that we may plead it: So does faith
from God; But we must see it our selves, and show it to others, or else we do
not observe the Law of faith. Romans 4.11.
Abraham received the Seal of the righteousness of faith, says the Apostle;
He had an outward testimony to proceed by; And then, Abraham became an outward
testimony and Rule to the faithful, Walk in the steps of the faith of
Abraham, says that Apostle in that place; Ver. 12.
Not a faith conceived only, but a faith which you saw, The faith of Abraham;
for, so the Apostle proposing to us the example of other men says, Their faith
follow you, Heb. 13.7.
Not faith in general, but their faith. So that it is not enough to say, I
feel the inspiration of the Spirit of God, He infuses faith, and faith infused
cannot be withdrawn; but, as there is a Law of faith, and a practice of faith,
a Rule of faith, and an example of faith, apply thy self to both, Regulate thy
faith by the Rule, that is, the Word, and by Example, that is, Believe those
things which the Saints of God have constantly and unanimely believed to be
necessary to salvation: The Word is the Law, and the Rule, The Church is the
Practice, and the Precedent that regulates thy faith; And if thou make
imaginary revelations, and inspirations thy Law, or the practice of Sectaries
thy Precedent, thou do but call Fancy and Imagination, by the name of
Reason and Understanding, and Opinion by the name of Faith, and Singularity,
and Schism, by the name of Communion of Saints. The Law of thy faith is, That
that that thou beleevest, be Universal, Catholic, believed by all; And then,
that the Application be particular, To believe, that as Christ dyed
sufficiently for all, so he dyed effectually for thee. And of this effectual
dying for thee, there arises an evidence from thy self, in thy conformity to
him; Thy conformity consists in this, That thou art willing to live according
to his Gospel, and ready to dye for him, that dyed for thee. For, till a man
have resisted unto blood, he cannot know experimentally what degrees toward
perfection his faith has: And though he may conceive in himself a holy
purpose to dye for Christ, yet till he have dyed for Christ, or dyed in Christ,
that is, as long as we are in this valley of tentations, there is nothing, no
not in spiritual things, not in faith it self, perfect.

It is not In credendis, in our embracing the object of faith; we do not that
perfectly; Spes.
It is not In petendis, in our directing our prayers faithfully neither; we do
not that; our faith is not perfect, nor our hope is not perfect; for, so argues
the Apostle, Ye ask, James 4.3.
and receive not, because ye ask amiss; you cannot hope constantly, because
you do not pray aright: And to make a Prayer a right Prayer, there go so many
essential circumstances, as that the best man may justly suspect his best
Prayer: for, since Prayer must be of faith, Prayer can be but so perfect, as
the faith is perfect; and the imperfections of the best faith we have seen.
Christ has given us but a short Prayer; and yet we are weary of that. Some of
the old Heretics of the Primitive Church abridged that Prayer, and some of
our later Schismatiques have annihilated, evacuated that Prayer: The Cathari
then, left out that one Petition, Dimitte nobis, Forgive us our trespasses, for
they thought themselves so pure, as that they needed no forgiveness, and our
new men leave out the whole Prayer, because the same Spirit that spoke in
Christ, speaks in their extemporall prayers, and they can pray, as well as
Christ could teach them. And (to leave those, whom we are bound to leave, those
old Heretics, those new Schismatiques) which of us ever, ever says over that
short Prayer, with a deliberate understanding of every Petition as we pass, or
without deviations, and extravagancies of our thoughts, in that halfe-minute of
our Devotion? We have not leisure to speak of the abuse of prayer in the Roman
Church; where they will antidate and postdate their prayers; Say to morrows
prayers to day, and to days prayers to morrow, if they have other uses and
employments of the due time between; where they will trade, and make
merchandise of prayers by way of exchange, My man shall fast for me, and I will
pray for my man; or my Attorney, and Proxy shall pray for us both, at my
charge; nay, where they will play for prayers, and the loser must pray for
both; To this there belongs but a holy scorn, and I would feign pass it over
quickly. But when we consider with a religious seriousness the manifold
weaknesses of the strongest devotions in time of Prayer, it is a sad
consideration. I throw my self down in my Chamber, and I call in, and invite
God, and his Angels thither, and when they are there, I neglect God and his
Angels, for the noise of a Fly, for the rattling of a Coach, for the whining of
a door; I talk on, in the same posture of praying; Eyes lifted up; knees
bowed down; as though I prayed to God; and, if God, or his Angels should ask
me, when I thought last of God in that prayer, I cannot tell: Sometimes I find
that I had forgot what I was about, but when I began to forget it, I cannot
tell. A memory of yesterdays pleasures, a fear of to morrows dangers, a straw
under my knee, a noise in mine ear, a light in mine eye, an any thing, a
nothing, a fancy, a Chimera in my brain, troubles me in my prayer. So
certainly is there nothing, nothing in spiritual things, perfect in this
world.

Not In credendis, Charitas.
In things that belong to Faith; not In petendis, In things that belong to
Hope; nor In agendis, In things that belong to Action, to Works, to Charity,
there is nothing perfect there neither. I would be loath to say, That every
good work is a sin; That were to say, That every deformed, or disordered man
were a beast, or that every corrupt meat were poison; It is not utterly so; not
so altogether; But it is so much toward it, as that there is no work of ours
so good, as that we can look for thanks at Gods hand for that work; no
work, that has not so much ill mingled with it, as that we need not cry God
mercy for that work. There was so much corruption in the getting, or so much
vain glory in the bestowing, as that no man builds an Hospital, but his soul
lies, though not dead, yet lame in that Hospital; no man mends a highway, but
he is, though not drowned, yet mired in that way; no man relieves the poor,
but he needs relief for that relief. In all those works of Charity, the
world that has benefit by them, is bound to confess and acknowledge a
goodness, and to call them good works; but the man that does them, and knows
the weaknesses of them, knows they are not good works. It is possible to Art,
to purge a peccant humor out of a sick body; but not possible to raise a dead
body to life. God, out of my Confession of the impuritie of my best actions,
shall vouchsafe to take off his eyes from that impurity, as though there were
none; but no spiritual thing in us, not Faith, not Hope, not Charity, have
any purity, any perfection in themselves; which is the general Doctrine we
proposed at first; And our next Consideration is, how this weakness appears
in the Action, and in the Words of Martha in our Text, Lord, if thou had
been here, my brother had not dyed.

Now lest we should attribute this weakness, Marthae fides
only to weak persons, upon whom we had a prejudice, to Martha alone, we note
to you first, that her sister Mary, to whom in the whole Story very much is
ascribed, when she comes to Christ, comes also in the same voice of infirmity,
Ver. 32.
Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died. No person so perfect,
that has not of these imperfections; Both these holy Sisters, howsoever there
might be differences of degrees in their holiness, have imperfections in all
three, in the consideration of their Faith, and their Hone, and their Charity;
though in all three they had also, and had both, good degrees toward
perfection. Look first upon their Faith; they both say, Lord, if thou had
been here, our brother had not died. We cannot say so to any Consultation, to
any College of Physicians; not to a Chiron, to an Esculapius, to a God of
Physic, could any man say, If you had been here, my friend had not died?
though surely there be much assistance to be received from them, whom God has
endowed with knowledge to that purpose. And yet there was a weakness in these
Sisters, in that they said but so, and no more to Christ. They thought Christ
to be the best amongst good men; but yet they were not come to the knowledge
that he was God. Martha says, I know, that even now, whatsoever thou ask of
God, Verse 22.
God will give it thee; but she does not know him to be God himself. I do not
here institute a confutation, but here, and every where I lament the growth,
and insinuation of that pestilent Heresy of Socinianisme; That Christ was a
holy, a thrice-holy man, an unreproachable, an irreprehensible, an admirable,
an incomparable man; A man, to whom, he that should equal any other man, were
worse then a Devil; A man worthy to be called God, in a far higher sense
then any Magistrate, any King, any Prophet; But yet he was no God, say they,
no Son of God; A Redemer, by way of good example; but no Redeemer, by way of
equivalent satisfaction, say those Heretics. S. Paul says, Ephesians. 2.12.
He is an Atheist, that is without Christ; And he is as much an Atheist still,
that pretends to receive Christ, and not as God; For if the receiving of Christ
must redeem him from being an Atheist, there can no other way be imagined, but
by receiving him as God, for that only, and no other good opinion of Christ,
overcomes, and removes his Atheism. After the last day, whatsoever is not
Heaven, is Hell; He that then shall be where the Sun is now, (if he be not
then in heaven) shall be as far from heaven, as if he were where the Center
of the earth is now; He that confesses not all Christ, confesses no Christ.
Horribile dictu, dicam tamen, says S. Augustine in another case; There belongs
a holy trembing to the saying of it, yet I must say it, If Christ were not God,
he was a devil that durst say he was God. This then was one weakness in
these Sisters faith, that it carried them not up to the consideration of Christ
as God; And then another rose out of that, That they insisted so much, relied
so much, upon his corporal, and personal presence, and promised themselves
more from that, then he had ever given them ground for; which was that which
Christ diverted Mary from, when after his Resurrection manifesting himself to
her, and she flying unto him with that impatient zeal, and that impetuous
devotion, Rabboni, Master, My Master, Christ said to her, Ioh. 20.16.
Touch me not, for I am not ascended to my Father; that is, Dwell not upon
this passionate consideration of my bodily, and personal presence, but send
thy thoughts, and thy reverence, and thy devotion, and thy holy amorousnesse
up, whither I am going, to the right hand of my Father, and consider me,
contemplate me there. S. Peter had another holy distemper of another kind,
upon the personal presence of Christ; He was so astonished at his presence in
the power of a Miracle, that he fell down at his feet, and said, Luke 5.8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. These Sisters longed for him,
and S. Peter longed as much to be delivered of him; both out of weakness and
error. So is it an error, and a weakness to attribute too much, or too little
to Christ's presence in his Sacraments, or other Ordinances. To imprison Christ
in Opere operato, to conclude him so, as that where that action is done, Christ
must necessarily be, and necessarily work, this is to say weakly with these
Sisters, Lord, if thou had been here, our brother had not died. As long as
we are present at thine Ordinance, thou art present with us. But to banish
Christ from those holy actions, and to say, That he is no otherwise present, or
works no otherwise in those actions, then in other times, and places, this is
to say with Peter, in his astonishment, Exi a me Domine, O Lord depart from me;
It is enough that thy Sacrament be a sign; I do not look that it should be a
Seal, or a Conduit of Grace; This is the danger this is the distemper, to
ascribe too much, or too little to Gods visible Ordinances, and Institutions,
either to say with those holy Sisters, Lord, if thou had been here, our
brother had not died, If we have a Sacrament, if we have a Sermon all is well,
we have enough; or else with Peter, Exi a me, Leave me to my self, to my
private motions, to my bosom inspirations, and I need no Church-work, no
Sermons, no Sacraments, no such assistances.

So there was weakness in their Faith, Marthae spes.
there was so too in their Hope, in their confidence in Christ, and in their
manner of expressing it. For, they did not go to him, when their brother was
sick, Joh. 3.1. Mat. 8.5. Mark 5.25, 33.
but sent. Nicodemus came in person for his sick soul; And the Centurion in
person, for his sick servant; And Iairus in person, for his sick daughter; And
the woman with the bloody Issue in person, for her sick-selfe. These sisters
did but send, but piously, and reverendly; Their Messenger was to say to
Christ, not Lazarus, not Our Brother, but He whom thou love, is sick; And
they left this intimation to work upon Christ; But that was not enough, we must
bring Christ and our necessities nearer together then so. There is good
instruction in the several expressings of Christ's curings of Peter's mother in
the Evangelists. Mark 1.29.
S. Mark says, They told him of her; And S. Luke says, They brought him up
to her; And S. Matthew says, He saw her, and took her by the hand. I must not
wrap up all my necessities in general terms in my prayers, but descend to
particulars; For this places my devotion upon particular considerations of God,
to consider him in every Attribute, what God has done for me in Power, what in
Wisdom, what in Mercy; which is a great assistance, and establishing, and
propagation of devotion. As it is a degree of unthankfulness, to thank God too
generally, and not to delight to insist upon the weight, and measure, and
proportion, and the goodness of every particular mercy: so is it an
irreverent, and inconsiderate thing, not to take my particular wants into my
thoughts, and into my prayers, that so I may take a holy knowledge, that I have
nothing, nothing but from God, and by prayer. And as God is an accessible God,
as he is his own Master of Requests, and is ever open to receive thy Petions,
in how small a matter soever: so is he an inexhaustible God, he can give
infinitely, and an indefatigable God, he cannot be pressed too much. Therefore
has Christ given us a Parable of getting Bread at midnight by Importunity,
Luke 11.5.18.7.
and not otherwise; And another of a Judge that heard the widows cause by
Importunity, and not otherwise; And, not a Parable, Matt. 15.21.
but a History, and a History of his own, of a woman of Canaan, that overcame
him in the behalf of her daughter, by Importunity; when, but by importunity,
she could not get so much as an answer, as a denial at his hands. Pray
personally, rely not upon dead nor living Saints; Thy Mother the Church prays
for thee, but pray for thy self too; She can open her bosom, and put the
breast to thy mouth, but thou must draw, and suck for thy self. Pray
personally, and pray frequently; David had may stationary times of the day, and
night too, to pray in. Pray frequently, and pray fervently; God took it not
ill, at David's hands, to be awaked, and to be called up, as though he were
asleep at our prayers, and to be called upon, to pull his hand out of his
bosom, as though he were slack in relieving our necessities. This was a
weakness in those Sisters, that they solicited not Christ in person; still get
as near God as you can; And that they declared not their case particularly; It
is not enough to pray, nor to confess in general terms; And, that they
pursued not their prayer earnestly, thoroughly; It is not enough to have prayed
once; Christ does not only excuse, but enjoine Importunity.

And then a weakness there was in their Charity too, Marthae charitas.
even toward their dead brother. To lament a dead friend is natural, and
civil; and he is the deader of the two, the verier carcass, that does not so.
But inordinate lamentation implies a suspicion of a worse state in him that is
gone; And if I do believe him to be in heaven, deliberately, advisedly to wish
him here, that is in heaven, is an uncharitable desire. For, for me to say, He
is preferred by being where he is, but I were better, if he were again where I
am, were such an indispofition, as if the Princes servant should be loath to
see his Master King, because he should not hold the same place with him, being
King, as he did when he was Prince. Not to hope well of him that is gone, is
uncharitableness; and at the same time, when I believe him to be better, to
wish him worse, is uncharitableness too. And such weaknesses were in those
holy and devout Sisters of Lazarus; which establishes our Conclusion, There is
nothing in this world, no not in spiritual things, not in knowledge, not in
faith, not in hope, not in charity perfect. But yet, for all these
imperfections, Christ does not refuse, nor chide, but cherish their piety,
which is also another circumstance in that Part.

There is no form of Building stronger then an Arch, and yet an Arch has
declinations, which even a flat-roofe has not; Non rejicit Christus.
The flat-roofe lies equal in all parts; the Arch declines downwards in all
parts, and yet the Arch is a firm supporter. Our Devotions do not the less
bear us upright, in the sight of God, because they have some declinations
toward natural affections: God does easilier pardon some neglectings of his
grace, when it proceeds out of a tenderness, or may be excused out of good
nature, then any presuming upon his grace. If a man do depart in some actions,
from an exact obedience of Gods will, upon infirmity, or humane affections, and
not a contempt, God passes it over often times. For, when our Savior Christ
says, Be pure as your Father in heaven is pure, that is a rule for our purity,
but not a measure of our purity; It is that we should be pure so, not that we
should be so pure as our Father in heaven. When we consider that weakness,
that went through the Apostles, even to Christ's Ascension, that they looked for
a temporal Kingdom, and for preferment in that; when we consider that
weakness in the chief of them, S. Peter, at the Transfiguration, when, Mar.
9.6.
as the Text says, He knew not what to say; when we consider the weakness of
his action, that for fear of death, he renounced the Lord of Life, and denied
his Master; when in this very story, when Christ said that Lazarus was asleep,
and that he would go to awake him, they could understand it so impertinently,
as that Christ should go such a journey, to come to the waking of a man,
asleep at that time when he spoke; All these infirmities of theirs, multiply
this consolation upon us, That though God look upon the Inscription, he looks
upon the metal too, Though he look that his Image should be preserved in us,
he looks in what earthen vessels this Image is put, and put by his own hand;
and though he hate us in our rebellions, yet he pities us in our grievances;
though he would have us better, he forsakes us not for every degree of
illness. There are three great dangers in this consideration of perfectness,
and purity; First to distrust of Gods mercy, if thou find not this purity in
thy self, and this perfectness; And then to presume upon God, nay upon thine
own right, in an overvaluing of thine own purity, and perfectness; And again,
to condemn others, whom thou will needs think less pure, or perfect then thy
self. Against this diffidence in God, to think our selves so desperately
impure, as that God will not look upon us; And this presumption in God, to
think our selves so pure, as that God is bound to look upon us; And this
uncharitableness toward others, to think none pure at all, that are not pure
our way; Christ arms us by his Example, He receives these sisters of Lazarus,
and accomplishes as much as they desired, though there were weaknesses in their
Faith, in their Hope, in their Charity, expressed in that unperfect speech,
Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed: for, there is nothing,
not in spiritual things perfect. This we have seen out of the Text we have
Heard; And now out of the Text, which we See, we shall see the rest, That as in
spiritual things, there is nothing Perfect, so in temporal, there is nothing
Permanent.

I need not call in new Philosophy, that denies a settlednesse, 2. Part.
an acquiescence in the very body of the Earth, but makes the Earth to move in
that place, where we thought the Sun had moved; I need not that help, that
the Earth it self is in Motion, to prove this, That nothing upon Earth is
permanent; The Assertion will stand of it self, till some man assign me some
instance, something that a man may rely upon, and find permanent. Consider the
greatest Bodies upon Earth, The Monarchies; Objects, which one would think,
Destiny might stand and stare at, but not shake; Consider the smallest bodies
upon Earth, The hairs of our head, Objects, which one would think, Destiny
would not observe, or could not discern; And yet, Destiny, (to speak to a
natural man) And God, (to speak to a Christian) is no more troubled to make a
Monarchy ruinous, then to make a hair gray. Nay, nothing needs be done to
either, by God, or Destiny; A Monarchy will ruin, as a hair will grow gray,
of it self. In the Elements themselves, of which all sub-elementary things are
composed, there is no acquiescence, but a vicissitudinary transmutation into
one another; Air condensed becomes water, a more solid body, And Air rarefied
becomes fire, a body more disputable, and in-apparant. It is so in the
Conditions of men too; A Merchant condensed, kneaded and packed up in a great
estate, becomes a Lord; And a Merchant rarefied, blown up by a perfidious
Factor, or by a riotous Son, evaporates into air, into nothing, and is not
seen. And if there were any thing permanent and durable in this world, yet we
got nothing by it, because howsoever that might last in it self, yet we could
not last to enjoy it; If our goods were not amongst Movables, yet we our
selves are; if they could stay with us, yet we cannot stay with them; which is
another Consideration in this part.

The world is a great Volume, and man the Index of that Book; Corpus hominis.
Even in the body of man, you may turn to the whole world; This body is an
Illustration of all Nature; Gods recapitulation of all that he had said before,
in his Fiat lux, and Fiat firmamentum, and in all the rest, said or done, in
all the six days. Propose this body to thy consideration in the highest
exaltation thereof; as it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Nay, not in a
Metaphor, or comparison of a Temple, or any other similitudinary thing, but as
it was really and truly the very body of God, in the person of Christ, and yet
this body must wither, must decay, must languish, must perish. When Goliath had
armed and fortified this body, And Iezabel had painted and perfumed this body,
And Dives had pampered and larded this body, As God said to Ezekiel, when he
brought him to the dry bones, Fili hominis, Son of Man, do thou think
these bones can live? They said in their hearts to all the world, Can these
bodies die? And they are dead. Iezabels dust is not Ambar, nor Goliahs dust
Terra sigillata, Medicinal; nor does the Serpent, whose meat they are both,
find any better relish in Dives dust, then in Lazarus. But as in our former
part, where our foundation was, That in nothing, no spiritual thing, there was
any perfectness, which we illustrated in the weaknesses of Knowledge, and
Faith, and Hope, and Charity, yet we concluded, that for all those defects, God
accepted those their religious services; So in this part, where our foundation
is, That nothing in temporal things is permanent, as we have illustrated that,
by the decay of that which is Gods noblest piece in Nature, The body of man; so
we shall also conclude that, with this goodness of God, that for all this
dissolution, and putrefaction, he affords this Body a Resurrection.

The Gentiles, Resurrectio.
and their Poets, describe the sad state of Death so, Nox una obeunda, That it
is one everlasting Night; To them, a Night; But to a Christian, it is Dies
Mortis, and Dies Resurrectionis, The day of Death, and The day of Resurrection;
We die in the light, in the sight of Gods presence, and we rise in the light,
in the sight of his very Essence. Nay, Gods corrections, and judgments upon us
in this life, are still expressed so, Dies visitationis, still it is a Day,
though a Day of visitation; and still we may discern God to be in the action.
Genesis 2.
The Lord of Life was the first that named Death; Morte morieris, says God,
Thou shall die the Death. I do the less fear, or abhor Death, because I
find it in his mouth; Even a malediction has a sweetness in his mouth; for
there is a blessing wrapped up in it; a mercy in every correction, a
Resurrection upon every Death. When Iezabels beauty, exalted to that height
which it had by art, or higher then that, to that height which it had in her
own opinion, shall be infinitely multiplied upon every Body; And as God shall
know no man from his own Son, so as not to see the very righteousness of his
own Son upon that man; So the Angels shall know no man from Christ, so as not
to desire to look upon that man's face, because the most deformed wretch that
is there, shall have the very beauty of Christ himself; So shall Goliahs
armor, and Dives fullness, be doubled, and redoubled upon us, And every thing
that we can call good, shall first be infinitely exalted in the goodness, and
then infinitely multiplied in the proportion, and again infinitely extended in
the duration. And since we are in an action of preparing this dead Brother of
ours to that state, (for the Funeral is the Easter-eve, The Burial is the
depositing of that man for the Resurrection) As we have held you, with Doctrine
of Mortification, by extending the Text, from Martha to this occasion; so shall
we dismiss you with Consolation, by a like occasional inverting the Text,
from passion in Martha's mouth, Lord, if thou had been here, my Brother had
not dyed, to joy in ours, Lord, because thou wast here, our Brother is not dead.

The Lord was with him in all these steps; In vita.
with him in his life; with him in his death; He is with him in his funerals,
and he shall be with him in his Resurrection; and therefore, because the Lord
was with him, our Brother is not dead. He was with him in the beginning of his
life, in this manifestation, That though he were of Parents of a good, of a
great Estate, yet his possibility and his expectation from them, did not
slacken his own industry; which is a Canker that eats into, nay that has eat
up many a family in this City, that relying wholly upon what the Father has
done, the Son does nothing for himself. And truly, it falls out too often,
that he that labors not for more, does not keep his own. God imprinted in him
an industrious disposition, though such hopes from such parents might have
excused some slacknesse, and God prospered his industry so, as that when his
Fathers estate came to a distribution by death, he needed it not. God was with
him, Psalm. 81.11.
as with David in a Dilatation, and then in a Repletion; God enlarged him, and
then he filled him; He gave him a large and a comprehensive understanding, and
with it, A public heart; And such as perchance in his way of education, and
in our narrow and contracted-times, in which every man determines himself in
himself, and scarce looks farther, it would be hard to find many Examples of
such largeness. You have, I think, a phrase of Driving a Trade; And you have,
I know, a practice of Driving away Trade, by other use of money; And you have
lost a man, that drove a great Trade, the right way in making the best use of
our home-commodity. To fetch in Wine, and Spice, and Silk, is but a drawing of
Trade; The right driving of trade, is, to vent our own outward; And yet, for
the drawing in of that, which might justly seem most behoofefull, that is, of
Arts, and Manufactures, to be employed upon our own Commodity within the
Kingdom, he did his part, diligently, at least, if not vehemently, if not
passionately. This City is a great Theater, and he Acted great and various
parts in it; And all well; And when he went higher, (as he was often heard in
Parliaments, at Council tables, and in more private accesses to the late King
of ever blessed memory) as, for that comprehension of those businesses, which
he pretended to understand, no man doubts, for no man lacks arguments and
evidences of his ability therein, So for his manner of expressing his
intentions, and digesting and uttering his purposes, I have sometimes heard the
greatest Master of Language and Judgment, which these times, or any other did,
or do, or shall give, (that good and great King of ours) say of him, That he
never heard any man of his breeding, handle businesses more rationally, more
pertinently, more elegantly, more perswasively; And when his purpose was, to do
a grace to a Preacher, of very good abilities, and good note in his own
Chapel, I have heard him say, that his language, and accent, and manner of
delivering himself, was like this man. This man has God accompanied all his
life; and by performance thereof seems to have made that Covenant with him,
which he made to Abraham, Multiplicabote vehementer, Genesis 17.2.
I will multiply thee exceedingly. He multiplied his estate so, as was fit to
endow many and great Children; and he multiplied his Children so, both in their
number, and in their quality, as they were fit to receive a great Estate. God
was with him all the way, In a Pillar of Fire, in the brightness of
prosperity, and in the Pillar of Clouds too, in many dark, and sad, and heavy
crosses: So great a Ship, required a great Ballast, So many blessings, many
crosses; And he had them, and sailed on his course the steadier for them; The
Cloud as well as the Fire, was a Pillar to him; His crosses, as well as his
blessings established his assurance in God; And so, in all the course of his
life, The Lord was here, and therefore our Brother is not dead; not dead in the
evidences and testimonies of life; for he, whom the world has just cause to
celebrate, for things done, when he was alive, is alive still in their
celebration.

The Lord was here, that is, with him at his death too. In morte.
He was served with the Process here in the City, but his cause was heard in
the Country; Here he sickned, There he languished, and dyed there. In his
sickness there, those that assisted him, are witnesses, of his many
expressings, of a religious and a constant heart toward God, and of his pious
joining with them, even in the holy declaration of kneeling, then, when they,
in favor of his weakness, would dissuade him from kneeling. I must not
defraud him of this testimony from ^y self, that into this place where we are
now met, I have observed him to enter with much reverence, and compose himself
in this place with much declaration of devotion. And truly it is that
reverence, which those persons who are of the same rank that he was in the
City, that reverence that they use in this place, when they come hither, is
that that makes us, who have now the administration of this Quire, glad, that
our Predecessors, but a very few years before our time, (and not before all
our times neither) admitted these Honorable and worshipful Persons of this
City, to sit in this Quire, so, as they do upon Sundays: The Church receives
an honor in it; But the honor is more in their reverence, then in their
presence; though in that too: And they receive an honor, and an ease in it;
and therefore they do piously toward God, and prudently for themselves, and
gratefully toward us, in giving us, by their reverent comportment here, so
just occasion of continuing that honor, and that ease to them here, which to
less reverend, and unrespective persons, we should be less willing to do. To
return to him in his sickness; He had but one days labor, and all the rest
were Sabbaths, one day in his sickness he converted to business; Thus; He
called his family, and friends together; Thankfully he acknowledged Gods
manifold blessings, and his own sins as penitently: And then, to those who
were to have the disposing of his estate, jointly with his Children, he
recommended his servants, and the poor, and the Hospitals, and the Prisons,
which, according to his purpose, have been all taken into consideration; And
after this (which was his Valediction to the world) he seemed always loath to
return to any worldly business, His last Commandment to Wife and Children
was Christ's last commandment to his Spouse the Church, in the Apostles, To
love one another. He blessed them, and the Estate devolved upon them, unto them:
And by Gods grace shall prove as true a Prophet to them in that blessing, as he
was to himself, when in entering his last bed, two days before his Death, he
said, Help me off with my earthly habit, and let me go to my last bed. Where,
in the second night after, he said, Little know ye what pain I feel this
night, yet I know, I shall have joy in the morning; And in that morning he
dyed. The form in which he implored his Savior, was evermore, toward his
end, this, Christ Jesus, which dyed on the Cross, forgive me my sins; He have
mercy upon me: And his last and dying words were the repetition of the name of
Jesus; And when he had not strength to utter that name distinctly and
perfectly, they might hear it from within him, as from a man a far off; even
then, when his hollow and remote naming of Jesus, was rather a certifying of
them, that he was with his Jesus, then a prayer that he might come to him. And
so The Lord was here, here with him in his Death; and because the Lord was
here, our Brother is not dead; not dead in the eyes and ears of God; for as
the blood of Abel speaks yet, so does the zeal of Gods Saints; and their last
prayers (though we hear them not) God continues still; and they pray in
Heaven, as the Martyrs under the Altar, even till the Resurrection.

He is with him now too; In funere.
Here in his Funerals. Burial, and Christian Burial, and Solemn Burial are
all evidences, and testimonies of Gods presence. God forbid we should conclude,
or argue an absence of God, from the want of Solemn Burial, or Christian
Burial, or any Burial; But neither must we deny it, to be an evidence of his
favor and presence, where he is pleased to afford these. So God makes that the
seal of all his blessings to Abraham, Genesis 15. Genesis 46. Genesis 50. Esaias 11.10.
Matt. 26.
That he should be buried in a good age; God established Jacob with that
promise, That his Son Joseph should have care of his Funerals: And Joseph does
cause his servants, The Physicians, to embalme him, when he was dead. Of Christ
it was Prophesied; That he should have a glorious Burial; And therefore Christ
interprets well that profuse, and prodigal piety of the Woman that poured out
the Ointment upon him, That she did it to Bury him; And so shall Joseph of
Arimathea be ever celebrated, for his care in celebrating Christ's Funerals. If
we were to send a Son, or a friend, to take possession of any place in Court,
or foreign parts, we would send him out in the best equipage: Let us not
grudge to set down our friends, in the Antichamber of Heaven, the Grave, in
as good manner, as without vaine-gloriousnesse, and wastfulnesse we may; And,
in inclining them, to whom that care belongs, to express that care as they do
this day, The Lord is with him, even in this Funeral; And because The Lord is
here, our brother is not dead; Not dead in the memories and estimation of men.

And lastly, In resurrectione.
that we may have God present in all his Manifestations, He that was, and is,
and is to come, was with him, in his life and death, and is with him in this
holy Solemnity, and shall be with him again in the Resurrection. Genesis 46.4.
God says to Jacob, I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also
surely bring thee up again. God goes down with a good man into the Grave, and
will surely bring him up again. When? The Angel promised to return to Abraham
and Sarah, Genesis 18.10.
for the assurance of the birth of Isaac, according to the time of life; that
is, in such time, as by nature a woman may have a child. God will return to
us in the Grave, according to the time of life; that is, in such time, as he,
by his gracious Decree, has fixed for the Resurrection. And in the mean time,
no more then the Godhead departed from the dead body of our Savior, in the
grave, does his power, and his presence depart from our dead bodies in that
darkness; But that which Moses said to the whole Congregation, I say to you
all, both to you that hear me, Deuteronomy. 4.4.
and to him that does not, All ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are
alive, every one of you, this day; Even he, whom we call dead, is alive this
day. In the presence of God, we lay him down; In the power of God, he shall
rise; In the person of Christ, he is risen already. And so into the same hands
that have received his soul, we commend his body; beseeching his blessed
Spirit, that as our charity enclines us to hope confidently of his good estate,
our faith may assure us of the same happiness, in our own behalf; And that
for all our sakes, but especially for his own glory, he will be pleased to
hasten the consummation of all, in that kingdom which that Son of God has
purchased for us, with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table of such places of SCRIPTURE, as are illustrated and expounded in
this BOOK.
GENESIS. 1.16. TWo great lights, etc. 81. A. 2.7. Man was a living soul 71. A.
18.10. According to the time of life 826. D. 26.18. Isaac dug the wells of
water, which 118. B. 29.12. Jacob kissed Rachel 407. C. 41.45. Pharaoh called
Joseph's name 529. A. 51.20. You thought evil against me, 171. B.

EXODUS. 4.22. Israel is his son 56. E. 14.14. The Lord shall fight for you
577. D. 23.3. Thou shall not countenance 782. C. 33.13. Show me now thy way 66.
E.

DEUTERONOMY. 21.23. He that is hanged is accursed of God 8. A. 30.15. See, I
have set before thee life and death 70. A. 30.19. I have set before you life
and death 148. D.

JOSHUAH. 10.12. Sun, stand thou still 700. A.
JUDGES. 2.5. They wept, 539. B.
RUTH. 1.19. Call me not Naomi 479. B.
2 SAMUEL. 14.14. We must needs die, and are 311. A. 26.12. The sleep of the
Lord was upon him 257. D.

2 KINGS. 9.3. None shall say, This is Iezebel 148. B. 11.12. They put the
crown 336. D. 20.7. Take a lump of figs 514. E.

JOB. 4.18. His Angels he charged with folly 9. C. 5.7. Man is borne unto
travatle, as 538. B. 7.1. Man's life is a warfare 142. A. and 603 E. 8.16. Woe
unto me poor rush, for etc. 141. B. 10.20. Lord spare me a while 162. C. 19.25.
I know my Redeemer lives, etc. 150. A. 19.26. In my flesh etc. 122. A. 20.11.
My bones are full of the sins 519. B.

PSALMS. 2.2. They imagine a vain thing 433. D. 2.8. Ask of me and I will
give thee etc. 26. E. and 462. E. 2. ult. Kiss the Son lest he be angry 541.
D. 3.7. Thou have broken the teeth 516. D. 6.5. In death there is no
remembrance of thee 533. E. 15.2. Lord, who shall ascend to thy Tabernacle 117.
E. 19.9. The judgments of the Lord justify themselves 366. D. 22.6. I am a
worm 18. A. 45. C. 65. A. 25.15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord 618. A.
37.5. Commit thy ways unto the Lord 686. B. 37.26. The righteous is merciful
83. E. 45.7. God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness 396. C. 50.12.
If I were hungry 101. B 55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore they
fear not God. 57. D. 65.1. Praise waits for thee 64. A. 66.3. Through the
greatness of thy power, shall thine enemies submit. 585. A. 72.18. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, which 394. D. 78.63. Their maidens were not given in
marriage. 679. C. 82.1. God stands in the 72. D. 90.10. The days of our
years etc. 83. B. 101.1. I will sing of thy mercy and 12. A. 101.5. Him that
has a high look 729. B. 102.5. My bones cleave to my flesh 519. B. 104.29.
They die, and they return 255. D. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed 55. B.
106.20. They changed their glory 85. A. 111.10. A good understanding have 612.
C. 113.5. He dwells in heaven 134. C. 119.57. The Lord is my portion 14. B.
119.136. Rivers of waters ran 161. E. 135.7. He causes the vapors 264. B.
136.4. Facit mirabilia magna 215. C. 139.21. Do not I hate them 99. C. 145.15.
The eyes of all wait 684. D. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes 483. A.

PROVERBS. 11.13. The fruit of the righteous 84. A. 12.23. A wise man
concealeth 565. C. 13.22. The wealth of the sinner etc. 83. C. 14.23. He shall
have hope 83. D. 17.6. The glory of children 84. A. 25.16. Fill not thy self
with honey 63. E.

ECCLES. 10.10. If the iron be blunt, we must 356. C. 10.20. Those that have
wings 92. D. 38.9. Myson, in thy sickness etc. 110. C.

CANTICLES. 1.8. O thou fairest among women 119. E. 2.15. Take us the little
Foxes, for they devour the Vine 117. A. 782. B. 4.12. My Sister, my Spouse is
a garden en closed 515. C. 8.6. Set me as a seal on thy heart, 456. D.

ESAIAS. 7.13. Is it a small thing to weary men, 15. A. 9.6. A child is given to
us, a Son is borne to us 86. C. 9.6. Counselor, The mighty God. 6. B. 14.12.
How art thou fallen from heaven 187. B. 18.1. Woe to the land shadowing with wings
671. B. 27.7. Has he smitten him as he smote those that smote him? 505. D.
36.21. They held their peace, and 410. B. 38.2. Hezekiah turned his face toward
the wall, and prayed 251. D. 40.15. As a drop upon the Bucket 64. D. 40.31.
They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength. 637. C. 53.10. It
pleased the Lord to bruise him, but 181. A. 55.8. My thoughts are not your 25.
B. 58.11. Thou shall be a spring of water 660. D. 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy
light is come 188. E.

JEREMIAH. 1.10. Behold, I have this day 734. B. 5.1. Run to and fro through
the streets of 422. A. 18.2. Arise and go down 147. B.

LAMENTATIONS. 1.2. She weepeth continually in the night. 540. A. 2.19. Pour
out thy heart like water 591. D. 2.10. Women eat their children of a span long
146. D. and 215. D. 4.8. My skin cleaves to my bones 519. B.

EZECHIEL. 9.4. Set a mark upon the foreheads 537. E. 16.29. Thou have
multiplied thy fornications, etc. 24. C. 44.2. This gate shall be shut etc. 22.
E.

HOSEA. 14.2. Take unto you words, and turn 578. C.
MICAH. 2.13. The breaker is gone up before, 181. B.
HABAKKUK. 2.4. The just shall live etc. 79. C. 2.18. What good can an Idol, or
etc 117. D.

HAGGAI. 2.9. The glory of the later house etc. 30. D.
ECCLUS. 7.36. Remember the end, and 371. B. 38.1. Honor a Physician with 187.
B. 38.15. He that sins before his 187. B.

MATTHEW. 1.25. Till she brought forth her Son 22. E. 5.48. Be ye perfect as
your Father in heaven is 823. A. 5.23. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
33. C. 7.19. He taught them as one 690. E. 9.2. My son be of good cheer,
343. C. 10.39. He that finds his life 150. C. 16.24. He that will follow me,
let 732. C. 16.28. There be some standing here, 259. A. 19.28. In the
regeneration 181. A. 20.23. It is not mine to give 761. E. 21.44. He that falls
upon this stone 665. B. 24.20. Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, 580.
B. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations 47. B.

MARK. 9.24. Lord, I believe 669. C.
LUKE. 1.28. Blessed art thou amongst women 18. C. 4.23. Physician, heal thy
self 420. B. 4.32. They were astonished at his 691. A. 7.29. The Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected. 366. D. 12.32. Fear not little flock, for etc. 45. C. and
228. B.

JOHN. 1.3, 4. All things were made by him 667. E. 1.16. Grace for grace 310.
E. 1.9. He was that light etc. 78. B. and 345. C. 1.16. Of his fullness have
all we received, and grace for grace 4. C. 2.4. Woman, what have I to do with
thee 23. D. 5.25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour 150. E. 5.17. My
Father works 240. A. 5.39. Search the Scriptures 339. B. 8.11. Sin no more
110. A. 9.10. I am the door 752. D. 10.3. His sheep hear his voice 66. D.
10.11. The good shepherd gives his life for the sheep 63. A. 19.29. They put
it upon Hyssop. 646. A. 20.16. Touch me not, for 821. D.

ACTS. 1.22. There was a necessity of one 180. C. 17.11. The Bereans searched
the etc. 472. E. 20.22. I go bound in the Spirit 473. C.

ROMANS. 6.21. What fruit had ye then 65. D. 8.15. Whereby we cry Abba, Father
27. D. 8.21. The creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage
etc. 9. D. 8.23. Our selves have the first fruits 293. B.

1 CORINTHIANS. 1.20. God has made the wisdom of this world, foolishness
180. B. 6.3. We shall judge the Angels 235. A. 6.20. Ye are bought with a
price 26. D. 10.13. No tentation shall befall us, but 789. B. 15.8. As of one
borne out of due 460. D. 15.3. Christ dyed for our sins 397. B. 15.28. God
shall be all in all 231. B. 15.29. For the dead 56. D.

2 CORINTHIANS. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves 118. A. 12.7. A thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan 526. E. 527. A. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for
thee 527. D.

EPHESIANS. 1.10. That God might gather in one 9. D. 2.12. Without Christ,
without God 71. C. 3.19. That they are filled with all the 4. C. 5.14. Awake
thou that sleep 188. E. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible 105. A.

PHILIPPIANS. 4.8. If there be any virtue. 681. A.
COLOSSIANS. 3.5. Mortify your members 151. B.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4.7. God has not called us to etc. 117. E. 5.25. I pray God
your spirit 335. E.

1 TIMOTHY 2.1. I exhort you that supplications and prayers etc. 510. D.
TITUS. 2.14. Christ gave himself for us 77. C.
HEBREWS. 4.12. The Word of God pierces etc. 335. D. and 517. B. 4.12. A two
edged sword 139. B. 11.35. Others were tortured etc. 150. C. 13.22. I beseech
you brethren, suffer 610. D.

JAMES. 1.17. The Father of lights 385. B. 5.3. Your gold and your silver etc.
81. B. 5.11. You have seen the end etc. 399. A.

1 PETER. 2.5. Built of lively stones 35. A.
2 PETER. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, 59. E.
1 JOHN. 3.2. Now we are the sons of God 120. C. 5.16. There is a sin unto
death 348. E.

REVELATION. 3.14. Thus says Amen 53. A. 12.4. The Dragons tail drew the 240.
E. 12.7. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon 146. E. 17.2. The
great Whore sits upon 310. B. 22.11. He that is holy 594. D.

The Table of such Authors, as are either cited, illustrated, or refelled in
this BOOK.
A ABulensis. 7. A. B. 50. A. 314. D. 763. C. Aerius. 781. B. Alcazar. 184. B.
Alvarez. 693. C. Alexander Alensis. 379. D. 603. C. Alcoranum. 379. C. 744. C.
Ambrosius. 18. A. 24. A. 38. A. 88. A. 105. D. 106. A. 110. E. 262. D. 306. B.
322. A. 390. B. 392. B. 407. A. 410. B. 546. B. 586. D. 603. E. 617. B. 784. C.
785. A. Andradius. 314. D. 763. C. Anselmus. 171. A. Apologia Confession:
Augustan: 786. B. Aquinas. 17. A. 51. E. 111. B. 156. A. 205. D. 216. B. C.
306. C. 344. A. 369. A. 527. A. 541. E. 795. D. Aristoteles. 388. A. 562. D.
744. B. 818. A. Arriba. 741. D. Athanasius. 180. D. 221. B. 235. E. 244. D.
251. E. Athenagoras. 204. D. Augustinus. 4. E. 9. B. E. 15. C. 16. C. 17. D.
23. B. 27. D. 31. A. 33. E. 37. B. 48. D. E. 51. E. 59. E. 61. C. 65. B. 66. E.
67. B. 68. A. E. 69. A. 70. A. E. 79. B. 81. A. E. 89. C. 97. B. 98. B. 100. A.
102. A. 105. E. 120. E. 121. C. 122. B. C. 133. B. 148. C. D. 153. B. 154. E.
161. C. 167. A. E. 169. D. 171. B. 180. C. 183. A. 188. A. D. 194. E. 197. B.
200. D. 229. E. 232. E. 295. E. 299. E. 304. C. D. 309. B. 313. E. 323. A. D.
330. D. 369. A. B. E. 386. D. 527. A. 546. B. De libro Enoch. 560. B. 563. D.
756. B. 785. B. 786. E. 802. C. Augustine. Eugubinus. 50. A. Augustinus de Roma.
171. C. Aulus Gellius. 6. A. 17. A. 407. A. Ayguanus. 506. B. Azorius. 490. D.

B Baldus. 168. E. Baronius. 142. D. 236. E. 489. E. refellitur. 492. A.
Basilius. 16. D. E. 17. E. 42. B. 160. D. 168. C. 269. C. 284. C. 306. B. 309.
D. 318. E. 352. E. 455. A. 511. B. 514. B. 515. B. 553. A. 712. E. 815 E.
Bellarminus. 790. D. 545. E. notatus. 542. E. 578. E. 699. B. 740. D. 791. B.
803. B. Berengarius. 37. C. Bernardus. 5. E. 6. B. 7. A. 11. B. 23. A. 51. C.
75. A. 90. A. 91. C. 93. A. B. C. 94. A. B. C. etc. 118. E. 152. C. 153. B.
155. A. 162. B. 200. C. 204. C. 319. E. 340. A. 383. A. C. 389. C. 405. E. 426.
A. 456. B. 510. D. 513. B. 550. B. 570. E. 680. B. 787. B. 806. E. Beda. 813.
C. Beza. 220. D. 737. E. 799. A. Benius. 740. A. Biblia Complutens. 712. D.
Biblia Vatican. 712. D. Biel. 380. C. Bodinus. 243. E. Bolduccus. 131. E. 133.
A. 234. A. Boethius. 171. A. Bonaventura. 687. D. Brigittae Revelationes. 43.
A. Bradwardinus. 171. A. Brondus. 603. C.

C Calvinus. 9. C. 14. E. 18. B. 32. D. 45. D. 49. E. 80. D. 217. E. 218. A.
220. D. 246. D. 271. C. 298. B. 347. B. 477. D. 800. D. Cajetanus. 131. C. 221.
A. 271. B. 490. C. 527. B. 586. D. 793. C. Carbo. 741. B. Catharinus. 4. E.
237. D. 271. B. 339. B. Canones Poenitentiales. 282. B. 402. A. 545. C. 691. D.
Caesarius. 758. D. Clemens Alexandrinus. 170. D. 187. D. 314. C. 710. D. 763.
C. 772. B. 784. B. Chrysologus. 161. D. 228. B. 246. D. 249. C. 490. D.
Chrysostomus. 24. A. 48. D. E. 58. B 93. A. 106. D. 152. C. 162. A. 210. E.
217. D. 263. C. 299. D. 314. C. 321. B. 322. C. 326. A. 362. C. 389. C. 401. E.
409. E. notatus. 426. B. 546. D. 712. E. 763. C. 785. C. 789. C. 795. C. 815.
D. Cantepratensis. 81. D. Chemnitius. 32. D. 786. B. Chiffletius. 246. C.
Choppinus. 771. C. Chrysippus. 484. B. Clavius. 765. A. Clemens Romanus. 758.
C. Collius. 262. E. Concilium Nicenum. 216. D. 300. D. 415. A. Concilium
Trident. 234. C. D. 404. D. 471. E. 773. A. Concilium Lateranense sub Innocent.
tertio. 252. B. 773. A. Concilium Constantiense. 773. A. Concilium Senonense.
231. E. Concilium Lateranense sub Leone decimo. 237. B. Concilium
Neocaesariense. 216. D. Concilium Carthaginense tertium. 775. A. Concilium
Eleberitanum. 80. C. Concilium Antiochenum primum, 426. C. Constitutiones
Apostolicae. 663. C. Cornelius a Lapide. 50. A. 688. A. Cornelius Mus. 489. D.
Corpus Juris Civilis. 711. C. Cramerus. 18. B. Cyprianus. 17. C. 36. B. 99. D.
269. E. Explicatus. 329. C. 330. D. 355. E. 414. E. 480. B. 800. C. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus. 20. E. 66. B. 67. A. 170. E. 188. C. 190. D. 194. A. 236. C. 302.
B. Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus. 262. C.

D Damascenus. 16. C. 27. C. 48. C. 49. A. 167. E. 168. B. 189. D. 236. C. 262.
B. 309. D. 396. D. 425. E. 689. A. 802. B. Demosthenes. 387. E. Didymus
Alexandrinus. 333. C. 533. D. Dionysius Areopagita. 121. A. 168. A. 261. E.
382. E. 480. B. 620. A. 785. E. Durandus. 802. A.

E Epictetus. 315. A. 387. E. 667. E. Epiphanius. 23. C. 159. B. 164. E. 176.
C. 394. D. 781. B. Ephrem Syrus. 538. D. Epistola Lentuli. 153. D. Erasmus. 32.
E. Estius. 792. D. 800. D. Euangelium Spiritus Sancti. 291. C. Euangelium
Syriacum. 525. A. Eusebius. 42. D. 45. E. 493. C. 540. B. 562. D. 784. A.

F Faustus Manichaeus. 318. C. Ferus. 50. C. Festus. 713. D. Feuardentius. 793.
E.

G Galenus. 818. B. Galelinus. 31. D. 502. D. Genebrardus. 17. A. Gerhardus.
743. B. Gerson. 202. E. 251. C. Gregorius Neocaesariensis. 758. D. Gregorius
Magnus. 9. E. 35. A. 99. D. 100. A. 107. D. 128. C. 141. B. 161. C. 181. A.
186. E. 247. E. 248. B. 266. C. 274. A. 316. B. 339. E. 342. C. 343. A. 406. A.
408. B. 461. A. 547. B. 552. E. 569. E. 580. E. 724. B. C. 785. D. 789. C.
Gretserus. 698. D. Greg: Nazianzen. 71. C. 121. A. 171. C. 235. E. 385. B. 394.
A. 396. C. 417. A. 480. D. 522. B. 539. B. 547. A. 552. C. 699. E. 761. A. 764.
D. Greg: Nyssen. 16. C. 160. E. 249. A. 251. E. 517. C. 542. A. 555. D. 811. A.
813. C. Guavantus. 485. E.

H Harmon. Synod. Belg. 115. E. Herodotus. 198. D. Hermes, sive Pastor. 784. B.
Heshusius. 759. A. Hieronymus. 15. C. 24. A. 26. D. 55. A. 72. E. 79. D. 99. B.
111. A. 121. B. 147. E. 164. E. 178. A. 182. D. 190. E. 200. C. 207. B. 217. A.
231. D. 236. C. 244. D. 248. A. 252. D. 272. C. 306. B. 309. D. 363. D. 368. E.
378. E. 405. C. hallucinatus. 430. E. 462. A. de prologo ejus Galeato. 670. C.
699. B. 789. C. 794. C. 806. E. Hilarious. 16. C. 248. D. 378. E. 416. A. 539.
A. 699. B. 784. D. Holkot. 311. A. 412. A. Horatius. 577. E. Hugo de Sancto
Victore. 157. A. 542. A.

I Ignatius. 758. C. Johannes Huss. 480. E. Josephus. 32. D. 397. E. 491. E.
687. E. Irenaeus. 16. C. 57. C. 151. D. 152. B. 415. E. 739. E. Isiodorus
Hispalensis. 410. E. 411. A. 656. D. Isiodorus Pelusiota. 596. E. 758. C.
Julianus Apost. 719. B. Julianus Pelagianus. 490. B. Justinianus. 793. A.
Justinus Martyr. 72. E. 156. A. 236. C. 269. B. 314. C. 401. E. 408. A. 425. E.
763. C.

L Lactantius. 80. A. 306. C. 354. C. 396. A. 408. C. 739. E. 751. E. 784. A.
Lapide. 50. A. Leo Magnus. 42. B. 48. C. D. 63. B. 221. E. 321. B. 431. B. 535.
D. 604. A. Leo Castrius. 695. D. Lex XII. Tabularum. 445. D. Lombardus. 237. B.
notatus. 334. E. Lorinus. 426. C. 574. C. 687. E. 695. D. Lutherus. 18. D. 130.
B. 205. A. 231. C. 232. D. 271. D. 301. D. 404. C. Apophthegma ejus. 405. C.
417. B. 426. A. 479. E. 501. A. 687. B. 786. B. 798. E. Lyra. 50. B. 555. D.

M Magdeburgenses. 489. C. 799. C. Maldonatus. 197. D. 356. E. 489. D. 739. D.
771. B. 798. A. Mariana. 687. E. Martialis. 550. B. S. Martialis. 758. C. P.
Martyr. 271. B. 347. C. Masoritae. 153. C. Maximus. 63. A. 535. E. Matchiavel.
744. B. Melancthon. 92. C. 744. C. 798. E. Melchior Canus. 42. A. 740. B.
Menander. 220. A. Mendoza. 162. B. D. Munsterus. 747. C. Musculus. 775. A.

N Nicephorus. 31. D. dictum ejus de Chrysostomo. 490. C. 699. B.
O Oecumenius. 66. A. 232. C. 527. A. Oleaster. 391. D. Origenes. 99. D. 102.
A. 118. C. 128. E. 170. E. 201. C. 262. D. 263. C. 299. B. 333. B. 362. C. 363.
D. 386. B. 411. C. 546. C. 700. C. 710. E. primus concionator. 758. D. 770. D.
784. C. Osiander. 221. C. 298. B.

P Palladius. 473. C. Pamelius. 329. C. Panigorolla. 166. A. Papias. 739. E.
Paracelsus. 64. E. Paraphrastes Chaldaeus. 134. A. 269. D. 404. B. Pellicanus.
221. C. 404. C. Peltanus. 97. E. Pererius. 50. A. 740. A. Philo Judaeus. 170.
B. 417. D. 420. C. 550. B. 561. C. 680. D. 812. C. Picus. 531. D. Pindarus.
442. D. Piscator. 46. C. 49. E. 131. E. 737. E. 799. A. Plato. 46. D. 68. E.
168. D. 318. D. 442. D. 752. E. 783. E. 812. C. Plinius. 17. A. 222. A. 385. C.
537. D. 617. B. 665. B. 713. A. 788. B. Plotinus. 812. C. Plutarchus. 665. C.
Polycarpus. 758. C. Polybius. 482. D. 551. A. Porphyrius. 207. B. 289. B.
Prosper. 240. D. Prudentius. 262. E. Psalmi Arabice. 582. A. Ptolomaeus. 818.
B.

Q Quintilianus. 289. B.
R Rabbi Aben Ezra. 131. C. Rabbi Moses. 63. E. 66. B. 608. B. Rabbi Solomon.
50. B. 404. B. Reuchlinus. 541. C. Rhemigius. 4. B. 340. A. Ribera. 184. C.
Roffensis. 789. A. Ruffinus. 270. E. Rupertus. 51. B.

S Salmeron. 489. D. Sanctius. 151. E. 405. E. Sandaeus. 495. A. 690. D.
Scotus. 111. B. Scribanius. 142. C. Schonfeldius. 743. B. Seneca. 147. E. 168.
E. 362. B. 387. E. 388. A. 713. E. 789. B. 812. D. Serarius. 406. B.
Septuaginta Interpretes. 404. B. 416. A. 528. B. 585. A. Severianus. 249. C.
Sextus Senensis. 786. E. Sidonius Apollinaris. 33. B. Sophronius. 490. C.
Stenartius. 605. E. Strabo. 198. D. Stunnica. 133. A. Synodus Dordrecthana.
742. C.

T Tacitus. 481. E. Talmud. 379. C. 492. A. Tannerus. 605. D. Tertullianus. 17.
C. 18. A. 33. E. 80. A. memoria lapsus. 101. B. 152. A. 168. C. 181. E. 207. E.
289. B. 290. D. 309. D. 312. B. 334. B. 337. B. C. 369. E. 370. E. 379. B. 388.
A. 395. B. E. 397. E. 400. A. B. 408. A. 414. E. 504. B. 739. E. 783. E. 794.
C. 800. E. Testamentum Syriacum. 636. C. 737. E. Theocritus. 478. A.
Theodoretus. 91. B. 232. A. 305. D. 462. A. 578. D. 795. A. Theophylactus. 91.
B. 181. B. 246. B. 527. A. 609. C. 795. C. Tremellius. 131. E. 133. E. 510. A.
560. C. 585. A. 690. B. 737. E. 809. C. Trismegistus. 287. B. 295. B. 347. C.
379. C. 501. C. Turrecremata. 603. C.

V G. Valentia. 356. D. 605. D. Vincentius Lyrinensis. 47. A. 699. B. 722. D.
Virgilius. 744. C. 784. A. Vita P. Nerei. 116. E. Vega. 339. D. Ulpianus. 194.
E. Vossius. 740. A. Us;pergensis. 208. A. Vulgata Editio. 146. D. 157. D. 162.
C. 260. A. 288. D. 311. A. 505. C. 610. E. 711. D. 717. C. 743. C. 761. B.

W Waldo. 291. D.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL CONTENTS IN THIS BOOK.
The number of the Figures refers to the Page; the Letter to the like Letter
in the Margin.
A ABsolute Decree; how dangerously man may be abused by it 691. E There is no
such in God, of punishing man, but as a sinner 675. C. D. E
Absolution of sins; the power of it 143. A. B The cheerfulness of their
spirits that have newly received it 264. A 596. B The necessity of it 370. A. B
Active life, and Contemplative, both good 30. D One, not to despise the other
ibid.
Admiration and Wonder, how it stands between Knowledge and Faith 194. A
Adoption, in civil use; the Laws and Customs of it 27. B Applied to our
spiritual Adoption ibid.
Adversity, not the best time to seek the Lord in 139. C. D. 245. D. E Whether
Adversity or Prosperity be the cause of most sins 658. D
Adultory; God expresses all carnal and spiritual sin by the name of
Adultery 632. E Advice, to be mixed with Love and Charity 93. C How many do
miscarry in it ibid. D
Afflictions, wherefore inflicted upon Men 109. C Wherefore on godly men, 129.
B. 480. A. B. C 664. E They are not evil 170. D Common as well to the good, as
bad, 420. E
Age; the center of Reverence 31. D Allelujah Psalms, which they are, and how
many 654. A Alms to be done 94. B. 106. C Cheerfully, and without delay 107. D
Against those that neglect them 414. B We, not to consider the person too
severely that is to receive them 764. A
Against being Alone 51. E. 761. E. 762. A Alphonso, King of Casteel, his
blasphemy 640. E Amen, ever doubled by Saint John, and why 658. B Anabaptists;
their wicked opinions 23. C. 91. C 344. D Anathema; the several acceptations
of it 401. E Saint Andrew, the first Saint in the Calendar, and why 718. C. D
Angels, how reconciled by the death of Christ 9. B Whether they understand
thoughts 111. B Or, see the Essence of God 120. E. 121. D. E They pray for us
130. A Whether they shall give account of their Stewardship over us, at the day
of Judgment 234. E. 235. A Thought in the Greek Church to be created before
the World 235. E Nothing in Scripture about their creation 235. D Not in
themselves Immortal 237 B. C. Some men called by the ministry of Angels, even
from the beginning of the world 261. E They that fell, might have repented,
according to the Schools 262. B They that fell, shall never before given 346. B
Of tutelar Angels 422. B Angels created with the Light 729. C
Anger in God; two errors about it, noted by Lactantius 408. D Anointing in
Scripture, not always taken for real Unction 44. E. 45. A etc Anointing,
proper to Kings, as well as Priests 396. A
Ant and the Be; the difference between their labor; and yet we are
commanded to learn of both 712. E Apatheia, against indolencie, and emptiness
of all Affections 156. A Apochrypha Books; the good use that is made of them
220. D Of their esteem with the Ancient Fathers 221. A. B. C
Applause after Sermon, given to the Primitive Fathers 48. D Applause of the
people, or popularity, a dangerous and uncertain thing, not to be affected by
any men; especially, not by the Clergy, whom it usually deceives most. ib.
Approaches to Sin, how soon and easily they become Sin 557. E Apostles;
why chosen out of simple fishermen 719. C What things were called Apostles,
before Christ's Apostles were so called 758 C
Apostolical Authority vainly claimed by the Pope 733. E Apostolical
Tradition, what it is 781. E
Articles of Faith, how they are proved by Reason 178. A 611. D Atheist,
nothing so unnatural as the Atheist, 486. B Of the universal, particular, and
practical Atheist ibid. and 487. A. B. and vide 756. B.
Authority of the Fathers, not baulked by the Reformed Churches 557. A Though
at the beginning of the Reformation our men were a little startled at it B. C


B Balsame; of the natural Balsame in the body and in the soul. 514. A
Baptism of children, how necessary 309. E. 425. B The Remembrance of our
Baptism, a stop against sin 310. A Christ, why Baptized 425. A The
Anabaptists argument against Baptism of Children, answered ibid. D The
Baptism of John, whether the same with that of Christ 425. E The custom of
late Baptising, why tolerated in the Church 800. A
Bees; the manner of their working sub tecto 712. E Commended for their
sedulity, community, secrecy, and purity 713. A. B
Beggars; against ordinary Street-Beggers, and relieving them. Benedictines, of
their increase and riches 602. E Benefactours and Founders, their honorable
commemoration and mention pleases God 85. D The Straights, to which, some of
the Reformed Churches have been put about it ibid.
The Benefits of this world seldom free 550. B Bishops not necessarily resident
at their Sea 470. D Six thousand Bishops at one time in the Christian Church
471. A The passage between Athanasius and Dracontius who refused to be made a
Bishop 471. D
Bishop of Rome, against his tyranny, cruelty etc. 284. B Against his
Infallibility 698. C. 722. D His Imprisoning of the Holy Ghost 292. A His
Universality 371. D Against his usurping Apostolical Authority, and not
contenting himself with Episcopal 733. E
Blasphemy, not restrained to God alone; other persons and things may be
blasphemed 343. E No Blessing in this world without permanency and continuance
754. E Blessings of this world, only Blessings in use 84. C How God blesses
man, and man blesses God 376. D
Blessedness, what it is; and what the Philosophers have thought of it 119. C.
D. 752. A Whom Plato commanded the Poets and writers in his State, to call
Blessed 562. D. E That temporal Blessings do not conduce at All to true
Blessedness 750. B The danger of Temporal Blessings, without Spiritual 752.
B What Plato thought Blessedness 752. E Spiritual Blessedness, how it is
superinduced upon Temporal, as the reasonable soul upon that of sense 755. C.
D
Blood; no Remission without it, and why 6. D Christ shed it seven times 7. B
The will, the Blood of the Soul 7. A Blood taken for sin, oftentimes in Holy
Writ 132. A
Bodies; the Kingdom of heaven imperfect without them 145. A The little power
we have over our own Bodies ibid. D Bodies glorified and their Dotes or
Endowments 189. A. B Gods love to our Bodies 194. B. C Of sinning against our
own Bodies by lust and licentiousness 195. D. E
Bones; what is meant by Bones in Scripture 516. C Bribery; against it, or
receiving of Rewards 389. E Brothers; the first enmity began in them 108. A
Brownists; their opinion, that no particular Church may consist of more persons
than may always hear that man, to whose charge that Church is given, censured
471. C. D Building; the Holy Ghost delights to use the name of Building and
House 684. C Against Busy-bodies with other folks matters 721. E. 722. A
Burden; how every thing, even the least, the Fly; even the best, as riches,
beauty, comeliness, is a Burden to us 664. C. D

C CArd. Cajetans reasons for not following the Judgment of the fathers in
expounding Scripture 796. E. 79^. A. Calamities, not to be jested at 478. E Not
always evidences of Gods displeasure ib.
Calling; the ordinary duties of our Calling not to be disputed, but executed
41. A Such as are extraordinary, may 42. A Against such as will take upon them
no Calling 45. D. 411. B. 606. B How acceptable to God that labor is, which is
taken in an honest Calling 721. C Against Intruders, and meddlers with other
men's Callings ibid. E
Calvin, an approver of Ceremonies 80. D Candles; the use of them in divine
Service, ancient 80. B Canonical Hours; no inconvenience in observing them,
so we place no merit in them 596. D Catechizing; the excellent use and benefit
of it 250. A. 561. B. C. D. etc. Cathedral Churches; why so called 115. C
Censuring of Preachers, and comparing one with another, condemned 692. E
Ceremonies; of their antiquity and use 80. C They should differ from Mysteries
ibid. Not hastily to be condemned ibid. E They are vehicula Religionis 300. B
Against the Opposers of them ibid. How we are to love them 512. A Not to be
disputed of by private men 575. C
Changes of this world, how many 481. D Of inconstancy, and changing of mind
483. C Changes of sin, how dangerous 543. A Children; of their love and duty
to Parents 387 E
CHRIST; he came of women noted in Scripture for their incontinency 24. A He
came to save All 26. C. 70. C. 66. B Learning at the height, when he was borne
72. C Whether he was Man, whilst in the Grave 157. A CHRIST; his Death and
Passion, how necessary, and how voluntary 7. D. 792. C Three remarkable
Conjunctions at his Birth 11 B The world how full with expectation of it 21. D
CHRIST shed blood seven times here on earth 7. B How effectually he is present
in the Sacrament 19. C His Incarnation; no way so proper to deliver us, as it
16. C His Humane Nature adunited to the Divine, whether Impeccable 169. B The
infiniteness of his merits rather placed in Pacto, than in Persona, by the
School 179. B The difference between his Dying, and other men's 272. E The
several Heresies concerning CHRIST 316. D CHRIST dyed for all men 741. E. 742.
A. B
Church; the power of it, in applying Christ to every particular soul 60. A
The true Church, which 61 A How soon multiplied and enriched 72. A. B The ten
Persecutions of it 184 B. C The Church, the ordinary place for knowledge and
illumination of a Christian 228. A The Primitive Church; how the whole world
was bent against it 602. C The Church, a Pillar; and how 615. C What a loss it
is to be kept from Gods Church 664. A The care which God has ever had of his
Church 779. E
Circle; the proper Hieroglyphick of God; and why 13. E Citation of Scripture;
the words, much more the Chapter and verse, not always observed in it 250. C.
325. D Complements; of their abuse and use 176. A. B. C. 412. D Comforts; how
easily we mistake false Comforts for true 279. E. 382. D. 383. A. B 501. A Of
the true Comfort of the Holy Ghost, 353. D Of that Comfort and consolation,
which the Minister of the Gospel is to preach to all people 746. A. B C
Confession to the Priest, in some cases, useful and necessary 558. A 568. A.
589. B. C How necessary to Confess 569. D. 586. E
Confidence; true Confidence proceeds only from true goodness 171. E
Confirmation; whether a Sacrament 329. C The use and benefit of it ibid. D. E
Continency; that trial not made as should be, whether young people can
Contain from marriage 217. B C Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, three
parts of true Repentance 568. A Conventicles: against their private opinions
228. C Against them 455. A They are no Bodies 756. D
Consideration of our selves and our insufficiencies, how necessary 44. D. 45.
A. etc. Constitutions: No sins to be laid and fathered upon them 90. A
Corporations: how they have no souls 99. A Covering of sins, what good, and
what bad 569. E It is good to cover them from giving other men examples 570. A
Counsel not to be given, unless we love those to whom we give it 93. C How
many miscarry in that point ibid. D
Craft: and that cunning and Craft which men affect in their several Callings
411. D Creatures: how far we may love the Creatures, and how far not 398. E
Curiosity: against the excess of it in matter of Knowledge 63. E. 64. A. 411.
E. 563. B. 701. A Conscience, obdurate, and over-tender; the effects of either
587. B. C. D Curses and Imprecations; whether we may use them 401. C. D. 555. E

D DAmned: the consummation of their torment, wherein it consists in the
opinion of the School 344. B More shall be saved than damned 765. C Of the
torments of the damned 776. B. C The absence of God, the greatest torment of
the damned ibid. D
Day of Judgment: the manner of proceeding in it 140. B Fearful, even to the
best 200. B. C The certainty and uncertainty of it 271. D To be had ever in
remembrance, and why 371. B. 389. C. 392. A
Death: how it may be desired of us, and how not 38. A. B. C. D. 148. B. C.
531. D.E Against the ambition of it in the pseudomartyrs 142. C The word
Fortasse has place in all things but Death 147. C. D It is a law, a tribute,
and a duty, and how 147. E. 148. A We not to grudge if we die soon, or others
live longer ibid. B Death; how an enemy to mankind, and how not ibid E God
made it not, but makes use of it 188. B Of undergoing Death for Christ 400. A,
B Not a banishment to good men, but a visitation of their friends 463. C Death;
why so terrible to the good men of former times 532. D The often contemplation
of Death takes much from the fear of it 473. E
Debts: of our Debts to God 87. C To our neighbors 93. E To our superiors 91.
C To our selves 94. D
Deceit and Deceiving: the mischief of it 742. B The law will not suppose it
either in a father or a master ibid. 42.
Decrees of God, to be considered only by the Execution 330. C None absolute,
considering man, before a Sinner 675. C. D. E
Departing from sin; to be general 552. A We are not to retain any one 568.
D
Deprecating of afflictions, whether or no lawful 504. B. C. D. E Desperation:
the sin of it greater and worse than that of presumption 398. C Several sects
there have been; but never any of Despayring men 346. A Against it 360. D E God
brings his servants to humiliation, often, but never to Desperation 464.
Destroying; whether man may lawfully destroy any one hurtful species in the
world 527. B 620. C De via, the name of such as were Christians in the former
times; that is, men of that way, according to S. Chrysostom 426. B Devils;
capable of mercy, according to many of the Fathers 66. A The Devils quoting of
Scripture 338. C
Devotion; a serious, sedulous, and impatient thing 244. E It is good to
accompany our selves to a general Devotion 512 D It must be constant 586. B
And not taken up by chance ibid. C
Disciplining, and mortifying Acts, after God has forgiven us our sins,
commended 546. E They infer neither Purgatory, nor Indulgences, nor
Satisfaction 547. A They are sharp arrows from a sweet hand ib. The necessity
of them, to make our Repentance entire 568. B
Discretion, the mother and nurse of all virtues 577. B What Discretion is to
be used in telling people of their sins ibid.
Division, the forerunner of destruction 138. D.E Not always unlawful to sow
Division amongst men, when they agree too well to ill purposes 493. D
Doubting; the way to know the truth 322. D Duels; the inhumanity and sin of
them 5. E Duties of our calling not to be disputed, but executed 41. A Of our
general weakness and impotency in spiritual Duties 513. C


E EArly seeking of God, what it is 245. C. D God is an Early God 809. A. B And
we to seek him Early ibid. D. E
Eloquence required in the delivery of Gods Word 47. D Enemies; profit to be
made of them 98. A We come too soon to the name, and then carry it too far
98. C God and Religion, both, have Enemies 375 D 703. C How we may, and how we
may not hate our Enemies ibid. D. E Our Enemies are Gods Enemies 704. A
Errors in the way, almost as dangerous as Errors in the end 639. A. D Of the
Errors of the Fathers of the Church 490. A About administering the Sacrament to
children; about the state of the soul after death, etc. 739. E Not good for
the Church to play with small Errors, and tolerate them, when she may as
easily redress them 782. B
Esaias, rather an Evangelist, than a Prophet 54. B Evil; none from God 168. C.
D Nothing is naturally Evil 171. A
Example; in all our actions and purposes, we to propose unto our selves some
pattern or Example 667. D. Examples; what power they have in matter of
instruction 572. D. 593. A What care is to be taken in making the inordinate
acts of some Holy men in Scripture our Examples 155. C. D. 488. D. E. 489. A.
526. E How far Example works above precept or command 165. B Of giving good
Examples to others 420. C God follows his own Examples 522. E Of giving bad
Examples unto other men 570. A. 573. E
Excommunication; the use of it amongst the Druides and the Jews 402. A Much
tenderness to be used in excommunicating any from the Church 667. A How many
men excommunicare themselves without any Church-censure ib. B. C. 418. B. C
Expostulation with God, how without sin 44. B. We may not excuse the
inordinatenesse of all Expostulations of good men in the Scripture 132. C Nor
come near that excess which we find in some of them 155. C Of that in the
widow of Zareptha 218. A
Against Extortion 94. A Against Extremities in matters of opinion 42. A. B.
etc. In Religion 326. D


F FAith; against implicit Faith, 178. C. 411. C Faith and Reason, how
contiguous they are 178. B Faith, how it is assisted by Reason 429. A. 612. A
Of the imperfection that is in our Faith 818. D Faith and Works 78. E. 368. A.
567. D. E Our Works more ours than our Faith 79. C. D. E. etc. The Faith of
others, how profitable to us 105. D And how not 106. E Men, not to deceive
themselves with thinking, that if they have Faith once, they shall have it
ever: or have enough 819. B. C
Fall; sin is a fall; and how 186. D. 187. B. C. 462. D Against
impossibility, of falling from grace received 240. B. C
Of Fame and getting a good name; the necessity of it 680. A Fathers; of the
power of life and death which they had over their own children 388. A How
Jesuits slight the authority of the Fathers of the Church 489. C How they are
to be followed 490. C
Fear; of the Fear of God 386. B The difference between fearefullnesse and
Fear 387. B Servile and Filial Fear, both good 386. D The Fear of God a
blessed disease 466. B It constitutes the best assurance 694. C Not only a
Fear, but even a terror of God may fall upon the best men 70. A
Festivalls: the reason of their Institution in the Church 298. B Of applying
particular Scriptures, to particular Festivalls 423. D
Filiation; the marks of our spiritual Filiation, less subject to error,
than of our Temporal 338. E Fasting; but thrice mentioned by David; and he
thrice derided for it 535. C The commendation, and use of it ibid. D. E
Finding of God; the several times of it 597. A Of Finding that which was lost
711. E The passage of the Usher in S. Augustine, that found a bag of money, and
would not take so much as the tithe of it 712. A
Fishers of men; the Apostles why so called 734. E Flatterers; how men may
flatter the best men, the very Angels, yea, and God himself 332. B Foliantes,
an Order in the Roman Church, who only feed on roots and leaves 731. C
Following Christ; how we are to Follow, in believing, and in doing 731. E
Against Forespeaking the Counsels or Actions of the State 535. E Foretelling of
death; the passage of the Monks of S. sidorus Monastery, about it 473. C Form
of public Prayer, used amongst the very Gentiles 89. A And they had a
particular Officer, who made Prayers and Collects for them, upon emergent
occasions ibid. Which were received every five years ibid.
Fortune and God; how they consist together 711. C Freewill; the obliquities of
it from whence 283. D The power of it in our conversion 309. A. B
Funerals; of the duties belonging to them 196. A. 198. B Of the several
manner of them, among several nations 198. D Christian Funerals, an evidence
of Gods presence 826. B
Fullness; how in Christ, and how in others of the Saints 3. C Three Fulnesses
in Christ, above others 4. A How Full all of us are of original sin 2. E How
Full God is of mercy 12. C Of Fullness without satisfaction; and of
satisfaction without Fullness 807. A Abraham why Full of years, and yet not so
old as Methusalem ibid. D Several Fulnesses ibid. E


G GEntiles, and their salvation; how prone the Fathers were in believing of it
261. D. 763. C Of the power of natural reason in them; and what many of the
Fathers thought of it 314. C Of their multiplicity of Gods 378. B. 484. D. 502.
E They durst not call their Tutelar Gods by their names 608. A
Gentleness, meekness and mildness; the power of it, both upon man and God
409. E. 410. A. B Glad; God, whether he be Glad, that he is God 812. B
Glorified bodies; their Endowments applied to the soul after her first
resurrection 189. A. B. C Gloria Patri, after every Psalm, how ancient 88. C
Glory; against our fear of giving God too much Glory 58. E No Glory to God in
destroying man only for his pleasure 85. B Glory, what it is 88. A The light of
Glory in heaven, what 231. A All things we do, must be to the Glory of God
636. E Of the disparity and degrees of Glory in the Kingdom of heaven 742. D.
743. A. B. C
Gluttony: the effects and miseries of it 579. D God; not to be loved in
consideration of the Temporal Blessings he bestows upon us, but for himself
750. C. D Four ways of knowing him 229. B God, how present even in hell 226.
D. E Seeing of God before us, in our actions, how necessary 169. E How we see
him in a glass 226. B How we are enemies to God 65. B All his ways are
goodness 66. E Several positions, motions, and transitions ascribed to him
67. C How omnipresent, with the Ubiquetary and the Stancarist 67. E Why he
makes some poor, and others rich 84. E Glories not in destroying man, till he
find cause 85. B Proposes his glory to himself, as the end of all his works
87. C. D. E All our wealth and honor to be ascribed to him 95. B Whether his
Essence shall be seen in heaven 120. D. 230. D No evil from him 168. C Not
the Author of sin 368. E To be reverenced as a Father 388. C Of the reason of
many Gods amongst the Gentiles 484. D God hates not any man, but as a finner
628. C. D His mercy to all men 679. A. B The numberless number of Gods
Benefits unto man 765. A
Our Goods; what care to be taken they be well gotten 83. A. 95. E They are
abusively called Goods 168. D
Goodness special in God 167. E. 168. A. B Golden Crowns of the Saints, how
forged in the Roman Church 743. D Gospel; whether yet preached over all the
world 363. D Why it is called in Scripture the Kingdom of God 472. A How
compared to a net 736. C
Grace; against irresistible Grace 456. B Grace and Nature how they cooperate
649. D No consummative Grace in this life 735. B
Graduall Psalms; which, and why they are so called 653. E Great men not
always good; and why 166. A But when good, the more acceptable; and their ill
the more pardonable ibid. B. C The true end of Greatness 321. B. C. D Great
men; how dangerously obnoxious to their own servants 551 A Gretzer the Jesuit,
how injurious to the power of Kings, in matters of Religion 698. D


H AGainst making too much Haste, either in Temporal or Spiritual Riches 520.
D Hatred; how it may consist with Charity 100 A Health: Spiritual Health to be
preferred before that of the Body 110. C. 755. A What a Blessing the Bodily
Health is 754. A. B.
Hearing the Word; against the neglect of it 331. A. B Against Hearing only
455. C
Heart: no inward part of man ascribed unto God, beside the Heart 64. B Heaven:
the joys of it 73. C. D. 223. A. B. C 266. A The Glory 682. A The Dotes or
Endowments of the Saints of Heaven 266. B. 189. A. B. etc. 824. C
Heresy: of the several Heresies against the person of Christ 316. D Of that
of the Photinians, and Nativitarians 344. C
Heretics: of several ways of dealing with them 355. C. D. 356. B. C. D Of
History, and returning the memory of man to things that are past and gone 290.
B The Holy Ghost; not so easily apprehended by the light of Reason, as the
other persons of the Trinity 318. C. D In the Procession especially; ibid. E.
327. A. B. C 335. B The manner how he works upon man 322. C. D Three branches
of sins against the Holy Ghost in the School 349. E Refusing of lawful
Authority, is sin against the Holy Ghost, in St. Bernards judgment 350. B The
power of the Holy Ghost, in blowing where he lists 364. B. C His operations in
mere moral men 365. A St. Paul believed of many to be the H. Ghost 461. E
Holy Ghost only Dogmaticall; the best men but Problematicall 658. A
Hope: how imperfect a Christian man's Hope is 820. A How; a hateful and a
damnable Monosyllable 301. D Honor and Reputation, which so many stand upon,
what it is 410. A Honey; what is meant by it in Scripture 712. C Hospitalite;
the commendation and benefit of it 414. D. E. 415. A. B Houses of Progress,
and standing Houses for God; Heaven and the Church 747. B Humane learning; how
necessary to the making of a good Divine 562. A Hypocrisy; the good use and
benefit that may be made by it 297. E. 636. B Against the wicked practice of it
585. D


I OF those Idaeas which are in God 667. E Against Idleness and laziness, and
taking of no Calling 45. D. 411. B Jehovah; the right pronouncing of that Name;
the means whereby Christ did Miracles, according to the calumniating Jews
502. C Not pronounced till of late ibid. D
Jesuits; their uncharitableness, even to their own Authors, in defaming and
disgracing of them, though their betters 50. A The pride of their Denomination
from Jesus 687. D How boldly they depart from the Fathers and their Authority
740. B. C. 796. C D Their pride in taking upon them the name of Fathers 798. A
Jesus; of the name of Jesus 503. C How S. Paul delights himself in that Name
503. D. 688. A
Jews; not one of them in all the world a Soldier 5. D Their opinion of
Christ's coming. 21. C Their impious custom of anointing such as die, with the
blood of a Christian Infant ibid.
Ignorance; the several Divisions and subdivisions of it in the School 287.
B. How full the most knowing men are of it ibid. C. D A learned Ignorance, what
295. E
Of the several Imperfections in our Faith, in our Hope, and in our Charity
819.820. A. B. C. D Imprecations, in Scripture, are often only Prophecies 401.
C Not allowed us D. but in some cases 555. E
Against Impossibility of Falling 240. B Incarnation; the mystery of it 16. C.
D. 395. E. 396. A. D E Inconsideration: the miseries of it. 246. D. E. 247. A.
296. E. 297. B. C. D In case of Zeal, the more pardonable. ib. B
Indignation for sin, how great it ought to be. 542. C Of that Individuality
wherein man is to be considered. 710. D Of that Infallibility with which the
Holy Ghost proposes his Dictates in the scripture, and how far it is from
that possibility, probability, and verisimilitude of the Church of Rome 657. C
Jnfidels: of their right unto the things of this world. 214. D Indulgencies:
the vanity the Church of Rome was grown to, in preaching and extolling of them
773. B. C The multiplicity of them 788. A The Reformation arose from them ibid.
D
Indulgencies; what they were in the Primitive Church 788. E. Against
Ingratitude for mercies and Diliverances past 88. B. 577. E Why so seldom
condemned in the scripture. 550. A
Injuries: of patience in suffering them 410. A. B Innovations: the difference
between Innovations, and Renovations 735. A Inquisition: of torturing men in
the Romish Inquisition: and the uncertainty of such kind of Trials 194.195.
C. D Intentions: the best men's best intentions, usually misconstrued 344. E
Instinct: the difference between the Reason of Man, and the instinct of Beast:
what it is; and wherein it consists 227. B. C Inward speculations, inward
zeal, inward prayer, are not full performances of a Christian man's duty 700. B
Jordan: the River Jordan, why so called 718. E Joys of Heaven: of their
eternity 73. C. D 223. A. B. C. 266. A. 340. D. 747. E Heaven represented in
Joy and Glory 672. A
Joy of the wicked, which they have in this world, counterfeit 635. C Of the
Joy of the godly, which they have in this world 671. E. 672. etc. 673. A. B
Cheerfulness and Joy commended 816. B
Judging of other men condemned 128. D. 479. A In doubtful cases we are ever
to incline toward Charity 164. E There may be sin in a charitable Judging of
some holy men's Actions 488. D
Judgment; of the day of Judgment, and the uncertainty thereof 271. D Gods
Judgments have not exactly the name of Punishments. 544. C How unwilling God
is to speak of, or to come to Judgment 676. C
Justificare, to Justify; taken three several ways 366. C Neither Works nor
Faith the cause of our Justification 367. E


K KIngs; the best form of Government by Kings 51. B Our duty and debt unto
them 91. C The Releiving of them, more necessary than giving of Alms 92. A
What Humility and Reverence in Subjects is due unto them ibid. D And afforded
in the very Scripture ibid. Not only their substantial, but their
circumstantiall and ceremonial wants, to be prevented by the Subjects Giving
100. E Their Crown of Thorns 137. B Kings; a particular ordinance of God, and
nothing resulting out of the tacit consent of the people 391. C The King to
institute and order matters in the public service of God 698. A He is Keeper
of both the Tables D Against those disloyal jealousies and suspicions, which
the people have of the King, and of his affection to Religion 699. D In matters
of favor, the King is one of the people, says the Law 754. C. D
Kisses; of their treacherous, carnal, and sacred uses 405.406. A. B. C Used
of Kinsfolks 407. C As a Recognition of Power D In coming and going E In
religious reverence E In sign of concord 408. A
Kneeling; the necessity of it, in the time of prayer 72. E. 73. A Of the
Kneeling at the Sacrament 115. D. 116. A. B.
Knowledge of Fundamentals, every man is bound to have; but not of the
superstructure and superedification 807. B How Imperfect all our Knowledge is,
in Arts and Sciences 818. A
Knowledge; against overmuch curiosity, in attaining to it 63. E. 308. C. 319.
A. B Whether we shall Know one another in the next world 157. C Of sobriety in
Knowledge 270. C. 701. A
Knowing of our selves, how hard a thing it is 563. C Knowing of God; four
ordinary ways of it in the Schools 229. B

L Labor; threefold Labor in the Scripture 538. B Law and the Gospel; of
the several state of either 284. E. 285. A Of the Law of Nature, under which
every man is 362. C How the Law is said to show what is sin 687. B
Laws of Temporal Princes; whether or no they bind the conscience of the
Subject; wherefore never stated by the Pope, or by any Council 741. B
Liberality and Bounty, Civil and Spiritual, what 759. E Liberality, a virtue
that begets a virtue ibid. The true body and true soul of Liberality, what it
is 760. C
Life, the excellency of it 69. D. E. 70. A All that is good, included in it.
70. A
Light, the first creature 759. D Literae Formatae, in the Primitive Church,
their Institution and use 415. A Lord; whether God could be called the Lord
before there were any creatures, a disputable thing 757. A The Judgment of
Tertullian and S. Augustine, either way ibid. B
Love, the first Act of the Will 225. D How we may love the creatures 398. E
598. B Against the Love of the things of this world 187. C. 399. C Against
loving of God, for the Temporal blessings he bestows upon us 750. C
Loving our enemies; six degrees observed in it 97. B Lust and Licentiousness;
the burdens that it makes men under go 623. D Lying; whether it be lawful
before one that is no competent Judge 491. B

M Macchabees; their torture and patience 221. E. 222. A. B. C. etc. Man; what
Man is 64. D. E. 65. A. etc. The dignity and honor of Man 655. C. D He
cannot deliberately wish himself an Angel; for, he should lose thereby ibid. E
Of those helps and assistances which Man affords to Man 656. D. E. etc. Man is
called every creature in Scripture, and why 770. C. D
Mary; the Crowns of England, Scotland, Denmark, and Hungary, much about one
time, fell upon women, whose name was Mary 243. E It is a noble and a
comprehensive name, and why 244. A
Marriage; of second Marriages 216. D. E. etc, Masters; of that esteem and
regard is to be had to such as have taught us, or have been our Masters 288.
E. 289. A why called Patres-familias 388. B
Mediocrity of Estate; the commendation of it 661. A. B. etc. 685. D Orders in
the Church of Rome from both extremes; but not one from the Mean 661. B. What
is a Mediocrity to one, is not, nor ought to be to another 714. C
Memory; the Holy Ghosts pulpit oftener than the Understanding 290. B. C Of the
sinful Memory of past sins, how dangerous it is 542. D
Mercy of God, how much above his judgments 12. B. 67. A. 71. A How full God
is of it. C Occasional Mercies, what, and how many D The Devils capable of
Mercy, in the judgment of many Fathers. 66. A. 262. D The proper difference
between Mercy and Truth 530. D Against those that abridge the great volume of
Gods Mercies 568. E Of several Mercies and refreshments, which are none of
Gods 810. E. 811. A God can do nothing but in Mercy 811. C
Merits foreseen; no cause of Graces in us 5. A Millenarii; their error,
what, and how general: almost all the Fathers tainted with it 261. C Miracles;
against multiplying of them in the Roman Chuch 36. D Mirabilis, or, the man
that works Miracles; the first of those great names given to Christ, by the
Prophet Esaias 58. C Nothing dearer to God, than a Miracle 215. A They are his
own Prerogative ibid. B It is more to change Nature by Miracles, than to make
Nature 394. E No man to ground his Faith upon a Miracle, as it seems to him.
429. A How to judge of Miracles, whether they be true or false 429. B
Dangerous putting of God to a Miracle in saving us 456. B What is properly a
Miracle 683. D The Creation it self, none ibid.
Monuments; not in Churches, in the Primitive times 730 D Mortification;
outward Mortification and austerity, a specious thing 492. E Mortification, to
be general, of all the parts, and not of one only 541. B
Mosselim; a kind of Doctors amongst the Jews, that taught the people by
parables and obscure sayings 690. E The Multitude; of their levity, judgment,
and changing of opinions 482. B. D Against Murmuring at Gods blessings, if they
be not as great as we desire 576. C Mute; against standing Mute, at
examinations 491. C Mysteries; of two kinds in the Schools 203. D Every
Religion under heaven, has had her Mysteries, and some things in-intelligible
of all sorts of men 690. D


N NAmes and Titles; nothing puffs men up more 734. D The Heathen never
called their Tutelar Gods by their Names, and why 608. A Of getting a good Name
amongst men, and against those that neglect it 680. A. E Of men's retaining
those Names that are most acceptable 285. B Of the Name of Christian, and when
it was given, and how 426. B Adam named all creatures but himself, and why
563. B
Natalitia Martyrum; their days of suffering so called, and why 268. C. 461. C
Nativities; three Nativities to every Christian, and which they are 424. E
Nature; of that sight, which we have of God, even by the light of Nature 227.
B. 686. E Of that power which some of the Fathers attribute to Nature, without
Grace 314. C Men do not half so much against sin, as even by the power of
Nature they are able to do 315. B. C Of the testimony which a Natural soul
gives unto it self of it self 337. B Nature not equivalent to Grace 649 A
Nature not our own. ibid. Nature and Grace how they cooperate ibid. D
Neighborhood, and evil Neighborhood, and communicating with evil men
420. C Noctambulones; men that walk in their sleep, wake if they be called by
their Names 467. A Nothing; there is nothing more contrary to God, than to be,
to do, or to think Nothing 265. B The Devil himself, cannot wish himself
deliberately to be nothing C An Order of Friars in the Roman Church; that, in
humility, called themselves Nullanos or Nothings 731. C
Of the Numberless number of Gods benefits to Man. 765. A

O Occasional instruments of Gods glory; what cold affections they meet with
in the world amongst men disaffected to Gods cause 154. E Occasional, mercies
offered; what, and how many 12. D Occasional Convertites; who 461. C God, no
Occasional God, and why 586. B Devotion no Occasional thing, and why 244. E A
great disease both in Church and State, that Occasional things have diverted
the principal, and hindered them from being done 797. C
Often contemplation of death takes much from the fear of it 473. E Old;
against growing old in sin 543. C Opinion; in a middle station between
ignorance and knowledge 354. C Foolish and fantastical Opinions should not so
much as be disputed against ibid. D Of gayning a good Opinion amongst men 481. E
Oppression; against Oppression and Extortion 94. A Original sin; how full we
are of it 2. E It is a Natural poison in us; and how it works 313. D The
Gentiles, how purged of Original sin; in the judgment of some Romanists 314.
D How Original sin is voluntary in us 363. A
Ostracisme amongst the Athenians what 479. C

P PAinting and adorning of themselves; how used, how abused of men and women
196. B. C. 541. C. 714. A The limits of it, not so narrow as some conceive them
643. C
Parents; the honor due unto them 217. D Patience; in suffering of injuries;
the power and benefit of it 410. B Peace; the consideration and the benefit of
it 145. E. 146. A. B The loveliness and amiablenesse of it considered 753. B.
C Of Peace and plenty ibid.
Penance; different Penances upon different sins; yet practiced in our Church
402. B Public Penances in the Primitive Church, and why 545. D No satisfaction
to Gods justice in them 544 B. C. D How to understand the Fathers, enclining
that way 545. E
Perplexities; of the several kinds of them 606. C Persecution of the
Primitive Church described 185. B. C Perfect; there is nothing in the world
perfect; no, not in spiritual things 817. D. 818. A Of Persevering; and not
trusting to our former goodness 165. C. D. 303. A. B. 331. A. 547. D. E
Petalisme amongst the Syracusians, what it was 479. C S. Peter's being at Rome;
how believed, and how not 404. E. 733. E. 744. D S. Peter and S. Paul, how
magnified by S. Chrysostom. 462. B. C
Philosophers; what knowledge many of them had of Christ 68. E Pilgrimages; how
they begun, and grew on in the Church of Rome 252. B The abuses of them, taxed
by the Romanists themselves ibid. C And by sundry Fathers ibid. D
Places Consecrated; of their honor and use 251. D Against being over-homely,
and over-fellowly with God and them 691. C
Place and Precedence; the fond contentions about it 730. E Especially amongst
the several Orders of Friars, who all pretend to the most humble Names that
can be 731. D
Against the sin of night-Pollutions; 129. C. D Popularity; the sin and
danger of it 482. C The vanity of it 660. A
Poverty and Riches; which occasioneth most sins 658. D. 659. D What kind of
Poverty is a blessing 728. D. E
Power; of that Power that is in us to discern our own Actions and assist our
selves in our own Salvation 118. B. C. D Prayer for the dead; no precept, no
example of it in the Law, or Gospel 780. A First used of the Gentiles: and of
them taken up by the Jews ibid. B. C Then of the Christians; and how ibid. D.
E Why the Fathers did not oppose the practice of it. 780. D. E. 781. B
Turtullian the first that took knowledge of it. 781. A Aerius did oppose it:
but not harkened to, and why 781. C How far allowed by Epiphanius. ibid. D.
What the Fathers meant by Praying for the dead, out of Dennis the Areopagite
735. E which is allowed by the Apology for the Confession of Auspourg 786. B
Prayer: A set form of Prayer used of the Gentiles 689. A The Office of
Conditor precum, what it was ib. Their Prayers received every five years ibid.
A. 771. E
Prayer; how we may Pray earnestly, and yet wait the Lords leisure 34. D Of
Prayer at home, and at Church 35. C.etc. 90. B. 264. E. 370. B. 688. E
Unseasonable Prayers not accepted of God 50. E. 521. B Prayers to be said
kneeling 72. E Prayer and Preaching 89. E Against ex tempore Prayers 90. C.
130. C. 668. B. C. And Praying to several Saints, for several things 90. D
What Prayer is properly called Ours, 130. A The condition of pure Prayer 131. A
Not always heard of God, and why 133. B. C. 553. C. Against fashionall and
customary Prayer 512. E Of the importunity, impudency, and violence of Prayer
522. B Against incogitancy in Prayer 555. B Against irreverence in Gods House,
in the time of Prayer 692. A Of the several errors that are easily committed,
and do all frustrate our Prayers 692. D The duties and dignities of Prayer
804. B Repeating the same Prayer often, no idle thing 812 B Of those
distractions which the best of us have in Prayer 820. B. C. Of the abuses of
Prayer in the Church of Rome ibid. We are to descend to particulars in our
Prayers 822. A Of that fervency and importunity which is required in our
Prayers ibid. B. C
Praise and thanksgiving; all our Religion is nothing else 88. C The necessity
and benefit of it ibid. D Of such Praise as is due to the good actions of men
167 A. B. C. etc. Praise, what it is 679. D That it may be fought of good men
ibid. Praise to be directed upon three Objects 680. C We may Praise, and yet
not flatter D. E Of Praying and Praising 804. C. 805. B
Preaching and Praying; the benefit and use of either 689. B. C. D Preaching,
more frequent in the Primitive Times than now; and good reason why 324. C
Preaching often ex tempore; and Preaching of other men's Sermons, ordinary ibid.
D Against the sudden extemporall Preaching of this time 325. A Some points of
Divinity not fit to be Preached 561. D. E In what sense it is good for a man
to Preach himself 574. B. C. D Against popular Preaching 660. B Of Abuses
offered to Preaching 693. A The several Names of Preaching 758. D No
resemblance of Preaching amongst the Gentiles 771. E
Preisthood; the honor and dignity of it 32. D 391 D.E That, the particular
way of ennobling men amongst the Jews ibid. 32. E The Priest to be sent for
before the Physician 110. C In extraordinary cases, above the King; but not
otherwise 396. B The Egyptian Kings killed themselves, when the Priest bid them
485. C
Of the Pretenses and coverings, and excuses which we find out for our sins
570. B Against Pride 65. A Pride the first sin of the Angels 622. C All Pride
is not forbidden Man ibid. D What is not Pride 623. B. 727. D How early a sin
Pride is 726. D Nothing so contrary to God as Pride is 727. E 728. A Against
Prodigality 94. C Of that Progress which a man is to make, be he never so
learned or religious 427. B. C. D. 616. D
Promises; the difference between the Promises of the Messiah, and the
Performance of them, by Christ's coming in the Flesh 68. B. 406. E Prophet; no
visible calling to the Office of a Prophet 54. D. The promises of God in the
Prophets, how different from those in the Gospel 40. E. A This a seditious
inference; the Prophets did thus and thus in the Law: therefore the Ministers
of the Gospel should do so likewise; and why 734. A
Psalms; The Book of Psalms; the dignity and virtue of it 653. D.E They are
the Manna of the Church 663. B Such forbid to be made Priests, that were not
perfect in the Psalms 813. B Singing of the Psalms; how general and
commendable in S. Hieromes times ibid. B. C
Purgatory; none in the old Testament, and why, 783. E How derived from Poets
and Philosophers, to Fathers 784. A. B. C How suspitiously and doubtfully the
Fathers speak of it bid. specially, S Augustine 786. E Bellarmine refuted about
it 792.793


Q QVestions arising, taken away by Silencing of both parties 42. D Against
curiosity in seeking after them 57. D There is always Divinity enough to save
a soul that was never called into Question 745. A How peevish some Romish
Authors do deto^t the Scripture, when they fall upon any Question, or
Controversy; though otherwise they content themselves with the true meaning
and sense of the same words 790. E. 791. A
Quomodo; to Question how God does this or that, dangerous 301. E. 367. C

R REason, not to be enquired after, in all points of Faith 23. B Reasons not
convincing, never to be proffered for to prove Articles of Faith 205. D God
uses to accompany those Duties which he commands, with Reasons to enduce us
to the performance of them 593. A
Reconciliation, how little amongst the Papists 10. D All Nations under heaven,
have acknowledged some means of Reconciliation to their offended gods, in the
remission of their sins 564. C
Religion: against such as damnifie Religion by their outward profession, more,
than if they did forsake it 757. D Every Religion had her mysteries, her
Reservations and in-intelligiblenesse, which were not easily understood of all
men 690. D And therefore Religion not to be made too homely and course a thing
ibid. C Christian Religion, an easy yoke; a short and contracted burden 71. D
All points of Religion not to be divulged to the people 87. D Defects in
Religion, safer than superfluities 291. A Of peaceable conversation with men of
diverse Religions 310. C We, charged to have but a negative Religion 636. A
Religion; how far we may proceed in the outward declaration of our Religion
814. A
Resurrection; of three sorts 149. E Of that from persecution 185. B. C. D Of
that from Sin 186. D. E.etc Of that from Death 189. D How, a Resurrection of
the soul; being the soul cannot die 189. D Christ; how the First Resurrection
191. B Our Resurrection, a mystery 204. C Resurrection; All Religions amongst
the Heathens, had some Impressions of it 800. E
Retrospection or looking upon time past, the best rule to judge of the future
668. D Reverence; how much due to men of old Age 31. D What Required in Gods
House 43. D
Revelations; we are not to hearken after them 238 E Nor yet, to bind God
from them 239. A
Rewards; against bribery, or receiving of Rewards 389. E God first proposes to
himself persons to be Rewarded or condemned, before he thinks of their
condemnation or their Reward 674. B. 675. B. C
Riches; the cause of less sin than poverty 658. D Especially, considered in
the highest degree, and in the lowest; that is, abundant Riches, and extreme
beggarly poverty 659. D Against the perverse desire of Riches. 728. C Riches,
S. Chrysostom calls the parents of absurdities; and why 729. A
The Remane Church, a true Church; as the Pest house, is a house 606. A. 621. C
Rome; the Church of Rome, the better for reformamation 621. B They do charge
us that we have but a negative Religion 636. A Why they so much under-value the
Scripture; and yet endeavor to bring books of other Authors into that rank,
as the Macchabees and such like 738. E Rome it self, how it has been handled
ever by Catholics in their bloody wars 779. A Almost all the Controversies
between Rome and the Christian world, are matters of profit 791. A
Rule and Example; the two only ways of Teaching 571. E. 668. B The only
Rule of doctrine, the Scripture and Word of God 738. E


S THe Sabbath; a Ceremonial Law 92. C Sacrament; how effectually Christ is
present in it 19. C Of preparing our selves to the worthy receiving of it 32.
A.etc. 33. A.etc. Against Superstition and Profaneness too, in the coming to
it 34. A Of Christ's real presence in it 36. D. 37. B. C That which we receive
in the Sacrament, to be Adored 693. B Against unworthy receiving of it 693. D.
E Of both extremes about Chrsts presence in the Sacrament 821. E
Saints; against praying to them 90. D. 378. D. 595. A. 744. A. 757. B The
Saints in heaven pray for us 106. B Why they must not pray to Saints in the
Church of Rome, upon good Friday, Easter, and Whitsunday 485. D Whether they
enjoy degrees of Glory in heaven 742. E
Salvation; of the general possibility of Salvation for all men 66. B. 330. A.
B. 742. B. C. D. Not to be ascribed to our Works 107. D Nor to our Faith ibid.
E More that are Saved, than that are damned 241. A. 259. C The impossibility of
Salvation to any man before he was a man, a discomfortable doctrine 278. B Of
that certainty of Salvation, which is taught of some in the Roman Church; and
how far we are from it 339. D. E. 340. A. 608. C Salvation offered to all
men, and in earnest 742. A. B
Savior; the name of Savior attributed to others beside Christ 528. D
Scriptures; the most eloquent Books that are 47. E 556. E. 557. C four
Elements of the right exposition and sense of Scripture 305. B Moderation in
reading of them 323. C Scripures the only rule of Doctrine 738. E
Secrecy in Confession, commended; but in case of disloyalty 92. E. 575. E
Seeing of God in our Actions, how necessary 169. E
Against Selfe-Subsistence, or standing of our selves 240. A. B Against
Self-love 156. A Sermons; how loath the Fathers were to lack company at them
48. C Of preaching the same Sermons twice 114. C 250. C The danger of hearing
Sermons without practicing 455. C. D
Sighing for sin; the benefit of it 537. D Sight; the noblest of the senses;
and all the senses 225. B Sign of the Cross; wherefore used in the Primative
times 538. A And why by us, in baptism ibid. Signs, how they may be sought
after, and how not 15. B. C. D
Shame for sin; a good sign 557. D To be voice-proofe, not afraid nor
Ashamed of what the World says of a Man, an ill sign of a Spiritual
obduration in sin 589. A
Silence; the several sorts of it; Silence of Reverence 575. C Silence of
subjection ibid. D Silence which is good 576. B. C Silence which is bad 577. D
Good to be Silent sometimes, even in good things; and when 576. E
Simple-men of this world; why chosen for Christ's Apostles 719. C Singular;
Gods speaks of things of grace in the Singular: but of heavy things in the
plural number, ever 711. A Single instances; no safe concluding from them 460.
E Neither in the case of the Thief on the Cross, nor S. Paul 461. B
Singularity; not ground enough to condemn every opinion 234. C Against
Singularity 51. D. 177. C. 573. D. 722. B Of a Single testimony 234. B
Sin; the cause of all sicknesses 109. C Little light and customarie Sins,
how dangerous 117. B. 164. C. D. 585. E All Sin is from our selves: not from
any thing in God 118. A. 330. D The Sin of the Heart, the greatest of all Sin,
and why 140. D How well some Men husband their Sin 147. A That it is good for
men to fall into some Sins 171. B. C Sin is a fall, and how 186. D. 187. C
Whether it have rationem demeriti, and may properly offend God 342. C Sin,
not merely nothing 342. E Not so much of any thing as of Sin 343. C How soon
Sin is followed of Repentance 540. C How Sin rises by little and little, in
us 585. C
Against sitting in the time of Divine Service 72. D Socinians; their monstrous
opinions 317. C And nicknaming of Athanasius Sathanasius 654. D Against the
growth of that pestilent Heresy of Socinianisme 821. B
Sorrow for the dead; how lawful 157. C. D. E. 822. D Of the end less Sorrow
of the wicked 632. B No communication of their Sorrow 634. D
The Soul; of the miseries of it in the body 190. A Of the laziness of the
Soul in the disquisition of any Divine Truths 190. B C Of her excellency of
knowledge in the next world ibid. C. D Of bending the Soul up to her proper
height, and putting of her home 483. D Soul and Spirit; what the Fathers
understand by them in Scripture 517. C
Subjects, how to look upon the faults and errors of their Governors 13. C How
reverent to be toward their Princes 92. D
Supererogation; against Works of Supererogation: and of the fondness of them
390. C 494. E. 495. A. 547. C. 732. E Superstition better than Profaneness, and
why 69. A The danger of it to be prevented, but how 485. E
Supplications; how they differ from Petitions or Prayers 553. E Synedrion; the
Original and power of the Synedrion, or Sanhedrim, amongst the Jews 491. E
Herod called before it; but not when he was King 492. A


T Tears; against their inordinatenesse 155. A Never ascribed to God 156. D
Well employed for the dead, though they be at rest 157. A Of those whose
constitution will afford no Tears 160. D Four considerations that will
enforce Tears 160. E. 161. A Of Tears shed for worldly losses ib. C. D. 162.
A For sin 539. B Of the effect of Tears 162. B How God is said in Scripture
to hear Tears that make no sound 552. E Tears the humidum-radicale of the
Soul 577. E
Temporal blessings; how seldom prayed for in Antiquity 750. D. E They are
blessings; but blessings of the left hand 751. D Nothing permanent in them 823.
D
Tentations; all men not alike enabled against them 310. E Whether it be
lawful to pray against all kind of Tentations 527. C One of the Devils
greatest Tentations it is to make us think our selves above Tentations, or
Tentation-proofe, that they cannot hurt us 603. E The use and necessity of them
789. C
Thanksgiving; the duty of thanksgiving, better than that of Prayer 549. D How
small it is, if proportioned to the love of God unto us 550. B
Thoughts; of the greatness of sins of thought 140. D. 543. D Titles and
bare empty Names; how men are puffed up with them 734. D Torturing; whether or
no to be admitted, in case of Religion 194. D Tongue; how many it has damned
344. B Tradition; against the making of Traditions articles of Faith 779. D
Transubstantiation; the riddles, and contradictions of it. 36. E What true
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament may be admitted. 693. C
Tribulations; the benefit of them 563. B 604. A. B Spiritual Tribulations and
afflictions, heavier than Temporal 665. B. D. E Tribulation and affliction,
part of our daily bread which we ought to pray for, and how 787. B
Tribute; God never wrought miracle in the matter of money, but only for
Tribute to Caesar 91. E Trinity; the knowledge of it not by natural reason
attained 301. B Not one of a thousand knows what himself means, when he
speaks of the Trinity. 307. E Some obumbrations of the Trinity, even in nature
379 What, are illustrations of it, to us Christians are no Arguments unto the
Jews 417. B Four several trinities 417. E. 418. A It is the only rule of
our Faith, the Trinity 426. E To be believed first of all, but not last of all
to be understood 428. C. D The opinions of several Heretics, concerning it
429. D The several ways of expressing it by figures and letters 429. E
Troubles; five several sorts of Troubles 518. D The universality and
inevitableness of them 664. B
Truth; not always to be spoken 576. E Turning; of Gods Turning to us, and of
our Turning to God 524. B. C. D. 525. A. B. 526. A. B

V VAgabonds and incorrigible rogues; against receiving or harboring of them
415. B. C Vain things in themselves, may be brought to a religious use 226. E
Vbiquetaries; 67. E Confuted by the Angels Argument 248. C Of that Vicissitude
which is in all temporal things; 823. D
Vigils; why discontinued in the Primitive Church 813. A Virginity; The
dignity and praise of it 17. C. D Three Heresies impeaching the Virginity of
the blessed Lady 17. D Against vowed Virginity 30. D
Virgin Mary; The error of Tertullian about her 18. A Of the Manichees and
Anabaptists 23. D Against appeals to her in heaven 46. A Borne in Original
sin 314. A Called of the Fathers Deipara, but not Christipara; and why 400. D
Threatened at a siege of Constantinople to be drowned, if she did not drown
the enemy 418. E The Church only in the Virgin Mary, according to the School
603. C
Against Uncharitable objecting of repented sins 499. D Unity; the Devils
way to break it 138. D The Insatiableness of sin 709 C Uprightness; what
Uprightness is required of man in this world 677 B. C What it is to be
Upright in heart ibid. 678. A. B. C
Against Usury 753. E. 754. A. Vulgate Edition; of the Antiquity and Authority
of it 542. E Not to be preferred before the original ibid.


W War; the miseries and incommodities of it 146. C. D Waters; those of
Baptism, sin, tribulation, and death 309. C.etc. What is meant by Waters in
Scripture 598. D
Waiting upon Gods time; how it consists with fervent Prayer 34. D Wings; the
several acceptations of the Word in Scripture 671. B Winning upon God by
prayer, how well God likes it 513. E Wisdom; of sins against it, especially
ignorance, and curiosity 411. B Witness; the credit of the Testimony,
depends much upon his credit that is the Witness 238. B Women; our Savior
came from such as were dangerously suspected and noted in Scripture, for their
incontinence. 24. A Never any good Angel appeared in the likeness of a Woman
242. D Whether Women were created after Gods Image; a question in S. Ambrose
his Commentaries upon the Epistles; that has called those Commentaries in
doubt 242. E Of Women's able in State affairs and matters of Government ibid.
Powerful in matters of Religion, both on the right hand, and on the left 243. A
Wonder; the difference between the Philosophers and the Fathers about
wondering 194. A Word of God; the very Angels of heaven refer themselves unto
it 249. E Stronger than any reason to a Christian 394. B 815. A The only rule
of Doctrine 738. E
The World is a sea, and in how many respects, 735. C Works; we no enemies to
good works, as the Adversary does traduce us 82. A.etc. No Faith without them
136. A We are to continue in them 554. B Works, good, when to a good end 82. E
To be done, of what 83. A How they may be seen of men 141. B Sometimes there
is good use in concealing our Works of mortification 538. E Of those
imperfections which are in the best of our Good Works 820 D. E
Wounds of love; how God does so wound us, that we kiss that hand that strikes
us 463. A

Z Zeal to be reconciled to discretion 10. A How the devil makes it his
Instrument 42. B Of the Zeal we ought to have to Gods service 72. D Zeal
distempered, what it will do 237. A Zeal and uncharitableness, are two
incompatible things 480. E Of Daniels Zeal in praying against the express
Proclamation of the King 814. A. B. C
Zoroastes, he only laughed when he was born 21. A

FINIS.
Errata.
Page line read 22 39 waives 22 40 waives 22 50 waives 110 52 when he 116 40
may come 142 31 the Cato's 164 39 Manours 196 15 in indignifying 420 32 man 426
45 blown 534 35 Topics 710 46 exorcised 751 43 or any people 782 63
Interimists.

In the life.

Page 15 line 12 for merit, read mercy

Page 16. line 40. for friends, read friend.


