Psalm. 150.

^Praise GOD upon ^ the Lute and Vi- oll.

THE SECOND BOOK of Songs or Airs, of 2. 4. and 5. parts: With Tableture for
the Lute or Orpherian, with the Violl de Gamba.

Composed by JOHN DOVVLAND Batcheler of Music, and Lutenist to the King of
Denmark: Also an excelent lesson for the Lute and Base Viol, called Dowlands
adieu.

Published by George Eastland, and are to be sold at his house near the
green Dragon and Sword, in Fleetstreete.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Este, the assign of Thomas Morley. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Lady Lucie Comptesse of BEDFORD.
EXcellent Lady: I send unto your La: from the Court of a foreign Prince,
this volume of my second labors: as to the worthiest Patroness, of Music:
which is the Noblest of all Sciences: for the whole frame of Nature, is nothing
but Harmony, as well in souls, as bodies: And because I am now removed from
your sight, I will speak boldly, that your La: shall be unthankful to Nature
her self, if you do not love, and defend that Art, by which, she has given
you so well tuned a mind.

Your Ladyship has in your self, an excellent agreement of many virtues, of
which: though I admire all, Yet I am bound by my profession, to give especial
honor, to your knowledge of Music: which in the judgment of ancient times,
was so proper an excelencie to Women, that the Muses took their name from it,
and yet so rare, that the world durst imagine but nine of them.

I most humby beseech your La: to receive this work, into your favor: and the
rather, because it comes far to begit, of you. From Helsingnoure in Denmark
the first of June.

1600.

Your Ladyships

in all humble devotion:

John Dowland.

A. ij.

To the right Noble and Virtuous Lady, Lucie Comptesse of BEDFORD.
G. Eastland. To I. Dowlands Lute.

LVte arise and charm the air,
Until a thousand forms she bear,
Conjure them all that they repair,
Into the circles of her ear,
Ever to dwell in concord there,
By this thy tunes may have access,
Even to her spirit whose flowring treasure,
Does sweetest Harmony express,
Filling all ears and hearts with pleasure
On earth, observing heavenly measure,
Right well can she Judge and defend them,
Doubt not of that for she can mend them.
To the courteous Reader.
GEntlemen, if the consideration of mine own estate, or the true worth of
money, had prevailed with me, above the desire of pleasuring you, and showing my
love to my friend, this second labors of Master Dowland, (whose very name is
a large preface of commendacions to the book,) had for ever lain hid in
darkness, or at the least frozen in a cold and foreign country. I assure you
that both my charge and pains in publishing it, has exceeded ordinary, yet
thus much I have to assure me of requital, that neither the work is ordinary
nor are your judgments ordinary to whom I present it, so that I have no reason
but to hope sor good increase in my labors, especially of your good favors
toward me, which of all things I most esteem. Which if I find in this, I
mean shortly (God willing) to set at liberty for your service, a prisoner
taken at Cales, who if he discouers not something (in matter of Music)
worthy your knowledge, let the reputation of my judgment in Music answer
it. In the mean time, I commend my absent friend to your remembrance, and my
self to your favorable conceits.

George Eastland.

From my house near the green Dragon and sword in Fleetstreet.

A TABLE OF ALL the Songs contained in this BOOK.
Songs to two voices.
I saw my Lady weep: I Flow my tears fall from your springs: II Sorrow sorrow
stay, lend true repentant tears: III Dye not before thy day: IIII Mourn,
mourn, day is with darkness fled: V Times eldest son, old age the heir of
ease: First part. VI Then sit thee down, and say thy Nunc demittis: Second
part. VII When others sings Venite exultemus: Third part. VIII
Songs to 4. voices.
Praise blindness eyes, for seeing is deceit: IX O sweet woods, the delight
of solitarienesse: X If fluds of tears could cleanse my follies past: XI Fine
knacks for Ladies, cheap, choice, brave and new: XII Now cease my wandering
eyes: XIII Come ye heavy states of night: XIIII White as Lillies was her face:
XV Woeful heart with grief opressed: XVI A Sheperd in a shade his plaining
made: XVII Faction that ever dwells in court: XVIII Shall I sue, shall I seek
for grace: XIX Finding in fields my Siluia all alone: XX
Songs to 5. voices.
Clear or Cloudie sweet as April showring: XXI Humor say what makst thou
here: XXII
FINIS.
I.
CANTO.
To the most famous, Anthony Holborne.
^I Saw my La- ^ die weep, and sor- row proud to be ad-uan-ced so: ^ in those
fair eyes, ij. where all perfections keep, her face was full of woe, ^ full
ofwoe, but such a woe (believe me) as wins more hearts, then mirth can do,
with her, ij. ^ in ty- sing parts. ^

Sorrow was there made fair,
And passion wise, ears a delightful thing,
Silence beyond all speech a wisdom rare,
She made her sighs to sing,
And all things with so sweet a sadness move,
As made my heart at once both grieve and love.
O fayrer then ought else,
The world can show, leave of in time to grieve,
Enough, mough, your joyful looks excells,
Tears kills the heart believe,
O strive not to be excellent in woe,
Which only breeds your beauties overthrow.
I. CANTO.
To the most famous, Anthony Holborne.
^I saw my Lady weep, ii. ij. ^ ij. and sorrovv proud, to be advanced ^ so, in
those fayer eyes, ij. vvher all perfections keep: Her face was full full of ^
vvoe, But such a vvoe, as vvinnes more hearts, Then mirth can do, with her
intising parts.

II.
CANTO.
Lacrime:
^
FLow my tears fall from your springs, Exilde for e- uer: Let me
Down vain lights shine you no more, No nights are dark e- nough for
^
morn where nights black bird her sad infamy sings, there let me live for-
lorne.
those that in dis- pair their last fortuns deplore, light does but shame dis-
close.
^
Never may my woes be re- lieued, since pit- tie is fled, and tears, and
sighs, and groans
From the highest spire of con- tentment, my for- tune is thrown, and fear,
and grief, and pain
^
my weary days, ij. of all joys here de- pri- ued.
for my de- serts, ij. are my hopes since hope is gone.
^
Hark you shadows that in darcknesse dwell, learn to contemn light, Happy,
happy they
^

^ that in hell feel not the worlds des- pite. ^

II. BASSO.
LACRIME.
^
FLow tears from your springs, Ex- ild for e- uer let me mourn: where
Down lights shine no more, no night is dark enough for those: that
^
nights black bird her sad in- fa- my sings, there let me live forlorn.
in dis- pair their fortunes de-plore, light does but shame disclose.
^
Ne- uer may my vvoes, my vvoes, be re- lie- ued, since pitt'is fled: and
tears, and
From the high-est spire, highest spire of contentment, my fortunes thrown,
and fear, and
^
sighs, and groans, my vvea-ry days, ij. all joys have deprived. Hark that
in
grief, and pain, for my de- serts, ij. are hopes, hope is gone.
^
darkness dwell, learn to contemn light, Happy: ij. they that in hell feel
not the worlds despite.
III.
CANTO.
^SOrrow sorrowstay, lend true repentant tears, ^ to a woeful, ij. wretch-ed
wight, hence, ij. dis- pair with thy tor- ^ menting fears: do not, O do not
my heart poor heart affright, pity, ij. ij. ^ ij, ij, ij, help now or never,
mark me not to endless pain, ij. ^ a- las I am co^dempne'd, ij. I am
condemned e-uer, nohope, no ^ help, there does re- maine, but down, down,
down, down I fall, ij. down ^

^ and a-rise, ij. I ne- uer shall, but down, down, down ^ ^ down, I fall,
ij. down and a- rise, ij. ^ I ne- uer shall. ^

III. BASSO.
^SOrrow sorrow stay, lend true repentant tears, lend true repentant repentant
tears, ^ to a woeful woeful wretched wight: Hence hence despair, with thy
tormenting fears, ij. ^ Oh do not my poor heart my poor heart affright: Pity
pity help now or never, mark me ^ not to endless pain, ij. alas I am
condemned, condemned ever: ij. ^ I am condemned ever, no hope no help there does
remain, but down d. d. d. d. I fall, but ^ down d. d. d. d. d. I fall, down
and arise, down and a- rise, a- rise I never shall, but down d. ^ d. d. d. I
fall, but down d. d. d. d. d. I fall, down and arise, down and a- rise, a-
rise, arise, ^ ij. ij. ij. I. never shall.

IIII.
CANTO.
^DYe not be- fore thy day, poor poor man condemned, ^ But life thy low
looks, ij. from the humble earth, Kiss not despair and see sweet ^ hope con-
temned: The hag has no delight, but moan but moan for mirth, O ^ fie poor
fond* ling, ij. fie fie be willing, to pre- ^ serve thy self from killing: Hope
thy keeper glad to free thee, Bids thee go and will not see thee, ^

^ hye thee quickly from thy wrong, so she ends her willing song. ^

IIII. BASSO.
^DYe not before thy day poor man conden'd, but lift thy low looks ^ ij. thy
looks from t'humble earth, kiss not despair and ^ see sweet hope cotemned:
The hag has no delight but moan but moan for mirth, O fie O fie ^ fie poor
fondling fie fie be vvilling, to preserve thy self from killing, Hope hope thy
keeper is ^ glad for to free thee, and bids thee go and will not see thee,
hye thee quickly from thy wrong, ^ so she ends her vvilling song.

V
CANTO.
^MOurne, mourn, day is with darkness fled, what heaven then go-uernes earth,
^ o none, but hell in heavens stead, choaks with his mistes our mirth. Mourn ^
mourn, look now for no more day nor night, but that from hell, Then all must
as they ^ may in darkness learn to dwell. But yet this change, must needs
change our delight, that ^ thus the Sun, ij. the Sun should harbor with the
night. ^

V. BASSO.
^MOurne days with darkness fled, What heaven then gouernes earth, O ^ none
but hell in heavens stead, Chokes with his mists our mirth. Mourn ^ look now
for no more day, nor night but that from hell, Then all must as they may, ^ In
darkness learn to dwell, But yet this change, this change, must change must
change delight, ^ That thus the Sun should harbor with the night.

VI.
CANTO.
^TImes eldest son, old age the heir of ease, Stre^gths foe, loves woe, and
foster ^ to devotion, bids gallant youths in marshall prowes please, as for
himself, he has no earth-ly ^ motion, But thinks sighs, tears, vows,
prayers, and sa- cri-fi-ces, As good as shows, maskes, iustes, or ^ tilt de-
ui-ses. But thinckes. ^

First part. VI. BASSO.
^TImes eldest son old age old age the heir of ease, strengthes ^ foe,
loves woe and foster to devotion: Bids gallant youths in martial ^ prowes
please, as for him selse he has no earthly motion, but thincks but thincks
sighs ^ tears, vows, prayers, and sacrifices, as good as shows, masks,
Iusts, or Tilt devises. But thincks:

VII.
CANTO.
Second part.
^THen sit thee down, and say thy Nune Demittis, with ^ De profundis, Credo,
and Te Deum, Chant Mise-re-re for what now so fit is, as that, ^ or this,
Para-tum est cor meum, O that thy Saint would take in worth thy heart, ^ thou
can not please her with a better part. O that thy ^

VII. BASSO.
Second part.
^THen sit thee down and say thy Nunc de-mittis with De profundis, ^ Credo,
and Te deum, chant Mi-serere, for what now so fit is, as that ^ or this,
Paratum est cor meum, O that thy Saint would take in vvorth thy heart, thou
can ^ not please her with a better part. O that thy

VIII.
CANTO.
Third part.
^WHen others sings Venite exultemus, stand by ^ and turn to Noli emulari, For
quare fremu- e-runt use oremus Viuat ^ E- li-za, Vi- uat E- li- za, Foran aue
mari, and teach those swains that ^ lives about thy cell, to say A- men A- men
when thou do pray so well. ^

Here ends the Songs of two parts,
VIII. BASSO.
Third part.
^WHen others sings Venite venite exul- temus, stand by and turn to noli ^ to
noli emu-lari, for quare fremuerunt use Oremus, Vi- uat E- li- za, Vi- ^ uat E-
li- za for an Aue Mari, and teach those swains that lives a- bout thy cell: to
sing ^ A- men A- men, when thou do pray so well.

Here ends the songs of two parts.
IX.
CANTO.
^PRaise blindnesseeies, for see- ing is deceit, Be dumb vain tongue, words
are but ^ flattering winds, break heart and bleed for there is no re-ceit, to
purge in-constancy from most men's ^ Lenuoy: ^ minds. And so I wackt amazd and
could not move, I know my dream was ^ Lenuoy: ^ true, and yet I love. ^

And if thine ears false Haralds to thy heart,
Convey into thy head hopes to obtain,
Then tell thy hearing thou art deaf by art,
Now love is art that wonted to be plain,
Now none is bald except they see his brains,
Affection is not known till one be dead,
Reward for love are labors for his pains,
Loves quiver made of gold his shafts of lead.
And so I wackt, etc.
IX. ALTO.
^PRaise blindness eyes, for seeing is deceit, be dumb vain tongue, words are
but flattering winds, ^ Lenuoy: ^ break heart and bleed, for there is no
receipt, to purge inconstancy, from most men's minds. And ^ so I wackt amazed
and could not move, I know my dream was true and yet I love.

IX. BASSO.
^PRaise blindness eyes for seeing is deceit, be dumb vain ^ tongue words are
but flattering wyndes, break heart and bleed for there is no receipt, ^ Lenuoy: ^
to purge inconstancy from most men's minds. And so I wackt a- ^ mazed and
could not move, I know my dream was true, and yet I love.

IX. TENORE.
^PRaise blindness eyes for seeing is deceit, be dumb vain tongue, words are
but flattering winds, ^ Lenuoy: ^ break heart and bleed, for there is no
receipt, to purge inconstancy from most men's minds. And ^ so I wackt amazd and
could not move, I know my dream my dream was true and yet I love.

X.
CANTO.
To Master Hugh Holland.
^O Sweet woods the de- light of so- li- ta- ri- nesse, O how ^ much do I love
your so- li- ta- ri- resse. From fames desire, from loves delight retired, In
these sad ^ groves an Hermits life I led, And those false pleasures which I
once ad- ^ mir'd, With sad re- mem-brance of my fall, ij I diead, To birds, to
trees, to earth, im- ^ part I this, For she less se- cret, and as sense-
less is. ^

Experience which repentance only brings,
Does bid me now my heart from love estrange,
Love is disdained when it does look at Kings,
And love lo placed base and apt to change:
There power does rake from him his liberty,
Her want of worth makes him in cradell die.
O sweet woods, etc.
O how much, etc.
You men that give false worship unto Love,
And seek that which you never shall obtain,
The endless work of Sisiphus you procure,
Whole end is this to know you strive in vain,
Hope and desire which now your Idols be,
You needs must loose and feel despair with me.
O sweet woods, etc.
O how much, etc.
You woods in you the fairest Nimphs have walked,
Nymphs at whose sight all hearts did yield to Love,
You woods in whom dear lovers often have talked,
How do you now a place of mourning prove,
Wansted my Mistres says this is the doom,
Thou art loves Childbed, Nursery, and Tomb.
O sweet woods, etc.
O how much, etc.
X. ALTO.
^O Sweet woods sweet woods the delight of Solitariness, O how much do I love
your ^ solitariness. From fames desire, from loves delight retyrde, in these
sad groves an Hermits life ^ I led, I led, and those, ij. false pleasures which
I once admired, with fad remembrance of my ^ fall, ij. I dread, to birds, to
trees, to earth, ij. impart I this, for she less secret and as se^celes is.

X. BASSO.
To Master Hugh Holland.
^O How much do I love your so- li- ta-rinesse. ^ From fames desire, from
loves delight retirde, In those sad groves an ^ Hermits life I led, I led, And
these false pleasures which I ^ once admirde, With sad remembrance of my fall,
ij I dread, to ^ birds, to trees, to earth, ij. impart I this, For she less
secret and ^ as senseless is.

X. TENORE.
^O Sweet woods the delight of solitariness, O how much do I love your
solitari- nesse. ^ From Fames desire, from loves delight retyrde, in these sad
groves an Hermits life I led, I led, ^ and those false pleasures which I once
admyr'd, with sad remembrance of my fall, ij. I dread, to ^ birds, to trees, to
earth, ij. impart I this, for she less secret and as senseless senseless is.

XI.
CANTO.
^IF fluds of tears could cleanse my follies past, And smoakes of sighs might
sa- ^ cri- fice for sin, If groaning cries might salve my fault at last, Or
endless moan, for ^ error pardon win, Then would I cry, weep, sigh, and ever
moan, mine er- ^ rors, fault, sins, follies past and gone. ^

I see my hopes must wither in their bud,
I see my favors are no lasting flowers,
I see that words will breed no better good,
Then loss of time and lightening but at hours,
Thus when I see then thus I say therefore,
That favors hopes and words, can blind no more*
XI. ALTO.
^IF fluds of tears could cleanse my follies past, and smoakes of sighs might
sacrifice for sin, If ^ groaning cries might salve my falt at last, or
endless moan for error pardon win, Then would I cry, weep, ^ sigh and ever
moan, mine errors fault, errors fault, sins follies past and gone.

XI. BASSO.
^IF fluds of tears could cleanse my follies past, and smoaks of sighs might ^
sacrifice for sin, if groaning cries might salve my fault at last, or endless
moan for ^ error pardon win, Then would I cry, weep, sigh and ever moan,
mine ^ errors ij. faults, sins follies past and gone.

XI. TENORE.
^IF fluds of tears could elense my follies past, And smoakes of sighs might
sacrifice for sin, If ^ groaning cries might salve my fault at last, Or endless
moan for error pardon win, Then would I cry, weep, ^ sigh, and ever moan, Mine
errors, ij. faults, sins, sins, follies past and gone.

XII.
CANTO.
^FIne knacks for ladies, cheap choice brave and new, Good penniworths but ^
money can-not move, I keep a faier but for the faier to view, a beggar may be
liberal of ^ love, Though all my wares be trash the heart is true, the heart is
true, the heart ^ is, true. ^

Great gifts are guiles and look for gifts again,
My trifles come, as treasures from my mind,
It is a precious Jewel to be plain,
Sometimes in shell th'orienst pearls we find,
Of others take a sheafe, of me a grain,
Of me a grain,
Of me a grain.
Within this pack pinnes points laces and gloves,
And diverse toies fitting a country faier,
But my heart where duty serves and loves,
Turtels and twins, courts brood, a heavenly paier,
Happy the heart that thincks of no-remoues,
Of no remoues,
Of no remoues.
XII. ALTO.
^FIne knacks for Ladies, cheap, choice, brave and new, good peniworthes, but
money cannot ^ move, I keep a fayer, but for the fayer to view, a beggar may be
liberal of love, though all my wares be ^ trash, the heart is true, ij. ij. is
true.

XII. BASSO.
^FIne knacks for Ladies cheap, choice, brave and new, good peni- ^ worthes,
but money cannot move, I keep a fayer, but for the fayer to view, a ^ beggar may
be liberal of love: though all my wares be trash, the heart is true, is ^
true, the heart is true, ij. the heart is true.

XII. TENORE.
^FIne knacks for Ladies, cheap, choice, brave and new, good peniworthes but
money cannot move, ^ I keep a fayer but for the fayer to view, a beggar may be
liberal of love, though all my wares ^ be trash, the heart, the heart is true.
ij. is true, the heart is true, the heart is true.

XIII.
CANTO.
^
NOw cease my wandering eyes, Strange beauties to admire, One faith
In change least comfort lies, Long joys yield long desire. New hopes
^
one love, Makes our frail pleasures e-ter-nall, And in sweetness prove.
new joys, Are still with sor-row decli-ning, Vn-to deep a- noies.
^
One man has but one soul,
Which art cannot divide,
If all one soul must love,
Two loves most be denide,
One soul one love,
By faith and merit united cannot remove,
Distracted spirits,
Are ever changing and hapless in their delights.
Nature two eyes has given,
All beauty to impart,
As Well in earth as heaven,
But she has given one heart,
That though we see,
Ten thousand beauties yet in us one should be,
One steadfast love,
Because our hearts stand fixed although our eyes do move.
XIII. ALTO.
^
NOw cease my wandering eyes, strange beaw- ties to admyre. One faith one
In change least comfort lies, long Joys yield long de- sire. New hopes new
^
love makes our frail pleasures eter- nall, and in sweetness prove.
Joys are still with sor- row decli- ning, un- to deep a- noyes.
XIII. BASSO.
^
NOw cease my wandering eyes, strange beaw-ties to ad-myre:
In change least com-fort lies, long Joys yield long de- sire.
^
One faith one love makes our frail pleasures e-ter-nall, and in sweetness
prove.
New hopes new Joys are still with sor- row decli-ning, un- to deep a- noyes.
XIII. TENORE.
^
NOw cease my wandering eyes, strange bew- ties to admyre. One faith one
In change least comfort lies, long Joys yield long desire. New hopes new
^
love, ij. makes our frail pleasures eternal, and in sweetness prout.
Joys, ij. are still with sorrow declining, vn-to deep a- noyes.
XIIII.
CANTO.
^COme ye heavy states of night, Do my fathers spirit right, ^ Sound- ings
balefull let me borrow, Burthe-ning my song with sorrow, Come sor-row come ^
her eyes that sings, By thee are tur- ned in- to springs. ^

Come you Virgins of the night,
That in Dirges sad delight,
Quier my Anthems, I do borrow
Gold nor pearl, but sounds of sorrow:
Come sorrow come her eyes that sings,
By thee are turned into springs.
XIIII. ALTO.
^COme come ye heavy states of night, do my fathers spirit right, soundings
balefull ^ let me borrow, burthening my song with sorrow, Come sorrow come come
her eyes that sings, by thee ^ are turned, are turned in- to springs.

XIIII. BASSO.
^COme, come ye heavy states of night, Do my fathers spirit right, Soun- ^
dings balefull let me borrow, Burthening my song with sorrow, Come sorrow come
^ her eyes that singe, By thee are turned in-to spring.

XIIII. TENORE.
^COme come ye heavy states of night, do my fathers spirit right, soundings
balefull let me ^ borrow, burthening my song with sorrow, Come sor- row come
her eyes that singes, by thee are tur- ^ ned, are turned into springs.

XV.
CANTO.
^WHite as Lillies was her face, When she smiled, She be- guiled, ^ Quitting
faith with foul disgrace, Virtue service thus neglected, Heart with for- rows
^ has in-fected. ^

2 When I swore my heart her own,
She disdained,
I complained,
Yet she left me overthrown,
Careless of my bitter groaning,
Ruthlesse bent to no relieuing.
3 Vows and oaths and faith assured,
Constant ever,
Changing never,
Yet she could not be procured,
To belecue my pains exceeding,
From her scant neglect proceeding.
4 Oh that Love should have the art,
By surmises,
And disguises,
To destroy a faithful heart,
Or that wanton looking women,
Should reward their friends as foemen.
5 All in vain is Ladies love,
Quickly choosed,
Shortly loosed,
For their pride is to remove,
Out alas their looks first won us,
And their pride has straight undone us.
6 To thy self the sweetest faier,
Thou have wounded,
And confounded,
Changles faith with foul dispaier,
And my service has envied,
And my succors has denied.
7 By thine error thou haft loft,
Heart unfeigned,
Truth unstained,
And the swain that loved most,
More assured in love then many,
More despised in love then any,
8 For my heart though set at naught,
Since you will it,
Spoil and kill it,
I will never change my thoughts,
But grieve that beauty ere was borne.
XV. ALTO.
^WHite as Lillies was her face, When she smiled she beguiled, Quitting faith
with soul dis- ^ grace, Virtue service thus neglected, Heart with sorrows
has in- fected.

XV. BASSO.
^WHite as Lillies was her face, When she smiled, She beguiled, Quit- ^ ting
fath with foul disgrace, Virtue service thus neglected, Heart with sorrows ^
has infected.

XV. TENORE.
^WHite as Lillies was her face, When she smiled, She beguiled, Quitting faith
with foul dis- ^ grace, Virtue service thus neg- lected, heart with sorrows
with sorrows has in- sected.

XVI.
CANTO.
^WOfull heart with grief oppressed, Since my fortunes most dis- ^ tressed,
From my joys has me re- mo- ued, Follow those sweet ^ eyes adored, Those
sweet eyes where- in are stored, All my plea- sures ^ best be- loved. ^

Fly my breast, leave me forsaken,
Wherein Griese his seat has taken,
All his arrows through me darting,
Thou may live by her Sunne-shining,
I shall suffer no more pining,
By thy loss, then by her parting.
XVI. ALTO.
^WOfull heart with grief oppressed, since my fortunes most distressed, From
my Joys ^ my Joys has me removed, follow those sweet eyes a- dored, those
faier eyes wherein are ^ stored, all my ple- sures best be- loved.

XVI. BASSO.
^WOfull heart with griese oppressed, since my fortunes most di- ^ stressed,
from my Joys has me re- moved, follow those sweet eyes, sweet eyes a- ^
dored, all my plea- sures best beloved.

XVI. TENORE.
^WOfull heart with griese oppressed, since my fortunes most distressed, From
my Joys, ^ my Joys has me re- moved, Follow those sweet eyes those sweet
eyes adored, those sweet eyes where- ^ in are stored, all my pleasures best
pleasures best be- loved.

XVII.
CANTO.
^
A Shepherd in a shade, his plaining made, Of love and lo-uers wrong,
Since love and Fortune will, I honor still, your fair and lovely eye,
^
Un- to the fairest less, That trod on grass, And thus bee-gan his song,
What conquest will it be, Sweet Nymph for thee, It I for sorrow dye, Restore,
restore my
^
heart again, Which love by thy sweet looks has slain, Least that inforst by
your disdain, I sing,
^
Fie fie on love, ij. it is a foolish thing.
^
My heart where have you laid O cruel maid,
To kill when you might save,
Why have ye cast it sorth as nothing worth,
Without a tomb or grave.
O let it be intombed and lie,
In your sweet mind and memory,
Least I resound on every warbling string,
Fyefye on love that is a foolish thing.
XVII. ALTO.
^
A Shepherd in a shade, his plaining made, of love and louets wrong, un- to the
fairest less,
Since love and fortune will, I honor still, your fair and lovely eye, what
conquest will it be,
^
ij. that trod on grass, and thus be- began his song. Restore restore my heart
a-
ij. sweet Nimphe for thee, if I for sor-row dye.
^
gain, which love by thy sweet looks has slain, by your disdain I sing, fie
fie on love, fie fie on love,
^
fie, it is a folish thing.
XVII. BASSO.
^
A A Shepherd in a shade, his plaining made, of love and
Since love and fortune will, I ho-nour still, your fair and
^
lo-uers wrong, un- to the fai-rest less, that trod on
loue-ly eye, what conquest will it be, sweet Nimphe for
^
grass, and thus began his song. Restore restore my heart a-
thee, if I for sorrow dye.
^
gain, which love by thy sweet looks has slain, least that inforst
^
by your disdain I sing, fie fie on love, fie fie on love fie it
^
is a fo-lish thing.
XVII. TENORE.
^
A Shepherd in a shade, his playning made. of love and lovers wrong, un- to the
fai-rest less,
Since love and fortnue will, I ho-nour still, your faier and lovely eye, what
conquest will it be,
^
ij. that trod on grass, and thus be- began his song. Restore restore my heart
a-
sweet Nimphe for thee, if I for sor-row dye.
^
gain, which love by thy sweet sweet looks has slain, least that inforst,
inforst by your disdain, ij.
^
I sing fie fie on love, fie fie fie on love it is a folish thing.
XVIII.
CANTO.
^FAction that ever dwells, In court where wits excells, has set de- ^ fiance,
Fortune and love has sworn, That they were never borne, of one aliance. ^

1 Fortune swears, weakest hearts
The book of Cupids arts
Turn with her wheel,
Senses themselves shall prove
Venture her place in love
Ask them that feel.
2 This discord it beget
Atheist that honor not
Nature thought good,
Fortune should ever dwell
In court where wits excel
Love keep the vvood.
3 So to the wood went I
With love to live and die
Fortune forlorn,
Experience of my youth
Made me think humble truth
In desert borne.
4 My saint is dear to me,
And Ione her self is she
Ione faier and true,
Ione that does ever move,
Passions of love with love
Fortune adieu.
XVIII. ALTO.
^FAction that e- uer dwells, in Court where wits excells, has set defiance,
fortune ^ and love, has sworn, that they were ne- uer borne of one a- liance.

XVIII. BASSO.
^FAction, that ever dwells, in Court where wits excells, has set ^ de-
fiance, fortune, and love has sworn, that they were never borne, of oue
aliance.

XVIII. TENORE.
^FAction, that ever dwells, in Court where wits excells, has set de-fiance:
Forrune and ^ love, has sworn, that they were ne- uer borne, of one a- liance.

XIX.
CANTO.
^SHall I sue shall I seek for grace? Shall I pray shall I prove? Shall I ^
strive to a heavenly Joy, with an earthly love? Shall I think that a bleeding
heart or ^ a wounded eye, Or a sigh can ascend the clouds to at-taine so hie. ^

2 Silly wretch forsake these dreams, of a vain desire,
O bethink what hie regard, holy hopes do require.
Favor is as fair as things are, treasure is not bought,
Favor is not won with words, nor the wish of a thought.
3 Pity is but a poor defense, for a dying heart,
Ladies eyes respect no moan, in a mean desert.
She is to worthy far, for a worth so base,
Cruel and but just is she, in my just disgrace.
Justice gives each man his own, though my love be just,
Yet will not she pity my grief, therefore die I must,
Silly heart then yield to die, perish in despair,
Witness yet how feign I die, When I die for the fair.
XIX. ALTO.
^SHall I sue, shall I seek for grace, shall I pray, shall I prove, shall I
strive to a heavenly ^ Joy, with an earthly love, shall I thinck that a
bleeding heart, ij. or a wounded eye, or a ^ sigh can ascend the clouds,
ascend the clouds, to attain so hie.

XIX. BASSO.
^SHall I sue shall I seek for grace, shall I pray shall I prove, ^ shall I
strive to a heavenly Joy with an earthly love: Shall I thinck, ij. ^ that a
bleeding heart or a wounded eye, or a sigh, can ascend the clouds ^ to attain
so hie.

XIX. TENORE.
^SHall I sue, shall I seek for grace, shall I pray, shall I prove, shall I
strive to a heavenly ^ Joy with an earthly love, Shall I thinck that a
bleeding heart or a wounded eye, or a sigh ^ can ascend the clouds, the
clouds, to attain so hie.

XX.
CANTO.
for FInding in fields: ye shall find a better dittie.

^TOsse not my soul, O love twixt hope and fear, ^ Show me some ground where
I may firm- ly stand or sure- ly ^ fall, I care not which a- pear, So one
will close me ^ Lenuoy: ^ in a cer- taine band. When once of ill the utter-
most is ^ Lenuoy: ^ known, The strength of sor- row quite is o-uer thrown. ^

Take me Assurance to thy blisfull hold,
Or thou Despair unto thy darkest Cell,
Fach has full rest, the one in joys enrolde,
The Other, in that he fears no more, is well:
When once the uttermost of ill is known,
The strength of sorrow quite is overthrown.
The end of the four parts.
XX. ALTO.
^TOsse not my soul (O love) twixt hope and fear, show me some ground where I
may firm- ^ ly stand, or surely fall, ij. I care not which apeare, so one will
close me in a ^ Lenuoy: ^ certain band, in a certain band. When once of ill,
the uttermost is known, ij. ^ the strength of sorrow quite is overthrown.

XX. BASSO.
^TOsse not my soul: Show me some ground where I may firmly stand, or ^
surely fall, ij. I care not which apeare, so one will close, ij. ^ Lenuoy: ^
will close me in a certain band. When once of ^ ill the uttermost is known,
the strength of sorrow quite is over thrown.

The end of the four parts.
XX. TENORE.
^TOsse not my soul, (O love,) twixt hope and fear, ij. Show me some ground
^ where I may firmly stand or surely fall, or fall, or surely fall, I care not
which apeare, ij. ^ Lenuoy: ^ so one will close, me in a certain band. When
once of ill, the utter- ^ most, when once of ill the uttermost is known, the
strength of sorrow quite is over thrown.

XXI.
QVINTO.
For a treble Vidl.
^CLeare or Cloudie: Of that night bird that sings, Who thought all sweet,
ij. ^ Yet iarring notes out ringeth.

XXI. CANTO.
^CLeare or cloudie sweet as April showring, Smoth or frowning so is her ^
face to me, Pleased or smiling like mild May all flowring, When skies blew
silk and me- dowes ^ carpets be, Her speeches notes of that night bird that
sings, Who thought all ^ sweet yet larring notes out- ring- eth. ^

Her grace like June, when earth and trees be trimde,
In best attire of complete beauties height,
Her love again like summers days be dimde,
With little clouds of doubtful constant faith,
Her trust her doubt, like rain and heat in Skies,
Gently thundering, she lightning to mine eyes,
Sweet summer spring that breaths life and growing,
In weeds as into herbs and flowers,
And sees of service diverse sorts in sowing,
Some happily seeming and some being yours,
Rain on your herbs and flowers that truly serve,
And let your weeds lack dew and duly sterue.
XXI. ALTO.
^CLeare or cloudie sweet as April showring, smoth or frowning, so is her face
to me, pleased ^ or smiling, like mild may all flowring, when Skies blew filke
and meadows car- pets be, her speches, ^ notes of that night bird that sings,
who thought all sweet, yet Iarring notes out ringeth.

XXI. BASSO.
^CLeare or Clowdie, sweet as April showring, smothe or frow- ^ ning, so is
her face to me, pleased or smiling, like mild May all flowring, when ^ Skies
blue filke and meadows carpets be, her speeches notes of that night bird ^ that
sings, who thought all sweet, yet iarring notes out ringeth.

XXI. TENORE.
^CLeare or cloudie sweet as April showring, smoth or frowning so is her face
to me, pleased or ^ smiling like mild May all flowring, when Skies blew silk
blew silk and Meadows carpets be, her speeches ^ notes of that night bird that
fingeth, who thought all sweet yet iarring notes out ringeth.

XXII.
QVINTO.
For a treble Violl.
^HVmor: Princes ^ Chorus: ^

XXII. CANTO.
A Dialogue.
^HVmor say what make thou here, In the presence of a Queen, ^ Thou art a
heavy leaden mood, ^ Chorus: ^ But never Hu- mor yet was true, but that but
that but that that that that that that ^ that which one-ly one-ly pleases you.
^

1 O, I am as heavy as earth,
Say then who is Humor now.
1 Why then it is I am drownde in Woe,
But never Humor, etc.
1 Mirth then is drownde in sorrows brim,
Oh, in sorrow all things sleep.
1 In her presence all things smile,
Humor frolike then a while.
But never Humor, etc.
XXII. ALTO.
^HVmor: ^ Chorus: ^ But never humor yet was ^ true, but that but that but that
that that that that that that that which only only pleases you.

XXII. BASSO.
^HVmor: Princes hold conceit most ^ dear, all conceit in humor seen: Humor
is inuencions food: Chorus: ^ but never humor yet was true, but that but that
but that that that ^ that that that that that which one- ly pleases you.

2 I am now inclind to mirth, humor I as well as thou.
2 No no wit is cherisht so, but never humor: etc.
2 No no fool the light's things swim* heavy things sinck to the deep: but
never humor: etc.
XXII. TENORE.
^HVmor: ^ Chorus: ^ But never humor yet was true, but that but that ^ but that
that that that that that that that which one-ly pleases you.

BASSO.
^DOwlands adieu, ^

FINIS.
Dowlands adieu for Master Oliver Cromwell.
^

FINIS.

