AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE ENGLISH SEMINARIES, AMD IESVITES: Showing their loose
kind of writing, and negligent handling the cause of Religion, in the whole
course of their works.

By JOHN DOVE Doctor in Divinity.

JEREMY 47. 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently. TAM
ROBVR. TAM ROBOR. NI=COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610.


LONDON, Printed for SIMON WATERSON dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign
of the Crown. 1610.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD Lord, TOBY, by the providence
of God, Lord Archbishop of York, Primate, and Metropolitan of England.
MOST Reverend Father in God, my especial good Lord. Albeit there is no end in
Ecclesi. 12. 12.
writing many books, and much reading is a weariness to the flesh (as the wise
man speaks:) yet does the condition of this present age require a multitude
of books: neither ought we to be weary, so long as the labor only is ours,
the cause Gods, and not our own. Our Adversaries are never weary of
withstanding the truth, they never cease to provoke us by books, our names are
daily traduced in their papers, that unless the Spirit of God wax cold, and
the zeal of his house be quenched in us, we cannot be silent. And as your
Grace has labored these forty years without intermission, like a silfull
Maister-builder of Gods house, a painful husbandman in the Vineyard, a
vigilant Pastor over the flock, and were never yet weary of weldoing: so my
trust is this small volume shall not seem tedious, which here I offer unto
your reading, and humbly present unto your Grace. Since your Grace has been
called to the office of a Bishop, (as with S, Paul, it is a worthy 1. Tim. 3.
1.
work) so it has been with you, all your time hitherto, a work rather then a
promotion, neither have you fainted under so great a burden. My prayer is for
you, that God which has begun this good work in you, will also perform it
until the day of Jesus Christ. That as you have deserved that good report
which the godly Emperor Theodosius (...). Sixtus Senensis, Biblioth. sanctae
lib. 4.
in the Church of Constantinople gave of S. Ambrose then Bishop of Milanie: so
you may contiuue still another Saint Ambrose in our Church, to the glory and
honor of God, to whose goodness and mercy I commend your Grace, and your
godly labors.

Your Graces most humble in the Lord. JOHN DOVE.

THE INTRODVCTION DECLARING WHAT IS THE drift and intent of the Author.
I Acknowledge my self with Saint Paul to be a debtor unto all men, to Romans 1.
14.
the Greek and the Barbarian, to the wise and the unwise, so far as lies in
me to win some of all sorts to Jesus Christ. Having already by the will of God,
published a short treatise of persuasion to the ignorant Recusants, to
reconcile themselves to our Church: I hold it my duty to speak somewhat to
them also which fit in the chair of Moses; which would be accounted the great
Masters in Israel, guides of the blind, lights to them which sit in darkness,
instructers of them which lack discretion, and teachers of them which are
unlearned. My purpose is not to speak of all points concerning which there is
controversy and difference between them and us, (for so should I make a
tedious volume) but only by instance in some few places for example sake, in
liew of all the rest, to advertise them of such errors as daily they commit in
the whole course of their writings, when they handle the cause of religion, to
the prejudice of the cause it self which they take in hand, and to the slander
of learning. That I may use the words of the Apostle: This is not to cast away
the cloakes of shame, 2. Cor. 4. 2.
but still to walk in craftiness, to handle the word of God deceiptfully, and
not in the declaration of the truth; neither so doing can they approve
themselves to their own consciences in the sight of God. They would bear the
world in hand, that they are more exact in their judgment, more painful in
their studies, more acute in their arguments, more advised in their answers,
more diligent in all things they undertake, then any other of the contrary
religion; whereas, due examination being had, it does appear they slubber up
many things negligently, and perform them loosely. They despise all our
Schools of learning, in respect of their own Universities; as if solid
learning, and true Schoole-diuinity were no where taught but among themselves,
they hold all others to be superficial: and yet contrary to all
Schoole-learning they suppress the truth by fallacies throughout their books,
they transgress the rules and laws of disputation, and in no place will they
stand to the orders received in Schools. Their young frye of Seminaries and
seed-men, which are trained up under them, see not with their own eyes, but
receive their sophismes for true syllogismes, upon the credit and trust which
they repose in their teachers; as if it were impiety to call any thing into
question which their Readers have taught them; or heresy to examine their
grounds by the rules of Art, which are the true touchstone and only try all
of arguments. In their discourses which they publish, they use such prolixity,
that the matter which is plain and obuious to any man of reasonable capacity,
seems perplexe, and very difficult: they deliver the state of the question so
uncertainly, that the reader loses himself as in a labyrinth, not conceauing
what is the scope and drift of the Author, whether he hold the affirmative part
or the negative. In the end, having seemed to stand long in opposition against
us, they concur with us. They allege no other arguments in defense of the
religion which they do maintain, but such as have been oftentimes answered by
Calvin, Beza, Kemnitius, and other Protestant Writers: which arguments being
already answered, are of no validity, and therefore we expect they should reply
against the answers, and not produce the same things again. Neither will their
disciples take notice of any answer, but allege these triuiall things for
novelties, and rare inventions, as never heard of before.

These things are but Satan transformed into an Angel of light, deceptio visus
to deceive the world, as the Babylonian The History of Bell and the Dragon.
Priests did the King Astyages, making him believe that Bell did eat and
drink, and was a living God; when he was but a dead Idol. The King at the
first, because he found the door of the temple sealed up with his own
signet, the meat devoured, and the wine drunk up which he set before the
idol, but saw not the privy entrance which was under the table, cried out with
a loud voice: Great art thou o Bell, and in thee is no deceit. But when Daniel
showed him the footing of the Priests, and their wives and children, in the
ashes which he strewed on the pauements, and the privy door which they came in
at; he confessed there was deceit in the Priests of Bell, and he saw plainly,
that Bell was no God but an idol. So my purpose is to find their falsehood by
their footing, to show how they enter in at the false door, and go not the
right way; to detect their sleights and iuggling casts, whereby they advance
error and falsehood, but stand in opposition against the truth. Forasmuch
therefore as if the Gospel be yet hidden, it is hidden to them which are lost;
the Lord of his mercy take away from their disciples and followers, that veil
or covering, which until this time has continued untaken away, and remove
from them the spirit of slumber, that hereafter seeing they may see. The Lord
of his goodness endue the teachers themselves with his grace, that henceforth
as sincere Pastors, and faithful Stewards of his word, they may walk in
simplicity, and handle his word plainly in the declaration of the truth, that
they may approve themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God: that
when the chief Shepherd and Archbishop of our souls shall appear, they may
receive an incorruptible crown of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

CHAP. 1.
Of the Head of the Church.

ANd that I may first with Saint John the Baptist, lay the axe to the root of
the tree; because the Cardinal deriueth the Popes supremacy from S. Peter, let
us therefore Mat. 3. 10.
examine by what right he entituleth S. Peter to that supremacy. Bellar. de
Romans Pont. lib. 1. c. 10.
For his supremacy being shaken, the Popes authority which is grounded upon it,
cannot stand. Our Savior upon Saint Peter his confession, where he says: Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God: answered: Thou Mat. 16. 18.
art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church. It is as impossible to
reduce these words into a true syllogism, or form of argumentation, as it was
for the Oracles to speak Caesar. Bar. in apparat. 13. Exodus 8. 19.
when the Son of God had enjoined them silence, or for the Egyptians to make
lice when the finger of God was against them. Every lawful syllogism must
consist only of three parts, or terms, as they call them; but here are four,
Petrus Petra, persona Petri, and structura Ecclesiae: the person of him that
made the confession, his name, his confession it self which is called the
rock, or foundation stone; and the building of the Church. His person, and his
name, where it is said: Tues Petrus, thou art Peter: the confession or
foundation stone, upon this rock: the aedifice or building it self, will I
build my Church. The medius terminus, or argument, whereby every conclusion
ought to be proved, must be one and the self same as well in the Minor
proposition as in the Mayor: but here it cannot be so, for it is Petra in
Maiori, and Petrus in Minors, the rock in the Mayor, and Peter in the Minor,
as if they should conclude in this manner: The rock is the foundation of the
Church; but the Apostle which made this confession, is Peter: therefore the
Apostle which made this confession is the foundation of the Church. But this is
not in Mood and Figure, the medius terminus being not the same in both
propositions. Therefore if they will correct it, and reduce it into a true
form, they must conclude in this manner: Whosoever is the rock, he is the
foundation of the Church. But the Apostle which made this confession (meaning
Peter) is the rock: therefore the Apostle which made this confession, is the
foundation of the Church. And then, besides that they do confound the
confession and the confessor, S. Peter's person and his doctrine, which are two
several and distinct things, the Minor is untrue, and contrary to the
assertion of our Savior Christ. For he does not say: Tues Petra, thou art the
rock; but tues Petrus, thou art Peter: nor super hunc Petrum, sed super hanc
Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam; upon this Peter, but upon this rock will I build
my Church. (...). So then, where he says THOU, he speaks of his person; and
mentioning PETER, he tells what is his name; speaking of the ROCK, he
justifies his religion, being three several points besides the aedifice and
building of the Church, whereof that religion is the foundation stone.

Now before we proceed any further in this argument, let us avoid such
exceptions as the adversary brings against the analyzing of this text. First,
Bellarmine obiecteth, De Romans Pontifice. l. 1. c. 10.
that our Savior spoke in the Syrian tongue, and in that language this one
word CEPHAS is nomen proprium viri, and commune saxi, the proper name of a man,
and a name common to all stones, as also in the Greek tongue (...) signifies
both Peter and a stone; and it is plain in the Syriac text he said: Thou art
Cephas, and upon this Cephas will I build my Church. And thereupon he
concludes, that Cephas in the first place should not signify his name, and in
the second the rock, as I delivered in my Analysis, but in both places the
rock; so that there may be tres tantum termini, only three terms or parts to
make a true syllogism, and consequently that Peter is the rock. To which I
reply: there can be no good argument drawn from the authority of the Syriac
text, not only because of the ambiguity of the word, which makes the matter
doubtful, according to the grammatical construction, and very uncertain; but
also because that text is disalowed by the Church of Rome: whereas the Latin
text, out of which I made this Analysis makes for me, and is upon pain of
anathema to be received as authentical; and so I touch him to the quick, and
slay him with his own sword. As Cephas according to Grammar signifies both
the name of a man, and a stone, yet in this place it cannot signify both of
them; because it is otherwise in the Greek, which is the original, and
without exception, and in the vulgar Latinetranslation, which do make that very
plain, where the first Cephas is Peter, and the second a stone: and so that
which is, or might seem to be ambiguous, and yield matter of controversy in
the Syriac, is cleared in these editions, and all ambiguity is taken away,
there is no starting-hole left for the Sophister to cauell upon. Concerning the
Syriac text Bellarmine makes doubt, where he writes thus: De testamento De
verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 4.
nouo mayor est dubitatio, Of the whole edition of the Syriac new testament,
there is a greater doubt, whether it were written in that tongue by the Authors
themselves or no? Again, he delivers his own judgment in these words:
Quod si editio Syriaca aetate horu^ patrum posterior est, vt ego quidem mihi
certe persuadeo, non potest eius authoritas tanta esse vt cum editione Graeca
aut Latina merito comparari possit, vt interim illud non omittam, quod non
desunt etiam quaedam in ea editione quae viris doctis and pijs non admodum
placeant. If the Syriac edition be of less antiquity then these Fathers
(meaning Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, and others of whom
there he spoke) as I certainly persuade my self it is, it cannot be any way of
equal authority, with the Greek and Latin; besides, that many things are
found in that edition distasting to men, both godly and learned. Again, Valde
probabile est Euangelium Matthaei, and epistolam Sancti Pauli ad Hebraeos
Syriaca lingua scripta esse: There is great probability only that S. Matthew
his Gospel, and S. Paul his Epistle to the Hebrews were written in the Syrian
tongue. There he does not take it as a clear case that S. Matthew his Gospel
was written in Syriac by himself, but only he leaves it as a probable
conjecture. But the Greek he will have to be without exception: Constat nouum
testamentum Graece scriptum ab ipsis De verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 7.
Apostolis vel Euangelistis, quorum nomina in titulis singulorum librorum vel
epistolarum praefiguntur, exceptis duntaxat euangelio Matthaei and Marci, et
Epistola ad Hebraeos. It is manifest that the new testament was written in
Greek by those Apostles or Evangelists whose names are praefixed to every
book or Epistle, excepting the Gospels of S. Matthew and S. Mark, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews. But Athanasius existimat ab Apostolo Iacobo Matthaei
euangeliu^ in Graecam linguam esse translatu^; alij vero Ioha^ni Apostolo; at
alij ipsi Matthaeo eam translatione^ attribuunt: sed cuiuscunque sit, it a
recepta est ab Ecclesia illa tra^slatio, acsi ea lingua scriptu^ fuisset
euangeliu^ Mathaei. Athanasius thinks S. Matthews Gospel was translated into
Greek by S. James the Apostle, others by S. John the Apostle, others by S.
Matthew himself; but by whomsoever it was translated, the Greek translation
is so approved by the Church, as if it had been originally written in that
tongue. Again: Itaque Graeca editio noui testamenti vniuersa Apostolos and
Euangelistas authors habet: Therefore all the Greek edition was set forth by
the Apostles and Evangelists, And as for the vulgar Latin edition it is by the
Council of Trent imposed upon all Romish Catholics Council. Trid. Sess. 3.
upon pain of excommunication, to be received as authentical, and without
exception. Therefore according to the rules of their Catholic religion, I
argue against the Catholics more safely and firmly out of the Greek and
Latin which are plain, and of whose authority they make no question, then
Bellarmine does against us out of the Syriac, which is both ambiguous, and of
no authority in the Church to build upon. So then, for as much as by the decree
of that Council, nothing can be held for truth in the Syriac which is
repugnant to the Latin, but the Latin makes for us; I conclude that my
Analysis of the text, is without exception, let him refute it if he can.

Now this being the question, whether the Church be founded upon the person, or
upon the doctrine of Saint Peter? If they say, upon his person: I reply: the
Church was from the beginning of the world, and it stood as firm as now it
does, before the conversion of S. Peter. When S. Peter was not, the Church was
one and the same which now it is, and it could not stand without a foundation.
But the faith which he professed, was more ancient then himself, even from the
beginning common to the whole Church; so that the Church might well be builded
upon that faith, though not upon Saint Peter, nor upon the person of any
sinful man. And therefore our Savior says: he will build his Church, that is
the members of the Church under the Gospel, which make but vnam Ecclesiam
aggregatam, one Church jointly with that which was under the time of nature,
and the time of the law, upon the same foundation, being all stones of the same
building. But Bellarmine alleges out of Saint Chrysostom Hom. 55. in Matthew.
Where he De Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap. 10.
says: Tues Petrus, and super te aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, Thou art Peter,
and upon thee will I build my Church. And Hom. 4. in Esaiae cap. 6. Quid autem
Petrus ille basis Ecclesiae? What shall we say of Peter the foundation of the
Church? As if Saint Chrysostom did not acknowledge the doctrine, but the
person, not the confession, but the confessor himself, to be the foundation of
the Church. To the first place I answer: I have examined, but find no such
place in that Homily, but that which is contrary to it. But supposing that to
be true, which he has so faisified, I answer to it, as likewise to the second
place which is rightly by him produced, that it is but the fallacy of
aequiuocatio^. For he alleges that out of Chrysostom, as a speech proper,
which is but metonymically understood. It is a figure called Metonomia causae.
So Abram speaks to the rich man: They have Moses and the Luke 16. 29.
Prophets; meaning not the men themselves which were dead, but their books
which were extant. So Saint Paul Ephesians. 2. 20.
teaches that we are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
that is: upon the faith which is taught in the Prophetical and Apostolical
writings; so that there is but one faith, one ground or foundation, upon which
the old Church from the beginning, and the new Church under the Gospel are
builded upon: these two being but one, as before I have delivered. And that the
meaning of Saint Chrysostom is metonimicall, and not proper, Chryss. hons. 55.
in Mat.
it appears by his own exposition of himself, where he says in the same
Homily, contrary to that which Bellarmine has alleged: super hanc Petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, id est, fidem and confessionem, I will build my
Church upon this rock, that is, upon this faith and confession which thou have
made. And it is justified to be a true exposition by the consent of other
Fathers, as of Saint Hilary, which says: super hanc confessionis Lib. 6. de
Trinit. Lib. 4. de Trini^
Petram aedificatio Ecclesiae est, upon this rock of confession, is the Church
founded. And of Cyrillus, which says: Petram opinor nihil aliud quam
inconoussam and firmissimam discipulifide^ vocauit, He called the faith of S.
Peter arocke, because it was steadfast as a rock that cannot be moved.

And by the way to prevent that which may in subtilty, but not in sincerity be
objected against us; that the foundation must be answerable to the building,
but we which are builded upon that foundation, are all living stones, and 1
Pet. 2. 5.
we come to him which is also a living stone, disallowed of men, which is Jesus
Christ; as the building is personal, so there must be a personal foundation,
the persons of men are these living stones: I answer, the only true and proper
foundation of the Church is Christ, as the Apostle teaches: No other
foundation can any man lay, then that which 1. Cor. 3. 11.
is already laid, which is Jesus Christ. I will therefore explain the meaning
of Saint Chrysostom, Saint Hillary, and Saint Cyril, in what sort faith may be
verified to be the foundation of the Church; and yet with a due reservation of
that prerogative which belongs to our Savior Christ, and which Saint Paul
ascribes to him; and so I will reconcile Luther l. de potestate Pope. Calvin
Instit. li. 4. c. 6. sect. 6.
Luther which says, faith is the rock, unto Calvin which affirms, that this
rock is Jesus Christ. As a gold ring of very small weight, having a precious
stone in it of great value, may be justly estimated at an high price; not for
the due value of the gold it self, but for the worth of the precious stone
which is set in it, it may be said to be worth an hundred pounds; so faith is
said to save, though salvation belong to Jesus Christ; and to be the foundation
of the Church, though Christ be properly that foundation, because he is the
object of our faith: and our Savior Christ and faith are so inseparably joined
together, that they cannot be divided one from the other, or conceived one
without the other. Thus have I briefly declared how the Church is not founded
upon S. Peter: But suppose it could be proved, how can it be derived from him
to the Pope? The office of Apostleship was personal, and died with S. Peter's
person. The Apostles were equal in authority. It was said to them all: Go and
preach, as well as to Peter. Math. 28. Mat. 16.
That which was said severally to Peter: To thee will I give the keys, was
said jointly to all the Apostles; Whose sins Ioh. 20. 23.
ye remit, they shall be remitted. And this confession of Peter was made in the
name of them all: so says Theophilact, and Theoph. in Mat. 16. Ambrose in
Psalm. 38.
Saint Ambrose. But if it were granted that Saint Peter was above all the rest
of the Apostles, this gives no pre-eminence to the Pope being no Apostle. For
Apostleship consists in these things; They were immediately called of God;
they saw our Savior in the flesh; they could give the holy Ghost by imposition
of hands; the Spirit of God did so direct them, that in their writings they
could not err: which things belonged personally unto them, but are not left
hereditary to the succeeding ages. The foundation being thus shaken, the
building falls of it self.

That I may come nearer to the man of Rome, to discuss this question, whether
there ought to be one head ministerial of the Church universal militant upon
the earth or no? Bellarmine to prove the affirmative part, argues De Romans
Pontifice. l. 1. c. 9.
out of Aristotle in this manner: A Monarchy is the best, and most absolute
state of government: therefore the government of the universal Church ought to
be monarchical. I answer: It is a fallacy called Ignoratio Elenchi, in so much
as Aristotle his Antecedent, and Bellarmine his Consequent, are not understood,
Ad idem, secundum idem, etc. A Monarchy is the best state of civil government,
and for one country, but not of Ecclesiastical government, nor for the whole
world. No one secular Prince is sufficient to govern a world, neither if any
one man could be supposed sufficient, could it stand with justice that one
should govern a world; because no man can attain to be such a Monarke, but by
oppression, and violent inchroching upon the dominions of other Princes.
Again, a Monarchy is the best state of civil government of one country; but
the Ecclesiastical government cannot simply be so, but only when the Church
so governed is in such a country as is subject to one secular Prince, and not
in an Aristocraticall, or Democraticall state: because the Ministers of the
Church must be subordinate to the supreme secular magistrates, and the
Ecclesiastical government of the Church must be subordinate and answerable to
the civil government of the country where that Church is. Again, as one man
cannot govern the civil state of the world: so much less can one man be head
of the whole Church; all authority both civil and Ecclesiastical being
derived from our Savior Christ, which is both the head of the Church, and the
Prince of the Kings Ephesians. 1. 22. Apoc. 1. 5. Ma. 28. 18.
of the earth, and all power is given to him from God his Father both in heaven
and earth. Our Savior Christ is considered two manner of ways: as he is God,
so is he the King of the whole world by the right of his creation: as he is
the Redeemer, so is he the Head of the universal Church by right of his
redemption: as he is God, he has his Vicegerents over the world, and they be
his secular Magistrates. Ego dixi, vos dij estis, I have said ye are Gods. But
Psalm. 81. 6.
as he is the head of the Church he has no Copartener nor Vicegerent: no
copartener, for so he were an imperfect mediator: no vicegerent among men, for
no man is able to supply his place in that behalf, which I prove by this
argument: The office and work of his mediation proceeds from his two
natures, God and Man, which concur in one action of the same person; so that
he which supplyeth his office, must be of an infinite power, which is not to be
found in any man besides himself. Now lest it should be objected that he has
said of Ministers also: Ego dixi, vos dij estis, I have said ye are Gods, as
well as of Princes, Ioh. 10. 34.
and therefore it should be concluded that they are his vicegerents for the
Church, as Princes for the common wealth: I answer, the argument does not hold.
For as both Princes and Ministers have their authority derived from him, so
after a different manner; Princes as vicegerents: Ministers only as active
instruments. For the keys of the Church being in number but two: the one of
the Word and Sacraments, the other of Government: In the opening and shutting
with these keys which is the execution it self, are to be considered two
things, the active instrument, and the principal agent. The Ministers are
only the active instruments, to preach to the outward ears of men, when God
alone gives the gift of Faith, and conuerteth the heart inwardly as the
principal agent: they confer the outward elements only in the ministration
of the Sacraments: he alone seals remission of sins, and gives inward
graces: they lay hands upon men to ordeine them Ministers, which is the outward
calling: he does call them inwardly, and make them able by giving them his holy
Spirit: they testify and pronounce before the congregation in iure fori, that
wicked men are excommunicated out of the Church; but God only ratifieth it in
iure poli, and cutteth them off from being members of Christ, and shuts the
kingdom of heaven against them. From the Head to all the members must be such
an influence as possible cannot be from any sinful man, as I have delivered in
my former Treatise. Thus you see how idly and weakly the Popes supremacy is by
them defended. And therefore unless stronger arguments be alleged, and more
substantially proved, they cannot justly blame us for withdrawing our necks
out of the obedience to the sea of Rome.

CHAP. 2.
Of Image Worship.

BEcause they write, that worshipping images they commit no idolatry, in that
they distinguish between an Bellar. de imaginib. lib. 2. c. 5. 1. Reg. 7.
image and an idol: that an image is the representation of something that is in
the nature of things, as in Salomons temple were the images of Lions, and Oxen:
but an idol is made only to represent somewhat that never was, as the idols
of Mercury and Jupiter, which are but false Gods of the Gentiles, Gods by
imagination, and not indeed. And therefore they hold it for a slander to their
religion, that their images are called Idols. Let the first question therefore
be concerning the truth of that distinction, that ye may examine their five
reasons whereby that distinction is by them avouched. First, says Bellarmine,
Images which are a true representation of somewhat, are never called Idols in
the holy Scriptures; as in Salomons temple: The images, but not the idols of
Lions, and Oxen. To which I answer: first, it is but a kind of (...) or
contention about words, which, be they understood howsoever, be they confounded
or distinguished, the worshipping of them is the breach of Gods commandment,
where we are forbidden to worship any graven image, or Exodus 20.
the likeness of any thing. Secondly, this negative proof drawn from
Scriptures, is no sufficient argument, but contrary to the laws of
disputations, as is plainly set down in the Topic called Pronunciatum,
Authoritas non valet Rodolphus Agricola.
in negatiuis. Thirdly, I bring instance against him, out of the holy
Scriptures, where the image of a Calfe is called an Idol. For so says Saint
Stephen: (...), they made a calfe in those days, Acts 7. 41.
and offered sacrifice to an idol. There in plain terms the image, or true
representation of a calfe, is called an idol. By this you see what small credit
is to be given to this distinction, and what false grounds Catholic doctrine
is builded upon. Again, Idols by Bellarmine himself are called statuae, and
are so translated in the Latin, 1. Kings 10. 16. 17. and what is statua but an
image? Secondly, says he: An idol is in the Hebrew tongue. Leuit. 19. 26.
Number. 23. Ose. 6. a vain thing, a false thing, a lie, always signifying some
false representation, a false image, and not a true image; as Abacuc. 2. 18.
Which reason because it is but colewoorts twice sodden, a mere tautologie, and
all one with the former, I answer to it as before. Thirdly, he argues out of
Saint Paul 1. Cor. 8. 4. We know an idol is nothing. It is something (says
he) in respect of the matter whereof it is made, as wood, stone, metal; but
nothing in respect of the form, because it represents that which is not. To
which I answer as before, by denial, in as much as the golden calfe, being for
the matter gold, represented that which in form was somewhat, a bodily
substance, animal mugibile, a lowing beast. And that I may make a better
exposition of Saint Paul's words, out of S. Paul himself, of that proposition:
Idolum nihil est, an idol is nothing: as in matter it is something, so in
respect of any divine virtue in it, which the idolater ascribes to it, it is
nothing. And again, by the analogy of that place, it is nothing either in
respect of sanctification or pollution of those meats which are offered to it.
And if there be any that cannot, or will not be satisfied with this answer,
let them reply against it. Fourthly, says he: S. Hierom upon Abac. 2. and
Zach. 13. compares heresies and idol together, because as an idol is a false
image, so an heresy is a false imagination. To which I answer: S. Hierom might
as justly have compared heresies with images, which are many times as unlike
the man for whose pictures they are made, as heresy is different from the
truth. But he fails in the maine point of his comparison, because this
proposition is not generally true, that an idol is a false image, because the
calfe in Horeb, of which I first spoke, was both an idol and a true image.
Fifthly, out of Eustachius lib. 11. Odyss: (says he) an idol is properly such
a representation as the shadows of men, flying fantasies, and imaginations of
the brain, which we think we see, when nothing is before our eyes, ghosts,
apparitions of such as be dead. To which I answer out of the vulgar Latin
Bible, which is of better authority with the Church of Rome then ever
Eustachius was: that the word image, is also used in the same manner, as: In
imagine transit homo, Man passes away as an Psalm 39. ^. Job. 4. 16.
image or a shadow. And Job says: In the thoughts of the visions of the night,
when sleep falls on men, fear came upon me, and dread which made all my
bones to tremble, and the wind passed before me, and made the hairs of my
flesh to stand up: then stood one, I knew not not his face, and imago, animage
was before mine eyes, and in silence heard I a voice, etc. Thus under a color
and show of learning, has he made an idle and fruitless discourse, to
entangle the simple reader, with no small prejudice to the Romish religion,
which is defended by such slight shifts, rather then by manifest truth.

This scruple being removed, it remains in the second place, that we discuss
this question: whether images are to be worshipped or not? And herein the
practice of the Romish Church is contrary to the doctrine they do teach,
because in their Churches they worship images, and set them up to be
worshipped; and inioyne the people to adore them; and yet not able to stand in
the defense thereof, by their Writers they forsake their old defense, and by
their Canons deny that any divine worship is due unto them. For the Council of
Trent has these words: Imagines Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
Christi and sanctorum honorandae sunt, modo tamen in imaginibus non collocetur
fiducia, nec ab ijs aliquid petatur, nec in ijs esse credatur aliqua diuinit
as, sed solum honorentur propter eos quos nobis repraesentant: Images are to be
honored (not to be adored:) and they are to be honored only with such
limitations, that we put no trust or confidence in them; that we pray not unto
them; that we ascribe not any divine virtue to them, but only they are to be
honored for their sakes whose images they are, and whose likeness they
represent to us. There you see plainly what their doctrine is, how they deny
them adoration. And yet by their practice, they do not only prostrate
themselves before them, as the Gentiles did before their idols, but plainly
show in action, that they suppose some divine power to be in them, in that they
pray to them, and by their long peregrinations weary themselves in visiting
some images rather then others; yea they travel very far to prostrate
themselves before the images of our Savior Christ, and the virgin Mary, and
other Saints in far countries, when they have in their own Churches at home
the images of the same Saints; yea far more beautiful then are abroad.
Bellarmine says: Omnes cruces ador amus, we adore all images of the cross:
And yet by his own exposition, this word ador De imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 12.
amus, we adore them, is no more then if he had said; We honor them, and
think reverently of them, or use them reverently; because they be for exercise
of devotion, and make difference between them and other things which are
appointed only for civil uses. And to make good this his exposition, he
refers us to that decree of the Council of Trent, which before I have
alleged. Moreover he shows, that as there is one adoration which is
religious belonging to God; so there is an other only officious, belonging to
all Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies; and such things as are used in the
Church. And to that purpose he alleges the authority of the 2. Council of
Nice, which speaks more in favor of images then all other Councels, and
decrees in this sort: Imagines sunt venerandae, non quidem cultu latriae, sed
honor illo quo prosequimur Council. Nic. 2. Act. 7.
sacras literas, vasa sacra: Images are to be worshipped; but how? not with
such worship as belongs to God; but only to be honored, as the Church
books, and the Church vessels. (But I think no Catholic, holds that the
Bible, the Basen, the Font, and the Chalice, are to be worshipped by
adoration.) And so they call them sacras imagines, sacred images; as they call
other things which belong to the Church, res sacras, holy things; as the
Communion cups, vasa sacra, holy Chalices; the Font, lauacrum sacrum; their
Priests, personas sacras; their Churches, Aedes sacras; their Bibles, Biblia
sacra: and yet adore them not. And thus, as men ashamed of themselves, they
qualify the matter by such subtilties among the learned, to avoid suspicion of
idolatry, and continue the people in ignorance and gross idolatry. Again,
whereas Aquinas, and other Catholic Doctors, have before delivered in gross
terms, that images are to be worshipped, cultu latriae, with divine worship,
or such worship as is due unto God. Bellarmine to qualify the matter, and to
reduce them to the meaning of the Council De imag. li. 2. cap. 25.
of Trent, would seem to make a more mild exposition of these words, coigning
this distinction: Inter sanctos and eorum imagines, and reliquias, between the
Saints themselves, and their images and relics. So inter Christum and eius
imagines and reliquias, between our Savior Christ, and his images and
relics. And so he has written that the images and relics are to be
worshipped with the same worship, as they whose images and relics they are;
and so the images and relics of Saints with the worship of doulia, and of
Christ with latria; But yet at the length, as a Cow that gives a paile full of
milk, and then kicketh it down with her heel, he does by a distinction so
qualify the matter, and set down such a state of the question, whereby all is
overthrown. For, says he, that worship which is called latria, and that which
is doulia, are of two sorts, one is cultus verus, a true worship, which is due
to the persons themselves: the other but analogicus, an analogicall, or
equivocal worship only, which is due to the images and relics. But what
difference is between analogum, and analogatum, a live Saint, and the picture
of a Saint, I refer the consideration thereof to the judgment of all Scholars
which have learned but Aristotle his Antipredicaments. As a painted man, or
analogical man is no man, so analogical worship is no worship; a painted man is
but the resemblance of a man, so analogicall worship is but a resemblance of
worship, and not worship it self. But it is hard to devise how they should
make such a resemblance of worship before the image, and not worship the image.
And howsoever, if it were possible, yet the Apostle teaches how they ought to
avoid all show of evil. And thus has he avoided that which was alleged
against him by aequiuocation, which is contrary to the law of Schools.

To leave their doctrine, and come to their scandalous practice, we charge them
with breach of the second commandment, because they fall down before their
images, Bellarmine in defense thereof, says: They do not cultu^ tribuere De
imag. l. 3. cap. 11.
simulacris ta^quam Dijs, worship their images as Gods, but only they worship
God in the images of God, and Saints in the images of those Saints before whom
they fall down, and that such worship is not prohibited in holy writ. Now
therefore upon this point let us join our issue. If to prostrate themselves
before the image, and say they worship not the image, but God in the image,
might be lawful; then might both Jews and Gentiles which did the like, have
excused their idolatry, forasmuch as neither of them hold their idols to be
Gods when they fall down before them. For knowing by the light of nature there
was a God, but knowing him not as he ought to be known, nor in what sort he
should be worshipped, they framed idols, and worshipped him in those idols; and
yet for so doing, they were condemned in the holy Scriptures, because he being
a Spirit, would be worshipped in Spirit, but not in an idol; and so he will not
be worshipped in an image. Concerning the Jews, which were idolaters, they
knew their golden calfe was no God, but worshipped God in the calfe. Bellarmine
therefore asks why they said: Faciamus De imag. l. 2. cap. 13. Exodus 23.
Deas qui praecedant nos: let us make Gods to go before us? and Hi sunt Dij qui
eduxerunt te de terra Aegypti: these be the Gods which brought thee out of
Egypt? I answer, their manner was to call idols Gods; but Deos repraesetatiuos,
gods by represetation, because they made the^ to represent God, using the
figure called enallage numeri, Gods for God, the plural number for the
singular. I answer him also by his own distinction, they did mean Deos
analogicos non veros, Gods analogically but not truly and univocally
understood. So in the story of the Judges, speaking of Micha the idolater, the
text says: This man Micha had an house of Gods, the holy Ghost would Judge. 18.
5.
not call his idols Gods but in this sense, because they were idols. There it
is plain that in the Scriptures that which is known and understood to be no
God but an idol, yet is called a God. And that I may somewhat enlarge this point
for the better satisfaction of the reader. The Jews knew that God in
particular which brought the^ out of Egypt before Exodus 19. 9. 11.
the golden calfe was made; for a little before he came down in their sight
upon mount Sina, they heard him speak with Exodus 20. 19.
their own ears, he appeared in thundering and lightning; his presence was so
terrible they were afraid, they said to Moses: Talk thou with us and we will
hear thee, but let not him talk with us lest we die; and therefore could not
think this calfe which they made afterward, to be the same God; which could not
speak, nor terrify them at all, and consequently they held it to be but an
analogicall or representative God. But says Bellarmine, though first they knew
him, yet when they made the calfe they had forgotten him. How proves he that?
Feceru^t Psalm. 105.
vitulu^ in Horeb, they made a calfe in Horeb, they worshipped the molten
image, and forgot God which saved them, and did wonderful things in Egypt. To
which I answer by distinction, that forgetfulness is of two sorts; one which
is ignorance, when a man lets slip out of his memory that which once he
knew, or heard, or saw, as when Peter heard the cock crow, he remembered the
words of Jesus: the other of ingratude, as where it is written: The Butler did
Mat. 26. 75.
not remember Joseph, but forgot him, that is, he was ungrateful Genesis 40. 23
to him. And in that sense the Israelites forgate God. Again, any impiety,
negligence, presumption, disobedience, is called forgetfulness; as David
speaks: The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all they which forget God.
Psalm. 9. 17.
And that the forgetfulness of the Jews, could not be the oblivion of
ignorance, I prove by the text it self: cras erit solemnitas Iehouae, tomorrow
shall a solemn feast be kept to the God Iehoua. (Which Iehoua is the proper
name of the God of heaven, known then only among the Jews) so that they
worshipped Iehoua in the calfe. But, says Bellarmine, Respondeo forte Iudaeos
illos qui plures Deos veros esse tradebant, non putasse hoc nomen esse proprium
sed appellatiuum: Peradventure those Jews which held a multitude of true Gods,
thought that Iehoua was not a name proper to one, but common to many. To which
I reply: That besides religion must not be grounded upon Bellarmine his
PERADVENTVRES, and idle conjectures, how can he avoid this text parallel unto
that, to show what was the opinion of the Jewish Idolaters, where Mica his
mother says: Sanctificaui, and voui Iehouae, etc. I have sanctified the
silver, and dedicated it to Iehoua, to Judge. 17. 3.
make a molten Image? Forasmuch as there by his own words, Ieboua and
sculptile, God and the molten Image, are two several things, votum quod est
sculptile, and numen cui sculptile vouetur, the vow which is the molten image,
and the God Iehoua, to whom the image is devoted, she could not think that
image to be Iehoua. To come to the worship of the Gentiles, what answer does he
make to these arguments? First they did, vni Deo plura simulacra erigere, erect
many idols to one God. For example, they acknowledge but one Jupiter, yet in
every country were idols of Jupiter: therefore they made a difference between
the God himself and his idol: consequently they did not think the idol to
be a God. His answer is, Habuerunt alios Deos in coelo, alios interra; De imag.
li. 2. cap. 13.
nec putauerunt absurdum si vnus Deus coelestis, vt Jupiter vel Apollo haberet
interra multos collegas minores, id est, multa idola eiusdem nominis: The
heathens had some Gods in heaven, some on earth; neither did they think it an
absurdity that one God in heaven, as Jupiter or Apollo, should have many fellow
Gods inferior upon earth, that is, many idols to bear their names. And I pray
you what is this answer, but a confession, or grant of that which I have
alleged, that the heathens accounted their Gods which they thought to be in
heaven, to be Gods indeed, and these upon earth, before whom they prostrated
themselves, to be but idols, and representations of them which were in heaven?
therefore they did not think they were Gods. Secondly, they framed daily new
idols, and yet said not that they made new Gods. His answer is: Putarunt Gentes
senouos Deos facere, saltem terrestres: The Gentiles so doing, thought at the
least, they made such Gods as were upon earth, although not such as were in
heaven: which is no more then he spoke before to the first objection, a grant
of that which I have objected. Thirdly, Mutarunt simulacra pro arbitrio, nec
tamen Deos mutarunt: They changed their idols at their pleasure, whereas their
Gods continued the same. To it he says: Respondeo Ethnicos eadem stultitia qua
putabunt Deos posse fieri manibus hominum, potuisse etiam credere Deos aliquos
potuisse destrui manibus hominum: As the heathens in their foolishness thought
they could make Gods with their hands: so in as great folly they thought they
could destroy the Gods which they had made. And this is no more then was in the
answer to the first objection, where he confessed that in the opinion of the
heathen, their idols were but idols, and no true Gods. Fourthly, S. Augustine
relates, that when the Gentiles were accused of idolatry, they answered that:
Non colebant idolum, sed numen quod per idolum significabatur: August. in Psalm.
113.
they did not worship the idol, but the God which was represented by it. This
objection Bellarmine repeateth in his 2. book and 11. chapter. But in the 13.
chapter, where he takes upon him to answer the arguments going before, as I
have showed, he passes this over with silence.

But to to come the reasons which Bellarmine produces against us for proof of
this defense. If (says he) they did not believe these idols to be very gods,
but representations only of God, and so worshipped not them, but God in them;
why do the Prophets labor so much to persuade them that they were no gods? I
answer: whatsoever we prostrate our selves before Esaias 46. Psa. 13. Act. 19.
in our prayers, consequently we make it our god, not by our opinion, but by
that adoration, which is the prostrating of our selves before it; not directly,
but by a consequent. And because the people did so, the Prophets, and S. Paul
in those places by him cited, do not so much labor to prove them no Gods, as
if the people had thought them to be so, but because they prostrated themselves
before them, and so by a consequent made them gods. But (says Bellarmine) if
they did not think them to be gods, why did they invoke, and call upon them?
why did they pray unto them unless they thought that they did hear them? I
answer out of the Roman Catechism which holds this doctrine: that they must
pray to the images of saints in the Romish Churches, not Catechis. Romans pars.
4. cap. 6 sect. 3.
thinking that the images can hear them, but that the saints, which by those
images are represented, should hear them when they pray before their images.
The words are these. Quum ad imaginem sancti alicuius quis dominicam orationem
pronunciet, ita tum sentiat se ab illo petere vt secum oret, sibique postulet
ea quae Dominicae orationis formula continentur, and sui denique sit interpres
and deprecator apud Deum. When any man says the Lords prayer before the image
of any saint, let his meaning be thus, that he craves of the saint himself
whose image it is, that the saint would pray with him, and obtain for him
those petitions which in that form of prayer are comprehended, and so that he
would be for him instead of an interpreter, and a spokes man for him with God.
So then, as the Catholic prays to the image of the saint, that the saint his
self may hear him, and not the image: likewise, the Gentile prays to the
idol, not that the idol, but God should hear him. Other arguments he
produces, weaker then these, as namely: That the Gentiles thought their idols
to be gods, because they were so taught by their Priests; and the world did so
believe, because the idols did seem to speak, when indeed, not they, but the
devils spoke out of them, as also because they had the shape of men, they
thought they had in the^ life and motion. To which I answer: their Priests did
not so teach them, neither did the world believe that they were gods, but
analogically as before: For the Gentiles held that God was a spirit and not a
body; the devils speaking out of them could not make the Gentiles believe they
spoke, no more the^ the friars speaking out of the rood-loft makes the
Catholic think that the image in the rood-loft speaks. Again, the devils
speaking out of them did imitate God, which spoke out of the fiery Exodus 2.
bush, when it could not seem probable that the bush spoke, but God out of it.
Lastly, that their idols had the shape of men, it makes against him, for that
should be an inducement rather to make them think they were no gods, but
rather men.

And to conclude, that I may not be tedious, concerning the erecting of images
in the Church, whether it be lawful or no? They allege for proof of the
lawfulness thereof the example of God himself, which commanded images to be
erected in the temple of Solomon, and thereupon conclude, we may by that
warrant erect images in Catechis. Romans pars 3. cap. 2. Bell. de imaginib. li.
b2. cap. 5.
our Churches; which is but to deceive the simple with a fallacy called, A
dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. Solomon lawfully erected images in
his temple having received a commandment from God; therefore we may erect them
in our churches, when God has not given any such commandment. The Israelites
lawfully robbed the Egyptians, Exodus 11. 2.
when God appointed them so to do; but we may not do the like, having no such
dispensation from God. He is liberrimum agens, a free agent, and above his law;
but we are under it, and may not break it without warrant from him. God says:
Non facies tibi sculptile, thou shall make to Exodus 20.
thy self no graven image; and yet we may Deo sculptilia facere, make graven
images to God, that is, when he does so appoint it, and so Solomon did.

CHAP. 3
Of Predestination.

FOr the better understanding what predestination is, it behooves us to know
first; that God has written three books, the one of nature, to hold us
without excuse, in which we may read there is a God; and that is the fabrike
of the world. The other of Grace, to save our souls, which is the holy Bible,
where he has manifested himself in his Romans 1. 20. Psalm. 19. 1. 2. Tim. 3. ^5.
Son. The third of life, for our farther assurance, which is his secret
counsel, and it he reserueth to himself in his own bosom. In it we cannot
read particularly whose names are written, because it is not published as the
two Apoc. 20. 15. Apoc. 5. 1.
other are, but it is sealed up with seven seals, and none can open it, but
the Lamb Christ Jesus. Yet out of the book of Grace we are taught that some
few are written in the book of life, and the lamb Christ Jesus has revealed
to S. Paul his chosen vessel seven leaves of that book, containing seven
heads, or principal chapters, to give us some small light and taste thereof,
that we may not be merely ignorant of so much as in his wisdom he thought fit
to impart unto us.

The Apostle has these words: We know that all things work together to the
best to them that love God, even to them Romans 8. 28. 89. 30.
that are called of his purpose, for those whom he knew before he has
predestined to be made like the image of his Son, that he might be the
firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, whom he has predestined, them he
called, whom he called, them he justified, whom he justified, them also he
glorified. And in another place: He has chosen us in him (meaning Christ)
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and Ephesians. 1. 4. 5.
blameless before him in love, who has predestined us to be adopted through
Jesus Christ, unto his self, according to the good pleasure of his will. In
which words are delivered these seven principal heads, to wit, Purpose,
Foreknowledge, Predestination, Election, Vocation, Justification,
Glorification, which all of them I define after this manner.

His purpose is his eternal and immutable decree in general, that he will be
glorified by his creatures.

Foreknowledge is his eternal and immutable decree, proceeding merely from
his will and pleasure, that he will be glorified by the salvation of men. Which
foreknowledge called in Latin praescientia, is not derived of the verb scio,
which signifies barely to know, but of s^isco, which is So Beza in annot. main
in Romans 8. So Bell. de great. and lib. arbit. l. 2^. 13. 2. Tim. 2. 19. Mat. 7.
23.
ante decernere, to know with a certain decree, or determination that he will
have it to be so, as where it is written: This foundation remains sure; God
knows who are his. And again where our Savior says in the gospel to the
false apostles: I know you not. For otherwise, though the foreknowledge of God
be immutable, it cannot be the cause that any thing should come to pass; for
nothing comes to pass because he knew it would be so, but because he ordained
that it should be so.

Predestination is his eternal and immutable decree, proceeding only from his
will and pleasure, that he will be glorified by the salvation of some
particular men above the rest, as where it is written: I have loved Jacob, and
hated Mal. 1. 2. Romans 9. 13.
Esau.

Election is his eternal and immutable decree, proceeding from his will and
pleasure, that the whole lump being a lump or mass of iniquity, they which
are predestined to be vessels of honor should be separated from the other
clay, which serves to make vessels of wrath and destruction. And all these
four go before the conception of Romans 9. 13.
man, the other three follow after, not in Gods secret determination, but only
in his execution, two of them in this life, and the other in the life to come.

Vocation is an action of especial grace in this life, in which by the holy
Ghost inwardly working, the Minister of the word outwardly preaching, and the
will of man unfeignedly consenting, man is effectually converted to the faith,
and piety of life.

Justification is a sentence of grace in this life, out of which they which are
effectually called, are by him through Christ absolved from sin, and
consequently from the sentence and decree of death.

Glorification is an action of glory in the life to come, by which corruption
being cast off, he does cloth them with immortality after the similitude of
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

These are subordinate one to the other, the first four being before one
another in order but not in time; because they are eternal: the other three,
though in Gods book they be also eternal in respect of his determination, yet
in respect of the men that are called, justified, and glorified, as they are
acts proceeding from his decrees to execute and accomplish that in them which
God has decreed, not only in order but also in time, they follow after, as
they are not in eternity but in time. These things being duly considered, let
us come to the state of the question.

Our doctrine is, that God by eternal decree has ordained some to salvation,
others to damnation; the cause which moved him so to do, being not in them, but
only in himself, and that is only his will and pleasure. The subjects
therefore of this disputation are two sorts of men, Paucitas saluendorum, the
paucity, or small remnant of them which are saved. And concerning them,
Bellarmine his defense is all one with ours; that they are saved, no cause
being in themselves, but only in God, without any foresight of any thing in
them. He says it is a doctrine consonant to Degrat and lib. arbit. l. 1. cap.
10.
Scriptures, to the tradition of the Church, and to reason grounded upon
Scriptures and Fathers. The difference between him and us is only concerning
them which are comprehended in the second rank, which is numerositas
damnatoru^: the great multitude of them which are damned. Of them he says:
Caluiniani contendunt homines ante praeuisionem paccati ad mortem Degratia and
lib. arb. l. 2 cap. 16.
destinatos quod cum Dei iustitia pugnat: It cannot stand with the justice of
God to ordeine men to destruction without foresight of some cause to be in
themselves. Our answer is: God ordained them to destruction of his own will,
not for their sins, and yet not being without sin, but bringing with them
into the world from their nativity and conception, sufficient matter of
condemnation before his decree should be put in execution: as the Hebrews when
they were in Egypt did both build for Pharaoh, and also find straw their
selves to make mortar for the building. We distinguish Exodus 5. 7.
inter vasa ipsa, and vniuersam massam, between the vessels in particular
which are made to condemnation, and the whole lump out of which they are
fashioned and framed. Though they were ordained to damnation for no iniquity
which was particularly in themselves; yet that there might be no injustice with
God, he had a general respect to the mould of iniquity whereof they were made.
He hated Esau in his own person, not for any thing that was in Esau, but there
was matter enough in the whole lump out of which he was created, wherefore he
should hate him. Saint Augustine says: Merito iniustum videretur quod fiunt
vasa ad perditionem nisi esset in Adam vniuersa massa damnata: It might
Eucherid. ad Laur. c. 98.
seem injustice that any should be vessels ordained to destruction, had it not
been so, that the whole lump out of which those vessels were formed, had been
damned before in Adam. So he makes the foundation of this decree to be the
fall of Adam; and yet so, that the fault and guilt of condemnation should rest
in themselves; and yet this fall of Adam not to be an antecedent or cause of
this decree, but a consequent or sequel of that decree. But concerning the
vessels in particular which are comprehended in this lump, the Apostle says:
God hated Esau that his purpose might remain according to election, not by
works, but by him that calls, Romans 9. 11.
where he plainly delivers this doctrine: That God in this reprobation of
Esau, respected nothing in his person, but the cause which moved him to this
hatred, was only in himself. If the aduersay allege (as usually he does)
that albeit God did no hate him ex operibus, for his evil works which were in
in him, because then he was unborn: yet he did hate him ex praeuisis operibus,
because he foresaw those evil works which afterward when he should be borne
he would commit: I answer: That objection is prevented, and fully satisfied by
the words themselves in that which follows after. Concerning the words
themselves Saint Augustine says: Si futura opera quae Deus vtique praesciebat
vellet intelligi, nequaqum diceret non ex operibus, sed ex futuris operibus,
eoque modo istam solueret Euchirid. ad Laur. cap. 98.
quaestionem, immo nullam omnino quam solui opus esset faceret quaestionem: If
the Apostle had understood foresight of works to be any cause, he had not said
as he did NOT OF WORKS, but he would rather have said: God hated him because
of the works which he foresaw in him, and so he would not only have resolved
this question, but also have made it so plain, that it should have been
without question. But in the words which follow, Saint Paul expresses his own
meaning to be as I have delivered, first by making answer to this objection: Is
there iniquity with God? God forbid. For flesh would object that it were
injustice condemnare hominem non natum, to condemn the child unborn: To which
objection he answers: It is no iniquity, which answer in defense of Gods
justice, had been needless, and the objection as fruitless, if it were so
that God did in his decree condemn him out of a foresight of sin, which he
knew he would commit, forasmuch as God in his foresight could not be deceived,
and his decree was not to be executed until the sin were committed, and that
were in man's judgment no iniquity or injustice. Secondly he clears the
matter by enlarging that point to make it more apparent to man's capacity, where
he says: He will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and where he will,
he hardens. And again, it is not in him that wills (meaning man's
endeavors) nor in him that runs (meaning the works of man) but in God that
shows mercy. There he, reaches that the only law of justice, and rule
whereby God in his predestination and reprobation is directed, and the highest
cause which moves him thereunto, is only his will. Non potest unjust agere
cuius volunt as est iusticiae regula: He cannot do injustice which is tied to
no other rule of justice, but his will. Whatsoever is the will of God, the same
with him is justice. Having thus laid open the state of the question, and
showed briefly what is our defense, let us examine what may be said against us.

Our adversaries which we are to conclude withal, are Bellarmine and Becanus,
two famous Jesuits. Bellarmine seems in words somewhat to descent from us by
wilful mistaking both of us and of Saint Augustine, from whom he would derive
the grounds of his disputation, as a man that will not see that which plainly
he sees. He goes about the bush by sleights and subtilties, that he might at
the least, bear the world in hand he stands in opposition against us, but
when he comes to the point, he discenteth not from us. As for Becanus which
has written after him, he would be thought to see more then others did before;
and therefore feeds his own fantasy with new tricks, and busieth the
reader with strange conceits far fetched, and nothing pettinent to the
matter. In his whole tract he beats the air, and fights with his own
shadow, but comes nothing near unto that which is cardo questionis, and
prora quasi, and puppis totius controuersiae, the maine matter now in
controversy between him and us. But that we may first come to Bellarmine.

Of reprobation he speaks thus: Causa reprobationis De gratia and lib. arb.
lib. 2. c. 16.
partim ad solam Dei voluntatem, partim ad peccata prauisareferenda est, The
cause of reprobation is partly the mere will of God, and partly the foresight
of sin. In these terms he seems to impugn us. But afterward he explaneth
his meaning by a distinction, saying: Reprobatio duos actus comprehendit, vnum
negatiuum, alterum affirmatiuum, Negatiuus est: Non habet Deus voluntatem eos
saluandi, and quantum ad illum actum, nulla datur eius causa ex part hominum.
Affirmatiuus est: Habet Deus voluntatem eos damnandi, and huius causa est
praeuisio peccati; There are two acts of God in his reprobation, the first
negative, the other affirmative. His negative act is this: He has no will to
save them, and of that act there is no cause at all in men, but only in
himself. The affirmative act is this: He has a will to damn them, and the
cause of this is the foresight of sin. For proof of the negative says,
Bellarmine: God hated Esau, antequam aliquid mali agisset, non solum coram
hominibus, sed etiam in praescientia Dei, before he had done any evil, not
only in the sight of men, but also in the foreknowledge of God. He hated him
(says he) not for original sin, for then should he as well have hated
Jacob, because original sin was common to them both; nor because he was
worthy of hatred, for so they were both, and so he should have hated all men,
and elected none, because all were worthy of hatred. By the way (says he) it
is to be noted, that these words: to hate, to harden, which in terms are
affirmative, in sense are negative, as odisse est nolle diligere, indurare
nolle misereri, to hate, is not to love, to harden, is not to be willing to
show mercy. Again (says he) that a man is hardened, though it be a punishment
for sins past, yet it is an effect of this reprobation, so that God does
harden him because from eternity he appointed him to be a reprobate. Last of
all (says he) facere vasain contumeliam, to make men vessels of dishonor;
though being understood in this sense: deputare ad contumeliam, to depute them
to dishonor and shame is affirmative; yet, being thus understood: Facere vasa
qualia requirit totius massae conditio, and sic relinquere, and nihil aliud
addere, to make them such vessels as the nature and condition of the whole
lump requires, and so to leave them, and do no further act, is negative, and
of all these there is no cause in men, but only in God. But for proof of the
affirmative, which is: Habere voluntatem damnandi, to have a will to damn them
(says he) that is by reason of the foresight of sin, we have instance. Ite
maledicti in ignem aternum, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, the cause of
this damnation is showed to be in themselves: Math. 29.
I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc. Bonus Deus est, iustus Deus est,
God is good, and God is just, he can August. lib. 3. aduersus Iulianum cap. 18.
save, though men have not deserved salvation, because he is good, but he
cannot condemn them unless they have deserved condemnation, because he is
just. Condemnare aliquem sine culpa est punire sine causa, quod iniustum est,
To condemn a man without fault is to punish without cause, and that cannot
stand with justice. So far goes Bellarmine.

Now, that I may speak to every point, I will first repeat his words:
Reprobation (says he) has two parts, one negative, that God will not save,
the cause of that is in God, the other affirmative, that God will condemn, the
cause thereof is in man. First, I say this is no lawful distinction, to make a
diversity of that which is an identity; for there is aequipollentia in re, they
be different only in terms, but are equipollent one to the other in
substance. He shows out of Saint Augustine that to hate, and to harden, which
in terms are affirmative, are in matterall one with nolle diligere, nolle
misereri, not to love, not to have mercy, which are negative. But after the
same manner I come upon him, Deus vult damnare, God will condemn, is a
proposition in voice affirmative, and equiuolent to this: Deus non vult
saluare, God will not save, which is negative. And as there is no mean
between love and hatred, mercy and induration, but he that is not loved of God
is hated, he that finds no mercy is hardened: So, in Gods predestination there
is no mean or third thing between salvation and damnation, but necessarily by
this decree, he that is not saved must be damned, he that is not separated from
the lump of iniquity must be left to continue in the lump of iniquity, no
mean between separation from it, and continuance in it.

But secondly, to leave his idle terms to himself, which savor of subtlety,
and not of substance, and which make that to seem dark and obscure, which is
as clear as the day light; I will show plainly out of himself that in
doctrine he consents with us: For, concerning this affirmative act God will
condemn Esau, which he says is an act of Gods reprobation, let him acquit
himself if he can. I would know whether he will have it to be a part of
reprobation, as it is in ipso decreto, in the decree it self, or in decreti
executione, in the execution of the decree? in intention or in action? one of
them it must be.

The decree it self which is Gods intention is eternal, the action which is
the execution of his decree, is temporal. If he mean it is to be referred to
the decree it self, I prove by his own argument, that then the cause why he
would condemn Esau, was not in Esau, but only in God. For, he framed his
argument to prove the negative part in this manner: That God would not save
Esau, it was not because he foresaw sin in him, for then he should not have
saved Jacob; for he foresaw sin in Jacob as well as in Esau. So I come upon
him with his own argument: That God would condemn Esau, it was not because he
foresaw sin in him; for then he would have condemned Jacob, because he did
foresee sin in Jacob as well as in Esau; Therefore, as Bellarmine infers:
the cause was only in God that he would not save Esau. So I infer, the cause
was only in God that he would condemn Esau. But if he mean that the
affirmative part is to be referred to the condemnation which is the execution
of reprobation, which is temporal, and not to the decree it self, which is
eternal (as needs he must) and it appears plainly by his words following
that so he means, we hold with him, and his defense is all one with ours.
For, how does he prove the affirmative part: That God will condemn them, it is
in themselves? but by this sentence of Scripture, Math. 25. Go ye cursed into
eternal fire, the cause being showed to be in themselves: I was hungry, and ye
fed me not. These words are a final sentence to be pronounced at the end of
the world, and not the decree it self, which was before the beginning of the
world, these words put the decree in execution, and are a sentence published to
the world by the mouth of our Savior Christ, whereas reprobation is a secret
which God reserueth to himself in his own bosom. And, whereas he calls
this final sentence of the Judge reprobation, it cannot properly be so called,
but only by the figure called metonimia effectus pro causa, where the effect
is used for the cause; for this is condemnation, and not reprobation, an effect
of reprobation, but not reprobation it self.

And, where for proof of the affirmative part he says out of Saint Augustine,
Condemnare sine culpa ost punire sine August. l. 3: aduers. Julian. cap. 18.
causa quod iniustum est, To condemn without fault, is to punish without
cause, and that is against justice; I hold with him, God cannot in his justice
punish or condemn any man which has not deserved condemnation or punishment:
but what is this to reprobation? Peter Martyr acknowledged so much long before
Bellarmine his works came forth, where he said: Peccata sunt causa cur
condemnantur, non tamen cur Petrus Martyr locorum comclassis. 3. cap. 1.
a Deo reprobantur, Sins are the cause why men are damned, and yet no cause
why men are reprobates. So where he says that God does make vessels of
dishonor, the cause is in himself; but that he does deputare ad contumeliam,
appoint them to wrath and dishonor: It is in the men themselves, we consent
with him, in as much as this deputation is an action which is temporal, but
that making of vessels of wrath is a decree which is eternal. Peter Martyr
says: Peccata sunt causa damnationis quae fit in tempore, sed non
reprobationis quae fuit ab aeterno, Sin is the cause of damnation which is in
time; but not of reprobation, which was before time, sin is an effect of
reprobation, and therefore it cannot be a cause of reprobation. As the Apostle
Saint Paul, and Bellarmine his self do show, Ephesians. 1. 4. De gratia and lib.
arb. l. 2. cap. 10.
that good works are no cause, but an effect of election: so the argument
follows: sin is not a cause, but an effect of reprobation. The sin of
Pharaoh was hardness of heart, he would not let the people go; this could not
be the cause why God eternally did reject him, but God rejected him eternally;
and therefore in time he hardened his heart, that he should not let the people
go.

Last of all, there are two sorts of causes, one the highest, an other
subordinate, which go between the decree, and the execution thereof. So that
albeit Gods will was the first and highest cause that he ordained some to
damnation: which cause was only in himself; yet there are found other causes
inferior and subordinate, sufficient to stand with the rule of justice, that
his decree should be put in execution, as hardness of heart, infidelity, and
other sins, which causes are inherent in the men themselves.

Becanus writes in this manner: The doctrine of predestination Euchirid. cap.
1.
(says he) is understood two manner of ways: either according to the
Catholic defense, that God did, post praeuisionem originalis peccati, quum
vniuersae esset massa perdita, aliquos aligere ex sua misericordia ad gloriam,
alios in massa perditionis relinquere vt essent vasa in contumeliam, After he
foresaw original sin in the whole lump being corrupted, of his mercy choose
some to be vessels of honor, and leave others in the lump of perdition to be
vessels of dishonor: Or according to Calvin, that God before he fore saw
original sin, Ex massa integra, Out of the lump being sound, ordained some
to life, others to death without any offense of theirs or their parents. And as
it is taken in that second sense he argues against Calvin, and out of this
division so made by himself, he frames his disputation.

By the way, before we come to his arguments. First, it is superfluous and
idle, to suppose that God did predestinate ante aut post praeuisionem peccati,
before or after the foresight of original sin, because he did both
praeuidere and praedestinare ab aeterno, foresee and predestinate from
everlasting, with him there is nihil prius aut posterius, nothing before or
after, because he is before all time. Again, this were to impute ignorance
unto God, as if some thing had been to come to pass which once he did not
foresee. Thirdly, our question is not of the time when? but of the cause why
God did predestinate? I confess with Bellarmine these terms: Post
praeuisionem operum and expraeuisis operibus, After Degrat and lib. arbit. l.
2, cap. 10.
the foresight of works, and out of a foresight of works (making this
foresight to be the cause) are all one, so that he disputes not of the time
when? but of the cause why God did predestinate? But, with this Jesuit it is
otherwise, as it appears by the sequel of his disputation; and therefore he
comes not near the question which he proposes. As also, massaintegra and
corrupta, the state of innocence and of sin, though in time they succeeded
one another; yet in Gods foresight they were both at once. But let us come to
his argument.

That God did not predestinate any man to life ex massa integra, out of the
lump being sound, before he foresaw original sin in him, he takes upon him
to confirm by two reasons, the first is this: If God did so, then the decree
of predestination was before the decree of Christ his incarnation, but that
decree of predestination was not before the decree of Christ's incarnation;
Therefore God did not predestinate man to life out of the lump being sound,
before he foresaw original sin in him. He proves the sequel of the Mayor;
because the foresight of sin is more ancient then the decree of incarnation:
for had not Adam sinned, Christ had never been incarnate. He proves the Minor,
because else our election had not been grounded upon the merits of our Savior
Christ. For Saint Paul says: Elegit nos in Christo, he has chosen us in
Christ, etc. To which Ephesians. 1. 4.
I answer: This is (...), a skirmish with his own shadow, but no combat with
Calvin, because he obtrudeth that to Calvin which is not his doctrine. Calvin
does not hold that God did predestinate any man to life ex massa integra, out
of the lump being sound: for the lump being sound, men were in state of life
iure creationis, by the right of their first creation, and if the lump had
continued sound, there had been no use of predestination; for that is grounded
upon Christ his merits, which were to take place massa perdita, and corrupta,
the lump being corrupted. And much less did Calvin hold that God did
predestinate or ordeine to death, ex massa integra, out of the lump being
sound. For, besides that it was impossible that man should dye, the whole lump
(...)uing in the first integrity, it could not stand with Gods justice. But
Caluins doctrine is, that God did ab aeterno ante (...) creatam, multo magis
ante massam integram aut corruptam, eternally before the lump was created, and
therefore before the integrity or corruption of it, predestinate out of it by
his decree, some to life, some to death, foreseeing that it should be
corrupted. For in his predestination, he had a general respect to the whole
lump, which he foresaw should be corrupted, though not to the corruption of
every particular vessel which was to be framed out of that lump: so his
predestination which was decreed from eternity was executed in time, after the
lump had received corruption; for so long as it continued sound, there could
be no use of predestination, nor possibility of death. And so, even as they
which are saved, are the children of God before they are borne, by eternal
predestination, but not by actual adoption until they be sanctified; likewise
they which are damned, be eternally by reprobation before they are born, but
not actually before they be infected with sin, the children of Belial, and
vessels of destruction.

Secondly, how could there be praeuisio peccati in massa integra, aforesight of
sin in the lump being sound? when integritas massae and originale peccatum,
the soundness of the lump and original sin cannot stand together? God did
foresoe that the sound lump should be infected, but not so long as it
continued in integrity. The lump so long as it was found, consisted but of two
persons, Adam and Eve, both which are saved, by all men's confession: how then
did God predestinate any to damnation out of the lump being in integrity? I
confess that in respect of the corruption of the whole lump which God did
foresee, there was first aforesight of sin, then a decree that Christ should
be incarnate, and then the decree of predestination founded upon the merits of
Jesus Christ, which were in order, and as we do apprehend them, one before the
other; yet in eternity, with God they were altogether, but in respect of massa
integra, the lump being sound, there were none of these; so that this
syllogism confuteth not Calvin.

His second argument is this: Infants (sath he) dying without baptism,
according to Caluins doctrine, are saved by the faith of their parents;
therefore God having a respect to their faith predestined them, non sine
intuitu operum, not without a foresight and relation to somewhat which was in
the persons of those men. To which I answer: That in the state of innocence
Baptism was not instituted, neither was Faith preached, and therefore he
disputeteth idly. Again if he had brought this argument to prove
predestination after the lump was corrupted, to proceed from any thing that
God respected in man: It were but a Fallacy, non causa pro causa. For faith
which God foresaw in any man, is not the cause why he did predestinate him to
salvation, but contrarily his predestination is the cause why man is
comprehended under the covenant of Grace, and why he gives him faith that he
may be saved. For whomsoever he vouchsafes the end, them also he vouchsafes
the means whereby they may attain to that end. Gods predestination consists
with good works as it does with faith, though he predestinateth freely without
the merit of good works, the works being an effect and end of Gods election,
and not the cause that moved Ephesians. 1.
him to elect us: for the Apostle says: He chose us that we might be holy, and
not because we were holy, or because he did foresee that we should be holy. And
his election is made sure to us by good works, which are the effects and fruits
thereof. 2. Pet. r. 10.


Against reprobation, or predestination to death, ante praeuisionem originalis
peccati ex massa integra, before the foresight of original sin, out of the
lump being sound, he argues in this manner: First, God decreed to create man
to perpetual happiness, where it is said: Faciamus hominem, let us make Genesis
2.
man according to our own image. Secondly, he decreed not that man should dye
unless he were disobedient: Quacunque die, Genesis 2.
what day soever thou shall eat of the middle tree, thou shall dye. Thirdly,
he decreed to show mercy to all mankind rather then cruelty, vniuersae vie
eius misericordia, all his ways are mercy. Psalm. 24.
Yea God was merciful even to the reprobates, because he gave his Son to be
the Redeemer of mankind. And there digressing from his argument, he exclaimeth
against Calvin, as if Calvin should say, that God did execute cruelty upon
mankind, elect but a few, and damn a great multitude, condemn man before his
cause is heard, stir man up to commit sin, that thereupon he might take
occasion to punish him. My answer is as before. First, that he did not foresee
any original sin that could be in man so long as man was to continue in the
state of innocence; and therefore he does but beat the air as before, to
prove that against Calvin, which Calvin never meant, that God should
predestinate any man to death the lump being pure: for reprobation and the
state of innocence could not stand together. As he created man to everlasting
happiness, so he decreed not that man should continue in that happiness. As
his decree of death was but conditional, if man were disobedient: so he gave
not man constancy to persevere in obedience. As all the ways of the Lord are
mercy, so his mercy belongs only to the faithful, but he gave not to all
the gift of faith. As he was merciful even to the reprobates, in that he gave
his Son to be a redeemer of the whole world; so this benefit did not extend
any way to the reprobates, but only to the elect. He gave him to be a
sufficient Redeemer of the whole world, if the whole world would have received
him, but he was an effectual redeemer only to the believers. He offered his
grace through Christ to all men, even to the reprobates, but he sealed and
confirmed it only to the elect. So these arguments refute not Calvin. And that
I may answer his exclamations. This cannot be cruelty in God, but as the
Apostle says: It is justice. Nunquid deo non licebit quod figulo licet? May
not God do as much as the Potter may do? Neither Romans 9. 21.
is this to condemn men the cause being not heard: for the whole lump being
corrupted, the particulars could not be clear, neither was any particular to
expostulate with God, the whole lump being justly damned, more then Moses was
to be admitted to plead for himself why he should not be cast into the water,
when it was decreed generally that all male children of the Hebrews should be
cast into the water. Exodus 1.
It was sufficient without further arguing the case, that Moses was a male
child of the Hebrews: so it was sufficient that Esau was the son of Adam.
That God elected but a small remnant, and damneth many millions, it is no new
doctrine, our Savior says: Many are called, but few are chosen. Saint
Augustine says: God is glorified as well by destroying, as by saving of
mankind, else he would not create so Ad optatum epist. 157.
many millions whom he knew before should be damned. If all (says Augustine)
which are borne of Adam should be saved: lateret beneficium quod donatur
indignis, Gods mercy to them which are saved (which are indeed unworthy of
salvation) would not appear. Plures Deus facit damnandos quam saluandos
incomparabili multitudine, vt reiectorum multitudine ostenderetur quam nulli
momenti est apud Deum iustu^ quantalibet numerositas iustissime damnatorum,
atque vt hinc quoque intelligant qui ex ipsa damnatione redimuntur, hoc fuisse
massae illi vniuersae debitum, quod tam magnae eius parti redditum cernerent:
God ordained more to condemnation then to salvation without all comparison:
first, that it might appear by the maier part of them which are damned, how
little God, which is so just regards the destruction of whole multitudes of
sinners, which are most justly punished. Secondly, they which are redeemed from
that damnation, may by their own redemption confess when they see the mayor
part damned, that that damnation was due to the whole lump, which was adjudged
to the greater part. And last of all, if he think it an hard speech in Calvin
to say that God inciteth men to sin, that so he might take occasion to punish
them, let Saint Paul answer it out of whom Calvin did allege it, Romans 9. 17.
18.
where he says: God hardened, and God stirred up Pharaoh, for this purpose,
that he might show his power in him, and that his name might be declared
through all the earth. To conclude, whereas he obiecteth, 1. Tim. 2. It is the
will of God that all men should be saved. And Ose. 13. Perditio tua ex te,
salus ex me Israel, that thou art damned it proceeds from thy self, that
thou art saved it is to be ascribed to me, o Israel: And therefore infers
that the cause of predestination is in our selves, and not in God: I answer
first to Saint Paul, It is his will that all should be saved, that is his
revealed, but not his secret will, and to Hose, our destruction is of our
selves, and yet it is of God that men are predestined to destruction, for as
much as there are two causes of damnation, one principal, which is his will,
and that is outward, and not in men: the other subordinate which comes
between the decree and the execution of the decree, which is damnation, and
that is sin, matter worthy enough of damnation; and that is inherent in man.
And thus you see the saying of the Apostle verified of this Jesuit, Volentes
esse Doctores legis non intelligunt quid loquuntur, neque 1. Tim. 7.
de quibus affirmant. They would be Doctors of the law, and yet understand not
what they speak, neither whereof they affirm.

CHAP. 4.
Of invocation of Saints.

THe Church of Rome has been, for many years past, charged with the crime of
idolatry, for yielding that worship to dead men's souls which is due only to
God. Being not able to stand any longer upon the justification of themselves,
the matter appearing so foul, they fly from their first holds, and devise new
defenses to avoid that grievous imputation; and yet still to retain their
ancient superstition. Therefore concerning invocation of Saints, Bellarm de
sactorum bea^. lib. 1. cap. 17.
they deliver this doctrine: Non licet a sanctis aliquid petere, vt nobis
tanquam auctores aliquid conceda^t, sed vt coru^ precibus a Deo nobis beneficia
concedantur: It is not lawful to pray unto Saints as authors and giuers of any
good thing which they should bestow upon us, but only as helpers and mediators
unto God in our behalf, that by their prayers for us, we may more easily
obtain at the hands of God such things as we shall ask. Being charged that
their practice is contrary to this doctrine, that in the practice of their
religion throughout their Churches they pray still in as gross manner, as
before they did, howsoever in their Schoole-diuinity they dare not maintain
it, to clear themselves they say: Si quis dicat sancte Petre miserere Bellar.
Ibidem.
mei, quantum ad verba sic licet dicere, sed sensus intelligendus est: Miserere
mei orando pro me, da mihi aditum coeli, id est precibus impetra: It is lawful
to pray in these terms: S. Peter have mercy upon me, open to me the gate of
heaven: but that prayer is not to be understood as it is conceived in those
express words, but in another sense, which is this: Pray for me that I may
obtain mercy, by thy prayers obtain for me that the gate of heaven may be
opened unto me, To which I reply, that the common people among them are no
Schoolmen, and therefore this evasion does not make their prayer to be less
idolatrous then it was before. This is but to hold the people still in
darkness, and to rob God of his honor by the fallacy of equivocation. But let
us examine the grounds of this defense: They allege the words of the Apostle:
I magnify my office to try if by any means I might Bell ibidem. Romans 11. 14.
provoke them of my flesh to follow them, and might save some of them. And in
another place: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some. To these words I answer: 1. Cor. 9. 22.
they are sufficient to prove that while Saint Peter lived, God stirred him up
as an instrument of his glory to bring men to the kingdom of heaven, and to
save their souls, but not after he was departed out of this life. So 1. Tim.
4. 16.
Timothy taking heed to learning, and continuing therein, might both save
himself, and them which heard him, when he lived, but not after his death. For
who knows not, that verbum Dei est officio seruatrix humani generis? the word
of God has a saving power, and that the ministry of the Gospel is the
ordinary mean to save men's souls? But what is this to Saints departed, whose
ministry cease, or to prove the lawfulness of prayer to the dead which do
not hear us? S. Paul spoke of saving men in his life time, not after his
death, by his preaching to them, not by their praying to him that he should
pray for them. This is no true kind of argumentation, but a fallacy called
Ignoratio Elenchi.

The defense of the Romish Church being this: that Saints are to be inuocated
after they be dead, not as authors, but as mediators; let this be the question
between us: whether any such invocation is commended unto us in the holy
Scriptures, or no? Eckius, one of their greatest Euchirid. com. locorum cap. 15.
Schoole-diuines that ever was in the University of Ingolstad, makes this
free confession, that innocation of Saints is not expressly commanded in holy
Writ: Explicit sanctorum inuocatio non est praecepta in sacris literis: Not in
the old testament (says he) because the people of themselves were prone to
idolatry, and the Saints departed were then in Limbus, and not in heaven. In
the new testament the Apostles wrote no such thing, left such doctrine should
be a means to bring the Gentiles back again to idolatry as also because the
Apostles their selves would not be thought so ambitious as to seek their own
glory after their death. I desire them therefore with Christian sobriety to
speak to these four points.

First, the wisdom of the holy Ghost being such, that in the whole body of
the Bible, such invocation was not so much as once named for fear of idolatry,
how can it be denied but this invocation has at the least some affinity with
idolatry? or why should the Church of Rome either withstand, or go beyond the
wisdom of God, to maintain and publish that in their humane policy, which
God in his divine wisdom thought fit to be suppressed and concealed? or why
should not the peril of idolatry be as carefully shunned now as then it was?

Secondly, forasmuch as the confession of Bellarmine is: Dico illa omnia
scripta esse ab Apostolis quae sunt omnibus necessaria, De verbo Dei lib. 4.
cap. 10.
and quae ipsipalam omnibus vulgo praedicaru^t, that all things which are
necessary for the Church to know, or which the Apostles in their Sermons by
word of mouth did publish and teach are written by the Apostles, but this
invocation is not mentioned in their writings; and therefore was neither taught
by them nor held necessary to salvation. Why does the Church of Rome so
vehemently maintain it? S. Paul says: No man must Romans 12. 3.
presume to understand above that which is meet to be understood, but that
every man must, sapere adsobrietatem, understand with sobriety. And what it is
plus sapere quam oportet, to understand above that which is meet, and not
according to sobriety, he shows in another place: supra id quod scriptum est
sapere, when 1. Cor. 4. 6.
any man shall presume beyond that which is written.

Thirdly, if invocation of Saints were necessary for the easier obtaining of
mercy at the hands of God, and the readier way to save men's souls; and yet the
Apostles forbear to publish this doctrine, because they would not be thought
ambitious, they were not faithful Stewards of the word, nor so careful of the
Church of Christ as behooved men of that holy vocation for humane respects
neglecting their office. Furthermore, they did contrary to the rule of Saint
Paul, in concealing the truth of religion, which was to do evil, that good
might follow, which imputation Romans 3. 8.
cannot without great impiety be laid upon such sanctified vessels. Nay which
is more, how can it stand with that which Saint Paul testifies of himself,
where he says: I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the council
of Act. 20. 27. and 35.
God. And again, I have showed you all things.

Fourthly, in the same chapter Eckius having delivered that such invocation is
no where expressed in the holy Scriptures; yet takes upon him to produce many
express places to prove the same; I would therefore be satisfied with what
conscience he could aledge those places to resist a known truth?

But to come to Bellarmine, when Mathias was to be elected in the place of
Judas, the Apostles prayed after this manner: Thou Lord, which know the
hearts of all men, Act. 2. 24.
show whether of these two thou have chosen. In which words it is expressed
that he which only is infinitely wise, has reserved the knowledge of men's
hearts to himself. But this is a ground or principle agreed upon between us
both, that we may pray unto none, but only to him which knows the heart: He
answers: that not only God, but also the Saints departed are (...),
searchers and understanders of the secrets of men's hearts. I reply: That
belongs only to the Creator, which made the heart. For, says Solomon, Hear
thou in heaven 1. Reg. 8. 39.
in thy dwelling place, and be merciful, and do, and give every man according
to all his ways, as thou know his heart, for thou only know the hearts
of all the children of men: He distinguishes in this manner: Non tribuunt
Catholici De sactoru^ beat lib. 1. cap. 16.
sanctis mortuis diuinitatem, id est, vim cognoscendi mentium cogitationes.
Cognoscunt quidem preces nostras, non vt sunt in mentibus nostris, sed vt sunt
in Deo quem vident, and qui eas ipsis ostendit. The Catholics ascribe not to
Saints departed any Deity, as if they had power in themselves to be discerners
of men's thoughts. And yet they conceive our prayers, though not by any insight
into us, or inspection into the inward and hidden man, but by vision in the
Majesty of God, whom they do see, and who reuealeth our prayers unto them.
Against this answer I dispute in this manner out of his own book in another
place: If Saints conceive our prayers in such sort, as is aforesaid, then it is
by a general illumination De sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20.
or vision, by which at their first entrance into the state of happiness, in
the Majesty of God, they see all at once, or else successively by a special
revelation from God, at such times and seasons only as prayers in particular
are made unto them, he stands in doubt what he should answer, whether it be
by such a general illumination, or such especial revelation? by which of them
it is, or whether it be by any of them, or not, he cannot tell. For he says:
Ex his duabus prior videtur simpliciter probabilior tamen posterior sententia
est magis idonea ad conuincendos hereticos: It is more probable it should be by
vision, and yet it is a more safe defense against the heretics, to hold that
it is by revelation: In which words you see what weak grounds he builds
upon, which are only, probabilitas, and studium contradice^di, the first
probility, or humane conjecture: the second, a vain desire of contradiction,
to withstand his adversaries in disputation; whether it be by truth or
falsehood, right or wrong, by certainty or uncertainty, by hap or good cunning,
he cares not. I reply therefore: If Saints hear us not, it is very idle to
pray unto them, if it were possible that they could hear us: but if we cannot
resolve our selves that they do hear us, our prayers can neither be
effectual, nor yet made with a good conscience. That they cannot be
effectual, it is the doctrine of Saint James: Every thing which Iam. 1. 6.
we ask must be asked in faith, and not with doubting, etc. That such prayers
are made with an ill conscience, and are sin, it is the doctrine of Saint
Paul: He that doubts Romans 14. 23.
is condemned, because he does it not of faith: and whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind. But we cannot
be assured that they hear us, seeing there is no ground nor proof thereof in
the holy Scriptures: neither can the classical Authors and and maintainers of
that doctrine, yield any plain or firm reason to satisfy either us, or their
own selves, how it may be so, that we should believe it, and subscribe unto it.

He alleges many arguments in defense of invocation of Saints, as mediators
to pray for us, which arguments have been alleged long before his time by
Eckius, and other Catholic Doctors. And they have been long since ansered by
Peter Martyr, Calvin, Kemnitius, and other Protestant writers, before his book
came forth. Now it was to be expected for the Catholic credit of Bellarmine,
so great a Doctor, that he should not have produced these old arguments again
whose answers were published in print so long since: for that is no cunning,
but he should have been furnished with new stuff, or at the least, have
replied upon the answers, (hic labor, hoc opus est) which he has not done. The
answers therefore being so sufficient, that he does not reply upon them, as
his proofs are but the same which were before, so it shall be sufficient to
answer them as they were answered before, and so to satisfy old arguments with
old answers.

Saints (says Bellarmine) do pray for the good estate of the whole Church in
general, and for such men in particular as do pray unto them, and we ought to
pray unto them, that they would particularly pray for us. And that I may speak
to these three propositions, although I deny not the first, that Saints do pray
for us in general: yet I will examine the validity of his arguments which he
alleges for proof thereof, to show how weak the grounds are which they
build upon, and so I will in order descend to the rest, only to set down his
arguments, and Kemnitius his answers to those arguments published in print long
before, for the satisfaction of others by whom they were before objected, as
follows?

That Saints departed do pray generally for the whole Church.
BEll. Hieremy 15. The Lord said to me, though Moses De sanct. be at. lib. 1.
cap. 18.
and Samuel should stand before me, yet my affection could not be toward this
people. Therefore Moses and Samuel being dead, both then could, and usually at
other times did, pray for the people, alioqui inepta esset Dei loquutio;
otherwise God had spoken these words impertinently, as if a man had said: If my
Ox pray for thee, he shall not prevail, meaning that Oxen cannot pray.


Kemnitius. We deny not but Saints departed do pray Exam. decret. Trid. pars 3.
for the whole Church, but it cannot be proved by this text. First, a
conditional proposition proves nothing unless the condition were performed,
but Moses and Samuel did not the^ stand before God; therefore they made no
intercession for the people. Secondly, by the confession of the Church of Rome
they were then in Limbus, as all other Saints departed, until the death of our
Savior Christ; therefore they could make no intercession. Thirdly, the
idolatry of the people was so odious in the sight of God, that if Moses and
Samuel had been alive to make intercession for the people, as in their life
time they did, yet God would not hear them. Fourthly, this supposition was
made of Moses and Samuel being alive, and not after their death. To which I
add my own answer, this argument is a fallacy called the ignorance of the
Elenche.


Bellarm. 2. Maccab. 15. Judas in a vision saw Onias the Priest, and Jeremy the
Prophet, pray for the people, but that book of Maccabes is held for
Canonical. Council. 3. Carthag. cap. 47.


Kemnitius. First, that is but a dream, and not a story, and is related to
animate the Soldiers to fight valiantly. Secondly, notwithstanding the
relation of this dream, neither Judas Maccabeus, nor yet his army, did
invoke Onias, or Jeremy, but only God. Thirdly, that book is understood to
be Canonical for examples of life, but not for' points of doctrine; and
therefore makes not for this purpose.


Bellarm. Apoc. 5. 8. The 24. Elders fell down before the throne, having their
phials full of odours, which were the prayers of Saints.


Kemnitius. These prayers as they were their own, and not of other men which
were made unto them; so they were only a thanksgiving to God for their own
redemption, and for the redemption of the whole Church, but no intercession.


Bellarm. 2. Pet. 1. 15. I will endeavor therefore always, that ye may be able
to have remembrance of these things after my departure.


Kemnitius. Saint Peter did this endeavor, by his epistle while he lived, not
by his prayers after he was dead.


Bellarm. Luke 16. The glutton in hell prayed for his kindred, much more do the
just in heaven pray for the whole Church.


Kemnit. First, we must not forsake the Scriptures to receive instruction from
them which are damned in hell, which being forsaken of God, seek for comfort
any where rather then at the hands of God. Secondly, this is but a parable, and
not a story. Thirdly, if it were a story, yet this prayer is not heard.
Fourthly, he saw Abram whom he prayed unto, and received answer from him: what
is this to Saints departed, whom we see not, neither hear them make any
answer? Fifthly, the glutton remembered in what state he left his kindsfolks
when he departed; but they might have repented after his departure, for any
thing that he knew. This proves not that the dead know the state of them
which are alive, neither yet that they pray for the Church in general.


That Saints departed do pray for particular men which pray to them.
BEllarm. The Saints do not only pray forvs, but also take De sanct. beat.
lib. 1. cap. 18.
charge over men, and whole Countries and Provinces, as the Angels do.
Concerning the Angels we have proof Toby. 12. Zach. 1. Apoc. 8. Dan. 10. Psalm.
19. Matthew. 18. And much more the Saints departed, which are as the Angels, Luke
20. and have a prerogative above Angels, because they are members of the body
of Christ, and are nearer unto us, and better able to have a feeling of men's
infirmities, being men themselves.


Kemnit. The book of Toby is not Canonical to prove Exam. decret. Trid. pars
3.
any point of faith, but only for examples of good life. That Angel in
Zachary is our Savior Christ, which makes intercession for his Church, and
his prayer is his own, which is there mentioned, and not the prayer of the
Church. The Angel in the Apocalips, which offers the prayers of the Saints,
is expressed Heb. 9. to be our Savior Christ, the mediator of the new
Testament: which makes his appearance in our behalf, Heb. 13. through him we
offer our sacrifices of prayers to God. Again, to the Angels God reuealeth so
much concerning the affairs of men on earth, as appertains to the ministry
of those Angels, and they have the charge of men committed unto them. But it
cannot be proved that the like charge is committed to Saints departed; neither
can the argument follow which is drawn from Angels to men. That Saints
departed are like the Angels in heaven, is meant there only concerning single
life, that they marry not, as it appears by the text. And this is not only
the exposition of Kemnitius; but also of the English Seminaries themselves, in
their notes upon the same place, printed at Rhemes. And whereas Bellarmine
alleges for proof, that Saints departed have the regiment of whole
Provinces, because it is written, Apoc. 2. He that over comes, shall have
power over nations: It is to be understood of the discipline and doctrine of
the Church in this life; whereby nations shall be converted, but not of any
government of theirs after they be deceased.


Bellarm. The Fathers make for us.


Kemnit. The Fathers were falsified by the Papists. See Kemnitius at large, how
he satisfies the objections out of the Fathers.


Bellarm. It is also proved by many apparitions of Saints, which appearing to
men in dreams, have testified that particularly they did pray for us.


Kemnit. This can be no proof without testimony out of the word of God. For
Moses says: Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Thou shall not hearken to the words of the Prophet,
or unto the dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart, and all your soul,
etc. Heb. 1. In times past God spoke many ways to our Fathers by the Prophets,
but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son. And post illam
postremam patefactionem non est expectanda reuelatio alterius noui dogmatis:
After God has delivered his will unto us this last time by his Son, we must
not look for any latter revelation by which any new doctrine should be
revealed unto us.


That Saints are to be inuocated.
BEllarm. Job. 5. 1. Call now if any will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? De sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 19.



Kemnit. The meaning is not that Job in his calamity should fly to the Saints
for succor, but that instance could not be given in any Saint whom ever God
punished, without just cause.


Bellarm. Job. 33. 23. If there be an Angel with him, one of a thousand, to
declare unto man his righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, and
say: Deliver him that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a
reconciliation.


Kemnit. If there be present a minister of Gods word, (for ministers are called
Angels) and out of the word of God he shall show unto man what is right and
just, and so the ministry of the word shall be applied for comfort to the
terrified and distressed conscience, God will work by this ministry
repentance unto salvation.


Bellarm. Exodus 32. 13. Moses prays for the people in these words: Lord
remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, etc. In which is to be
noted: that when Moses thought not himself sufficient to pacify the wrath of
God, he was glad to fly to the help of the Patriarchs, which Patriarchs,
because then being in Limbus, did not ordinarily understand or conceive the
prayers of the living: therefore it was not the custom in the old Testament,
to say: O holy Abram pray for me; but only in those days men prayed unto God:
but in their prayers, they alleged the merits of Saints departed, that by the
merits of those Saints their prayers might more easily be heard. So David.
Psalm. 131. Lord remember David with all his troubles. And many other places
are parallel unto these.


Kemnit. In the prayers which are recited in the old Testament, oftentimes the
good works of the Patriarchs and Saints are mentioned, to show, that they
which so prayed, relied upon the promises and covenants, which God made with
the Patriarchs and Saints departed, while they lived. That they fly not unto
them for help it is plain by their doctrine which they profess. Esaias. 63.
16. Abraham is ignorant of us, Israel knows us not; yet thou, o Lord, art our
Father. Neither do they mention the works of the Patriarchs in this sense, as
if they should say: Hear us, o Lord, for their sakes, because they have
deserved it at thy hands; but hear us Lord for thy promise which thou did
make, for thy oaths sake, which thou did swear unto them, when they
believed thee, obeyed thee, and did those works.


Bellarm. In the Scriptures, as 1. King. chap. 7. Romans 15. etc. They do pray to
the lining Saints, that they would pray for them. Much more then is it lawful
to invoke the dead Saints, whose souls do reign with Jesus Christ. If it be
not lawful, then, either because they will not, or because they cannot hear
us, or because they understand us not, or else because it is derogatory to God,
or to our Savior Christ. But it cannot be said that they will not, because
being in heaven their charity is greater then when they were on earth: neither
that they cannot, because, if they could being strangers and pilgrims upon
earth, much more can they in heaven, which is their native country; neither
that they understand not, forasmuch as the Angels, Luke 15. understand when a
sinner is converted, but the Saints are like to the Angels, as before it was
proved; neither that it is a dishonor unto God, or to our Savior Christ, for
then had it been a dishonor to them to invoke the Saints living.


Kemnit. An argument cannot be drawn from those things which are done upon
earth, to prove what is done in heaven, without some testimony of the
Scriptures. For the eye has not seen, nor the care has not heard, neither
can the heart of man conceive the things which are in heaven, further then by
the Scriptures they are revealed. Secondly, if any man should desire them which
are living to pray for him in that manner as the Papists pray to dead Saints;
that by their intercession and merits they may be heard, the prayers unto the
living, were also derogatory to the Priesthood of Jesus Christ. To the other
parts contained in that division, is answered before.


An Answer to the Book entitled, PROTESTANT PROOFS OF CATHOLIC RELIGION.
IT pleased God I published a short Treatise of persuasion to the ignorant
Recusants, to reconcile themselves to our Church. I might happily have
persuaded them, at the least, to be half Conuerts, as Saint Paul did King
Agrippa Act. 26. 28. Mat. 13. Mat. 10. 13.
to be half a Christian, had they not been as a plot of ground unapt to
receive good seed; and like those houses, with whom for their unworthiness the
peace of the Apostles could not abide. The points which especially I urged,
were proved out of Bellarmine, their own Doctor, and in the places by me
produced, I falfified nothing; but dealt sincerely, let the learned disprove
me, if they can. If they examine my arguments according to the laws of
Schools, they shall find nothing false that may justly be denied; nothing
equivocal, that needs distinction: so that they must either answer me with
silence, or else, if they deal ingeniously, say with the inchanters: Digitus
Exodus 8 19. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 7. and 10.
Dei est, It is the finger of God, and make as open a confession of euiction,
as Julian the Apostata did, when he cried out: Vicisti Galilaee, Thou have
gotten the victory thou Galilean: yet have I been contradicted, but how
justly, let the learned reader judge. An author without a name, printed a book
at Paris, Anno 1607. with this Title: The first part of Protestant proofs for
Catholic Religion and Recusancy, taken only from the writings of such
Protestant Doctors as have been published since the reign of his Majesty.
Which book is nothing else but an undigested Chaos, or Miscellanea of half
sentences rudely consarcinated together, a confused heap of places, some
merely divised by himself, and not to be found in these Protestant Doctors;
some wrested and falsely applied; some truly alleged; but impertinent to the
argument he takes in hand: all of them being praemisses without conclusions,
to make an idle show of proof where nothing is proved; and of a confutation
where nothing is confuted. These proofs he says, he collected out of the
books of the reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, Doctor
Suckliffe, Doctor Field, Doctor Downam, Doctor Morton,, Mr. Egerton, and my
self, among many others, in defense of his Recusancy, and Romish religion. But
he has not undertaken to answer any of our books; neither can any judicious
man hold such recital of our words, to be a confutation of our works. Of these
learned Writers, and reverend men, I say with the parents of the blind man:
Aetatem habent, they are sufficient Ioh. 9. 21.
to answer for themselves; and therefore I undertake nothing in their behalf,
only for Apology of mine own self, I may truly say: Because it is as
impossible for him to make a just reply against me, as it was for the Centurion
to deny the power of God in our Savior Christ, when being Mat. 27. 54.
convicted by evident demonstration, he said: Vere filius Deiest, In truth he
was the son of God: Therefore he has with Elimas perverted the straight
ways of the Lord, and Acts 13. 10.
withstood the truth by indirect and sinister means, as Iamnes and Iambres
resisted Moses; For I pressed them by way Exodus 7. 11. 13.
of sound reason, and strong argument, he has dealt by Elenches and Sophismes,
as the Apostle speaks: (...), deceiving them by paralogismes. Iam 1. 22.


First, he has these words. The greatest number of Protestant writers, Doctor
Succliffe, Doctor Dove, etc. do teach there is no matter of faith, no material
or substantial point or difference in religion between Protestants and
Puritants, but they are of one Church, faith, and religion. But we doubt
whether they will stand to their positions they writ, in Queen Elizabeth
days, seeing they defend they may often change (at the least at the change of
every Prince. Dove persuasion Page 31. Wherein let the reader judge whether he
has dealt with me ingenuously or no? For I spoke only of the manner of
compiling our Service book, he charge me as if I had spoken of faith,
material and substantial points of religion. I spoke of fact, what we did
concerning our Service book, and they concerning their Breauiry, which have
changed See the preface of Pope Pius 5. in Breuiarum Romans ex decreto Synodus
Trid. restitutum.
as often as we, he speaks of right, as if I had said, we not only then
might, upon such good considerations, as then justly moved us, but also may
ever hereafter, when there is no such just cause to induce us thereunto, change
and alter our faith and grounds of religion. My words were antagonisticall, and
by way of objection from them, with answer to their objection, he does make
relation of them, as if they were dogmaticall, and as a grounded conclusion
maintained among us. Therefore I charge him with two fallacies. The first is,
Fallacia accentus. For when words spoken interogatiuely are repeated
indicatiuely, or words spoken ironically, as if they were spoken plainly, or
by way of objection, as if they were dogmaticall, and all such like are
referred to that fallacy. Secondly, he cites part of my words, which are the
objection: and leaves out the other part, which are the answer, which is
comprehended under the Elenche, called Fallacia diuisionis, of which one
species is: Quando citatur imperfecta sententia, non integra, when part of the
words are recited which the Sophister thinks may serve his turn, the other
part is omitted, lest the whole sentence should make against him.

Secondly, he writes thus: The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of
faithful men, in which the pure word of God is preached, the Sacraments duly
administered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all things that are of
necessity required to the same, Couel, Field, Dove, be of the same mind,
Perswas. page. 23. I confess, I am of the same mind, not only in thesi, but
also in hypothesi: that our Church is such a congregation, that Gods word is
truly preached, and the Sacraments duly administered among us, according to
Christ his institution. But this is not with Sampson, to fetch meat out of the
eater. Judge. 14. 14.
Our words make for our selves, but yield no advantage to our adversaries,
among whom neither Gods word is truly preached, nor the Sacraments duly
administered. Therefore they are idly produced by him, to delude the reader in
making a show of proof for their religion, and of confutation for ours, when
there is no MEDIVS TERMINVS, whereby any thing should be proved or confuted. And
if he apply it by hypothesis to the Church of Rome, that it is such a visible
congregation, etc. and that therefore Recusants may safely continue in it, and
refuse to communicate with us, we were never of that mind, neither can that be
any Protestant proof. But it is a Petitio principij, begging of the question,
which he takes as granted when it is denied.

Thirdly, thus: M. Williats words. To errors of doctrine which are not
fundamental, even the true Church of Christ is subject. So Field ordinarily in
his books of the Church: so Sutcliffe, Dove Perswa. page 31. 32. But what does
he conclude out of these words? That therefore Recusants may wilfully maintain
the errors of the Church of Rome, rather then be reconciled to our Church,
which is purged from such errors? These words are no Protestant proof of
Catholic religion: Hoc est ludere, non argumentari, this is to play the
wanton, not the Logitian.

Fourthly, he charge me in this manner: Concerning doctrine. Doctor Dove
writes in these terms: In fundamental points of doctrine, the greatest
Papists in the world agree with us. Perswas. page. 11. These are my words; I
deny them not. Moreover, I did instance in these fundamental points, wherein
they consent with us, and thereupon I inferred, that they did rashly condemn
us for heretics, what then follows? will he therefore infer, that either
holding the fundamental points therefore their superstitions and errors may
safely be maintained? or that therefore they may be justly excused for not
communicating with us, as if their consenting with us in fundamental points,
should be a cause why they should the rather abhor our Church and religion?
It is a sufficient prejudice to the cause of their religion, that they dispute
in such loose manner. Again, he says: So Doctor Dove in his whole Treatise
never charge the Church of Rome, either with schism or heresy, but
labors to excuse themselves, offering that we shall communicate with them,
without any change of opinion; and yet he sets downs this for an infallible
position: THIS PROPOSITION IS VNDOVBTEDLY TRVE: NO HERETIC, OR SCHISMATIKE IS
TO BE COMMVNICATED WITHAL. Perswas. page 5. In that I have not charged them
with schism or heresy, I have showed that we are more charitable to them,
then they are to us, which do charge us with both. In that he says: I only
labored to excuse our selves, as if I had proved nothing to clear us from
that iniust aspertion, I refer him to the place it self, where I have made
due proof that we are free from both heresy and schism, by such sound
reasons as this Author cannot answer. But whereas he says it is offered on my
part, that they shall at their pleasure communicate with us without change of
opinion, he burdeneth me with an untruth by himself divised, and not to be
quoted out of any of my books. In so writing, he may fill up a volume, but he
shall never strengthen his own cause, of weaken ours. Moreover (says he) he
gives us security that by no possibility (according to the former reason of
general Councels) the Roman Church can be judged heretical. His words be
these, page 14. No Church can be condemned and judged heretical by any private
censure, but it must be public, by a general Council, as he there
expounds himself, and is granted before. But what does he conclude out of
this? That because the Church of Rome is not condemned by a general Council
to be heretical; it must needs be therefore orthodoxall? This is such a
consequent as neither Protestants, nor any other of sound judgment will grant.

Fifthly, he charge me thus: Touching Sacraments, he alleges page 27. 28.
that according to our definition of a Sacrament, there are as many as we teach;
and this shall not breed any jar between us; that therefore we should
refuse to communicate together. And transubstantiation it self shall be no
bar: but if we will receive at their hands, they will not examine how we
expound these words: Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. page 29. And of
discipline he writes: In that Council of Trent they set forth such wholesome
Canons concerning discipline, as were fit for a reformed Church. I deny not
these words, but I deny that they make any thing for the defense of Recusancy.
Concerning the word Sacrament, as it is a name divised by man, but not found in
the Scriptures: so it is not any matter of salvation to vary about the number
of Sacraments; especially among them with whom it is not agreed what a
Sacrament is: For, where words are not understood, ad idem, secundem idem, etc.
nothing hinders, but contrary, or contradictory propositions may be both
true, as to say: There are seven, and there are not seven Sacraments: For so
concerning the number of Sacraments they and we differ in words when we may
easily agree in substance. The word Sacrament is strictly taken with us, and so
according to M. Calvin his definition; it is an outward sign ordained of God
to be continued in his Church, as a part of his divine Service, offering to all
men, but sealing only to the faithful his inward grace, for the strengthening
of their says, and the applying of Christ his death unto them. And so there
can be but two, according to the confession of Saint Augustine: A resurrectione
Domini quaedam pauca De doct. Christi lib. 3 cap. 9.
signapro multis, eademque factu facillima, intellectu augustissinta
obseruatione castissima ipse Dominus and Apostolica tradidit disciplina,
baptismum and coenam Domini: Since the Lord his resurrection, our Savior his
self, and from him his Apostles, have commended to us for outward signs, or
seals, a very few in steed of many, and those for performance most easy, for
signification most ample, for observation most pure and holy, and they are
Baptism, and the Lords Supper. But this word Sacrament is more largely taken
in the Church of Rome for a sign in general, although it do not apply unto
us, and represent before our eyes the death of Jesus Christ. And it is defined
to be Signum rei sacra an outward sign of any holy thing. And according to
that definition, there may be not Cathechis. Romannus pars 2. de. sacram. sect.
3.
only 7. but also 70. Sacraments. Of transubstantion, having first proved that
the bread and the wine in the Eucharist cannot be transubstantiated; and yet
not denying them to be the body and blood of our Savior, because he has said
they are so, I said: in that we both agree, only the difference between us,
is, how the words: This is my body, are to be understood? whether really or
sacramentally, properly or mystically? And that it should be no bar or
scruple to their consciences in what sense we understand it, so as we deliver
it to them according to the institution of our Savior Christ: and that if they
will in all other things submit themselves to the laws of our Church, we will
not press them so far in examining them how they expound the words, but
rather yield so much to their weakness in this one point, until God shall
reveal a further measure of the knowledge of his truth unto them. So these
words of mine import nothing in favor of transubstantiation. Thirdly, the
Council of Trent has set down wholesome Canons concerning discipline, as in
part the 3. Lataran Counsel did long before; as namely, for preaching, and
Council. La. tar. 3. Can. 13. and Con. cil. 4. Later. Can. 29.
learned ministers, etc. And the reformed Churches of England, Scotland,
Germany, Netherland, Geneua, have received many of those Canons, although they
come from the Pope, as deeming them fit for a reformed Church. But these my
words make nothing for the allowance of that Council it self, or of the
points of doctrine there concluded; neither yet of their Recusancy, among whom
for the most part, these Canons of discipline are not received.

Sixthly, Concerning the Popes supremacy, of Europe there can be no question.
For, generally Protestants agree with Field, Dove, Ormerod, that the regiment
of the West Churches (among which this nation is one) belonged to the Pope of
Rome. Page. 29. 30. I spoke of the Popes supremacy, and my words are these:
What authority soever the Pope had over the Latin Church, or West part of the
world, it has been given him by humane constitutions only, and general
consent of Princes and States, which they suffered him to enjoy during their
good liking, and no longer. And having thus showed that the Popes authority
over other Churches, was not by divine institution, but only by humane
permission; not certain, but during the pleasure of Princes and States: my
words favor not his supremacy over us in England, out of which by consent of
Prince and Parliament, he has been abandoned long since. And therefore, I
say, the Bishop of Rome is little beholding to me for his title of supremacy:
This is a very loose and negligent kind of disputation.

Seventhly, says he, Dove Persw. page 15. refers the question what books be
Canonical Scriptures to the two Doctors, S. Augustine and S. Hierom. His words
be these: Catholics prove them to be Canonical out of S. Augustine: we, that
they be Apocripha, out of S. Hierome; both which Doctors: are of no small
authority in the Church of Rome: therefore in this we differ no more from them,
then S. Hierome did from S. Augustine. Therefore I hope for many causes
Protestants will give place to us in this question. I deny not, but the
question being propounded concerning the books of Toby, Judith, Baruch,
Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, the Maccabes, and the fragment of Esther, whether
they were Canonical, (as the Church of Rome does hold) or Apocripha, as our
Church maintains? I answered: that forasmuch as there is Canon fidei, and
morum, One Canon or rule of good life, another of faith: and that may be Canon
morum, quodnon est fidei, Arule and pattern of good life for us to follow,
which is not a sufficient ground of doctrine to build our faith upon: they were
both Canonical, and Apocripha: Canonical, according to Saint Augustins, for
rules of good life: Apocripha, according to S. Hierome; because they were no
true grounds of doctrine. And so the Church of Rome and our selves, rightly
understanding one another, as Saint Hierome and Saint Augustine understood
themselves, there needed not be any difference concerning this point between
us. But how can he infer upon this: that therefore we must give place to him
in this question? As Saint Hierome gave no place to Saint Augustine, so will we
give no place to any; only I wish they would better understand both us and
themselves, and give place to the truth. And, forasmuch as they allow both of
Saint Hierome, and Saint Augustine, to be Orthodoxall Doctors, they cannot
receive S. Augustine his opinion, but they must also embrace S. Hieroms
exposition, where it is explained what is the meaning of S. Augustine, where
he allows those books to be Canonical.

Eighthly, says he, Concerning the vulgar Latin translation allowed among
Catholics, D. Dove writes thus, page 16. We grant it fit, that for
uniformity, in quotation of places in Schools, and Pulpits, one Latin text
should be used, and we can be contented for the antiquity thereof, to prefer
the old vulgar translation, before all other Latin books; and so much we
yield to the Council of Trent. The praemisses are mine, but what is his
conclusion? Because we ascribe to the vulgar edition, more then to all other
Latin translations; and therein agree with the Church of Rome: and because we
yield to the Council of Trent so far as reason does require, and no further;
but disagree both from the Church of Rome, and that Council in things which are
erroneous: Concedendo vera, negando falsa, will he therefore take this for a
Protestant proof of his Catholic religion? Non taliauxilio, nec defensoribus
istis Roma caret: If the Church of Rome had no better champions, it would not
stand.

Ninthly, Doctor Couel writes: No translation whatsoever is authentical
Scripture. And Doctor Dove adds: All translations have many faults. page. 16.
In so writing, I write the truth. For only God is free from error; and
therefore only the original text is authentical Scripture. All men are
subject to errors, Omnis homo mendax, but all translations are the works of
men. But how idly is this brought in as a Protestant proof of Recusancy?
well may it serve against Recusants, which ascribe more to the translation the^
to the original. If no translation be authentical, then it follows as a
firm consequent, that the vulgar Latin edition cannot be authentical,
howsoever the Council of Trent has imposed it upon us as authentical.

Tenthly, For this time and place (says he) I will only make amplification of
Doctor Dove, his grant and confession, which follows in these words: When the
Mass was first put down, King Henry had his English litourgie, and that was
then judged absolute without all exception. But when King Edward came to the
Crown, that was condemned, and another was in the place; which Peter Martyr,
and Bucet did approve as very consonant to Gods word. When Q. Elizabeth began
her reign, the former was judged to be full of imperfections, and a new was
divised, and allowed by consent of the Clergy. But about the middle of her
reign, we grew weary of that book, and great means have been wrought to
abandon it, and establish another, which although it was not obtained; yet we
do at the least, at every change of Prince, change our book of Common prayer,
we be so want on we know not what we would have. Page 31. Hitherto his words,
and he freely confessed errors in all these states and changes. For defense
whereof, besides that these words are written by way of objection from them,
rather then any confession made by our selves: I did not so much as intimate
that there were errors in all these states and changes, as he unjustly
charge me; but only that in the Service books of King Henry, and King
Edward, some things were judged to savor of the superstitions of the Church of
Rome. But as for the Service book which was allowed by Queen Elizabeth, it
stood not only during her time without alteration, but also it is ratified by
his Majesty, and allowed of by the State; albeit by some particularmen it has
been impugned, as nothing else can be by the wit of man so well devised, but
man's wit can dispute against it. And as for those errors which were reformed
in the books of K. Henry, and King Edward, they were the superstitions only of
the Church of Rome, the land being not then sufficiently reformed, nor purity
of religion so perfectly established, as now it is, because the Bishops and
Clergy men by whom those books were written, their selves were too much so
wred with the Romish leaven. And our daily renouncing those superstitions, and
receiving greater light of the Gospel, could be no Protestant proof that we
should any way favor their superstitions.

Eleuenthly, he writes thus: Why may we not say with the Council of Florence,
cited by M. Williat for General, and the Patriarchs of the Apostolic seas
there present, and the Council of Constance, not of unequal authority, and the
Council of Trent (to pass others) with 6. Cardinals, 4. Legates, 3.
Patriarchs, 32. Archbishops, 228. Bishops, and 5. Abbots there assembled, (as
Doctor Dove tells us) that Protestancy in all places is false, and Catholic
religion true; where no Protestant Church can show any one such like authority
for their cause? The third part of such an assembly would have been a great
countenance to Protestant religion, far greater then ever it had, or is
likely to procure. To which I answer: First, concerning the Council of
Florence, in all those 25. Sessions which in it were: held, 15. of them being
at Ferraria, where the Council began, and the other at Florence, where the
Council was concluded, there is scarce any one point of religion touched, of
which there is any controversy between Protestants and Recusants; only while
it was at Ferraria, before the acts of the first Session, the question of
Purgatory was superficially disputed. Therefore that Council was far from
co^demning Protestancy, or approving Catholic religion. Secondly, of the
Council of Constance, which he will have to be of no less authority:
Bellarmine his self denies it to have any authority at all, or credit of a
general De Council. l. 1. cap. 7.
Council, alleging that it is in the Catalogue of those 15. Synods which the
Catholic Church has not received. It seems therefoe that this Author was
not well acquainted with the general Councels. Thirdly, as I confessed such a
number of Prelates to be present at the Council of Trent, so I alleged
reasons why it could not be a lawful council; which he is so far from
answering, that he passes them over with silence. As also he spares to
repeat the residue of my words, which make against him, according to his
accustomed fallacy, wherein I derogated from the credit of this assembly,
showing that they were there only at the end of the Council, being then newly
created by the Pope to countenace the Synod, and so to subscribe to all
conclusions for form sake. But at the beginning, when matters were argued,
there were but forty Bishops, and four Legates, too small an assembly to
deserve the name of a general Council. Albeit, it is not a bare multitude of
suffrages, and presence of Bishops, that can give countenance to a general
Council. For the whole multitude of Priests and others cried against our
Savior Christ: Crucify him. The Kings stood up, and the Princes took
council together against the Lord, and his anointed. Mat. 26. 50 Psalm. 2. 2.


So then, if he argue from the Council of Florence, to condemn our religion,
I deny his antecedent. If from the Council of Constance, I deny his argument:
If from the Council of Trent, it is but a Fallacy, Petitio principij; because
he takes that for a proof, which is the matter in dispute.

THE ANSWER TO A TREATISE INTITVLED: A SEARCH MADE INto matters of Religion:
By FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, Deacon of the Protestants Church, before his change to
the Catholic. Dedicated to the Kings Majesty.

Against Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, Jewel, Williat, Dove, Rogers, and
other Protestants.

JEREMY 47. 10. Cursed be he that does the works of the Lord negligently.
LONDON, Printed for SIMON WATERSON, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Crown. 1610.

THE ANSWER TO A TREATISE INTITVLED: A Search made into matters of Religion, by
FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, Deacon of the Protestants Church, before his change to the
Catholic, dedicated to the Kings Majesty: Against Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius,
Beza, Jewel, Williat, Dove, Rogers, and other Protestants.
IN my persuasion to the Recusants to reconcile themselves to our Church, I
used these words: The ignorant Recusant pretends his conscience, saying: It
is against my conscience to come to Church; and, whatsoever I do against my
conscience, is sin. I confess, whatsoever is done without testimony or warrant
of conscience, is sin to them that do it, be that which is done in it self
never so lawful; because the Apostle says: He that doubts, is condemned if
he eat, because he eats not of faith; and whatsoever is Romans 14.
not of faith, is sin. In which words, by faith, is understood conscience.
But by the way, they must see that their conscience be rightly informed, else
it will be their damnation. Out of which words, M. Walsingham makes this
collection: That I seemed to him, substantially to justify out of these words
of S. Paul, the Recusancy of Catholics, if they can prove they have a good
ground, or motive of conscience. It is true, one absurdity being granted, many
others will follow. Therefore to this hypothetical proposition, I answer, by
granting the Mayor, and denying the Minor. For they cannot prove they have any
such good ground or motive of conscience; therefore their Reculancy is not
justified out of these words. It is but Petitio principij, a begging of the
question. Again, he says: If their conscience were erroneous, and grounded
upon false grounds, and principles: yet, so long as that persuasion endures,
it seems they may not be forced. The insufficiency of which argument I will
lay open by the like. He that has not examined himself, may not come to the
Lords table, lest he eat and drink unworthily; and so 1. Cor. 11. 28. 29.
eat and drink his own damnation, not discerning the Lords body. Shall this
want of examination of a man's self, be therefore a warrant to any man to live
like an infidel? never to examine himself? and so never to come to the Lords
table? and so to be exempted from the authority, and coactiue power of the
Church? He must be forced to examine himself, and communicate: So the
Recusant, whose conscience is erroneous, and founded upon false principles,
must be forced to renounce his errors, to build his religion, upon sounder
principles, to receive instruction, and inform his conscience better, and so
to come to the Church.

He takes upon him to disprove my definition of conscience, which is, that it
is an application of a general knowledge, grounded upon Gods word to
particular actions and intents. He says: This definition is defective, being
not so large as the thing that is defined; because the heathens which know not
Gods word, yet have a conscience grounded only upon the law of nature. I
answer, that if conscience be by him Romans 2. 14.
univocally understood, (as all things ought to be which are defined) my
definition cannot be disproued. But when he instanceth in the consciences of
heathen men, he flies to equivocation, whereas an equivocal thing cannot be
defined. In like manner, if I should define religion to be a rule of faith and
life, grounded upon Gods word, he might take the same exception against it, and
say, that the religion of the Turks is grounded upon the Alcaron; the religion
of the Jews is grounded partly upon the Talmod: the religion of the
Catholics partly upon the Traditions of men. If I define a man to be animal
rationale, a body endued with a reasonable soul, he may likewise say that
definition agrees not with a painted man, or the picture of a man. As speaking
of religion, I define not false religion; but the true Christian religion: and
speaking of a man, I define not an equivocal, or analogicall, but an univocal
man: So I define not a dark and erroneous, but a sound, and true understanding
conscience. As for the heathens, they have yet left some relics of the image
of God, which are reason and understanding. Therefore the Apostle says: The
Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law,
having not the law, they are a law to themselves, which show the effects of the
law written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their
thoughts accusing one another, or excusing: that is, the Gentiles have not the
law absolutely, and in such perfect manner as the Jews, to whom God delivered
every precept of the law expressly by writing; yet they have, will they, nill
they, written in their hearts some feeling of religion, and are able to put a
difference between virtue and vice; which suffices only to their damnation.
They do by nature, ea quae legis sunt, the things contained in the law: that
is, they command things which are honest, forbid the things which are unjust,
set down punishments for theft, adultery, and such like offenses. But by the
way: Aliud est facere quod lex iubet, aliud facere quod lex facit, aut ea quae
legis sunt facere. It is one thing to do what the law commands, (for that
they do not, that were to keep the law) another thing to do the things
contained in the law, or to do as the law does: that is, only to command the
things which the law commands, and to forbid what the law forbids; which
only the Gentiles do. Neither do they that fully, but only in some part,
concerning outward things; but are far from the knowledge of true piety to
save their souls. So then, the conscience of the Gentiles being sufficiently
instructed without Gods word, by the light of nature, only to their
condemnation, what does that concern my purpose which define a conscience
rightly informed, and sufficiently grounded to salvation?

He goes about to disprove my definition of heresy, which I defined to be: an
error stiffely and obstinately maintained and defended; not by a consequent,
but directly impugning some article of faith. Which definition he says is also
defective, because it is not so large as the thing which is defined. His words
are these: For if we look into all the heresies recorded by Ireneus,
Tertullian, Epiphanius, Saint Augustine, etc. we shall not find the lest part
directly, and expressly, against any article of the Apostles Creed, which M.
D. Dove a little after does say he means, as of the Pelagians, which holds
that a man may do good works by the power of his own free will without grace,
the Aetians, that faith was sufficient without good works to life everlasting,
and that Christ had revealed more to them, then to the Apostles, the Aerians
that denied prayer, and sacrifices for the dead, and set fasts of the Church.
Neither can D. Dove prove that his own example of the Arian heresy by him
alleged, did directly impugn any article of the Creed, but by a consequent.
For Arius denied the equality of the Son with the Father, and by a consequent
his Godhead, and so by a consequent the second article of the Creed: Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord.

First, I answer, he has not dealt ingenuously with me. For I did not in my
definition of heresy restrain Faith only to the Creed of the Apostles, as the
place it self will plainly show; for I did mention not only that Creed, but
also the Creed of Nice, of Ephesus, of Constantinople, Perswas. page 13.
which I said we hold, and also the text of the Bible, to free us from heresy.

Secondly, the Pelagian holding that a man could do good works by the power of
his own free will without grace: directly impugneth faith, even the text of
the Bible, where it is written: We are not sufficient of our selves to think
2. Cor. 3. 5
any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. O Lord I Ier. 10.
23.
know that the way of man is not in himself; neither is it in man to walk and
direct his steps. All the imaginations of the Genesis 5. 1. Cor. 2. 14. Col. 2.
13. 1. Cor. 12. 3. Iam. 2. 14.
thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually. The natural man
perceaueth not the things that are of God. We are dead in sins. No man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit of God. The Aetian saying: Faith
without good works is sufficient to eternal life, directly, denies the
doctrine of the Bible: What avails it my brethren, though a man say he has
faith when he has no works? can the faith save him? If faith have no works
it is dead. Whereas the Aetian holds that Christ has revealed more to him
then to the Apostles, it is expressly, and directly against the Scriptures,
where S. Paul says: I have kept nothing back, but have showed you Act. 20. 27.
all the counsel of God. That the Arians denied the Godhead of Christ, not by
a consequent only, but directly, witness S. Augustine, and Epiphanius. For S.
Augustine says that Ad quod vult. cap. 49. Contra ha^ reses l. 2, 1. 2.
they held: Filium esse creaturam, That the Son of God was a creature. And
Epiphanius: Non veritus est ipse ac discipuli eius creaturam vocare eum qui
omnia creauit, verbum ex patre sine tempore, and sine principio genitum, Both
he and his disciples feared not to call him a creature which created all
things, even the word which was begotten of his Father, without time, and
without beginning. As for Aerius he could not be an heretic for denying
prayer and sacrifice for the dead, and set fasts of the Church; For as much as
prayer and sacrifice for the dead are contrary to sound doctrine, and fasts are
a matter of indifferency, and not of faith. That he was condemned for an
heretic, it was not so much for these opinions, as for that first being a
Schismaticke, because he could not obtain a Bishopric he became an Arian, as
it appears by S. Augustine, his words are these: Doluisse fertur quod
Episcopus non potuit ordinari, and in Arianorum haeresim lapsus propria quoque
dogmata addidisse dicens: orare pro Aug. de haeres. cap. 35.
mortuis, vel oblationem offerre, non oportere, etc. He was discontented
because he could not obtain a Bishopric; and thereupon he fell into the
heresy of the Arians, to which he added some opinions of his own, saying: it
was not lawful to pray, or offer sacrifice for the dead, etc. These positions
of his, S. Augustine does not call heresies, but only opinions. Likewise
Epiphanius. Therefore adhuc saluares est, my definition of Epiph. contra
haeres. l. 3. tom. 1. haeresi 75.
heresy remains sound, and not to be by him gainesayd. But by the way, that
I may give good satisfaction to the reader concerning this point. We find in
the catalogue of heresies many reckoned up, which are so far from directly
impugning faith, that indeed they do not at all impugn the faith, as that of
Aerius, which denied prayer and sacrifice for the dead, and the set fasts of
the Church. To which I answer out of S. Augustine. First, these Fathers which
make such long catalogues of heresies, do not write as if they in their own
judgments did hold all these to be heresies; but only they deliver what
opinions in several ages have been condemned as heretical, leaving it to the
private judgment of the reader, whether they were justly condemned as
heretical, or not: but their selves deliver not what is their own judgment.
For says he: Quid faciat haereticum, regulari quadam definitione comprehendi,
sicut Prafat. ad Quod vult.
ego existimo, aut omnino non potest, aut difficillime potest: To deliver by a
lawful definition what thing makes an heretic, in my opinion it is
impossible, or at lest, of great difficulty. Again, Epist. ad Quod vult.
that in the catalogue of heresies the Fathers do not agree concerning the
number of them, but some reckon up more, some fewer, he says: Quod vtique non
euenisset, nisi aliud vni eoru^ videretur esse haeresis, and aliud alteri, The
cause was for that such an opinion as seemed heresy in the judgment of one
Father, in the judgment of another was not heretical. And concerning
Epiphanius the Bishop of Cypris, and Philestrius Bishop of Brix; which both
writ of heresies: the one making a longer Catalogue then the other, he says:
Procul dubio in ea quaestione vbi disceptatur quid sit haeresis, non idem
videbatur ambobus, and reuer a hoc omnino definire difficile est: and ideo
cauendum, quum omnes in numerum redigere conamur, ne pretermittamus aliquas
quum hareses sint, aut enumeremus aliquas quum haereses non sint: That which
seemed an heresy to one of them, did not seem so to the other; and to define
truly what is heresy, is very hard: and they which will write the Catalogue of
heresies, must be very circumspect, lest they leave out of the Catalogue, some
opinions which are indeed heretical, and put in others which are no heresies.
Secondly, the Fathers in those Catalogues did not understand this word Heresy,
so strictly as in our age it is understood; but generally for every sect in
religion, differing from the received opinion of the Church, as Epist. ad Quod
vult.
it appears by S. Augustine in the words going before, where he makes an
heresy and a sect all one, showing: Quantum inter se differunt de numero
sectarum. How much Epiphanius and Philastrius descent concerning the number of
sects? where he calls them sects, which before he called heresies. And it is
no marvel though with those Fatheres, all heresies do not directly impugn
the Faith, when by the^ only sects are understood. But to make every opinion
an heresy which not only, directly, but also by a consequent impugneth faith,
as M. Walsingham will have it, is to make no difference between error and
heresy; but De corrup. artib.
to call every error in religion an heresy, as Ludouicus Viues speaks:
Haeresis nomen rebus leuissimis impingitur, The name of heresy is laid upon
every light matter. And De haeres. l. 1. cap. 7.
of him it may one time or other be verified which Alphonsus de Castro
speaks: Idcirco fit, vt hiqui tam leuiter de haeresi pronuntiant, non
expendentes de quare loquantur, saepe sua ipsorum sagitta feriantur,
incidantque in eam foueam quam alijs parabant. It happens that they which so
rashly call every thing heresy, not considering whereof they speak, be
oftentimes beaten with their own weapon, and fall into the pit which they
dug for others.

I showed, page 10. how Pusillanimity makes men sometimes do contrary to their
own conscience, as Cardinal Pole, who dying said: The Protestants are the
honester men, I would be a Protestant, were it not for the Church of Rome. This
I brought for example to illustrate, not for argument to prove. For exempla non
probant, examples prove not. He turns it another way, saying: I broughtit for
a reason to prove that Protestants are no heretics.

In defense of our Church, that it could not be accounted heretical, I called
into question the authority of the Council of Trent by which it was condemned,
alleging diverse exceptions against that Council, that it could not be a
lawful general Council, the paucity of the Bishops which were there present,
their partiality, the definition of a general Council cited by Bellarmine,
which could no Tomo. 1. contro. 4. cap. 4.
way be verified of that assembly. Having produced these arguments to disinable
that Council, he does not so much as repeat any of them; much less does he
answer them: only he says, that it seemed to him a slight argument, and to
give more advantage to my adversary, then defense to my self and my cause. I
reply, that it is no marvel though a man of slight judgment, which passes
over all other things of moment so slightly, do esteem those arguments to be
so slight, which his self cannot answer.

To persuade Catholics to come to our Church, I showed how the learned among
them, do come every day nearer to our religion, and more and more favor our
opinions. He says it is a dream. I wish this dreamer to awake out of sleep,
and with greater vigilance to consider of the particulars as they are produced
by me, I said:

First, the learned Catholics agree with us concerning the books of
Scripture which be Canonical, which Apocripha, I writ in this manner: The
books of Toby, Judith, Baruch, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Maccabes, the fragment
of Esther, they hold to be Canonical, according to S. Augustine: We, to be
Apocripha, according to S. Hierome; and in this point we differ no more from
them, then Hierome did from Augustine, which did both agree, and were easily
reconciled. S. Hierome interpreting S. Augustines meaning: that they were
Canonical enough to prove rules of life, not grounds of doctrine and faith.
Thus have we delivered long since. But Bellarmine De verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 7. 8.
9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
handling this question at large, replieth not against us: nay, he does not so
much as mention this distinction of Canons of faith, and Canons of good life.
Therefore we take it as a thing granted by the laws of disputation, that he
holds as we hold, rests satisfied with our answer, and the case to be
clear between us both. M. Walsingham blusheth not to deliver a notorious
untruth, saying: that Bellarmine handles this distinction at large, and
refuteth the same in his first book, De verbo Dei, cap. 10. In which book and
chapter, no such thing can be found.

Secondly, they agree with us concerning the Bible, which is the best and
truest edition. For whereas we holding the original text only to be
authentical, the Council of Trent Decret. 3. Sessionis.
obtrudeth to us the vulgar Latin translation. Bellarmine prefers the
original before the Latin, as we do. M. Walsingham is not ashamed to charge me
that I have abused both the Council of Trent and Bellarmine. That I have not
abused the Council, witness the Council it self: that I have not abused
Bellarmine, witness Bellarmine De verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 11.

Thirdly, they agree with us concerning the sufficiency of the Scriptures, that
in them are delivered all things necessary to salvation, contrary to the
ancient doctrine of the Church of Rome. So Bellarmine, De verbo Dei, lib. 4.
cap. 10. He is not ashamed to say: In reading the place he has discovered a
notable fraud. Whether I have dealt fraudulently or sincerely, let the reader
judge. But wherein lies the fraud? He says that Bellarmine speaks these
words only by way of answer to an objection. I conclude therefore it is no
fraud. If I had taken that for positive doctrine which was spoken by way of
objection, it had been fraud in me; but seeing it is an answer to an
objection, it is no fraud, but sincere dealing.

Fourthly, they hold with us that Purgatory is a tradition, and not to be found
in the holy Scriptures, witness Bellarmine de verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 4. He
thinks to avoid us by saying that Bellarmine speaks only antagonistically,
by way of objection out of Luther, and not dogmatically out of his own
judgment; which is but Petitio principij, a begging of the question. For it
was questioned by me, whether Bellarmine spoke out of his own judgment, or
not? and the affirmative was by me proved and concluded. He brings no proof
for the negative part, but only makes that for his allegation, which is the
question it self.

Fifthly, they descent not from us about the authority of the Scriptures, that
it is above the authority of the Church; witness Bellarmine de verbo Dei. lib.
3. cap. 10. He repeateth the words, but makes no answer to them.

He charge me with Papistry, because I confessed that our Church was
condemned as heretical by the Council of Trent; which is but Petitio
principij: for I denied our Church to be ever the more heretical for the
censure of that Council, whose authoriry I disinabled by sufficient reasons,
to which he makes no answer: and therefore in that place I have not played the
Papist.

Whereas I exhorted the Recusants, diligently to read, as well our writers, as
their own; our answers as well as their objections; and then to examine their
own judgments before they pass their sentence against us to condemn us of
heresy: He makes two answers: first, that they have already done so, to which
I reply: they have done it partially. Secondly, that unlearned men and women
are not able to do so; and therefore they must rely upon the judgment of the
Catholic Church. To which I reply, that if they be not able, the fault is in
the the Catholic Church of Rome, which holds the people still in ignorance,
whereas S. John teaches, that they ought to be of such knowledge, as to try
and examine the Spirits: and the Citizens of Berea are commended by the holy 1.
Ioh. 4. 1. Act. 17. 11. 2. Cor. 4. 3.
Ghost, because they were able to examine Saint Paul's doctrine. And I say with
the Apostle: That if the Gospel be hidden, it is hidden to them which are
lost.

I alleged that few things are in our book of Common prayers, which are not
taken out of the Bible, or out of that which was good in the Mass book: so
that if they allow of the Bible and their Mass book, they cannot disallow of
our Service book. He answers in these words: If all the Service book were
taken out of the Bible it self, (as most of all heretical Service has been in
every age pretended to be) yet might the collection and combination be such as
might make it unlawful and pestiferous: as when the Arrians did sing: Gloria
patri cum filio, and per filium, and the Catholics, and filio. The difference
in sound of words, was small; but in substance and malice execrable. To which I
reply, that forasmuch as he makes such a supposition, but shows no such
collection or combination in our Service book; neither any thing in it like to
that of the Arrians, he speaks idly, and to no purpose; neither is any
thing thereby derogated from the credit of our Service book.

To the Recusants which object that there are dissentions among us: I answered,
that so there were among them: I named Eckius, Pighius, Thomas, Scotus: nay,
there were dissentions among the Apostles themselves: so that dissension is no
argument to disinable us from being the true Church, for in religion we agree.
M. Walsingham charge me with three absurdities: the first of ignorance or
folly; for that Eckius, Pighius, Thomas, Scotus dissented only in matters
disputable, and not determined by the Church for points of faith. In which
words he makes the Church of Rome to be so negligent in their determination of
matters of religion, as if they held the doctrine of justification, wherein
Eckius and Pighius disagreed, and of merit wherein the Thomists and Scotist
disagreed not to appertain unto faith, and to be matters so indifferent, as if
they afforded only cause of disputation, but needed not to be discided.

The second absurdity he says is impiety, for that the Apostles contentions
were not about matters of different doctrine. I say no more are ours. The third
he says is ridiculous audacity, to deny so absolutely disagreement in matters
of religion among us, whereof the whole world can be witness out of our own
books, and inuectiues one against another. To which I answer, that albeit some
particular factious spirits among us write seditious pamphlets one against
another, this imputation cannot justly be laid upon our Church, which by all
manner of good means suppresseth dissension, but maintains peace and unity.
Thus much I thought fit to deliver, not for answer to his disgraceful speeches
uttered against me, which I pass over with silence, as not touching the cause
of religion, but in defense only of the truth which I took in hand, that our
aduersarie^s may understand how we have not suffered those things so loosely to
pass our hands, which they so loosely have published against us, to the view
of the world, And so leaving them to the mercy of the Lord, my prayer is:
Vincat Christus, cadat haeresis, that falsehood may still be detected, and truth
may get the upper hand.

Amen.
FINIS.

