A CATALOGVE OF THE DEPVTIES OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY STATES GENERAL OF THE
UNITED Provinces.

AND Of the Reverend and Learned DIVINES, who now are met in the National
Synod.

Celebrated in the City of Dordrecht IN HOLLAND.

Translated out of the Latin and Dutch Copies.

With A SHORT NARRATION OF the occasions, and Introduction of the said
Synodicall Assembly.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Nich. Bourne, and Nath. Newberie, and are to be
sold at the Exchange. 1618.

TO THE READER.
Stratageme of the devil.
THE chiefest Stratageme of the Devil, against the Kingdom, City, and House of
God, is, Contention and Division, Mat. 12. yet the Lord in his admirable
wisdom knows how to exercise his children thereby, and to make manifest those
which are approved, 1. Cor. 11.19.

Antiochian distention.
This Stratageme has been used by him, even from the beginning, until this
crooked Age of ours. In the days of the Apostles no small distention and
disputation was raised in that famous Church of Antiochia, whereof the chief
Author was (as Epiphanius records) that perverse Heretic and son of the
devil, Corinthus, who after his disturbing of Gods house, was bruised to death
by the fall of a house.

It appears by the holy History written by S. Luke, Disturbers.
that the disturbers of the Antiochian Church, came with a fair show, were
adorned with the title of Teachers, and were called by the name of Believers,
no less then others.

It is also to be noted, that those who now disturb the peace of Sion, want
no titles nor fair appearance.

Parties disturbed.
The parties disturbed are called Brethren, whereby it appears, that the devil
our adversary, seeks to sow controversies, even amongst those, who many
ways are bound to mutual love and amity.

The question.
The matter in question was a point of doctrine, and therefore S. Paul and
Barnabe presently opposed themselves thereunto, with diligent inquiry and
powerful Confutations: for no delay is warrantable in the discovering of false
brethren and griping Wolves.

This faithful opposition little prevailing, Synod
the resolution of the Antiochian Church was, to refer the matter unto a
greater assembly or meeting of the Apostles and other believers. Which
proceeding has since bin used in the primitive Church with excellent success,
for our imitation.

At Jerusalem.
The fittest place was reputed Jerusalem, where both parties came, and liberty
was given freely to lay open and debate their Questions and opinions.

The President of that holy Assembly was S. James son of Alphaeus, President.
who with his brethren, understanding the state of the question, examined the
same on the touchstone of Gods holy Word: and finally concluded, Conclusion.
That Salvation was only to be sought and found in Jesus Christ, etc. and not
partly in the Ceremonies of the Law. Whereunto was added very sound counsel for
the re-establishing of peace in the Church, and for the preventing of future
Contentions.

This pattern of holy meeting, Imitation.
is now imitated by the United Provinces, being admonished thereunto by diverse
letters of reformed Christian Princes, but chiefly of his Sacred Majesty of
Great Britain, who by his own Writings, and by the mouth of his Ambassadors
has wrought much in the furthering of this great Business, whereby Gods cause
is faithfully defended, Vtility.
and from whence is expected a worthy Union in the reformed Churches, to the
overthrow of the Romish Antichrist, who since his Revelation has deceived the
world with the vain glory of General Councels: whereas it is manifest, The
abuse of Popery in Synodes.
1. That Synodes were not ordained by him, to clear or confirm any points of
true Doctrine by the Word of God, but for to oppose himself thereunto: and for
to confirm his received errors; yea for to coin new Articles of faith.

Besides, no liberty was granted in those Synodes to speak, unless it were
with danger of life, as it fell out in the Council of Constance, where
Johannes Hus, and Hieronymus of Prage were burned, for maintaining of true
Doctrine against Popish errors.

Finally, the meeting of Cardinals and shaven Priest is to no purpose, whereas
the Pope professes himself to be the only man, from whose breast and breath
is to be expected infallible truth.

Place of the Synod.
THe place of meeting is the city of Dort, or Dordrecht, which is reputed to be
the auncientest of Holland, and has the first place in the Assembly of States.

A great and fair Hall is prepared, with convenient Seats for those that are
deputed, and Galleries erected for the hearers: in a place called De Doelen,
that is, the Artillery garden.

The first day of November was appointed for the first Session, Time.
but it was deferred until the 13. of the said month, expecting some that
were not yet arrived.

Sermons preparatory 1. Session the 13. of Nouemb.
The 13. at eight of the clock in the morning two Sermons were made, the one in
Dutch, the other in French, accommodated unto the instant action, with very
fervent prayers unto God for the direction of his holy Spirit.

These Sermons being finished: from every Province were appointed two, for to
conduct those foreign Divines into their several Seats, Deduction to their
Seats. Oration of Balthazar Lydius.
which was performed with good order and great reverence: the order is
expressed hereafter.

The first person appointed to speak was Balthazar Lydius one of the Ministers
of Dort, who made a worthy Oration in Latin unto the Assembly, and a fervent
prayer unto God for the same, and concluded with thanksgiving unto the States
general, that they had honored him, to let his voice first be heard in such
an honorably Assembly.

Oration of the States.
Whereupon one of the Deputies of the States general rose, and made a worthy
Speech unto the Assembly, opening the causes of this meeting, and giving
thanks unto the foreign Divines, that they were come from so far distant
places, in such an unseasonable time: promising ever to be thankful for the
same, etc. And hereupon was read the Letter of the States general, expounding
their intention and will concerning the Assembly.

2. Session the 14. of November.
The next day following, by secret voices or suffrages, were chosen one
President of the Assembly, two Assistants, and two Secretaries or Notaries,
whose names are hereafter expressed.

These being elected, they were placed in the room or seats appointed for
them: and demanded in order the Letters of Credence of those that were come to
the Assembly which were read in the full Audience: Literae fiduciales.
And the matter at that time resolved upon, was, that all the Ministers
Remonstrants, Remonstrants cited.
or Arminians should be cited, and that they themselves might make choice of
the fittest amongst them, for to propound, expound, and defend their Doctrine
before the Assembly, with due reverence and order. And all this is to be done
publicly for the instruction of all those that understand the Latin tongue,
who from all parts resort thither in great multitudes.

THE NAMES OF THE DEPVTIES OF THE MOST NOBLE, Illustrious, and puissant STATES
General.
1. From the Dukedom of Gelder-land, and County of Sutphen: MArtinus
Gregorii, Doctor in the Law, chief Councelor in the Court of the Dukedom of
Geldria. Henricus ab Essen, Councellor in the Court of the Dukedom of Geldria.
2. From Holland and West-Friezland. Walraue de Brederode, Baron of Viana and
Ameyde, Vicount of Vtrecht, etc. Hugo Muys of Holy Knight, Sheriff of Dort:
and in his absence, Cornelius Francisci de Wit, Bourg-Master of the said City.
Iacobus Boulenius, Bourgmaster of Amsterdam. Geerardus de Nieubourg,
Bourgmaster of Alckmar. Rochus ab Honert, chief Councelor in the high Court of
Holland, Seeland, and West-Friesland. Nicholaus Cromholt, chief Councelor in
the provincial Court of Holland, Seeland, and West-Friesland.
3 From Seeland. Simon Schot, Doctor in the Laws, and Secretary of
Middelbourg. Iacobus a Camp, Doctor in the Laws, and Councelor of the States
of Seeland.
4 From Vtrecht. Fredericus de Suylen, a Nievelt, Lord of Aertsberg,
Brekewoude, etc. Gulielmus de Hardevelt, Bourgmaster of Amersfort.
5 From Friesland. Ernestus ab Aylua, Councelour of the States of Friesland.
Ernestus ab Harinxma, chief Counselor in the provincial Court of Friesland.
6 From Ouerysell. Henricus Hagen, Lord of Vollenhoue, Knight. Johannes ab
Hemert, Bourgmaster of Deuenter, one of the States general.
7 From Groeningen and Omlands. Hieronymus Isbrants, Doctor in the Laws,
Councelor in the Chamber of Accounts of the States general. Edzardus Iacobus
Clant, Lord in Essinge, and Sandweer. Daniel Heynsius, Professor in History,
Secretary, and Bibliothecarie of the University of Leyden: appointed also to
be Secretaty and Notarie in this Assembly.

THE REVEREND FAMOVS AND LEARNED Divines from foreign Parts sent to this
National Synod, at the request of the Illustrious States General.
1 From the most Illustrious, and most mighty King of Great Britain.
GEorgius, Bishop of Landaf. Josephus Hall, Doctor in Divinity, and Deane of
Worcester. Johannes Davenot, Doctor in Divinity, Professor in the University
of Cambridge, etc. Samuel Ward, Doctor in Divinity, and President of Sidney
College.
2 From the Illustrious Elector Palatine. Abrahamus Scultetus, Doctor in
Divinity, and Professor at Heidelberg. Paulus Tossanus, Doctor in Divinity,
and Councelor in the Ecclesiastical Senate of the Electorat. Henricus
Altingius, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor at Heydelberg.
3 From the illustrious Lantgraue of Hasse. Georgius Cruciger, Doctor in
Divinity, Professor and Rector in the University of Marpurg. Paulus Steinius,
Preacher in the Court at Cassel. Daniel Angeloerator, Superintendent of the
Churches in upper Hassia. Rodolphus Goclenius, Senior Professor in the
University of Marpurg.
4 From the four Cantons of Heluetia reformed. Johannes Iacobus Breitingerus,
Preacher at Zurich. Marcus Rutimeyerus, Doctor in Divinity at Berne.
Sebastianus Beckius, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor in the University of
Basel. Wolfgangus Mayerus, Doctor in Divinity, and Preacher at Basel. Johannes
Conradus Cochius, Preacher at Schafhusen.
5 From the Church and Commonwealth of Geneva. Johannes Deodatus, Professor and
Preacher at Geneua. Theodorus Tronchinus, Professor and Preacher at Geneua.
6 From the Church and Commonwealth of Brema. Matthias Martinius, Professor and
Rector of Brema. Henricus Isselburgius, Professor and Pastor of Brema, Doctor
in Divinity. Ludovicus Croicus, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor at Brema.
7 From the Church and Commonwealth of Emden. Daniel Elshemius, Preacher of
Emden. Ritsius Lucae, Preacher of Emden. From France, Brandenburg, and Nassau
are none come.
8 The Professors and Readers in Divinity in the Universities and Schools of
the United Provinces. Ioannes Polyander, Professor and Rector of Leiden.
Sibrandus Lubbertus, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor of Franeker. Franciscus
Gomarus, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor at Groninge. Anthonius Tysius,
professor at Harderwyck. Anthonius Walaeus, professor at Middelburg.

The reverend Pastors and Elders sent from the provincial Synods to the
National.
1 From Geldria and Zutphen. GVlielmus Stephani, Doctor in Divinity, and
preacher at Aernhem. Sebastianus Dammannus, preacher at Zutphen. Ioannes
Bouilletus, preacher at Warnfeld. Eilhardus a Mehen, preacher at Harderwick.
Iacobus Verheiden, Rector of the School of Nieumegen, and Elder. Henricus ab
Hell Esquire, of Zutphen, Elder.
2 From South-Holland. Balthazar Lydius, preacher at Dort. Henricus Arnoldi,
preacher at Delft. Festus Hommius, preacher at Leiden. Gisbertus Voetius,
preacher at Heusden. Arnoldus Muys of Holy, of Dort, Elder. Ioannes Latius of
Leyden, Elder.
3 From North-Holland. Iacobus Roelandus, preacher of Amsterdam. Iacobus
Triglandus, preacher of Amsterdam. Abrahamus Doreslaer, preacher of Enchusen.
Samuel Bartholdus, preacher of Monickendam. D. Dominicus ab Heemskerch of
Alckmar, Elder. Theodorus Heynck of Amsterdam, Elder.
4 From Seeland. Hermanus Foukelius, preacher of Middelburg. Godefredus
Vdemannus, preacher of Ziricksee. Cornelius Regius, preacher of Tergoes.
Lambertus de Rycke, preacher at Bergen-op-zoom. Josias Vosbergius, Master of
the Accounts of Seeland, and of Middelbourg, Elder. Hadrianus Hofferus,
Councellor of Siericksee, Elder.
5 From Vtrecht in the name of the Contra-Remonstrants. Johannes Debetius,
Preacher at Dort. Arnoldus Oortcampius, Preacher at Amersfort. Lambertus
Canterus Esquire, and of Vtrecht, Elder. From Vtrecht in the name of the
Remonstrants. Isaacus Frederici, Preacher of Vtrecht. Samuel Neranus, Preacher
of Amersfort. D. Stephanus Helsdingius, Councelor of Vtrecht and Elder.
6 From Friesland. Johannes Bogermannus, Preacher of Leeuwarden. Florentius
Ioannis, Preacher of Sneeck. Philippus Danielis, Preacher of Harlingen.
Meynardus ab Idserda, one of the States of Friesland, and Elder. Kempo a Donia,
Councelor and Elder of Leeuwarden. Johannes Sandius, Councelor and Elder of
Leeuwarden.
7 From Oueryssell. Casparus Sibellius, Preacher of Deuenter. Hieronymus
Vogelius, Preacher of Hasselt. Hermannus Wiferdingius, preacher of Swol.
Ioannes Langius, preacher of Vollenhoue. Willelmus a Brockhuysen Esquire, and
Elder. Ioannes a Lauicke, Bourgmaster of Campen, and Elder.
8 From Groningen and Omlands. Cornelius Hillenius, preacher of Groningen.
Georgius Placius, preacher of Abingadam. Wolfgangus Agricola, preacher of
Behem. Ioannes Lolingius, preacher of Noortbrock. Egbertus Halbes Licentiatus
Iuris, and Elder. Ioannes Ruffelart Esquire at Stem, and Elder.
9 From the Drente. Temo Asschenbergius, preacher at Meppel. Patroclus
Rummelingus, preacher at Rhuynen.
10 From the Gallo-belgicke Churches. Daniel Colonius, Regent of the College
of French Students in Leyden. Ioannes Crucius, preacher of Haerlem. Ioannes
Doucher, preacher at Flissing. Ieremias de Pours, preacher at Middelbourg.
Euerardus Becker of Middelbourg, Elder. Petrus Pontanus of Amsterdam, Elder.

The names of the chief Remonstrants or Arminians, cited to the Synod.
From Gelderland. Henricus Leo, preacher of Bommell. Bernerus Wesekius,
preacher of Echstenstan. Henricus Hollingerus, Preacher of the Grave.
From Souh-Holland. Simon Episcopius, Professor at Leyden. Ioannes Arnoldus
Coruinus, Preacher at Leyden. Bernardus Dwinglo, Preacher at Leyden. Edwardus
Poppius, preacher at Ter-Goude, Theophilus Rickweert, preacher at the Briell.
From North-Holland. Philippus Pynakerus, preacher at Alckmar. Dominicus Sapma,
preacher at Horn.
From Ouerysell. Thomas Goswinus, preacher at Campen. Assuerus Matthisius,
preacher at Campen.
From Vtrecht. Carolus Nielius, preacher in the French Church.
The President of the Synod. Ioannes Bogermannus, preacher of Leeuwarden.
The Assessores or Assistants. Iacobus Rolandus, and Hermannus Faukelius.
The Notaries, or Secretaries. Sebastianus Dammannus, and Festus Hommius.


FINIS.

