IGNATIUS HIS CONCLAUE: OR The Enthronization OF Loyola in Hell:

IMPRINTED At LONDON in.1611.

Jgnatius his Conclaue: OR His Inthronisation in a late Election in Hell:
Wherein many things are mingled by way of Satyr; Concerning The Disposition of
lesuits, The Creation of a new Hell, The establishing of a Church in the Moon.


There is also added an Apology for Jesuits.

All dedicated to the two Adversary Angels, which are Protectors of the Papal
Consistory, and of the College of Sorbon.

Translated out of Latin, LONDON, Printed by N.O. for Richard More, and are to
be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones Churchyard. 1611.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
DOest-thou seek after the Author? It is in vain; for he is harder to be
found then the parents of Popes were in the old times: yet if thou have an itch
of gessing, receive from me so much, as a friend of his, to whom he sent his
book to be read, writ to me. The Author was unwilling to have this book
published, thinking it unfit both for the matter, which in it self is weighty
and serious, and for that gravity which himself had proposed and obser ued in
an other book formerly published, to descend to this kind of writing. But I
on the other side, mustred my forces against him, and produced reasons and
examples. I proposed to him the great Erasmus (whom though In Con^ fol. 160.
Seribanius the Jesuit call him one of our Preachers.) yet their great Coccius
is well content to number him amongst his Authors. And to his bitter iestings
and skirmishings in this kind, our enemies confess, that our Church is as
much beholden, as to Luther himself, who fought so valiantly in the maine
battle. I remembered him also how familiar a fashion this was amongst the
Papists themselves; and how much Rebullus that Runaway, had done in this
kind, as well in those books, which he calls Salmonees, as in his other, which
he entitles, The Cabal of the Reformed Churches, of which book, if he were not
the Author, he was certainly the Apologist, and defender. Neither was that
man, whosoever he be, which calls himself Macer, inferior to Reboul in this
kind, when he dedicated to Laughter, and to Pleasure, his disputation of that
horrible Excommunication of Paulus 5. against the Venetians, and of other
matters concerning the salvation of souls. Both which, not contenting
themselves, as this Author does, to sport and obey their natural disposition
in a business (if you consider the persons) light enough (for what can be
vainer then a Jesuit?) have saucily risen up against Princes, and the Lords
Anointed I added moreover, that the things delivered in this book, were by
many degrees more modest, then those which themselves, in their own civil
wars, do daily vomit forth, when they butcher and mangle the fame and
reputation of their Popes and Cardinals by their revived Lucian, Pasquil. At
last he yielded, and made me owner of his book, which I send to you to be
delivered over to foreign nations, Proculum and
far from the father: and (as his desire is) posthum^
his last in this kind. He chooses and desires, that his other book should
testify his ingenuity, and candor, and his disposition to labor for the
reconciling of all parts. This Book must teach what humane infirmity is, and
how hard a matter it is for a man much conversant in the books and Acts of
Jesuits, so thoroughly to cast off the Jesuits, as that he contract nothing of
their natural drosles, which are Petulaucy, and Lightness. Vale.

TO THE TWO Tutelar Angels, protectors of the Popes Consistory, and of the
College of Sorbon.
MOST noble couple of Angels, least it hold be said that you did never agree,
and never meet, but that you did ever abhor one another, and ever Resemble
Ianus with a diuerseface,
I attempted to bring and join you together once in these papers; not that I
might compose your differences, for you have not chosen me for Arbitrator; but,
that you might beware of an enemy c^omon to you both, I will relate what I saw.
I was in an Extrasie, and My little wandering sportful Soul,
Ghest, and Companion of my body
had liberty to wander through all places, and to survey and reckon all the
rooms, and all the volumes of the heavens, and to comprehend the situation,
the dimensions, the nature, the people, and the policy, both of the swimming
Islands, the Planets, and of all those which are fixed in the firmament. Of
which, I think it an honester part as yet to be silent, then to do Galilaeo
wrong by speaking Nuncius syd^eus.
of it, who of late has summoned the other worlds, the Stars to come nearer to
him, and give him an account of themselves. Or to Keppler, who (as De stella in
Cygno.
himself testifies of himself) ever since Tycho Brachcs death, has received
it into his care, that no new thing should be done in heaven without his
knowledge. For by the law, Prevention must take place; and therefore what they
have found and discoured first, I am content they speak and utter first. Yet
this they may vouchsafe to take from me, that they shall hardly find Enoch, or
Elias any where in their circuit. When I had surueid all the Heavens, then as
The Lark by busy and laborious ways,
Having climbed up the eternal hill, does raise
His Hymns to Phoebus Harp, And striking then
His sails, his wings, does fall down backeagen
So suddenly, that one may saesely say
A stone came lazily, that came that way,
In the twinkling of an eye, I saw all the rooms in Hell open to my sight.
And by the benefit of certain spectacles, I know not of what making, but, I
think, of the same, by which Gregory the great, and Bed^ did discern so
distinctly the souls of their friends, when they were discharged from their
bodies, and sometimes the souls of such men as they knew not by sight, and of
some that were never in the world, and yet they could distinguish them flying
into Heaven, or conu^sing with living men, I saw all the channels in the bowels
of the Harth; and all the inhabitants of all nations, and of all ages were
suddenly made familiar to me. I think truly, Robert (...) de (...) (...). 6.
Aquinas when he took Christ's long Oration, as he hung upon the Cross, did
use some such instrument as this, but applied to the care: And so I think did
Iosethina di Gi^ron. Gratian.
he, which dedicated to Adrian 6, that Sermon which Christ made in praise of
his father Joseph: for else how did they hear that, which none but they ever
heard? As for the Suburbs of Hell (I mean both Limbo and Purgatory) I must
confess I passed them over so negligently, that I saw them not: and I was
hungerly carried, to find new places, never discovered before. For Purgatory did
not seem worthy to me of much diligence, because it may seem already to have
been belecued by some persons, in some corners of the Roman Church, for about
50 years; that is, ever since the Council of Trent had a mind to fulfill the
prophecies of Homer, Virgil, and the other Patriarchs of the Papists; and
being not satisfied with making one Transubstantiation, purposed to bring in
another: which is, to change fables into Articles of faith. Proceeding
therefore to more inward places, I saw a secret place, where there were not
many, beside Lucifer himself; to which, only they had title, which had so
attempted any innovation in this life, that they gave an affront to all
antiquity, and induced doubts, and anxieties, and scruples, and after, a
liberty of believing what they would; at length established opinions, directly
contrary to all established before. Of which place in Hell, Lucifer affoarded
us heretofore Theod. (...) (...), Tra. 6. (...)
some little knowledge, when more then 200 years since, in an Epistle written
to the Cardinal S. Sexti, he promised him a room in his palace, in the
remotest part of his eternal Chaos, which I take to be this place. And here
Pope Boniface 3, and Mahomet, seemed to contend about the highest room. He
gloried of having expelled an old Religion, and Mahomet of having brought in a
new: each of them a great deluge to the world. But it is to be feared, that
Mahomet will fail therein, both because he attributed something to the old
Testament, and because he used Sergius as his fellow-bishop, in making the
Alcoran; whereas it was cuident to the supreme judge Lu^fer, (for how could he
be ignorant of that, which himself had put into the Popes mind?) that Boniface
had not only neglected, but destroyed the policy of the State of Israel,
established in the old Testament, when he prepared Popes a way, to tread upon
the necks of Princes, but that he also abstained from all Example and
Coadiutor, when he took upon him that new Name, which Gregory himself (a
Pope neither very foolish, nor ouermodest) ever abhord. Besides that, every day
affords new Advocates to Boniface his side. For since the Francis^ were almost
worn out (of whom Sedulius Apolog.pro libro consorm. lib 2. cap. 2.
their General, Francis, had seen 6000 soldiers in one army, that is, in one
chapter) which, because they were then but fresh soldiers, he saw assisted
with 18000 Devils, the Jesuits have much recompensed those decays and damages,
who sometimes have maintained in Harlay (...) des Jesuits.
their Tents 200000 scholars. For though the Order of Benedict have ever been
so fruitful, that they say of it, That all the Volladerius de Canoniza.
Francis. To. (...) (...).
new Orders, which in later times have broken out, are but little springs, or
drops, and that Order the Ocean, which has sent out 52 Popes, 200 Cardinals,
1600 Archbishops, 4000 Bishops, and 50000 Saints approved by the Church, and
therefore it cannot be denied, but that Beniface his part is much relieved by
that Order; yet if they be compared to the Jesuits, or to the weak and
imperfect Types of them, the Franciscans, it is no great matter that they have
done. Though therefore they esteem Mahomet worthy of the name of an Innouator,
and therein, perchance not much inferior to Boniface, yet since his time, to
ours, almost all which have followed his sect, have lived barren in an
unanimity, and idle concord, and cannot boast that they have produced any new
matter: whereas Boniface his successors, awakened by him, have ever been
fruitful in bringing forth new sins, and new pardons, and idolatries, and
Kingkillings. Though therefore it may religiously, and piously be believed,
that Turks, as well as Papists, come daily in troops to the ordinary and
common places of Hell; yet certainly to this more honorable room, reserved
for especial Innouators, the Papists have more frequent access; and therefore
Mahomet is out of hope to prevail, and must imitate the Christian Emperors,
and be content to sit (as yet he does) at the Popes feet. Now to this place,
not only such endeavor to come, as have innouated in matters, directly
concerning the soul, but they also which have done so, either in the Arts, or
in conversation, or in any thing which exercises the faculties of the soul,
and may so provoke to quarrrelsome and brawling controversies: For so the truth
be lost, it is no matter how. But the gates are seldom opened, nor scarce
oftener then once in an Age. But my destiny favored mce so much, that I was
present then, and saw all the pretenders, and all that affected an entrance,
and Lucifer himself, who then came out into the outward chamber, to hear them
plead their own Causes. As soon as the door creekt, I spied a certain
Mathematician, which till then had been busied to find, to deride, to detrude
Ptolomey; and now with an erect countenance, and settled pace, came to the
gates, and with hands and feet (scarce respecting Lucifer himself) beat the
doors, and cried; Are these shut against me, to whom all the Heavens were ever
open, who was a Soul to the Earth, and gave it motion?

By this I knew it was Copernicus: For though I had never heard ill of his
life, and therefore might wonder to find him there; yet when I remembered, that
the Papists have extended the name, and the punishment of Heresy, almost to
every thing, and that as yet I used Gregortes Bellar. de purgat. (...). cap. 8.
and Bedes spectacles, by which one saw Origin, who deserved so well of the
Christian Church, burning in Hell, I doubted no longer, but assured my self
that it was Copernicus which I saw. To whom Lucifer said; Who are you? For
though even by this boldness you seem worthy to enter, and have attempted a
new faction even in Hell, yet you must first satisfy those which stand about
you, and which expect the same fortune as you do. Except, O Lucifer, answered
Copernicus, I thought thee of the race of the star Lucifer, with which I am
so well acquainted, I should not vouchsafe thee this discourse. I am he, which
pitying thee who were thrust into the Center of the world, raised both thee,
and thy prison, the Earth, up into the Heavens; so as by my means God does not
enjoy his revenge upon thee. The Sun, which was an officious spy, and a
betrayer of faults, and so thine enemy, I have appointed to go into the lowest
part of the world. Shall these gates be open to such as have innouated in small
matters? and shall they be shut against me, who have turned the whole frame of
the world, and am thereby almost a new Creator? More then this he spoke not.
Lucifer stuck (...) meditation. For what should he do? It seemed unjust to deny
entry to him which had deserved so well, and dangerous to grant it, to one of
so great ambitions, and undertakings: nor did he think that himself had
attempted greater matters before his fall. Something he had which he might have
conveniently opposed, but he was loath to utter it, least he should confess
his fear. But Ignatius Layola which was got near his chair, a subtle
fellow, and so endued with the Devil, that he was able to tempt, and not only
that, but (as they say) even to possess the Devil, apprehended this
perplexity in Lucifer. And making himself sure of his own entrance, and
knowing well, that many thous^nds of his family aspired to that place, he
opposed himself against all others. He was content they should be damned, but
not that they should govern. And though when he died he was utterly ignorant
in all great learning, and knew not so much as Ptolomeys, or Copernicus name,
but might have been persuaded, that the words Almagest, Zenith, and Nadir,
were Saints names, and fit to be put into the Litanie, and Orapro nobis joined
to them; yet after he had spent some time in hell, he had learnt somewhat of
his Jesuits, which daily came thither. And whilst he stayed at the threshold
of Hell; that is, from the time when he delivered himself over to the Popes
will, he took a little taste of learning. Thus furnished, thus he undertakes
Copernious. DO, you think to win our Lucifer to your part, by allowing him
the honor of being of the race of that star? who was not only made before
all the stars, but being glutted with the glory of shining there, transferred
his dwelling and Colonies (...) this Monarchy, and thereby (...) our Order a
noble example, to spy, to invade, and to (...) foreign kingdom^ Can our
Lucifer, or his (...) have any honor (...) that starr^ Lucifer, which is but
Venus? whose face how much we scorn, appears by this, that, for the m^st
part we use her auersly and preposterously. Rather letour Lucifer glory in
Lucifer the Calaritan Bishop; not therefore because he is placed amongst
Heretics, only for affirming ^
the propagation of the soul; but especially for this, that he was the first
that opposed the dignity of Princes, and imprinted the names of Antichrist,
ludas, and other stigmatique marks upon the Emperor; But for you, what new
thing hane you invented, by which our Lucifer gets any thing? What cares he
whether the earth traueil, or stand still? Has your raising up of the earth
into heaven, brought men to that confidence, that they build new towers or
threaten God again? Or do they out of thismotion of the earth conclude, that
there is no hell, or deny the punishment of sin? Do not men believe? do they
not live just, as they did before? Besides, this detracts from the dignity of
your learning, and derogates from your right and title of coming to this
place, that those opinions of yours may very well be true. If therefore any man
have honor or title to this place in this matter, it belongs wholly to our
Clauius, who opposed himself opportunely against you, and the truth, which at
that time was creeping into every man's mind. He only can be called the
Author of all contentions, and schoole-combats in this cause; and no greater
profit can be hoped for herein, but that for such brabbles, more necessary
matters be neglected. And yet not only for this is our Clauius to be
honored, but for the great pains also which he took in the Gregorian
Calender, by which both the peace of the Church, and Civil businesses have
been egregiously troubled: nor has heaven it self escaped his violence, but
has ever since obeyed his apointments: Harlay defense des lesuites mesdi. 6.
so that S. Stephen, John Baptist, and all the rest, which have bin commanded
to work miracles at certain appointed days, where their Relics are
preserved, do not now attend till the day come, as they were accustomed, but
are awaked ten days sooner, and constrained by him to come down from heaven
to do that business; But your inuentio^s can scarce be called yours, since
long before you, Heraclides, Ecphantus, and Aristarchus thrust them into the
world: who notwithstanding content themselves with lower rooms amongst the
other Philosophers, and aspire not to this place, reserved only for
Antichristian Heroes: neither do you agree so well amongst yourselues, as that
you can be said to have made a Sect, since, as you have perverted and changed
the order and Scheme of others: so Tycho Brachy has done by yours, and others
by his. Let therefore this little Mathematitian (dread Emperor) withdraw
himself to his own company. And if hereafter the fathers of our Order can
draw a Cathedral Decree from the Pope, by which it may be defined as a matter
of faith: That the earth does not move; and an Antahema inflicted upon all
which hold the contrary: the^ perchance both the Pope which shall decree that,
and Copernicus his followers, (if they be Papists) may have the dignity of this
place. Lucifer signified his assent; and Copernicus, without muttering a word,
was as quiet, as he thinks the sun, when he which stood next him, entered into
his place. To whom Lucifer said: And who are you? He answered, Philippus
Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus Bombast of Hohenheim. At this Lucifer
tre^bled, as if it were a new Exorcisme, and he thought it might well be the
first verse of Saint John, which is alwaics employed in Exorcismes, and might
now be taken out of the Welsh, or Irish Bibles. But when he understood that
it was but the web of his name, he recollected himself, and raising
himself vprig (...), asked what he had to say to the great Emperor Satan,
Lucifer, Beelzebub, Leuiathan, Abaddon. Paracelsus replied, It were an injury
to thee, o glorious Emperor, if I should deliver before thee, what I have
done, as though al those things had not proceeded from thee, which seemed to
have bin done by me, thy organe and conduit: yet since I shall rather be thy
trumpet herein,' then mine own, some things may be uttered by me. Besides
therefore that I brought all Methodicall Physicians, and the art it self into so
much contempt, that that kind of physic is almost lost; This also was ever my
pri^cipal purpose, that no certain new Art, nor fixed rules might be
established, but that al remedies might be dangerously drawn from my
uncertain, ragged, and imperfect experiments, in trial whereof, how many men
have been made carkases? And falling upon those times which did abound with
paradoxicall, and unusual diseases, of all which, the pox, which then began to
rage, was almost the center and sink; I ever professed an assured and an easy
cure thereof, least I should deter any from their licentiousness. And
whereas almost all poisons are so disposed and conditioned by nature, that they
offend some of the senses, and so are easily discerned and avoided, I brought
it to pass, that that treacherous quality of theirs might be removed, and so
they might safely be given without suspicion, and yet perform their office as
strongly. All this I must confess, I wrought by thy minerals and by thy fires,
but yet I cannot despair of my reward, because I was thy first Minister and
instrument, in these innouatio^s. By this time Ignatius had observed a tempest
risen in Lucifers countenance: for he was just of the same temper as Lucifer,
and therefore suffered with him in every thing, and felt al his alterations.
That therefore he might deliver him from ` Paracelsus, he said; You must not
think sir, that you may here draw out an oration to the proportion of your
name; It must be confessed, that you attempted great matters, and well
becoming a great officer of Lucifer, when you undertook not only to make a
man, in your Alimbicks, but also to preserve him immortal. And it cannot be
doubted, but that out of your Commentaries upon the Scriptures, in which you
were utterly ignorant, many men have taken occasion of erring, and thereby this
kingdom much indebted to you. But must you therefore have access to this
secret place? what have you compassed, even in Physic it self, of which we
lesuits are ignorant? For though our Ribadenegra have reckoned none of our
Order, which has written in Physic, yet (...) able and sufficient we are in
that faculty, I will be Bulla 18. in Greeze. cont. Ha. (...).
tried by that Pope, who has given a privilege to Jesuits to practice
Physic, and to be present at Deathbeds, (...) de may. Eccle. (...). cap.
7.
which is denied to other Orders: for why should he deny us their bodies,
whose souls he delivers to us? and since he has transferd upon us the power
to practice Physic, he may instly be thought to have transferd upon us the Art
it self, by the same omnipotent Bull; since he which graunts the end, is by
our Rules of law presumed to have granted all means necessary to that end.
Let me (dread Emperor,) have leave to speak truth before thee; These men
abuse and profane too much thy metals, which are the bowels, and treasure of
thy kingdom: For what does Physic profit thee? Physic (...). Theor. 1.
cap. (...).
is a sost, and womanish thing. For since no medicine does naturally draw
blood, that science is not fit nor worthy of our study, Besides why should
those things, which belong to you, be employed to preserve from deiseases, or
to procure long life? were it not fitter, that your brother, and colleague, the
Bishop of Rome, which gouernes upon the face of your earth, and gives daily
increase to your kingdom, should receive from these helps and subsidies? To
him belonges all the Gold, to him all the precious stones, concealed in your
entrails, whereby he might bait and ensnare the Prince; of the earth through
their Lord, and counselors means to his obedience, and to receive his
commandments, especially in these times, when almost every where his ancient
rights and tributes are denied unto him. To him belongs your Iron, and the
ignobler metals, to make engines; To him belong your Minerals apt for poison;
To him, the Saltpeter, and all the Elements of Gunpowder, by which he may
demolish and overthrow Kings and Kingdoms, and Courts, and seats of Justice.
Neither does Paracelsus truly deserve the name of an Innouator, whose doctrine,
Seuerinus and his other followers do refer to the most ancient times. Think
therefore your self well satisfied, if you be admitted to govern in chief
that Legion of homicide-Phisitians, and of Princes which shall be made away by
poison in the midst of their sins, and of women tempting by paintings and
face-phisicke. Of all which sorts great numbers will daily come hither out of
your Academy.

Content with this sentence, Paracelsus departed; and Machiauel succeeded, who
having observed Ignatius his forwardness, and sauciness, and how, vncal'd, he
had thrust himself into the office of kings Attorney, thought this stupid
patience of Copernicus, and Paracelsus (men which tasted too much of their
Germany) unfit for a Florentine: and therefore had provided some venomous
darts, out of his Italian Arsenal, to cast against this worn soldier of
Pampel^, this French-spanish mungrell, Ignatius. But when he thought better
upon it, and observed that Lucifer ever approved whatsoever Ignatius said, he
suddenly changed his purpose; and putting on another resolution, he determined
to direct his speech to Ignatius, as to the principal person next to Lucifer,
as well by this means to sweeten and mollify him, as to make Lucifer suspect,
that by these honors, and specious titles offered to Ignatius, and entertained
by him, his own dignity might be eclipsed, or clouded; and that Ignatius by
winning to his side, politic men, exercised in civil businesses, might
attempt some innovation in that kingdom. Thus therefore he began to speak.
Dtead Emperor, and you, his watchful and diligent Genius, father Ignatius,
Arch-chancellor of this Court, and highest Priest of this highest Synagogue
(except the primacy of the Roman Church reach also unto this place) let me
before I descend to my self, a little consider, speak, and admire your
stupendous wisdom, and the government of this state. You may vouchsafe to
remember (great Emperor) how long after the Nazarens death, you were forced to
live a solitary, a barren, and an Eremiticall life: till at last (as it was
ever your fashion to imitate heaven) out of your abundant love, you begot this
dearly beloved son of yours, Ignatius, which stands at your right hand. And
from both of you proceeds a spirit, whom you have sent into the world, who
triumphing both with Mitre and Crown, gouernes your Militant Church there. As
for those sons of Ignatius, who^ either he left alive, or were borne after
his death, and your spirit, the Bishop of Rome; how justly and properly may
they be called Equi^ocal men? And not only Equivocal in that sense, in which
the Popes Legates, at your Nicene Counsel were called Equiuocal, because they
did agree in all their opinions, and in all their words: but especially because
they have brought into the world a new art of Equivocation. O wonderful, and
incredible Hypercritiques, who, not out of marble fragments, but out of the
secretest Records of Hell it self: that is, out of the minds of Lucifer, the
`Pope, and Ignatius, (persons truly equivocal) have raised to life again the
language of the Tower of Babel, (...) long concealed, and brought us again
from understanding one an other. For my part ((...) noble pair of Emperors)
that I may freely confess the truth all which I have done, where soever there
shall be mention made of the Jesuits, can be reputed but childish; (...) this
honor I hope will not (...) denied me, that I brought (...) an Alphabet, and
provided certain Elements, and was some kind of school master in preparing
them a way to highe^ (...); yet it grieu^ me, and makes me ashamed that I
should be ranked wit^ this idle and Chymaeri^ Copernicus, or this cadauero
vulture, Paracelsus. I scor^ that those gates, into which such men could
conceive any hope of entrance, should not voluntarily fly open to me: yet I
can better endure the rashness and fellowship of Paracelsus, then the other:
because he having been conveniently practiced in the butcheries, and mangling
of men, he had the reason to hope for favor of the Jesuits: For I my self
went always that way of blood, and therefore I did ever prefer the
sacrifices of the Gentiles, and of the Jews, which were performed with
effusion of blood (whereby not only the people, but the Priests also were
animated to bold enterprises) befote the soft and wanto sacrifices of
Christians. If I might have had my choice, I should rather have wished, that
the Roman Church had taken the Bread, then the Wine, from the people, since in
the wine there is some color, to imagine and represent blood. Neither did you,
(most Reverend Bishop of this Dioces, Ignatius) abhor from this way of blood.
For having consecrated your first age to the wars, and grown somewhat unable
to follow that course, by reason of a wound; you did presently begin to think
seriously of a spiritual war, against the Church, and found means to open
ways, ever into Kings chambers, for your executioners. Which dignity, you did
not reserve only to your own Order, but (though I must confess, that the
foundation, and the nourishment of this Doctrine remains with you, and is
peculiar to you, out of your infinite liberality,) you have vouchsafed
sometime, to use the hands of other men in these imploiments. And therefore as
well they, who have so often in (...) (...) it in England, as they which have
brought their great purposes to effect in France, are indebted only to you for
their courage and resolution. But yet although the entrance into this place may
be decreed to none, but to Innouators, and to only such of them as have dealt
in Christian business; and of the^ also, to those only which have had the
fortune to do much harm, I cannot see but that next to the Jesuits, I must
be invited to enter, since I did not only teach those ways, by which,
thorough perfidiousnesse and dissembling of Religion, a (...) might possess,
and vsurp^ upon the liberty of free Commonwealths; but also (...) arm and
furnish the people with my ^ when they were under (...) oppression, they might
(...) est conspire, and (...) tyrant, or revenge them (...) of their Prince,
and redeem their former losses; so tha^ from both sides, both from Prince and
People, I brough^ an abundant har^est, and noble increase to this kingdom. By
this time I (...) (...) Lucifer to be much moved with this Oration, and to
incline much toward Machiauel. For he did acknowledge him to be a kind of
Patriarch, of those whom they call Laymen. And he had long observed, that the
Clergy of Rome (...) down to Hell daily, easily, voluntarily, and by troops,
because they were accustomed to sin against their consci^ence, and knowledge;
but that the Layitte sinning out of a (...) (...), and negligence of (...) the
truth, did rather offend by ignorance, and (...). And therefore he thought
himself bound to reward Machiauel, which had awakened (...) drowsy and
implicit Lay^ to greater, and more bloody ^ndertakings. Besides this, (...)
Ignatius could not be ^enied the place, whose ambitions and turbulencies
Lucifer understood very well, he thought Machiauel a fit and necessary
instrument to oppose against him; that so the skales being kept even by their
factions, he might govern in peace, and two poisons mingled might do no
harm. But he could not hide this intention from Ignatius, more subtle then
the De^ill, and the verier Lucifer of the two: Therefore Ignatius rushed out,
threw himself down at Lucifers feet, and groueling on the ground adored him.
Yet certainly, Vasques would not (...) this idolatry, because in the shape of
the (...) he worshipped him, whom he accounted the true God. Here Ignatius
cried and thundered out, With so great noise an horror,
That had that powder taken fire, by which
All the (...) of Britain had flowne to the Moon,
It had not equalled this noise and horror.
And when he was able to speak distinctly, thus he spoke. It cannot be said
(unspeakable Emperor) how much this obscure Florentine has transgressed
against thee, and against the Popo thy image-bearer, ^
(whether the word be accepted, as Gratian takes it, when he calls the
Scriptures, 21. q. omni^ (...).
Imaginary Books; or as they take it, which give that style to them who
carry Modest in verb. (...).
the Emperors image in the field;) and last of all against our Order. Durst
any man before him, think upon this kind of injury, and calumny, as to hope
that he should be able to flatter, to catch, to entrap (...) himself?
Certainly, whosoever flatters any man, and presents him those praises, which
in his own opinion are not due to him, thinks him inferior to himself and
makes account, that he has taken him prisoner, and triumphs over him. Who ever
flatters, either he derides, or (at the best) instructs. For there may be,
even in flattery, an honest kind of teaching, if Princes, by being told that
they are already induced with all virtues necessary for their functions, (...)
thereby taught what thos^ virtues are, and by a facile exhortation, excited to
endeauo to gain them. But was it (...) that this fellow, should dar^ eitherto
deride you, or (which is the greater injury) to teach you? Can it be believed,
that he delivers your praises from his heart, and does not rather 32, (...),
(...), Pudor.
herein follow Gratians leuity; who says, That you are called Prince of the
world, as a king at Chests, or as the Cardinal of Rauenna, only by derision?
This man, whilst he lived, attributed so much to his own wit, that he never
thought himself beholden to your helps, and insinuations; and was so far
from inuoking you, or sacrificing to you, that he did not so much as
acknowledge your kingdom, nor believe that there was any such thing in nature,
as you. I must confess, that he had the same opinion of God also, and
therefore deserves a place here, and a better then any of the Pagan or gen^le
idolaters: for, in every idolatry, and false worship, there is some Religion,
and some perverse simplicity, which tastes of humility; from all which, this
man was very free, when in his heart he utterly denied that there was any God.
Yet since he thought so in earnest, and believed that those things which he
affirmed were true, he must not be rancked with them, which having been
sufficiently instructed of the true God, and beloueing him to be so, do yet
fight against him in his enemies army. Neither ought it to be imputed to us as
a fault, that sometimes in our exorcismes we speak ill of you, and call you
Heretic, and Drunkard, Flagel. Damon. (...).
and Whisperer, and scabbed Beast, and Conjure the elements that they should
not receive you, and threaten you with Indissoluble Damnation, and torments a
thousand thousand times worse then you suffer yet. For these things you know,
are done out of a secret covenant and contract between us, and out of
Mysteries, which must not be opened to this Neophite, who in our Synagogue is
yet but amongst the Cathecumeni. Which also we acknowledge of Holy Water, and
our Agnas Dei, of which you do so wisely dissemble a fear, when they are
presented to you: For certainly, if there were any true force in them, to
deliver Bodies from Diseases, souls from sins, and the Elements from
Spirits, and malignant impressions, (as in the verses which Urban the fist sent
with his Summa Bullarij, verbo Agnus Dei.
Agnus Dei to the Emperor it is pretended.) It had been reason, that they
should first have exercised their force upon those verses, and so have purged
and delivered them, if not from Heresy, yet from Barbarousnesse, and
solecismes; that Heretics might not justly say, there was no truth in any of
them, but only the last; which is, That the least piece which thence does fall,
Will do one as much good as all.
And though our Order have adventured further in (...) then the rest, yet that
must be attributed to a special privilege, by which we have leave to
question any possessed person, of what matters we will; whereas all other Orders
are miserably bound to the present matter, and the business then in hand. For,
though I do not believe, that either from your self, or (...) your (...) the
Pope, any such privilege is issued; yet our Cotton deserves to be praised, who
being questioned, how he durst propose certain seditious Interrogatories to a
possessed person, to deliver himself, (...) such a privilege; and with an
vn-heardof boldness, and a new kind of falsifying, did (in a manner)
counterfeit Lucifers hand and seal, since none but he only could give this
privilege: But, if you consider us out of this liberty in Exorcismes, how
humble and servile we are toward you, the Relations of Peru testisie enough,
where it is recorded, that when one of your angels at midnight appeared to our
Litera di Diego Torres.
Bareena alone in his chamber, he presently rose out of his chair, and gave
him the place, whom he professed to be far worthier thereof, then he was.
But to proceed now to the injuries, which this fellow has done to the Bishop
of Rome, although very much might be spoken, yet by this alone, his disposition
may be sufficiently discerned, that he imputes to the Pope, vulgar and
popular sins, far unworthy of his greatness. Weak praising, is a kind of
Accusing, and we detract from a man's honor, if when we praise him for small
things, and would (...) to have said all, we conceal greater. Percha^ce this
man had seen some of the Catalogues of Refer^ Cases, which every year the
Popes increase, and he might think, that the Popes did therefore reserve these
sins to themselves, that they only might commit them. But either he is
ignorant, or injurious to them. For, can they be thought to have taken away
the liberty of sinning from the people, who do not only suffer men to keep
Did. 32. (...) (...).
Concubines, but sometimes do command them? who make S. Peter beholden to the
stews, for part of his revenue: and who excuse women from the infamous name of
whore, till they have delivered themselves Ibid.(...).
over to 23000 men. The Professors of which Religion Scappus de ture non
script. l. 1. cap. 54.
teach, that University men, which keep whores in their chambers, may not be
expeld for that, because it ought to be presumed before hand, that scholars
will not li^e without them. Shall he be thought to have a purpose of deterring
others from sin, which prouides so well for their security, that he teaches,
(...) Angel.verb. Papa. N 1.
that he may dispense in all the commandments of the second Table, and in all
moral law, and that those commandments of the second table can neither be
called Principles, nor Conclusions, necessarily deduced from Principles? And
therefore, (as they ever love that manner of teaching) he did illustrate his
Rule with an Example, and dispensed in a marriage between Brother and Sister,
and has hoorded up so many Indulge^cies in one barn, the city of Rome, that
it is easy for any man in an hour, or two, to draw out Pardons enough for
100000 years. How clear a witness of this liberality is Leo 10? who only for
rehearsing once the Lords prayer, and thrice repeating the name of Icsu (be it
spoken here without horror) has given 3000 years indulg^. How profuse a
Steward or Auditor was Boniface, who acknowledges so many Indulgences to be in
that one Church of Lateran, that none but God can number them? Besides these,
plenary Indulgences are given, not only to the Franciscans themselves, but to
their Parents also: and to any which dies in their habit; and to any which
desire that they may do so; and to those who are wrapped in it after death,
though they did not desire it; and five years Indulgence to those who do but
kiss it. And at last, Clement 7. by a privilege first given to one Order,
(which since is communicated to our Order, as the privilege of all other
Orders are) gave to any who should but visit a place belonging to them, or any
other place, if he could not come thither: or if he could come to no such
place, yet if he had but a desire to it, All indulgences which had been
granted, or hereafter should be granted in the universal world. And though
it be true, that if in any of these Indulgences a certain sum of money were
limited to be given (as for the most part it is;) a poor man, which could not
give that money, though he were never so contrite for his sins, could have no
benefit thereby: and though Gerson durst call those Indulgences foolish, and
superstitious, which gave 20000. years pardon for rehearsing one prayer, yet
they do abundantly testify the Popes liberal disposition, and that he is not
so covetous in reserving sins to himself; But if perchance once in an
hundred years, some one of the (...) of the people be put to death for Sodomy;
and that, not so much for the offense, as for usurping the right of the
Ecclesiastique Princes, we must not much lament nor grudge at that, since it
is only done to discontinue, and interrupt a praescription, to gain which
Title, the Layety has ever been very forward against the Clergy: for even in
this kind of his delicacies, the Pope is not so reserved and covetous, but
that he allows a taste thereof to his Cardinals, whom you once called
Carpidineros, (by an elegancy Moneytakers.
proper only to your Secritaries, the Monks) in an Epistle which you writ to
one of Theol. Niem. Nemus vnio Tract. 6. c. 29.
that College: For since, the Cardinals are so compacted into the Pope and so
made his own body: That it is Rodol. Cupers de Eccles.vniuer. fol. 4.
not lawful for them, without license first obtained from him, to be let blood
in a Fever, what may be denied unto them? Or what kind of sin is likely to be
left out of their glorious privileges, which are at least 200? Which Order the
Pope can Azor. par. 2. l. 4. c. 1. Mos^onius de may. Eccles. Milit. c. 5.
Ibidem Idem. c. 6.
no more remove out of the Ecclesiastique Hierarchy, then he can Bishops; both
because Cardinals were instituted by God, and because the Apostles themselves
were Cardinals before they were Bishops. Whom also in their creation he styles
his brothers, (...) de ^ (...). l. 1. c. 25.
and Princes of the world, and Co-iudges of the whole earth: and to (...) all:
That there are so many Kings as there are Cardinals. O fearful body; and as
in many other things, so in this especialy monstrous, that they are not able to
propagate their species: For all Azar vbi (...).
the Cardinals in a vacacy are not able to make one Cardinal more. To these men
certainly the Pope does no more grudge the plurality of sins, then he does of
Bonafices. And he has been content, that even Borgia shoud enjoy this
dignity, if he has heaped up, by his ingenious wickedness, more sorts of
sins in one Act, then (as far as I know) as any the Popes the^ selves have
attempted: For he did not only give the full reine to his licentiousness, but
raging with a second ambition, he would also change the Sex. Therein also his
stomach was not toward young beardlesse boys, nor such green fruit: for
he did not think, that he went far enough from the right Sex, except he
had a manly, a reverend, and a bearded Venus. Neither stayed he there; but his
witty lust proceeded further: yet he solicited not the Minions of the Popes;
but striving to equal the licentiousness of Sodomits, which would have had
the Angels; to come as near them as he could, he took a Cleargy-man, one of
the portion and lot of the Lord: and so made the maker of God, a Priest subject
to his lust; nor did he seek him out in a Cloister, or Quire; but that his
Venus might be the more monstrous, he would have her in a Mitre. And yet his
prodigious lust was not at the height; as much as he could he added: and
having found a (...), a Cleargy-man, a Bishop, he did not solicit him with
entreaties, and rewards, but ravished him by force. Since then the Popes do,
out of the fullness of their power, come to those kinds of sin, which have
neither Example nor Name, in so much that Pope Paulus Plat. in vit. Adri. 1.
Venetus, which used to paint himself, and desired to seem a woman, was
called the Goddess Cibele (which was not without mystery, since, prostitute
boys are sacred to that Goddess,) and since they do not grant ordinarily
that liberty of practicing sins, till they have used their own right and
privilege of Prevention and Anticipation, This prattling fellow Machiauel does
but treacherously, and dishonestly preuaricate, and betraie the cause, if he
think he has done enough for the dignity of the Popes, when he has
affoorded to them sins common to all the world. The transferring of Empires,
the ruin of Kingdoms, the Excommunications, and depositions of Kings, and
deuastations by fire and sword, should have been produced as their marks and
characters: for though the examples of the Popes tra^sferring the Empire, which
our men so much stand upon, be not indeed true, nor that the ancient Popes
practiced any such thing; yet since the statesmen of our Order, wiser the^ the
rest, have found how much this Temporal iurisdictio over Princes, co^duces to
the growth of the Church, they have persuaded the Popes, that this is not only
lawful for them, but often practiced heretofore: And therefore they provide,
that the Canons and Histories bec Apologia pro (...).
detorted to that opinion for though one of our Order do weaken that famous
Canon, Nos sanctorum, which was used still to be produced for this doctrine,
yet he did it then, when the King of Great (...) was to be mollisied and
sweetened toward us, and the laws to be mitigated, and when himself had put
on the name Eudamon. But let him return to his true state, and profess
himself a Cacod^mon, and he will be of our opinion. In which respect also we
may pardon our Cudsemi^ his rashness, when he denies the English nation De
despera^ (...). causa. c. 11.
to be heratiques, because they remain^ in a perpetual succession of Bishops:
For herein these men have thought it fit, to follow, in their practice, that
Translation, which reads the Romans 12. (...).
words of Paul: Serve the time, and not that which says: Serve the Lord. As
for the injury which this petty companion has offered to our Order, since in
our wrongs, both yours, and the Popes Majesty is wounded; since to us, as to
your Dictators, both you have given that large and ancient Commission: That
we should take care that the state take no harm, we cannot doubt of our
revenge: yet this above all the rest, does especially vex me, that when he
calls me P^elate, and Bishop, (names which we so much abhor and detest) I
know well, that out of his inward malignity, he has a relation to
Bellarmines, and Tolets sacrilegious Vowbreaking ambitio^s, by which they
embraced the Cardinalship, and other Church-dignities: but herein this poor
fellow, unacquainted with our affairs, is deceived, being ignorant, that these
men, by this act of being thus incorporated into the Pope are so much the
nearer to their Center and final happiness, this chamber of Lucifer, and that
by the breach of a vow, which the^ selves thought just, they have got a new
title thereunto: For the Cardinalship is our Martyrdom: and though not many of
our Order, have had that strength, that they have been such Martyrs, and that
the Popes themselves have been pleased to transfer this persecution into the
other Orders, who have had more Cardinals then we; yet without doubt, for such
of ours which have had so much courage, new Crowns, and new Garlands,
appropriate to our Martyrs, are prepared for them in this their Heaven;
because, being enabled by greater means, they are fitter for greater
mischiefs. We therefore lament the (...) Catalog. sol. 60 and 100.
weakness of our Laynez, and our B^rgia, who refused the Cardinalship offered
by Paulus 4. and Julius 3; (for in this place and this meeting it is unfit to
say they did so) even amongst the ancient Romans, when (...) de (...), (...).
they sacrificed to you those sacrifices, which offered any resistance, were
ever reputed vnaccepted: And therefore our Bellarmine deserves much praise, who
finding a new Genius and courage in his new Cardinalship, set out his
Retractations, and corrected all those places in his works, which might any
way be interpreted in the favor of Princes. But let us pass over all these
things: for we understand one (...) well enough; and let us more particularly
consider those things, which this man, who pretends to exceed all Ancient and
Modern Statesmen, boasts to have been done by him. Though truly no man will
easily believe, that he has gone sarr in any thing, which did so tire at the
beginning, or midway, that having seen the Pope, and known him, yet could
never come to the knowledge of the Devil. I know what his excuse and escape
will be: that things must not be extended insinitly; that we must consist and
arrest somewhere, and that more means and instruments ought not to be
admitted, where the matter may be dispatched by fewer. When therefore he was
sure that the Bishop of Rome was the cause of all mischief, and the first
mouer thereof, he chose rather to settle and determine in him, then by
acknowledging a Di^el to induce a new tyrany, and to be driven to confess,
that the Pope had usurped upon the devils right, which opinion, if any man be
pleased to maintain, we do not forbid him^ but yet it must be an argument to
us of no very nimble wit, if a man do so admire the Pope, that he leave out the
Devil, and so worship the Image, without relation to the Prototipe and first
pattern. But besides this, how idle, and how very nothings they are, which he
has shoueld together in his books, this makes it manifest, that some of every
Religion, and of every profession, have risen up against him, and no man
attempted to defend him: neither do I say this, because I think his doctrine
the worse for that, but it is therefore the less artificially c^rried, and the
less able to work those ends to which it is directed. For our parts we have
not proceeded so: For we have dished and dressed our precepts in these
affaired, with such cunning, that when our own men produce them to ensnare and
establish our puples, then we put upon them the majesty and reverence of the
Doctrine of the Church, and of the common opinion: But when our adversaries
allege the^, either to cast envy upon us, or to deter the weaker sort, then
they are content with a lower room, and vouchsafe to step aside into the rank
of private (...) (...). And the Canons themselves are with us sometimes
glorious, in their mitres and pontifical habits, and sound nothing but mere
Divine resolutions out of the Chair it self, and so have the sorce of
Oracles; sometimes we say they are ragged and lame, and do but whisper with a
doubtful and uncertain murmr, a hollow cloistral, or an eremitical voice,
and so have no more authority, then those poor men which writ them: sometimes
we say they were but rashly thrown into the peoples ears out of pulpits, in the
Homilies of fathers; sometimes that they were derived out of such Councels as
suffered abortion, and were del^uered of their children, which are their
Canons, before inanimation, which is the Popes assent, or out of such Councels,
as are now discontinued and dead, (howsoever they remained long time in use and
lively and in good state of health) and therefore cannot be thought sit to be
used now, or applied in civil businesses; sometimes we say the Popes voice is
in them all by his approbation; sometimes that only the voice of those
authors, from whom they are taken, speaks in them. And acordingly we deliver
diners and various ` Philosophy upon our Gratian, who compiled them; sometimes
we allow him the honor and dignity of Diamonds and the nobler sort of stones,
which have both their cleerenesse, and their firmness fromthis, that that
they are compacted of less parts, and atoms, then others are: and so is
Grat^ian; whom for the same cause, sometimes we account but a hill of many sands
cast together, and very (...) to (...) any foundation. I must confess, that
the fathers of our Order, out of a youthful siercenesse, which made them dare
and undertake any thing (for our order was scarce at years at that time) did
amiss in inducing the Council of Trent to establish certain. Rules and
Definitions, (...) which it might not be lawful to depart: for indeed there is
no remedy, but that sometimes we must depart from them: nor can it be
dissembled, that both the writers of our Order, and the Vide (...).
Dominicans have departed from them in that great war and Tragedy lately raised
at Rome, about Grace and Free Will. For it is not our purpose, that the writings
of our men should be so ratified, that they may not be changed, so that they
be of our Order which change them: so by the same liberty, which (...) Ioannes
Apolog. (...): (...) 3.
has taken in delivering the King of Britain from the danger of Deposition; (
because as yet no sentence is given against him) and also from many other
Canons, which others think may justly be discharged against him, it will be
as lawful for us, when that kingdom shall be enough stupefied with this our
Opin^, to restore those Canons to their former vigor, and to awake that state
out of her Lethergy, either with her own heat, intestine war, or by some
Medicine, drawn from other places: for Princes have all their securities from
our indulgence, and from the slack and gentle interpretation of the Canons:
they are but privileges, which since they are derived, and receive life from
us, they may be by us diminished, revoked, and anulled: for as it was lawful
for Mariana to depart from the doctrine of the (...) of Constance, so it was
lawful for Cotton to depart from (...) which, notwithstanding, we would have
only lawful for our Order, to who^ it is given to know times, and secrets of
state: for we see the Sorbonist^ themselves, (which may seem to have an
Aristocratical Papacy amongst themselves) though they labored to destroy the
doctrine of (...), did yet wisely forbear to name him, or any other Jesuit,
which was a modesty that I did not hope for Gretzer. Examen Speculi. fol. 139.
at their hands; since, before I I dyed, they made one Decree against (...) but
yet therein, I think some what may be attributed to my patience, and (...);
who knowing their strength, and our own infancy forbad all of my Order to make
any answer to that `Decree of theirs: neither were we so Herculean as to offer
to strangle Serpents in our cradle. But yet since after that time, they have
been often provoked by our men: (for I gave not so iron a Rule and Precepts to
my Disciples, as Francis did to his who would not have his Rule applied to
times and to new occasions) certainly they might have bin excused, if they had
been at this time sharper against us. And if the Parliament of Paris thought
it not fit to carry the matter so modestly in their Arrest against Mariana, but
made both the Book, and the Doctrine, and the Man, infamous: What should we
say more of it, but that it is a Giant, and a wild beast, which (...) fol. 25.
our men could never tame: for still it cries and howles, The Pope is bound to
proceed lawfully, and Canonically: and this they maliciously interpret of
their own laws, Idem. so. 32.
and of ancient Canons, which they hope to bring into use again, by an
insensible way of Arrest, and Sentences in that Court. This then is the point
of which we accuse Machiuell, that he carried not his Mine so safely, but that
the enemy perceived it still. But we, who have received the Church to be as a
ship, do freely sail in the deep sea; we have an anchor, but we have not cast
it yet, but keep it ever in our power, to cast it, and weigh it at our
pleasure. And we know well enough, that as to sailing ships, so to our
sailing Church, all rocks, all promontories, all firm and fast places are
dangerous, and threaten shipwreck, and therefore to be avoided, and liberty
and searoome to be affected; yet I do not obstinatly say, that there is
nothing in Machiuels commentary, which may be of use to this Church.
Certainly there is very much; but we are not men of that poverty, that we
need beg from others, nor dignify those things with our prayers, which
proceed not from our selves. The Senate of Rome gave us heretofore a noble
example of this temperance and abstinence, which therefore refused to place
Christ amongst their gods, because the matter was proposed by the Emperor, and
begun not in themselves. As for that particular, wherein Machiauel uses
especially to glory; which is, that he brought in the liberty of dissembling,
and lying, it has neither foundation nor color: For not only Plato, and
other fashioners of Common-(...), allowed the liberty of lying, to
Magistrates, Obseruationes in cassianum, fol. 736. ex collat. (...).
and to Physicians; but we also co^sidring the fathers of the Church, Origin,
Chrysostom, Hierom, have not only found that doctrine in them, but we have
also delivered them from all imputation, and reprehension by this evasion: That
it was lawful for them to maintain that opinion, till some definition of the
Church had established the contrary. Which certainly, (though this should not
be so openly spoken of) as yet was never done. But yet we have departed from
this doctrine of free lying, though it were received in practice, excused by
the Fathers, strengthened by examples of (...) and Angels, in the Scriptures,
and so almost established by the law of (...), and Nature; only for this
reason, because we were not the first Authors of it. But we have supplied this
loss with another doctrine, less suspicious; and yet of as much use for our
Church; which is (...) (...), and Mixed (...). The liberty therefore of lying,
is neither new, not safe as almost all Machiauells precepts are so stale and
obsol^te, that our Serarius using I must confess his lesuiticall Triha^ li. 2.
cap. 4.
liberty of w^lde anticipation, did not doubt to call Herod, who lived so long
before Machiuell, a Machiauellian. But that at one blow we may cut off all his
reasons, and all his hopes, this I affirm, this I pronounce; that all his
books, and all his deeds, tend only to this, that thereby a way may be
prepared to the ruin and destruction of that part of this Kingdom, which is
established at Rome: for what else does he endeavor or go about, but to change
the form of comon-wealth, and so to deprive the people (who are a soft, a
liquid and ductile metal, and apter for our impressions) of all their
liberty; and having so destroyed all ciuility and re-publique, D^lamesse fol.
358.
to reduce all states to Monarchies; a name which in secular states, we do so
much abhor, (I cannot say it without tears,) but I must say it, that not any
one Monarch is to be found, which either has not withdrawn himself wholly
from our kingdom, or wounded and endamadged in some weighty point; hereupon
our Cotton confesses, that the authority of the Pope is incomparably less then
it was, and that now the Christian Church, (which can agree to none but the
(...),) is but a diminutiue. And hereupon also it is, that the Cardinal, who
were (...) Thol. sa. l. 15. c. 4. v. 7
wont to meet oftener, meet now but once in a week, because the businesses of
the Court of Rome grow fewer. To forbear therefore mentioning of the Kings of
Britain, and Denmark, and the other Monarkes of the first sort, which have
utterly cast off Rome; even in France, our enemies are so much increased, that
they equal us almost in number: and for their strength, they have this
advantage above us, that they agree within themselves, and are at unity with
their neighbor Resourmed Churches; whereas our men, which call themselves
Catholic there, do so much differ from the Roman Catholic, that they do not
only prefer Councels, but even the king, before the Pope, and evermore
oppose those their two great Giants, Gog and Magog, their Parliament of Paris,
and their College of Sorbon, against all our endeauours. Besides all this, we
languish also miserably Scapp. de iure (...) Script. l. 1. c. 6. Ibid. c. 16.
in Spain, where Clergy men, if they break their fealty to their Lord, are
accused of treason; where Ecclesiastical persons are subject to secular
(...)meant, Ibid. c. 25
and, if they be sacrilegious, are burnt by the Ordinary Magistrate; which are
doctrines and practices, contrary, and dangerous to us. And though they will
seem to have given almost half the kingdom to the church, and so to have
divided equally; yet those Graunts are so infected, with pensions, and other
burdens, by which the kings servants, and the younger sons of great persons are
maintained, that this greatness of the Church there is rather a dropsy, then
a sound state of health, established by welconcocted nourishment, and is rather
done, to cast an Eouy upon the Church, then to give any true Majesty to it.
And even in usurping Ec^siasticall ^sdiction, the kings of Spain have not
only exceeded the kings of France, but also of Britany. For (says De Regno
Sicilia.
Baronius of that king) there is nowrisen up a new Head, a (...), and a wonder.
He Excommunicates, and he Absolues: And he practices this power even against
Bishops, and Cardinals: He stops Appeals, and he acknowledges no superiority
(...) the sea of Rome, but (...) in (...) of Prevention: And therefore, the
name Monarch, is a hateful and execrable name to us. Against which, Baronius
has thundered with such violence, such fierceness, and such bitterness, that
I could hardly add any thing thereunto, if I should speak (unspeakable
Emperor) with thine own tongue: For he calls it an Adulterine name, and a
Tower of Babel, and threatens destruction to that king (though himself were
his subject) except he forbear the name. In the mean time, he resolves him to
be a Tyran^, and pronounces him to stand yearly Excommunicate by the Bulla
(...). Neither does he offer to desend himself with any other excuse, when a
Cardinal reprehended his fiercenes toward the king, then this; (...) (...) ad
(...). (...).
Imperions zeal, has no power to spare God himself. And yet he confesses,
that this zeal was kindled by the Popes special command, and by his Oath
taken, as Cardinal. Neither has our Bellarmine almost any other cause of
aduauncing Monarchical government so much as he does, then thereby to remove
all secular men from so great a dignity, and to reserve it only to the Church.
It was therefore well done of that Rebullus (who now begins to be known in
this state) when having surfeited with Calumnies against the French Church, and
her Ministers, he has dared of late to draw his pen, and to join battle
against a most puissant foreign Prince: he did well (I say) and fitly, when
he called Bellarmine and Baronius, Salmonees.
The sword and buckler of the Roman Church. And I cannot choose but thank him
for affoording the Title of Sword to our Order; as well, because after so many
expositions of those words, ( Behold, here are two (...)) which our side has
gathered, to establish a temporal Jurisdiction in the Pope, and which our
Adversaries have removed, worn out, or scorned, this man has relieved us with
a new, and may seem to intend by the two swords, the Popes Excommunications,
and the Jesuits (...), and King-killings; as also because he has reserved to
our Order that sovereign dignity, that as God himself was pleased to defend
his Paradise with fire and sword, so we stand watchful upon the borders of our
Church, not only provided, as that Cherubin was with sire and sword, but with
the later invention of Gunpowder; about the first inuentour whereof I wonder,
why Antiquaries should contend, whether it were the Devil or a Friar, since
that may be all one. But as (O unspeakable Emperor) you have almost in all
things endeavored to imitate God: so have you most thoroughly performed it in
us; For when God attempted the Reformation of his Church, it became you also to
reform yours. And accordingly by your Capuchins, you did reform your
Franciscans; which, before we arose, were your chiefest laborers, and
workmen: and after, you Reformed your Capuchins, by your Recolets. And when
you perceived that in the Church of God, some men proceeded so far in that
Reformation, that they endeavored to draw out, not only all the peccant and
dangerous humors, but all her beauty, and exterior grace and Ornament, and
cuen her vital spirits, with her corrupt blood, and so induce a leanness, and
il-fauourednes upon her, and thought to (...) (...). l. (...). (...). 57.
a rigid coldness with a (...), you also were pleased to follow that Example,
and so, in us, did Reform, and awaken to higher enterprise, the dispositions
as well of the Circumcellions, as of the Assassins: for we do not limit our
selves in that low degree of the Circumcellions, when we urge and provoke
ohers to put us to death; nor of the Assassins which were hired to kill some
Kings, which passed through their quarter: for we exceed them both, because we
do these things voluntarily, for nothing, and every where. And as we will be
exceeded by none, in the thing it self: so to such things as may seem
mystical and significant, we oppose mystical things. And Carrauca stat.
synod, N. 41.
so, least that Canon; That no Clergyman should wear a knife with a point,
might seem to concern us, by some prophetical relation, we in our Rules have
opposed this precept: That our knife be often whetted, (...). Jesuit. cab.
(...). Refe^tor.
and so kept in an apt readiness for all uses: for our divination lies in the
co^templation of entrails; in which art we are thus much more subtle then
those amongst the old Romans, that we consider not the entrails of Beasts, but
the entrails of souls, in confessions, and the entrails of Princes, in
treasons; whose hearts we do not believe to be with us, till we see them: let
therefore this prattling Secretary hold his tongue, and be content that his
book be had in such reputation, as the world affoords to an Ephemerides, or
yearly Almanac, which being acco^modated to certain places, and certain
times, may be of some short use in some certain place: and let the Rules and
precepts of his disciples, like the Canons of prouincial Councels be of force
there, where they were made, but only ours which pierce, and pass through all
the world, retain the strength and vigor of Universal Councels. Let him
enjoy some honorable place amongst the Gentiles; but abstain from all of our
sides: neither when I say, Our side, do I only mean Modern men: for in all
times in the Roman Church there have been Friars which have far exceeded
Machiauel. Truly I thought this Oration of Ignatius very long: and I began to
think of my body which I had so long abandoned, least it should putrify, or
grow moldy, or be buried; yet I was loath to leave the stage, till I saw the
play ended: And I was in hope, that if any such thing should befall my body,
the Jesuits, who work Miracles so familiarly, and whose reputation I was so
careful of in this matter, would take compassion upon me, and restore me
again. But as I had sometimes observed Feathers or strawes swim on the
watersface,
Brought to the bridge, where through a narrow place
The water passes, thrown back, and dela^d;
And having daunc'd a while, and nimbly played
Upon the watery circles, Then have bin
By the streams liquid snares, and jaws, sucked in
And suncke into the womb of that s^olne bourne,
Leave the beholder desperate of return:
So I saw Machiauel often put forward, and often thrust back, and at last
vanish. And looking earnestly upon Lucifers (...), I perceived him to be
affected toward Ignatius, as Princes, who though they envy and grudge, that
their great Officers should have such immoderate means to get wealth; yet they
dare not complain of it, least thereby they should make them odious and
contemptible to the people: so that Lucifer now suffered a new Hell: that is,
the danger of a Popular Devil, vainglorious, and inclined to innouations
there. Therefore he determined to withdraw himself into his inward chamber,
and to admit none but Ignatius: for he could not exclude him, who had deserved
so well; neither did he think it safe to stay without, and give him more
occasions to amplify his own worth, and undervalue all the^ there in
public, and before so many vulgar Devils. But as he rose, a whole army of
souls besieged him. And all which had invented any new thing, even in the
smallest matters, thronged about him, and importuned an admission. Even those
which had but invented new attire for women, and those whom Pancirollo has
recorded in his Commentaries for invention De rebus nuper (...).
of Porcellandishes, of Spectacles, of Quintans, of stirrups, and of Cauiari,
thrust themselves into the troop. And of those, which pretended that they had
squared the circle, the number was infinite. But Ignatius scattered all this
cloud quickly, by commanding, by chiding, by deriding, and by force and
violence. Amongst the rest, I was sorry to see him use Peter Aretine so ill as
he did: For though Ignatius told him true when he boasted of his licentious
pictures, that because he was not much learned, he had left out many things of
that kind, with which the ancient histories and poemes abound; and that
therefore Aretine had not only not added any new invention, but had also taken
away all courage and spurs from youth, which would rashly trust, and rely
upon his diligence, and seek no further, and (...) loose that infinite and
precious treasure of Antiquity. He added moreover, that though Raderus, and
others of his Order, did use to gelde Poets, and other Authors: (and here I
could not choose but wonder, why they have not gelded their Vulgar Edition,
which in some places has such obscene words as the Hebrew tongue, which is
Harlay Defe^ des Jesuit. fol. 12.
therefore also called Holy, does so much abhor, that no obscene things can
be uttered in it) insomuch, that (as one of them very subtly notes) the
star of Venus is very seldom called by that name in the Scripture: for how
could it be, the word being not Hebrew? yet (said he) our men do not geld
them to that purpose, that the memory thereof should be abolished; but that
when themselves had first tried, whether Tiberius his Spintria, and Martialis
symple^ma, and others of that kind, were not rather Chimeraes, and
speculations of luxuriant wits, then things certain and constant, and such as
might be reduced to an Art and method in licentiousnes: for Jesuits never
con^ themselves with the Theory in thing, but straight proceed to practice)
they might after communicate them to their own Disciples and Nouitiates: for
this Church is fruitful in producing Sacraments; and being now loaded with
Divine sacraments, it produces Moral sacraments. In which, as in the divine,
it binds the Layety to one species; but they reserve to themselves the diverse
forms, and the secrets and mysteries in this matter, which they find in the
Authors whom they geld. Of which kind I think they give a little glimmering
and intimation, when in the life of their last made Goddess, Francisca Romana,
Valladerius fol. 24.
they say: that the bed where she lay with her husband, was a perpetual
Martyrdom to her, and a shop of miracles. But for all this, since Aretine was
one, who by a long^ custom of libellous and contumelious speaking against
Princes, had got such a habit, that at last he came to diminish and dis-esteeme
God himself. I wonder truly, that this Arch-Iesuite, though he would not
admit him to any eminent place in his Triumphant Church, should deny him an
office of lower estimation: For truly to my thinking, he might have been fit,
either to serve Ignatius, as master of his pleasures, or Lucifer as his Crier:
for whatsoever Lucifer durst think, this man durst speak. But Ignatius, who
thought himself sufficient for all uses, thrust him away, and when he offered
upward, offered his staff at him: Nor did he use Christopher Columbus with any
better respect; who having found all ways in the earth, and sea open to him,
did not fear any difficulty in Hell, but when he offered to enter, Ignatius
staid him, and said: You must remember, sir, that if this kingdom have got any
thing by the discovery of the West Indies, all that must be attributed to our
Order: for if the opinion of the Dominicans had Matalius Metellus, Praefat. in
^sorinm.
prevailed, That the inhabitants should be reduced, only by preaching and
without violence, certainly their 200000 of men would scarce in so many ages
have been brought to a 150 which by our means was so soon performed. And if
the law, made by Ferdinando, only against Canibals; That all which would not
be Christians should be bondslaues, had not been extended into other
Provinces, we should have lacked men, to digg us out that benefit, which
their countries afford. Except we when we took away their old Idolatry, had
recompensed them with a new one of ours; except we had obtruded to those
ignorant and barbarous people, sometimes natural things, sometimes
artificial, and counterfeit, in steed of Miracles; and except we had been
always ready to convey, and to apply this medicine made of this precious
America^ drug, unto the Princes of Europe, and their Lords, and Counselors,
the prof^te by the only discovery of these places (which must of necessity be
referred to fortune) would have been very little; yet I praise your
perseverance, and your patience; which since that seems to be your principal
virtue) you shall have good occasion to exercise here, when you remain in a
lower and remoter place, then you think belongs to your merits. But although
Lucifer being put into a heat, and almost smothered with this troop and
deluge of pretenders, seemed to have admitted Ignatius, as his Lieutenant, or
Legate a latere, and trusted him with an absolute power of doing what he would,
yet he quickly spied his own error, and danger thereby. He began to remember
how forcibly they (...) to urge the Canon Alius; by which the king of France
is said to have been deposed, not for his wickedness, but for his infirmity,
and unfitness to govern: And that kings do forfeit their dignity, if Paris de
puteo, de syndicat, de e^cess. regum.
they give them selves to other matters, and leave the government of the State
to their officers. Therefore Lucifer thought it time for him to enter into the
business, least at last Ignatius should prescribe therein; by which title of
prescription he well knew, how much the Church of Rome does advance and defend
it self against other Princes. And though he seemed very thankful to
Ignatius, for his delivery from this importunate company, yet when he
perceived, that his scope and purpose was, to keep all others out, he thought
the case needed greater consideration; For though he had a confidence in his
own Patriarchs, which had long before possessed that place, and in whose company
(as an Abbot said to the Devil, Sophronius ca. 45. Consenuerat.
who after long intermission, now tempted him) he was grown old, and do^bted
not but that they would defend their right, and oppose themselves against any
innovation, which Ignatius should practice, yet if none but he in a whole age
should be brought in, he was afraid, that this singularity would both
increase his courage and spirit, and their reverence, and respect toward him.
Casting therefore his eyes into every corner, at last a great way off, he
spied `Phillip Nerius: who acknowledging in his own particular no especial
merit toward this kingdom, forbore to press near the gate; But Lucifer
called to his remembrance, that Nerius and all that Order, of which he was the
Author, which is called congregatio Oratorij, were erected, advanced, and
dignisyed by the Pope, principally to this end, that, by their incessant
Sermons to the people, of the lives of Saints and other Ecclesiastique
Antiquities, they might get a new reputation, and so the torrent, and general
superstition toward the Jesuits, might grow a little remisser, and lukewarm:
for at that time the Pope himself began to be afraid of the Jesuits, for
they begun to publish their Paradox of Confession and absolution to be given
by letters, and Messengers, and by that means to draw the secrets of all
Princes only to themselves; And they had tried and solicited a great Monarch,
who has many designs upon Italy, against the Pope, and delivered to that
prince diverse articles, for the reforming of him. Now the Pope and Lucifer
love ever to follow one another example: And therefore that which the one had
done in the middle world, the other attempted in the lower. Hereupo^ he called
for Philip Nerius, and gave him many evidences of a good inclination toward
him. But Nerius was too stupid, to interpret them aright. Yet Ignatius spied
them, and before Lucifer should declare himself any further, or proceed too
far herein, least after he were far engaged, there should be no way, to
auert or withdraw him from his own propositions (for he saw there must be
respect had of his honor and constancy) he thought it fittest to oppose now
at the beginning. He said therefore, that he now perceived, that Lucifer had not
been altogether so much conversant with Philip as with the Jesuits, since he
knew not, how much Philip had ever professed himself an enemy to him. Vita N
(...) fol. 107.
For he did not only deny all visions, and apparitions, Fol. 108.
And commanded one to spit in Mary's face, when she appeared again, because
he thought it was the Devil; Fol. 212.
And drove away an other that came to tempt a sick man, in the shape of a
Physician; Fol. 229.
And was hardly drawn to believe any possessings; but Fol. 19.
when three Devils did meet him in the way, to afright him, he neither thought
them worthy of any Exorcisme, nor so much as the sign of the Cross, but
merely went by them, as though he scorned to look at the^, and so despighted
the^ with that negligence. It may be that he has drawn others into Religion,
but himself remained then in the Layety; in so much as I remember, that Fol.
26.
I used to call him, The Saints Bell, that hangs without, and calls others into
the Church. Fol. 313.
Neither do they which follow this Order, bind themselves with any vow or
oath; Neither do I know any thing for which this Fol. 163.
kingdom is beholding to him, but that he moved Baronius to write his Annals.

To all this Nerius said nothing, as though it had been spoken of some body
else. Without doubt, either he never knew, or had forgot that he had done those
things which rhey write of him. But Lucifer himself took the boldness
(having with some difficultio got Ignatius leave) to take Nerius his part: and
proceeded so far, that he adventured to say, that Baronius, Bozius, and
others, which proceeded out of the Hyue of Nerius, had used a more free, open,
and hard fashion against Princes, and better provided for the Popes Direct
Jurisdiction upon all Kingdoms, and more stoutly defended it, then they; which
undertaking the cause more tremblingly, then becomes the Majesty of so great a
business, adhered to `Bellarmines sect, and devised such crooked ways, and
such perplexed intanglings, as by reason of the various, and uncertain
circumstances, were of no use: And that whatsoever Nerius his scholars had
performed, must be attributed to him, as the fruit to the root. Ignatius
perceiving that Lucifer undertook all offices for Nerius, and became Judge,
Advocate, and witness, pursuing his former resolution, determined to interrupt
him, least when he had enlarged himself in Nerius commendation, he should
thereby be bound to a reward. He therefore cried out, What has Nerius done?
what has he, or his followers put in execution? have they not ever been only
exercised in speculations, and in preparatory doctrines? Are these books which
are written of the Jurisdiction of the Pope, to any better use then Physicians
Lectures of diseases, and of Medicines? whilst these Receipts lie hid in
Physicians books, and no body goes to the Patient; no body applies the
medicine to the disease, what good, what profit comes by all this? what part;
what member of this languishing body have they undertaken? In what Kingdom
have they corrected these humors, which offend the Pope, either by their
Incision or cauterising? what state have they cut up into an ^natomy? what
Sceleto^ have they provided for the instruction of Posterity? Do Do they hope
to cure their diseases, by talking and preaching, as it were with charms and
enchantments? If Nerius shall be thought worthy of this Honor, and this
place, because out of his scholars writings something may be gleaned, which
may be applied to this purpose, why should we not have Beza and Calvin, and the
rest of that sort here in Hell, since in their books there may be some things
found, which may be wrefted to this purpose? But, since their scope was not to
extirpate Monarchies, since they publis^ed no such Canons and Aphorisms as
might be applied to all cases, and so brought into certain use and
consequence, but limited theirs to circumstances which seldom fall out, since
they delivered nothing dangerous to Princes, but where, in their opinion, the
Souereignty resided in the People, or in certain Ephori, since they never
said, that this power to violate the person of a prince, might either be taken
by any private man, or committed to him, and that therefore none of their
disciples has ever boasted of having done any thing upon the person of his
sovereign: we see that this place has ever been shut against them: there have
been some few of the^ (though I can scarce afford those me^ the honor to
number them with Knox, and Goodman, and Buchanan) which following our examples
have troubled the peace of some states, and been injurious to some princes,
and have been admitted to some place in this Kingdom; but since they have
performed nothing with their hands, nor can excuse themselves by saying, they
were not able: (for wherein was Clement, or Rauillac more able then they; or
what is not he able to do in the midst of an Army, who despises his own
life?) they scarce ever aspire, or offer at this secret and sacred Chamber.
Lucifer had a purpose to have replied to this: that perchance all their hands
which had bin imbrued in the bowels of Princes, were not so immediately armed by
the Jesuits, as that they were ever present at all consultations and
resolutions: (and yet he meant to say this, not as sworn witness, but as
Lucifer himself, and the father of lies, in which capacity he might say any
thing) But that it was enough that Confessors do so possess them with that
doctrine, that it is not now proposed to them as Physic, but as natural
food, and ordinary diet; and that therefore for the performance of these
things, a Jesuits person is no more requisite, then that the heart of a man,
because it sends forth spirits into every limb, should therefore be present
in every limb: that when it (...), de formul. l. 10
was in use for the Consuls of Rome for the safety of their Country and army,
to deuote themselves over to the infernal god, it was lawful for themselves
to abstain and forbear the act, and they might appoint any Soldier for that
Sacrifice: and that so the Jesuits for the performance of their resolutions,
might stir up any amongst the people: (for now they enjoy all the
privileges, of (...). Manual. (...). (...). 9.
the Franciscans, who say; That the name of people comprehends all which are
not of their Order:) And that if this be granted, Nerius his scholars are
inferior to none; with whose books (if all the Jesuits should perish) the
Church might content herself, and never fear dearth nor leanenesse. This
Lucifer would have spoken; but he thought it better and easier to forbear:
for he observed, that Ignatius had given a sign, and that all his troops
which were many, subtle, and busy, set up their bristles, grumbled, and
compacted themselves into one body, gathered, produced, and urged all their
evidence, whatsoever they had done, or suffered. There the English Legion,
which was called Capistrata, which Hal^ered
Campian led, and (as I think) Garnet concluded, was fiercer then all the
rest. And as though there had been such a second martyrdom to have been
suffered, or as though they might have put off their Immortality, they offered
themselves to any imploiment. Therefore Lucifer gave N^rius a secret warning to
withdraw himself, and spoke no more of him; and despairing of bringing in an
other, began earnestly to think, how he might leave Ignatius out. This
therefore he said to him: I am sorry my Ignatius, that I can neither find in
others, deserts worthy of this place, nor any room in this place worthy of
your deserts. If I might die, I see there would be no long strife for a
successor: For if you have not yet done that act which I did at first in
Heaven, and thereby got this Empire, this may excuse you, that no man has
been able to tell you what it was: For if any of the Ancients say true, when
they call it Pride, or Licentiousness, or Lying: or if it be in any of the
Casuistis, which profess the Art of sinning, you cannot be accused of having
omitted it. But since I may neithor forsake this kingdom, nor divide it, this
only remedy is left: I will write to the Bishop of Rome: he shall call
Galilaeo the Florentine to him; who by this time has thoroughly instructed
himself of all the hills, woods, and Cities in the new world, the Moon. And
since he effected so much with his first Glasses, that he faw the Moon,
Nuncius (...).
in so near a distance, that he gave himself satisfaction of all, and the
least parts in her, when now being grown to more perfection in his Art, he
shall have made new Glasses, and they received a hallowing from the Pope, he
may draw the Moon, like a boat floating upon the water, as near the earth as
he will. And thither (because they ever claim that those employments of
discovery belong to them) shall all the Jesuits be transferred, and easily
unite and reconcile the Lunatique Church to the Roman Church, without doubt,
after the Jesuits have been there a little while, there will soon grow
naturally a Hell in that world also: over which, you Ignatius shall have
dominion, and establish your kingdom and dwelling there. And with the same
ease as you pass from the earth to the Moon, you may pass from the Moon to
the other stars, which are also thought to be worlds, and so you may beget and
propagate many Hells, and enlarge your Empire, and come nearer unto that high
seat, which I left at (...). Ignatius had not the patience to stay till
Lucefer had made an end; but as soon as he saw him pause, and take breath,
and look, first upon his face, to observe what changes were there, and after
to cast his eye to an other place in Hell where a great noise was suddenly
raised: he apprehended this intermission, and as though Lucifer had ended, he
said: That of Lucifers affection to the Roman Church, and to their Order every
day produced new Testimonies: and that this last was to be accounted as one of
the greatest. That he knew well with how great devotion the Bishop of Rome did
ever embrace and execute all counsels proceeding from him: And that therefore
he hoped, that he would reserve that employment for the (...), and that Empire
for him their founder: and that he believed the Pope had thought of this
before; and at that time when he put Parsons the English Jesuit in hope of a
Cardinalship, he had certainly a reference to this place, and to this Church:
That it would fall out shortly, that all the damages, which the Roman Church
hathlately suffered upon the earth, shall be recompensed only there. And
that, now this refuge was opened, if she should be reduced into greater
streights, or if she should be utterly exterminated, the world would not much
lament and mourn for it. And for the entertainment of the Jesuits there,
there can be no doubt made at this time, when, (although their profession be
to enter whether Princes will or no) all the Princes of the world will not
only graciously afford them leave to go, but willingly and cheerfully
accompany them with Certificates, and Dimissory letters. Nor would they much
resist it, if the Pope himself would vouchsafe to go with them, and so fulfill
in some small measure, that prophecy of his Gerson, De Auferibilitate Papae.
Besides this a woman gouernes there; of which Sex they have ever made their
profit, which have attempted any Innovation in religion; with how much
diligence were the two Empresses Pulcheria and Eudoxia solicited by the Pope
for the establishing of Easter? how earnestly did both Pelagius and the Pope
strive by their letters to draw the Empress to their side? For since ^ulia had
that honor given to her in public coins, that she was called the mother of
the Army, the Mother of the Gods, and of the Senate, and the Mother of her
Country; Why may not women instructed by us, be called Mothers of the Church?
Why may not we rely upon the wit of women, when, once, the Church delivered
over her self to a woman-Bishop? And since we are reputed so fortunate in
obtaining the favor of women, that women Reg. Jesuit. fol. 73. Ibid. fol.
(...).
are forbid to come into our houses; and we are forbid, to take the charge of
any Nuns; since we have had so good experience of their favor in all the
^dies, or at lest have thought it fit, that they which have the charge to write
our anniuersary letters from thence should make that boast, and add something
to the Truth, both because the Ancient Heretics held that course in
insinuating their opinions, and because they which are acquainted with our
practices will think any thing credible, which is written of us in that
behalf, why should we doubt of our fortune in this Queen, which is so much
subject to alterations, and passions? she languishes often in the absence of
the Sun, and often in Ecclipses falls into swounes, and is at the point of
death. In these advantages we must play our parts, and put our devises in
practice: for at these times any thing may be drawn from her. Nor must we
forbear to try, what verses, and incantations may work upon her: For in those
things which the Poets writ, though they themselves did not believe them, we
have since found many truths, and many deep mysteries: nor can I call to mind
any woman, which either deceived our hope, or escaped our cunning, but Elizabeth
of England; who might the rather be pardoned that, because she had put off all
affections of women. The principal Dignity of which sex, (which is, to be a
Mother) what reason had she to wish, or affect, since without those womanish
titles, unworthy of her, of wife, and mother, such an heir was otherwise
provided for her, as was not fit to be kept any longer from the inheritance.
But when I, who hate them, speak thus much in the honor of these two Princes,
I find my self carried with the same fury, as those Beasts were, which our men
say, did sometime adore the Host in the Mass. For it is against my will, that
I pay thus much to the Manes of Elizabeth; from scorning of which word Manes,
when the king of great Britain writ it, I would our Parsons had forborne,
fi^e one of our own Jesuits uses the Heissi^ (...) Aphor. (...). fol. 135.
same word, when reprehending our Adversaries, he says, That they do insult
upon Garnets Manes. And yet this Elizabeth was not free from all Innovation;
For the ancient Relioion was so much worn out, that to reduce that to the
former dignity, and so to renew it, was a kind of lanouation: and by this way
of innouating she satisfied the infirmity of her Sex, if she suffered any:
for a little Innovation might serve her, who was but a little a woman. Neither
dare I say, that this was properly an Innovation, lest there by I should
confess that Luther and many others which live in banishment in Heaven far
from us, might have a title to this place, as such Innouators. But we cannot
doubt, but that this lunatique. Queen will be more inclinable to our
Innouations: for our Clauius has been long familiarly conu^sant with her,
what she has done from the beginning, what she will do hereafter, how she
behaues herself toward her neighbor kingdoms, the rest of the stars, and
all the planetary, and firmamentary worlds; with whom she is in league, and
amity, and with whom at difference, he is perfectly instructed, so he have his
Ephemerides about him. But Claui^ is too great a personage to be best owed upon
this Lunatique Queen, either as her Counselor, or (which were more to our
profit) as her Co^fessor. So great a man must not be cast away upon so small a
matter. Nor have we any other besides, whom upon any occasion we may send to
the Sun, or to the other worlds, beyond the world. Therefore we must reserve
Clauius for greater uses. Our Herbestus, or Busaeus, or Voellus (and these be
all which have given any proof of their knowledge in Mathematiques) although
they be but tastlesse, and childish, may serve to observe her asspects, and
motions, and to make Catechisones fit for this Lunatique Church: for though
Garnet had Clauius for his Eudem. (...) an. Apol. pro (...). c. 9.
Master, yet he profited little in the Arts, but being filled with Bellarmines
Dictates, (who was also his Master) his mind was all upon Politiques. When
we are established there, this will add much to our dignity, that in our
letters which we send down to the earth, (except perchance the whole Roman
Church come up to us into the Moon) we may write of what miracles we list:
which we offered to do out (...) de (...). (...) do. (...). lib. (...). 9.
of the Indies, and with good success, till one of our Order, in a simplicity,
and ingenuity fitter for a Christian, then a Jesuit, acknowledged and lamented
that there were no miracles done there. Truly it had bin better for us to have
spit all those five Brothers, Acostas, out of our Order, then that any one of
them should have vomited this reproach against us. It is of such men as these
in our Order, that De (...) Iesni^. ab^trus. cap. 5.
our Gretzer says: There is No body without his Excrements, because though
they speak truth, yet they speak it too rawly. But as for this contemplation,
and the establishing of that government, (though it be a pleasant
consideration) we may neither pamper our selves longer with it now, nor detain
you longer therein. Let your Greatness write; let the Pope execute your
counsel; let the Moon approach when you two think fit. In the mean time let
me use this Chamber, as a resting place: For though Pope Gregory were stricken
by Bellar^, de Purgato. l. 2. 6. 8.
the Angel with a perpetual pain in his stomach and feet, because he
compelled God by his prayers, to deliver Traian out of Heil, and transfer him
to Heaven; and therefore God, by the mouth of (...), took an assurance for all
his S^cessours, that they should never dare to request the like again: yet
when the Pope shall call me back from hence, he can be in no danger, both
because in this contract, God cannot be presumed to have thought of me, since
I never thought of him, and so the contract therein void; and because the
Condition is not broken, if I be not removed into Heaven, but transferred from
an Earthly Hell, to a Lunatique Hell. More then this he could not be heard to
speak: For that noise, of which I spoke before, increased exceedingly, and
when Lucifer asked the cause, it was told him, that there was a soul newly
arrived in Hell, which said that the Pope was at last entreated to make
Ignatius a Saint, and that he hastened his Canonization, as thinking it an
vniust'thing, that when all artificers, and profane Butchers had particular
Saints to invoke, only these spiritual Butchers, and King-killers, should
have none: for when the Jesuit Cotton in those questions which by virtue of
his invisible privilege he had provided for a possessed person, amongst others,
dangerous both to England and France, had inserted this question: What shall I
do for Ignatius his Canonizing? and found out at last, that Philip, King of
Spain, and Henry, King of France, contended by their Ambassadors at Rome,
which of them should have the honor of obtaining his Canonizing (for both
pretending to be King of Navarre, both pretended that this right and honor
belonged to him: and so both deluded the Jesuits:) For Pi^rre Mathuri, l. 1.
Nar. 4.
D'Alcala a Franciscan, and P^nafort a Iacobite, were by Philips means
canonized, and the Jesuit left out. At last he despaired of having any
assistance from these Princes; nor did he think it convenient, that a Jesuit
should be so much beholden to a King, since Baronius was already come to that
Litera eius ad Philip 3.
height and constancy, that being accused of some wrongs done to his King,
he did not vouchsafe to write in his own excuse to the King, till the
Conclaue which was then held, was fully ended, least (as himself gives the
reason) if he had then been chosen Pope, it should be thought he had been
beholden to the King therein. For these reasons therefore they labor the Pope
themselves. They confess, that if they might choose, they had rather he
should restore them into all which they had lost in France, and Venice, then
that Ignatius should be sent up into Heaven; and that the Pope was rather bound
to do so, by the Order which God himself seems to have observed in the
Creation, where he first furnished Genesis 2.4.
the Earth, and then the Heavens, and confi^med himse^fe to be the Israelites
God by this Argument, that he had given them the land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8.
and other temporal blessings. But since this exceeded the Popes omnipotence
in Earth, it was fit he should try, what he could do in Heaven. Now the Pope
would feign have satisfied them with the title of (...), which formerly upon.
the entreaty of the Princes of that Family, he had affoorded to Aloisius
Gonzaga of that Order. (...) (...) (...). (...) Paul. 5.
He would also have given this title of Saint rather to Xauerius, who had the
reputation of having done Miracles. Indeed he would have done any thing, so he
might have slipped over Ignatius. But at last he is overcome; and so against
the will of Heaven, and of the Pope, Lucifer himself being not very forward in
it, Ignatius must be thrust in amongst the Saints. All this discourse, I,
being grown cunninger then that Doctor, Gabriell Nele (of whom Bartolus
speaks) L. 1. de veroblig.
that by the only motion of his lips, without any utterance, understood all
men, perceived and read in every man's countenance there. These things, as
soon as Lucifer apprehended them, gave an end to the contention; for now he
thought he might no longer doubt nor dispute of Ignatius his admission, who,
besides his former pretenses, had now gotten a new right and title to the
place, by his Canonization; and he feared that the Pope would take all delay
ill at his hands, because Canonization is now grown a kind of Declaration,
by which all men may take knowledge, that such a one, to whom the Church of
Rome is much beholden, is now made partaker of the principal dignities, and
places in Hell: For these men ever make as though they would follow Augustine
in all things, and therefore they provide that that also shall be true which
he said in this point: That the Relics of many are honored upon earth whose
souls are tormented in Hell. Therefore he took Ignatius by the hand, and led
him to the gate. In the mean time, I, which doubted of the truth of this
report of his Canonizing, went a little out for further instruction: for I
thought it scarce credible, that Paulus 5. who had but lately burdened both the
City of Rome, and the Church, with so great expenses, when he canonized
Francisca Romana, would so easily proceed to canonize Ignatius now, when
neither any prince offered to bear the charge, nor so much as solicited it:
for so he must be forced to waste both the Treasures of the Church at once.
And from Leo 3. who 800 years after Christ, is the first Pope which Canonized
any, I had not observed that this had ever been done: Neither do I think that
Paulus 5. was drawn to the Can onizing of this woman by any other respect,
then because that Rule which she appointed Valladerius fol. 57.
to her Order, was Dictated and written by Saint Paul: For though Peter, and
Magdalene, and others, were present at the writing thereof, as witnesses, yet
Paul was the Author thereof. And since Saint Paul's old Epistles trouble and
dis-aduantage this Church, they were glad to apprehend any thing of his new
writing, which might be for them, that so this new work of his might bear
witness of his second conversion to Papistry, since by his first conversion to
Christianity, they got nothing: for to say, that in this business Paulus 5.
could not choose but be God, God himself, to say, that he must needs have
lived familiarly with the Godhead: and must have heard Predestination it self
whispering to him: And must have had a place to sit in Council with the most
Divine Trinity, (all which Valladerius says of him) is Fol. 5.
not necessary in this matter, wherein the Popes, for the most part, proceed,
as humane affections lead them. But at last, after some enquiry, I found that
a certain idle Gazettier, which used to scrape up News, and Rumors at Rome,
and so to make up sale letters, vainer, and falser, then the Jesuits Letters
of Iapan, and the Indies, had brought this news to Hell, and a little
Jesuitical Nouice, a credulous soul, received it by his implicit faith, and
published it. I laughed at Lucifers easiness to believe, and I saw no reason
ever after, to accuse him of infidelity. Upon this I came back again, to spy
(if the gates were still open) with what affection Ignatius, and they who were
in ancient possession of that place, behaved themselves toward one an other.
And I found him yet in the porch, and there beginning a new contention: for
having presently cast his eyes to the principal place, next to Lucifers own
Throne, and finding it possessed, he stopped Lucifer, and asked him, who it was
that sat there. It was answered, that it was Pope Boniface; to whom, as to a
principal Innouator, for having first challenged the name of Universal Bishop,
that honor was affoorded. Is he an Innouator thundered Ignatius? shall I suffer
this, when all my Disciples have labored all this while to prove to the world,
that all the Popes before his time did use that name? And that Gregory did not
reprehend the Patriarch John for taking to himself an Antichristian name, but
for usurping a name which was due to none but the Pope. And could it be fit for
you, Lucifer, (who in this were either unmindful of the Roman Church, or else
too weak and incapable of her secrets and mysteries) to give way to any
sentence in Hell, which (though it were according to truth,) yet differed from
the Jesuits Oracles? With this Ignatius flies vpwardes, and rushes upon
Boniface, and throws him out of his Seat: And Lucifer went up with him as
fast, and gave him assistance, least, if he should forsake him, his own seat
might be endangered. And I returned to my body; which As a flower wet with
last nights dew, and then
Warmed with the new Sun, does shake of again
All drowsinesse, and raise his trembling Crown,
Which crookedly did languish, and stoop down
To kiss the earth, and panted now to sinde
Those beams returned, which had not long time shined,
was with this return of my soul sufficiently resreshed. And when I had seen
all this, and considered how fitly and pronortionally Rome and Hell an wered
one another, after I had seen a Jesuit turn the Pope out of his Chair in
Hell, I suspected that that Order would attempt as much at Rome.

An Apology for Jesuits.
NOW is it time to come to the Apology for Jesuits: that is, it is time to
leave speaking of them, for he favors them most, which says least of them;
Nor can any man, though he had declaimed against them till all the sand of the
sea were run through his houre-glasse, lack matter to add of their practices.
If any man have a mind to add any thing to this Apology, he has my leave;
and I have therefore left room for three or four lines. which is enough for
such a paradox: and more then Iungius, Scribanius, Gretzerus, Richeomus,
Cydonius, and all the rest which are used to Apologies, and almost tired with a
defensive war, are able to employ, if they will write only good things, and
true, of the Jesuits. Neither Bo^ar in Amphithe.
can they comfort themselves with this, That Cato was called to his answer
sour and forty times: for he was so many times acquitted, which both the
Parliaments of England, and France deny of the Jesuits. But if any man think
this Apology too short, he may think the whole book an Apology, by this rule
of their own- That it is their greatest Spongia pro Jesuit. cont Equip. polon.
fol. 20
argument of innocence to be accused by us. At this time, whilst they are yet
somewhat able to do some harm, in some places, let them make much of this
Apology. It will come to pass shortly, when as they have been disspoyled and
expelled at Venice, and shaked and fanned in France, so they will be forsaken
of other Princes, and then their own weakness will be their Apology, and
they will grow harmless out of necessity, and that which Vegetius said of Li.
1. ca. 14.
chariots armed with sithes and hooks, will be applied to the Jesuits, at
first they were a terror, and after a scorn.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page (...). line 19. for eternal read etheriall y. 16. l. 21. for O, read Do.
p. 18. l. 17. for notion read motion. p. 22. l. 12. for Bohenheim read
Hohenheim. p. 25. l. 20. for Hammer read Name, p. 28. l. 13. after from add
you. p. 30. l. 22. for Pampelnus tead Pampelune. p. 34. l. 3. for Too. read so,
and lin. 19. for understandings read undertakings. p. 35. l. 23. for before
read before. p. 41. marg. for Imag. ^uum, read Imaginarium. p. 53. l. 20. for
sons read seum. p. 55. l. 16. for profit read perfect. p. 50. l. 4. for
Boniface read Benefices, p. 63. l. 19. for it is, read it is not. p. 64. l. 12.
for our Author, read one another, p. 66. l. 5. for protolipe read prototype,
and line 19. for curried read carried, p. 75. l. 18. for prayers read praises.
p. 78. l. 2. for obsolute read obsolete. p. 94. l. 15. for to read so. p. 97.
l. 1. for longer read long. p. 99. l. 15. for drug. read dung.


