

This was for youth, Strength, Mirth, and wit that Time
Most count their golden Age; but it was not thine.
Thine was thy later years, so much refind
From youths Dross, Mirth, and wit; as thy pure mind
Thought (like the Angels) nothing but the Praise
Of thy Creator, in those last, best Days.
Witness this Book, (thy Emblem) which begins
With Love; but ends, with Sighs, and Tears for sin^s.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit. IZ: WA:

The First Anniuersarie. AN ANATOMY of the World. Wherein, BY OCCASION OF the
untimely death of Mistress ELIZABETH DRVRY, the frailty and the decay of this
whole World is represented.

LONDON, Printed by M. Bradwood for S. Macham, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head. 1612.

TO THE PRAISE of the Dead, and the ANATOMY.
WEll died the World, that we might live to see
This World of wit, in his Anatomee:
No evil wants his good: so wilder heirs;
Bedew their fathers Toombes, with forced tears,
Whose state requites their loss: whiles thus we gain
Well may we walk in blacks, but not complain.
Yet how can I consent the world is dead
While this Muse lives? which in his spirits stead
Seems to inform a world: and bids it be,
In spite of loss, or frail mortalitee?
And thou the subject of this welborne thought,
Thrice noble maid; could not have found nor sought
A fitter time to yield to thy sad Fate,
Then whiles this spirit lives; that can relate
Thy worth so well to our last nephews eyne,
That they shall wonder both at his, and thine:
Admired match! where strives in mutual grace
The cunning Pencill, and the ceomly face:
A task, which thy fair goodness made too much
For the bold pride of vulgar pens to tuch;
Enough is us to praise them that praise thee,
And say that but enough those praises be,
Which had thou lived, had hid their fearful head
From the angry checkings of thy modestred:
Death bars reward and shame: when enuy's gone,
And gain; it is safe to give the dead their own.
As then the wise Egyptians wont to lay
More on their Tombs, then houses: these of clay,
But those of brass, or marble were; so we
Give more unto thy Ghost, then unto thee.
Yet what we give to thee, thou gave to us,
And may but thank thy self, for being thus:
Yet what thou gave, and were, O happy maid,
Thy grace professed all due, were'tis repayd.
So these high songs that to thee suited bine,
Serve but to sound thy makers praise, in thine,
Which thy dear soul as sweetly sings to him
Amid the Quire of Saints and Seraphim,
As any Angels tongue can sing of thee;
The subjects differ, thothe skill agree:
For as by infant-yeeres men judge of age,
Thy early love, thy virtues, did presage
What an hie part thou bear in those best songs
Whereto no burden, nor no end belongs.
Sing on thou Virgin soul, whose lossefull gain
Thy loue-sicke Parents have bewayl'd in vain;
Never may thy name be in our songs forgot
Till we shall sing thy ditty, and thy note.
The First Anniuersary. AN ANATOMY of the World.
WHen that rich soul which to her heaven is gone, The entry into the work.

Whom all they celebrate, who know they have one,
(For who is sure he has a soul, unless
It see, and Judge, and follow worthiness,
And by Deeds praise it? He who does not this,
May lodge an In-mate soul, but it is not his.)
When that Queen ended here her progress time.
And, as to her standing house, to heaven did clymbe,
Where, loath to make the Saints attend her long,
She Is now a part both of the Quire, and Song.
This, world, in that great earthquake languished;
For in a common Bath of tears it bled,
Which drew the strongest vital spirits out:
But succored then with a perplexed doubt,
Whether the world did loose or gain in this,
(Because since now no other way there is
But goodness, to see her, whom all would see,
All must endeavor to be good as she.)
This great consumption to a fever turned,
And so the world had fits; it joyed, it mournd,
And, as men think, that Agues physic are,
And the Ague being spent, give over care,
So thou, sick world, mistak'st thy self to be
Well, when alas, you are in a Letargee.
Her death did wound, and tame thee than, and than
Thou might have better spared the Sun, or Man;
That wound was deep, but'tis more misery,
That thou have lost thy sense and memory.
It Was heavy then to hear thy voice of moan,
But this is worse, that thou art speechless grown.
Thou have forgot thy name, thou had; thou wast
Nothing but she, and her thou have o'repast.
For as a child kept from the Fount, until
A Prince, expected long, come to fulfill
The Ceremonies, thou unnamed had laid,
Had not her coming, thee her Palace made:
Her name defined thee, gave thee form and frame,
And thou forgetst to celebrate thy name.
Some months she has been dead (but being dead,
Measures of times are all determined)
But long shee'ath been away, long, long, yet none
Offers to tell us who it is that is gone.
But as in states doubtful of future heirs,
When sickness without remedy, empayres
The present Prince, they are loath it should be said,
The Prince does languish, or the Prince is dead:
So mankind feeling now a general thaw,
A strong example gone equal to law,
The Cyment which did faithfully compact
And glue all virtues, now resolved, and slack'd,
Thought it some blasphemy to say sh'was dead;
Or that our weakness was discovered
In that confession; therefore spoke no more
Then tongues, the soul being gone, the loss deplore.
But though it be too late to succor thee,
Sick world, yea dead, yea putrified, since she
Thy'ntrinsique Balm, and thy preservative,
Can never be renewed, thou never live,
I (since no man can make thee live) will try,
What we may gain by thy Anatomy.
Her death has taught us dearly, that thou art
Corrupt and mortal in thy purest part.
Let no man say, the world it self being dead,
It Is labor lost to have discovered.
The worlds infirmities, since there is none
Alive to study this dissectione; What life the world has (...).

For there is a kind of world remaining still,
Though she which did in animate and fill
The world, be gone, yet in this last long night,
Her Ghost does walk; that is, a glimmerig light,
A faint weak love of virtue and of good
Reflects from her, on them which understood
Her worth; And though she have shut in all day,
The twilight of her memory does stay;
Which, from the carcass of the old world, free,
Creates a new world; and new creatures be
Produced: The matter and the stuff of this,
Her virtue, and the form our practice is.
And though to be thus Elemented, arm
These Creatures, from hom-borne intrinsique harm,
(For all assumed unto this Dignitee,
So many weedlesse Paradises be,
Which of themselves produce no venomous sin,
Except some foreign Serpent bring it in)
Yet, because outward storms the strongest break,
And strength it self by confidence grows weak,
This new world may be safer, being told
The dangers and diseases of the old: The sicknesses of the world.

For with due temper men do then forgo,
Or covet things, when they their true worth know.
There is no health; Physicians say that we Impossibility of health.

At best, enjoy, but a neutralitee.
And can there be worse sickness, then to know
That we are never well, nor can be so?
We are borne ruinous: poor mothers cry,
That children come not right, nor orderly,
Except they headlong come and fall upon
An ominous precipitation.
How witty's ruin? how importunate
Upon mankind? It labored to frustrate
Even Gods purpose; and made woman, sent
For man's relief, cause of his languishment.
They were to good ends, and they are so still,
But accessory, and principal in ill.
For that first marriage was our funeral:
One woman at one blow, then killed us all,
And singly, one by one, they kill us now.
We do delightfully our selves allow
To that consumption; and profusely blind,
We kill our selves, to propagate, our kind.
And yet we do not that; we are not men:
There is not now that mankind, which was then
When as the Sun, and man, did seem to strive,
(Joint tenants of the world) who should suruie. Shortness of life.

When Stag, and Raven, and the long-liu'd tree.
Compared withman, died in minoritee.
When, if a slow-paced star had stolen away
From the obseruers marking, he might stay
Two or three hundred years to see it again,
And then make up his observation plain;
When, as the age was long, the the sise was great:
Man's grouth confessed, and recompensed the meat:
So spacious and large, that every soul
Did a fair Kingdom, and large Realm control:
And when the very stature thus erect,
Did that soul a good way toward Heaven direct.
Where is this mankind now? who lives to age,
Fit to be made Methusalem his page?
Alas, we scarce live long enough to try;
Whether a true made clock run right, or lie.
Old Grandsires talk of yesterday with sorrow,
And for our children we reserve to morrow.
So short is life, that every peasant strives,
In a torn house, or field, to have three lives,
And as in lasting, so in length is man.
Contracted to an inch, who was a span, Smalnesse of stature.

For had a man at first, in Forests strayed,
Or shipwrack'd in the Sea, one would have laid
A wager that an Elephant, or Whale
That met him, would not hastily assail
A thing so equal to him: now alas.
The Fayries, and the Pigmies well may pass
As credible; mankind decays so soon,
We Are searse our Fathers shadows cast at noone.
Only death adds to our length: nor are we grown
In stature to be men, till we are none.
But this were light, did our less volume hold
All the old Text; or had we changed to gold
Their silver; or disposed into less glass,
Spirits of virtue, which then scattred was.
But it is not so: we are not retired, but dampt?
And as our bodies, so our minds are cramp't:
It Is shrinking, not close-weaning, that has thus,
In mind and body both bedwarfed us.
We seem ambitious, Gods whole work t'vndoe;
Of nothing he made us, and we strive too,
To bring our selves to nothing back; and we
Do what we can, to do it so soon as he.
With new diseases on our selves we war,
And with new physic, a worse Engine far.
Thus man, this worlds Vice-Emperor, in whom
All faculties, all graces are at home;
And if in other Creatures they appear,
They Are but man's ministers, and Legates there,
To work on their rebellions, and reduce
Them to Ciuility, and to man's use.
This man, whom God did woo, and loath to attend
Till man came up, did down to man descend,
This man, so great, that all that is, is his,
Oh what a trifle, and poor thing he is?
If man were any thing, he is nothing now:
Help, or at least some time to wast, allow
To His other wants, yet when he did depart
With her whom we lament, he lost his heart.
She, of whom th'Ancients seemed to prophecy,
When they called virtues by the name of she,
She in whom virtue was so much refined,
That for Allay unto so pure a mind
She took the weaker Sex, she that could drive
The poisonous tincture, and the stayne of Eve,
Out of her thoughts, and deeds; and purify
All, by a true religious Alchimy;
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how poor a trifling thing man is.
And learn'st thus much by our Anatomee,
The heart being perished, no part can be free.
And that except thou feed (not banquet) on
The supernatural food, Religion
Thy better Grouth grows withered, and scant;
Be more than man, or you are less then an Ant.
Then, as mankind, so is the worlds whole frame
Quite out of joint, almost created lame:
For, before God had made up all the rest,
Corruption entered, and deprau'd the best:
It seized the Angels, and then first of all
The world did in her Cradle take a fall,
And turned her brains, and took a general maime
Wronging each joint of th'vniuersall frame.
The noblest part, man, felt it first; and than
Both beasts and plants, cursed in the curse of man. Decay of nature in other
parts.

So did the world from the first hour decay,
That evening was beginning of the day,
And now the Springs and Summers which we see,
Like sons of women after fifty be.
And new Philosophy calls all in doubt,
The Element of fire is quite put out;
The Sun is lost, and the earth, and no man's wit
Can well direct him where to look for it.
And freely men confess that this world's spent,
When in the Planets, and the Firmament
They seek so many new; they see that this
Is crumbled out again to his Atomis.
It Is all in pieces, all cohaerence gone;
All just supply, and all Relation:
Prince, Subject, Father, Son, are things forgot,
For every man alone thinks he has got
To be a Phoenix, and that then can be
None of that kind, of which he is, but he.
This is the worlds condition now, and now
She that should all parts to reunion bow,
She that had all Magnetique force alone,
To draw, and fasten sundred parts in one;
She whom wise nature had invented then
When she observed that every sort of men
Did in their voyage in this worlds Sea stray,
And needed a new compass fo their way;
She that was best, and first original
Of all fair copies; and the general
Steward to Fate; she whose rich eyes, and breast:
Guilt the West Indies, and perfumed the East;
Whose having breathed in this world, did bestow
Spice on those Isles, and bad them still smell so,
And that rich Indie which does gold interre,
Is but as single money, coined from her:
She to whom this world must it self refer,
As Suburbs, or the Microcosme of her,
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how lame a cripple this world is.
And learnst thus much by our Anatomy,
That this worlds general sickness does not lie
In any humor, or one certain part;
But as thou saw it rotten at the heart,
Thou see a Hectique fever has got hold
Of the whole substance, not to be contrould.
And that thou have but one way, not t'admit
The worlds infection, to be none of it.
For the worlds subtilst immaterial parts
Feel this consuming wound, and ages darts.
For the worlds beauty is decayed, or gone,
Disformity of parts.
Beauty, that is color, and proportion.
We think the heavens enjoy their Sphericall
Their round proportion embracing all.
But yet their various and perplexed course,
Observed in diverse ages does enforce
Men to find out so many Eccentrique parts,
Such diverse downright lines, such ouerthwarts,
As disproportion that pure form. It tears
The Firmament in eight and forty sheeres,
And in these constillations then arise
New stars, and old do vanish from our eyes:
As though heaven suffered earthquakes, peace or war,
When new Towers rise, and old demolished are.
They have empayld within a Zodiake
The freeborn Sun, and keep twelve signs awake
To watch his steps; the Goat and Crabbe control,
And fright him back, who else to either Pole,
(Did not these Tropiques fetter him) might run:
For his course is not round; nor can the Sun
Perfect a Circle, or maintain his way
One inche direct; but where he rose to day
He comes no more, but with a cousening line,
Steals by that point, and so is Serpentine:
And seeming weary with his reeleing thus,
He means to sleep, being now fallen nearer us.
So, of the stars which boast that they do run
In Circle still, none ends where he begun.
All their proportion's lame, it sinks, it swells.
For of Meridians, and Parallels,
Man has weau'd out a net, and this net thrown
Upon the Heavens, and now they are his own.
Loath to go up the hill, or labor thus
To go to heaven, we make heaven come to us.
We spur, we reign the stars, and in their race
They Are diversely content to obey our peace,
But keeps the earth her round proportion still?
Does not a Tenarif, or higher Hill
Rise so high like a Rock, that one might think
The floating Moon would shipwreck there, and sink?
Seas are so deep, that Whales being struck to day,
Perchance to morrow, scarce at middle way
Of their wished iourneys end, the bottom, dye.
And men, to sound depths, so much line untie,
As one might justly think, that there would rise
At end thereof, one of the Antipodies:
If under all, a Vault infernal be,
(Which sure is spacious, except that we
Invent another torment, that there must
Millions into a strait hot room be thrust)
Then solidnesse, and roundnesse have no place.
Are these but warts, and pockholes in the face
Of the earth? Think so: But yet confess, in this
The worlds proportion disfigured is,
That those two legs whereon it does rely, Disorder in the world.

Reward and punishment are bent awry.
And, Oh, it can no more be questioned,
That beauties best, proportion, is dead,
Since even grief itself, which now alone
Is left us, is without proportion.
She by whose lines proportion should be
Examined, measure of all Symmetree,
Whom had that Ancient seen, who thought souls made
Of Harmony, he would at next have said
That Harmony was she, and thence infer,
That souls were but Resultances from her,
And did from her into our bodies go,
As to our eyes, the forms from objects flow:
She, who if those great Douctors truly said
That th'Arke to man's proportions was made,
Had been a type for that, as that might be
A type of her in this, that contrary
Both Elements, and Passions lived at peace
In her, who caused all Civil war to cease.
She, after whom, what form soever we see,
Is discord, and rude incongruitee,
She, she is dead, she is dead; when thou know this,
Thou know how ugly a monster this world is:
And learnst thus much by our Anatomee,
That here is nothing to enamor thee:
And that, not only faults in inward parts,
Corruptions in our brains, or in our hearts.
Poisoning the fountains, whence our actions spring,
Endanger us: but that if every thing
Be not done fitly'nd in proportion,
To satisfy wise, and good lookers on,
(Since most men be such as most think they be)
They Are loathsome too, by this Deformitee.
For good, and well, must in our actions meet;
Wicked is not much worse then indiscreet.
But beauties other second Element,
Color, and luster now, is as near spent.
And had the world his just proportion,
Were it a ring still, yet the stone is gone.
As a compassionate Turcoyse which does tell
By looking pale, the wearer is not well,
As gold falls sick being stung with Mercury,
All the worlds parts of such complexion be.
When nature was most busy, the first week,
Swaddling the newborn earth, God seemd to like,
That she should sport herself sometimes, and play,
To mingle, and vary colors every day.
And then, as though she could not make inow,
Himself his various Rainbow did allow,
Sight is the noblest sense of any one,
Yet sight has only color to feed on,
And color is decayed: summers robe grows
Duskie, and like an often dyed garment shows.
Our blushing read, which used in cheeks to spread,
Is inward sunk, and only our souls are read.
Perchance the world might have recovered,
If she whom we lament had not been dead:
But she, in whom all white, and red, and blew
(Beauties ingredients) voluntary grew,
As in an vnuext Paradise; from whom
Did all things verdure, and their luster come,
Whose composition was miraculous,
Being all color, all Diaphanous,
(For Air, and Fire but thick gross bodies were,
And liueliest stones but drowsy, and pale to her,)
She, she, is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how wan a Ghost this our world is:
And learnst thus much by our Anatomee,
That it should more affright, then pleasure thee.
And that, since all fair color then did sink,
It Is now but wicked vanity to think,
To color vicious deeds with good pretense, Weakness in the want of
correspondence of heaven and earth

Or with bought colors to illude men's sense.
Nor in ought more this worlds decay appears,
Then that her influence the heaven forbeares,
Or that the Elements do not feel this,
The father, or the mother barren is.
The clouds conceive not rain, or do not power
In the due birth-time, down the balmy shower.
The Air does not motherly sit on the earth,
To hatch her seasons, and give all things birth.
Spring-times were common cradles, but are toombes;
And false-conceptions fill the general wombs.
The Air shows such Meteors, as none can see,
Not only what they mean, but what they be.
Earth such new worms, as would have troubled much,
The Egyptian Mages to have made more such.
What Artist now dares boast that he can bring
Heaven hither, or constellate any thing,
So as the influence of those stars may be
Imprisoned in an Herb, or Charm, or Tree,
And do by touch, all which those stars could do?
The art is lost, and correspondence too.
For heaven gives little, and the earth takes less,
And man least knows their trade, and purposes.
If this commerce twixt heaven and earth were not
Embarr'd, and all this trafique quite forgot,
She, for whose loss we have lamented thus,
Would work more fully' and pow'rfully on us.
Since herbs, and roots by dying, lose not all,
But they, yea Ashes too, are medicinal,
Death could not quench her virtue so, but that
It would be (if not followed) wondered at:
And all the world would be one dying Swan,
To sing her funeral praise, and vanish than.
But as some Serpents poison hurts not,
Except it be from the live Serpent shot,
So does her virtue need her here, to fit
That unto us; she working more then it.
But she, in whom, to such maturity,
Virtue was grown, past growth, that it must die,
She from whose influence all Impression came,
But, by Receivers impotencies, lame,
Who, though she could not transubstantiate
All states to gold, yet gilded every state,
So that some Princes have some temperance;
Some Counsaylors some purpose to advance
The common profit; and some people have
Some stay, no more then Kings should give, to crave;
Some women have some taciturnity,
Some Nunneries, some grains of chastity.
She that did thus much, and much more could do,
But that our age was Iron, and rusty too,
She, she is dead; she is dead: when thou know this,
Thou know how dry a Cinder this world is.
And learnst thus much by our Anatomy,
That'tis in vain to dew, or mollify
It with thy Tears, or Sweat, or Blood: no thing
Is worth our travail, grief, or perishing,
But those rich joys, which did possess her heart,
Of which she is now partaker, and a part.
But as in cutting up a man that is dead, Conclusion.

The body will not last out to have read
On every part, and therefore men direct
Their speech to parts, that are of most effect;
So the worlds carcass would not last, if I
Were punctual in this Anatomy.
Nor smells it well to hearers, if one tell
Them their disease, who feign would think they are well.
Here therefore be the end: And, blessed maid,
Of whom is meant what ever has been said,
Or shall be spoken well by any tongue,
Whose name refines course lines, and makes prose song,
Accept this tribute, and his first years rent,
Who till his dark short tapers end be spent,
As often as thy feast sees this widowed earth,
Will yearly celebrate thy second birth,
That is, thy death. For though the soul of man
Be got when man is made, it is borne but than
When man does die. Our body's as the womb,
And as a midwife death directs it home.
And you her creatures, whom she works upon
And have your last, and best concoction
From her example, and her virtue, if you
In reverence to her, do think it due,
That no one should her praises thus rehearse,
As matter fit for Chronicle, not verse,
Vouchsafe to call to mind, that God did make
A last, and lastingst piece, a song. He spoke
To Moses, to deliver unto all,
That song: because he knew they would let fall,
The Law, the Prophets, and the History,
But keep the song still in their memory.
Such an opinion (in due measure) made
Me this great Office boldly to invade.
Nor could incomprehensiblenesse deter
Me, from thus trying to emprison her.
Which when I saw that a strict grave could do,
I saw not why verse might not do so too.
Verse has a middle nature: Heaven keeps souls,
The Grave keeps bodies, Verse the same enroules.
A FUNERAL ELEGY.
It Is lost, to trust a Tomb with such a ghest,
Or to confine her in a Marble chest.
Alas, what is Marble, Ieat, or Porphiry,
Prized with the Chrysolite of either eye,
Or with those Pearls, and Rubies which she was?
Join the two Indies in one Tomb, it is glass;
And so is all to her materials,
Though every inche were ten escurials.
Yet she is demolished: Can we keep herthen
In works of hands, or of the wits of m^n?
Can th^se memorials, rags of paper, give
Life to that name, by which name they must live?
Sickly, alas, short-liu'd, aborted be
Those Carkas verses, whose soul is not sh^e.
And can she, who no longer would be sh^e,
Being such a Tabernacle, stoop to be
In paper wrapped; Or, when she would not lie
In such a house, dwell in an Elegy?
But it is no matter; we may well allow
Verse to live so long as the world will now
For her death wounded it. The world contains
Princes for arms, and Counsailors for brains,
Lawyers for tongues, Divines for hearts, and more,
The Rich for stomachs and for backs the Pore;
The officers for hands, Merchants for feet
By which remote and distant Countries meet.
But those fine spirits which do tune and set
This Organ, are those pieces which beget
Wonder and love; And these were she; and she
Being spent, the world must needs decrepit be.
For since death will proceed to triumph still,
He can find nothing, after her, to kill,
Except the world it self, so great as she.
Thus brave and confident may Nature be,
Death cannot give her such another blow,
Because she cannot such another show.
But must we say she is dead? May't not be said
That as a sundred Clock is peecemeale laid,
Not to be lost, but by the makers hand
Repolish'd, without error then to stand,
Or as the Affrique Niger stream enwombs
It self into the earth, and after comes,
(Having first made a natural bridge, to pass
For many leagues,) far greater then it was,
May't not be said, that her grave shall restore
Her, greater, purer, firmer, then before?
Heaven may say this, and joy in it; but can we
Who live, and lack her, here this vantage see?
What is it to us, alas, if there have been
An Angel made a Throne, or Cherubin?
We lose by it: And as aged men are glad
Being tastlesse grown, to joy in joys they had,
So now the sick starved world must feed vpone
This joy, that we had her, who now is gone.
Rejoice then nature, and this world, that you
Fearing the last fires hastening to subdue
Your force and vigor, ere it were near gone,
Wisely bestowed, and laid it all on one.
One, whose clear body was so pure, and thin,
Because it need disguise no thought within.
It Was but a through-light scarf, her mind t'enroule,
Or exhalation breathed out from her soul.
On^, whom all men who durst no more, admired,
And w^om, who ere had worth enough, desired;
As when a Temple's built, Saints emulate
To which of them, it shall be consecrate.
But as when Heaven looks on us with new eyes,
Those new stars every Artist exercise,
What place they should assign to them they doubt.
Argue, and agree not, till those stars go out:
So the world studied whose this piece should be,
Till she can be no bodies else, nor sh^e:
But like a Lamp of Balsamum, desired
Rather t'adorne, then last, she soon expired;
Clothed in her Virgin white integrity;
For marriage, though it do not stain, does dye.
To escape th'infirmities which wait vpone
Woman, she went away, before sh'was one.
And the worlds busy noise to overcome,
Took so much death, as served for opium.
For though she could not, nor could choose to die,
Shee'ath yielded to too long an Ecstasy.
He which not knowing her said History,
Should come to read the book of destiny,
How fair and chaste, humble and high shee'ad been,
Much promised, much performed, at not fifteen,
And measuring future things, by things before,
Should turn the leaf to read, and read no more,
Would think that either destiny mistook,
Or that some leaves were torn out of the book.
But it is not so: Fate did but Usher her
To years of Reasons use, and then infer
Her destiny to her self; which liberty
She took but for thus much, thus much to die.
Her modesty not suffering her to be
Fellow-Commissioner with destinee,
She did no more but die; if after her
Any shall live, which dare true good prefer,
Every such person is her delegate,
TO accomplish that which should have been her fate.
They shall make up that book, and shall have thanks
Offate and her, for filling up their blanks.
For future virtuous deeds are Legacies.
Which from the gift of her example rise.
And it is in heaven part of spiritual mirth,
To see how well, the good play her, on earth.
FINIS.
The Second Anniuersarie. OF THE PROGRES of the Soul. Wherein: BY OCCASION OF
THE Religious Death of Mistress ELIZABETH DRVRY, the incommodities of the Soul
in this life and her exaltation in the next, are Contemplated.

LONDON, Printed by M. Bradwood for S. Macham, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head. 1612.

THE HARBINGER to the Progres.
TWo souls move here, and mine (a third) must move
Paces of admiration, and of love;
Thy soul (Dear Virgin) whose this tribute is,
Moved from this mortal sphere to lively bliss;
And yet moves still, and still aspires to see
The worlds last day, thy glories full degree:
Like as those stars which thou ore-lookest far,
Are in their place, and yet still moved are
No soul (whiles with the lugage of this clay
It clogged is) can follow thee half way;
Or see thy flight; which does our thoughts outgoe
So fast, that now the lightning moves but slow:
But now thou art as high in heaven flowne
As heavens from us; what soul besides thine own
Can tell thy joys, or say he can rerelate
Thy glorious Iournals in that blessed state?
I envy thee (Rich soul) I envy thee,
Although I cannot yet thy glory see:
And thou (Great spirit) which here is followed have
So fast, as none can follow thine so fast;
So far as none can follow thine so far,
(And if this flesh did not the passage bar
Had raught her) let me wonder at thy flight
Which long agone had lost the vnlgar sight
And now make proud the better eyes, that they
Can see thee less'ned in thine aerie way;
So while thou make her souls by progress known
Thou make a noble progress of thine own.
From this worlds carcass having mounted hie
To that pure life of Immortality;
Since thine aspiring thoughts themselves so raise
That more may not beseem a creatures praise,
Yet still thou vow'st her more; and every year
Make a new progress, while thou wandrest here;
Still upwards mount; and let thy makers praise
Honor thy Laura, and adorn thy lays.
And since thy Muse her head in heaven shrouds
Oh let her never stoop below the clouds:
And if those glorious sainted souls may know
Or what we do, or what we sing below,
Those acts, those songs shall still content them best
Which praise those awful powers that make them blessed.
The Second Anniuersarie. OF THE PROGRES of the Soul.
NOthing could make me sooner to confess. The entrance.

That this world had an euerlastingnesse,
Then to consider, that a year is run,
Since both this lower worlds, and the Suns Sun,
The Luster, and the vigor of this All,
Did set; it were Blasphemy, to say, did fall.
But as a ship which has struck sail, does run,
By force of that force which before, it won,
Or as sometimes in a beheaded man,
Through at those two Red seas, which freely ran,
One from the Trunk, another from the Head,
His soul be saild, to her eternal bed,
His eyes will twinckle, and his tongue will roll,
As though he beckned, and called back his Soul,
He graspes his hands, and he pulls up his feet,
And seems to reach, and to step forth to meet.
His soul, when all these motions which we saw,
Are but as Ice, which crackles at a thaw:
Or as a Lute, which in moist weather, rings
Her knell alone, by cracking of her strings.
So strugles this dead world, now she is gone;
For there is motion in corruption.
As some Days are, at the Creation named,
Before the sun, the which framed Days, was framed,
So after this suns set, some show appears,
And orderly vicisitude of years.
Yet a new Deluge, and of Lethe flood,
Has drown' us all, All have forgot all good,
Forgetting her, the maine Reserve of all,
Yet in this Deluge, gross and general,
Thou see me strive for life; my life shall be,
To be hereafter praised, for praising thee,
Immortal Maid, who though thou would refuse
The name of Mother, be unto my Muse,
A Father since her chaste Ambition is,
Yearly to bring forth such a child as this.
These Hymes may work on future wits, and so
May great Grandchildren of thy praises grow.
And so, though not Revive, embalme, and spice
The world, which else would putrify with vice.
for thus, Man may extend thy progeny,
Until man do but vanish, and not die.
These Hymns thy issue, may increase so long,
As till Gods great Venite change the song.
Thirst for that time, O my insatiate soul, A just dis-estimation of this
world.

And serve thy thirst, with Gods safe-fealing Bowl.
Be thirsty still, and drink still till, thou go;
T'o the only Health, to be Hydroptique so.
Forget this rotten world; And unto thee,
Let thine own times as an old story be
Be not concerned: study not why, nor when;
Do not so much, as not believe a man.
For though to err, be worst, to try truths forth,
Is far more business, then this world is worth.
The World is but a Carkas; thou art fed
By it, but as a worm, that carcas bred;
And why should thou, poor worm, consider more,
When this world will grow better then before,
Then those thy fellow-wormes do think vpone
That carcasses last resurrectione.
Forget this world, and scarce think of it so,
As of old clothes, cast of a year ago.
To be thus stupid is Alacrity;
Men thus lethargique have best Memory.
Look upward; that is toward her, whose happy state
We now lament not, but congratulate.
She, to whom all this world it was but a stage,
Where all sat harkning how her youthful age
Should be emploid, because in all, she did,
Some Figure of the Golden times, was hid.
Who could not lack, what ere this world could give,
Because she was the form, that made it live;
Nor could complain, that this world was unfit,
To be staid in, then when she was in it;
She that first tried indifferent desires
By virtue, and virtue by religious fires,
She to whose person Paradise adhear'd,
As Courts to Princes; she whose eyes enspheard
Starlight enough, to have made the South control,
(Had she been there) the Starfull Northern Pole,
She, she is gone; she is gone; when thou know this,
What fragmentary rubbidge this world is.
Thou know, and that it is not worth a thought;
He honors it too much that thinks it naught.
Think then, My soul, that death is but a Groom, Contemplation of our state
in our deathbed.

Which brings a Taper to the outward romme,
Whence thou spiest first a little glimmering light,
And after brings it nearer to thy sight:
For such approches does Heaven make in death.
Think thy self laboring now with broken breath,
And think those broken and soft Notes to be
Division, and thy happiest Harmonee.
Think thee laid on thy death bed, loose and slack;
And think that but unbinding of a pack,
To take one precious thing, thy soul, from thence.
Think thy self parched with fevers violence,
Anger thine Ague more, by calling it
Thy Physic; chide the slacknesse of the fit.
Think that thou hearst thy knell, and think no more,
But that, as Bells called thee to Church before,
So this, to the Triumphant Church, calls thee.
Think Satan's Sergeants round about thee be,
And think that but for Legacies they thrust;
Give one thy Pride, to'another give thy Lust:
Give them those sins which they gave thee before,
And trust th'immaculate blood to wash thy score.
Think thy frinds weeping round, and think that they
Weep but because they go not yet thy way.
Think that they close thine eyes, and think in this,
That they confess much in the world, amiss,
Who dare not trust a dead man's eye with that,
Which they from God, and Angels cover not.
Think that they shroud thee up, and think from thence
They reinuest thee in white innocence.
Think that thy body rots, and (if so low,
Thy soul exalted so, thy thoughts can go.)
Think the a Prince, who of themselves create
Worms which insensibly devour their state.
Think that they bury thee, and think that right
Lays thee to sleep but a saint Lucies night.
Think these things cheerfully: and if thou be
Drowsy or slack, remember then that she,
She whose Complexion was so even made,
That which of her Ingredients should invade
The other three, no Fear, no Art could guess:
So far were all removed from more or less.
But as in Mithridate, or just perfumes,
Where all good things being met, no one presumes
To govern, or to triumph no the rest,
Only because all were, no part was best.
And as, though all do know, that quantities
Are made of lines, and lines from Points arise,
None can these lines or quantities vnioynt,
And say this is a line, or this a point,
So though the Elements and Humors were
In her, one could not say, this gouernes there.
Whose even constitution might have worn
Any disease to venture on the Sun,
Rather then her: and make a spirit fear
That he to disuniting subject were.
To whose proportious if we would compare
Cubes, they are unstable; Circles, Angulare;
She who was such a Chain, as Fate emploies
To bring mankind, all Fortunes it enioies,
So fast, so even wrought, as one would think,
No Accident, could threaten any link,
She, she embraced a sickness, gave it meat,
The purest Blood, and Breath, that ere it eat.
And has taught us that though a good man has
Title to Heaven, and plead it by his Faith,
And though he may pretend a conquest, since
Heaven was content to suffer violence,
Yea though he plead along possession too,
(For they'are in Heaven on Earth, who Heavens works do,)
Though he had right, and power, and Place before,
Yet Death must usher, and unlock the door.
Think further on thy self, my soul, and think; Incommodities of the Soul
in the Body.

How thou at first wast made but in a sink;
Think that it argued some infermitee,
That those two souls, which then thou foundst in me,
Thou fedst upon, And drewst into thee, both
My second soul of sense, and first of growth.
Think but how poor thou wast, how obnoxious,
Whom a small lump of flesh could poison thus.
This curded milk, this poor vnlittered whelpe
My body, could, beyond escape, or help,
Infect thee with original sin, and thou
Could neither then refuse, nor leave it now.
Think that no stubborn sullen Anchorit,
Which fixed to'a Pillar, or a Grave does sit
Beddded and Bathed in all his Ordures, dwells
So fowly as our souls, in their first-built Cells.
Think in how poor a prison thou did lie
After, enabled but to suck, and cry.
Think, when it was grown to most, it was a poor Inn,
A Province Packed up in two yards of skin.
And that usurped, or threatened with the rage
Of sicknesses, or their true mother, Age.
But think that Death has now enfranchised thee, Her liberty by death.

Thou have thy'expausion now and libertee;
Think that a rusty Piece, discharged, is flowen
In pieces, and the bullet is his own,
And freely flies: This to thy soul allow,
Think thy she will broke, think thy Soul hatched but now.
And think this slow-paced soul, which late did cleave,
To'a body, and went but by the bodies leave,
Twenty, perchance, or thirty mile a day,
Dispatches in a minute all the way,
Twixt Heaven, and Earth: she stays not in the Air,
To look what Meteors there themselves prepare;
She carries no desire to know, nor sense,
Whether th'Ayrs middle Region be intense,
For the Element of fire, she does not know,
Whether she past by such a place or no;
She baits not at the Moon, nor cares to try,
Whether in that new world, men live, and die.
Venus recards her not, to'enquire, how she
Can, (being one Star) Hesper, and Vesper be,
He that charmed Argus eyes, sweet Mercury,
Works not on her, who now is grown all Ey;
Who, if she meet the body of the Sun,
Goes through, not staying till his course be run;
Who finds in Mars his Camp, no corpse of Guard;
Nor is by Jove, nor by his father bard;
But ere she can consider how she went,
At once is at, and through the Firmament.
And as these stars were but so many beads
Strunge on one string, speed vndistinguish'd leads
Her through those spheres, as through the beads, a string,
Whose quick succession makes it still one thing:
As does the Pith, which, least our Bodies slack,
Strings fast the little bones of neck, and back;
So by the soul does death string Heaven and Earth,
For when our soul enioyes this her third birth,
(Creation gave her one, a second, grace,)
Heaven is as near, and present to her face,
As colors are, and objects, in a room
Where darkness was before, when Tapers come.
This must, my soul, thy long-short Progress be;
To'aduance these thoughts, remember then, that she
She, whose fair body no such prison was,
But that a soul might well be pleased to pass
An Age in her; she whose rich beauty lent
Mintage to others beauties, for they went
But for so much, as they were like to her;
She, in whose body (if we dare prefer
This low world, to so high a mark, as she,)
The Western treasure, Esterne spiceree,
Europe, and Afrique, and the unknown rest
Were easily found, or what in them was best;
And when w'haue made this large Discoueree,
Of all in her some one part then will be
Twenty such parts, whose plenty and riches is
Enough to make twenty such worlds as this;
She, whom had they known, who did first betroth
The Tutelar Angels, and assigned one, both
To Nations, Cities, and to Companies,
To Functions, Offices, and Dignities,
And to each several man, to him, and him,
They would have given her one for every limme;
She, of whose soul, if we may say, it was Gold,
Her body was th'Electrum, and did hold
Many degrees of that; (we understood
Her by her sight, her pure and eloquent blood
Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinckly wrought,
That one might almost say, her body thought,
She, she, thus richly, and largely housed, is gone:
And chides us slow-paced snailes, who crawle upon
Our prisons prison, earth, nor think us well
Longer, then whilst we bear our brittle shell.
Her ignorance in this life and knowledge in the next.
But it were but little to have changed our room,
If, as we were in this our living Tomb
Oppressed with ignorance, we still were so,
Poor soul in this thy flesh what do thou know.
Thou know thy self so little, as thou know not,
How thou did die, nor how thou wast begot.
Thou neither know, how thou at first came in,
Nor how thou took'st the poison of man's sin.
Nor do thou, (though thou know, that thou art so)
By what way thou art made immortal, know.
Thou art to narrow, wretch, to comprehend
Even thy self: yea though thou would but bend
To know thy body. Have not all souls thought
For many ages, that our body'is wrought
Of Air, and Fire, and other Elements?
And now they think of new ingredients.
And one soul thinks one, and another way
Another thinks, and ty's an even lay
Know thou but how the stone does enter in
The bladders Cave, and never break the skin?
Know thou how blood, which to the heart does flow,
Does from one ventricle to the other go?
And for the putrid stuff, which thou do spit,
Know thou how thy lungs have attracted it?
There are no passages so that there is
(For ought thou know) piercing of substances.
And of those many opinions which men raise
Of Nails and Hairs, do thou know which to praise?
What hope have we to know our selves, when we
Know not the least things, which for our use be?
We see in Authors, too stiff to recant.
A hundred controversies of an Ant.
And yet one watches, starues, freeses, and sweats,
To know but Catechismes and Alphabets
Of vnconcerning things, matters of fact;
How others on our stage their parts did Act;
What Caesar did, yea, and what Cicero said.
Why grass is green, or why our blood is red,
Are mysteries which none have reached unto.
In this low form, poor soul what will thou do?
When will thou shake of this Pedantery,
Of being thought by sense, and Fantasy?
Thou look through spectacles; small things seem great,
Below; But up unto the watchtowre get,
And see all things despoyld of fallacies:
Thou shall not peep through lattices of eyes,
Nor hear through Laberinths of ears, nor learn
By circuit, or collections to discern.
In Heaven thou straight know all, concerning it,
And what concerns it not, shall straight forget.
There thou (but in no other school) may be
Perchance, as learned, and as full, as she,
She who all Libraries had thoroughly red
At home, in her own thoughts, And practiced
So much good as would make as many more:
She whose example they must all implore,
Who would or do, or think well, and confess
That aie the virtuous Actions they express,
Are but a new, and worse edition,
Of her some one thought, or one action:
She, who in Thou Art of knowing Heaven, was grown
Here upon Earth, to such perfection,
That she has, ever since to Heaven she came,
(In a far fairer point,) but read the same:
She, she, not satisfied withal this wait,
(For so much knowledge, as would ouer-fraite
Another, did but Ballast her) is gone,
As well t'enioy, as get perfectione.
And calls us after her, in that she took,
(Taking herself) our best, and worthiest book.
Of our company in this life and in the next.
Return not, my soul, from this extasee,
And meditation of what thou shall be,
To earthly thoughts, till it to thee appear,
With whom thy conversation must be there.
With whom will thou Converse? what station
Can thou choose out, free from infection,
That will nor give thee theirs, nor drink in thine?
Shall thou not find a spungy slack Divine
Drink and suck in th'Instructions of Great men,
And for the word of God, vent them again?
Are there not some Courts, (And then, no things be
So like as Courts) which, in this let us see,
That wits and tongues of Libellars are weak,
Because they do more ill, then these can speak?
The poyson'is gone through all, poisons affect
Chiefly the cheifest parts, but some effect
In Nails, and Hairs, yea excrements, will show;
So wise the poison of sin, in the most low.
Up up, my drowsy soul, where thy new ear
Shall in the Angels songs no discord hear;
Where thou shall see the blessed Mother-maid
Joy in not being that, which men have said.
Where shee'is exalted more for being good,
Then for her interest, of motherhood.
Up to those Patriarckes, which did longer sit
Expecting Christ, then they'haue enjoyed him yet.
Up to those Prophets, which now gladly see
Their Prophecies grown to be Historee.
Up to The Apostles, who did bravely run,
All the Suns course, with more light then the Sun.
Up to those Martyrs, who did calmely bleed
Oil to The Apostles lamps, dew to their seed.
Up to those Virgins, who thoughts that almost
They made ioyntenants with the Holy Ghost,
If they to any should his Temple give.
Up, up, for in that squadron there does live
She, who has carried thither, new degrees
(As to their number) to their dignitees.
She, who being to herself, a state enjoyed
All royalties which any state emploid,
For she made wars, and triumphed, reason still
Did not overthrow, but rectify her will:
And she made peace, for no peace is like this,
That beauty and chastity together kiss:
She did high justice; for she crucified
Every first motion of rebellious pride:
And she gave pardons, and was liberal,
For, only her self except, she pardond all:
She coynd, in this, that her impressions gave
To all our actions all the worth they have:
She gave protections; the thoughts of her breast
Satan's rude Officers could nere arrest.
As these prerogatives being met in one,
Made her a sovereign state, religion
Made her a Church; and these two made her all.
She who was all this All, and could not fall
To worse, by company; (for she was still
More Antidote, then all the world was ill,
She, she does leave it, and by Death, survive
All this, in Heaven; whether who does not strive
The more, because shee'is there, he does not know
That accidental joys in Heaven do grow.
Of essential joy in this life and in the next.
But pause, My soul, and study ere thou fall
On accidental joys, th'essentiall.
Still before Accessories do abide
A trial, must the principal be tried.
And what essential joy can thou expect
Here upon earth? what permanent effect
Of transitory causes? Do thou love
Beauty? (And Beauty worthyest is to move)
Poor couse'ned cose'nor, that she, and that thou,
Which did begin to love, are neither now.
You are both fluid, changed since yesterday;
Next day repaires, (but ill) last days decay.
Nor are, (Although the river keep the name)
Yesterdaies waters, and to days the same.
So flows her face, and thine eyes, neither now
That saint, nor Pilgrim, which your loving row
Concernd, remains, but whilst you think you be
Constant, you'are howrely in inconstancee.
Honor may have pretense unto our love,
Because that God did live so long above
Without this Honor, and then loved it so,
That he at last made Creatures to to bestow
Honor on him; not that he needed it,
But that, to his hands, man might grow more fit.
But since all honors from inferiors flow,
(For they do give it; Princes do but show
Whom they would have so honored) and that this
On such opinions, and capacities
Is built, as rise, and fall, to more and less,
Alas, it is but a casual happiness.
Has ever any man to'himselfe assigned
This or that happiness, to'arrest his mind,
But that another man, which takes a worse,
Think him a fool for having taken that course?
They who did labor Babels tower to'rect,
Might have considerd, that for that effect,
All this whole solid Earth could not allow
Nor furnish forth Materials enough;
And that this Center, to raise such a place
Was far to little, to have been the Base;
No more affoords this worlds, foundatione
To erect true joy, were all the means in one.
But as the Heathen made them several gods,
Of all Gods Benefits, and all his Rods,
(For as the Wine, and Corn, and Onions are
Gods unto them, so Agues be, and war)
And as by changing that whole precious Gold
To such small copper coins, they lost the old,
And lost their only God, who ever must
Be sought alone, and not in such a thrust,
So much mankind true happiness mistakes;
No Joy enioyes that man, that many makes.
Then, soul, to thy first'pitch work upon again;
Know that all lines which circles do contain,
For once that they the center touch, do touch
Twice the circumference; and be thou such.
Double on Heaven, thy thoughts on Earth emploid;
All will not serve; Only who have enjoyed
The sight of God, in fullness, can think it;
For it is both the object, and the wit.
This is essential joy, where neither he
Can suffer Diminution, nor we;
It Is such a full, and such a filling good;
Had The Angels once looked on him, they had stood.
To fill the place of one of them, or more,
She whom we celebrate, is gone before.
She, who had Here so much essential joy.
As no chance could distract, much less destroy;
Who with Gods presence was acquainted so,
(Hearing, and speaking to him) as to know
His face, in any natural Stone, or Tree,
Better then when in Images they be:
Who kept, by diligent devotion,
Gods Image, in such reparation,
Within her heart, that what decay was grown,
Was her first Parents fault, and not her own:
Who being solicited to any Act,
Still heard God pleading his safe precontract;
Who by a faithful confidence, was here
Betrothed to God, and now is married there,
Whose twilights were more clear, then our mid day,
Who dreamt deuoutlier, then most use to pray;
Who being hear filled with grace, yet strove to be,
Both where more grace, and more capacitee
At once is given: she to Heaven is gone,
Who made this world in some proportion
A heaven, and here, became unto us all,
Joy, (as our joys admit) essential.
But could this low world joys essential touch, Of accidental joys in both
places.

Heavens accidental joys would pass them much.
How poor and lame, must then our casual be?
If thy Prince will his subjects to call thee
My Lord, and this do swell thee, thou art than,
By being a greater, grown to be less Man,
When no Physician of Reders can speak,
A joyful casual violence may break
A dangerous Apostem in thy breast;
And whilst thou ioyest in this, the dangerous rest,
The bag may rise up, and so strangle thee.
What eye was casual, may ever be.
What should the Nature change? Or make the same
Certain, which was but casual, when it came?
All casual joy does loud and plainly say,
Only by coming, that it can away.
Only in Heaven ioies strength is never spent;
And accidental things are permanent.
Joy of a souls arrival near decaies;
For that soul ever joys, and ever stays.
Joy that their last great Consummation
Approches in the resurrection;
When earthly bodies more celestial
Shall Be, then Angels were, for they could fall;
This kind of joy does every day admit
Degrees of grouth, but none of loosing it.
In this fresh joy, it is no small part, that she,
She, in whose goodness, he that names degree,
Does iniure her; (It Is loss to be called best,
There where the stuff is not such as the rest)
She, who left such a body, as even she
Only in Heaven could learn, how it can be
Made better; for she rather was two souls,
Or like to full, on both sides written Rols,
Where eyes might read upon the outward skin,
As strong Records for God, as minds within,
She, who by making full perfection grow,
Pieces a Circle, and still keeps it so,
Longed for, and longing for'it, to heaven is gone,
Where she receives, and gives addition.
Here in a place, where mis-deuotion frames Conclusion.

A thousand prayers to saints, whose very names
The ancient Church knew not, Heaven knows not yet,
And where, what laws of poetry admit,
Laws of religion, have at least the same,
Immortal Maid, I might inroque thy name.
Could any Saint provoke that appetite,
Thou here should make me a french conuertite.
But thou would not; nor would thou be content,
To take this, for my second years true Rent,
Did this Coin bear any other stamp, then his,
That gave thee power to do me, to say this.
Since his will is, that to posteritee,
Thou should for life, and death, a pattern be,
And that the world should notice have of this,
The purpose, and th'Autority is his;
Thou art the Proclamation; and I am
The Trumpet, at whose voice the people came.
FINIS.

