Apollo Christian: OR HELICON REFORMED.

ECCLES. 38.25. Scribe SAPIENTIAM in tempore vacuitatis.

HOR. de Art. Poe. Scribendi recte SAPERE est and principium, and fons.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Norton, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the King's Head. 1617.

TO THE HONOR, PROFIT, and DELIGHT OF THE MOST HONOVRABLIE DESCENDED,
AVLGERNON, LORD PERCIE, SON, AND HEIR APPARENT TO Henry, HEROIC EARL OF
Northumberland:

LORD OF THE HONORS OF COCKER MOUTH, AND PETWORTH:

LORD PERCIE, LVCIE, POININGS, FITZ-PANE, BRIAN, AND LATIMER:

KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER.

AND (UNDER HIS LORDSHIPS TITLE) FOR THE PROFIT, AND DELIGHT OF ALL THE
ILLUSTRIOUS YOVTH OF GREAT BRITAIN: OR ELSEWHERE WITHIN THE SPHERE OF THE
English Tongue: THE AUTHOR, HIS APOLLO CHRISTIAN, OR HELJCON REFORMED, IN
TESTIMONY OF LOVE, AND SERVICE TO MAGNIFICENT VERTVE, HVMBLY, RITELY,
CONSECRATETH.

PSALM. 91. In Decachordo Psalterio, cum cantico in Cithara.

HELICON REFORMED.
MELOS. I. To the Majesty of the Christian Name.
LOrd CHRIST, o give me leave and grace to sing
That sweet name JESUS, and the heavenly thing
Purport thereof, and how thou, overcome
By thine own goodness, into virgins womb
Disdeignd'st not to descend, and man to be
In second person of the TRINITEE,
Through union of substances, which great Clerks
Call Union Hypostaticke, where the marks
Of thy five purple wounds impressed abide,
In peirced hands, and feet, and trenched side.
Muses of Sion, and Mount Oliuet,
Whose ditties to men's voices are not set;
Or notes of Helicon, that dainty spring,
But Angels: neither tune ye to the string,
Or stops of breath, your most harmonious strains,
But to the spheares'selues where my Lord remains.
Ye blessed Faeries, Sirens, Sisters nine
(So many heavens are to the chrystalline)
Borrow a while the five wise virgins lamps,
Go down to David's tomb, and through the damps
Of time, and death, bring hither from his shrine,
That instrument of Psalmody divine,
His ten-strung harp, his great triangled Lyre,
Whose sacred sounds when furious Saul did hear,
Th'll spirit fled so they, who understand,
May quickened be with our God-guided hand.
MELOS. II. To the most rare virtue of true humility.
KIng Godfrey would not wear
A diadem of gold, Upon the Crown of thorns.

Where CHRIST his Lord did bear
A crown of thorns, whose every cruel fold
That royal head did tear;
Dipping their sharp points deep,
While Angels stood to weep,
In that most precious blood,
Whose venerable flood,
Made withered stocks green buds, and leaves to bear.
Godfreys devotion such,
Finds now a starry crown,
In city, more, by much,
Noble and fair, then that recouer'd town.
Whom Christ's thorns do not tuch,
Whom his blood moves not,
Who has Christ's love forgot,
Were he the greatest thing,
That ever was called King,
At being spurned to hell ought not to grutch.
MELOS. III. To the just confusion of vicious self-love.
David does free against himself confess,
And freely Paul, nor are they Saints the less.
God knows, and foreknowes all, nor will vpbraid
Or benefits, or blame, if we afraid
To leese his love, repent, and sin no more.
Confession does display the secret sore,
Counsel is medicine, mercy does apply.
Who ever else is good, a sinner I.
And if for this ingenuous dealing plain
Any despise, or do repute me vain,
I am a sinner I, and say it still.
And they who think themselves deuoyd of ill.
Or like an Abrase table pure and free,
To them I do not scorn, a scorn to be,
Themselves a scorn to God. For who wants sin?
Yet glory out of shame to seek to win
Has desperate ambition Then for this,
Another time, and place more proper is.
But best begins confession works of fame,
For God is reconciled by the same:
That sacrifice is Abels holocaust.
Grace making gracious, o how hard thou draw'st
Proud flesh, and blood to such an humble state,
As life's acts past to recapitulate!
In my books front, lo, to Gods honor stands
That I most sinner am, if so his hands
I may in Christ eschew, and vengeance escape.
Give to this holy work a perfect shape,
Most heavenly Father, for thy Son I sing,
Who both is Priest, Altar, and Offering.
His wounds had they not bled, my tears had trill'd,
And sighs had blown in vain those cisterns filled
With crimsen juice scruz'd from the gory grapes
Of his celestial vine, renew old shapes,
And wash black sins as white as infant borne.
I who, and all the world had been forlorn,
But for this heavenly benefit, must show,
That from whom's all, to him we all do owe.
MELOS. IV. To the satisfaction of commendable praise-loue.
O Why should mortals titles covet,
God's bafful'd so by Pontius Pilas, Upon the title in the table of the Cross.

In fixing up the crosses table?
A vain affection, yet we love it,
And neither is it to revile at.
For who would not seem honorable?
All Antiquaries cease your searches,
For the inscribed tables matter,
As whither Olive, Palm, or Cedar.
Upon the tropheas top it pearches,
And he who would in honors glitter,
Sure, must not only be a reader.
I do confess me most ambitious
Of The English Lyricks noble title,
Mine is the comfort, God's the glory.
O be then, o be propitious,
For albeit my power is little,
Yet is my love not perfunctorie.
Thy style in Hebrew, Greek and Roman,
JESUS Nazaren, King of Jews all,
As if that Pilat had turned Prophet.
Who wants title seems no man:
Christ's passion give it to my Muse all.
(...) proves often best when proud ones scoff it.
Thus will I never envy Caesar,
And favorites of Kings think under,
Without applying to times humors,
Talents of mind, destroyed by pleasure.
The sick world's cure a work of wonder,
I court not fame, nor phansies rumors.
Great Lady Fame, the vain man's Goddess.
Fair Truth and Judgment thee do marshall
After Queen Virtue. She is Sovereign.
So shadows hand maids are to bodies.
If metit be let men be partial.
But no doome's ill so Christian love reign.
The English Language rich in phrases,
(O Lamb of God, o Kingly Lion)
Rival to Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
By me the trumpet of thy praises,
Shall into Albion transport Sion,
And Christ's broad seal confirm my Paten.
MELOS. V. A Romant of Christ's Acts. To the clearing of CHRISTIANITIES bonor,
from all comparisons, and indignities. ADVERSVS PSEVDO PHILOSOPHOS,
PSEVDOPOLITICOS, ETOMNES OMNINO, NON SATIS CHRISTIANOS.
. 1.
LOrd Christ, by thee this whole huge frame was made,
By thee the deep foundations first were laid,
From whence the palace of the heavens did rise,
And all which seems so glorious in our eyes.
From thine eyes fire the stars and planets took
The light they use, each fountain, sea, and brook,
Ran liquid from thy mouth, the earth was clad
In herbs, and flowers, and fruits their colors had
By the bright seals of their Prototypons,
And first Idaeas, whose reflections
Came from thy mind, and th'obiects printed fair,
Engrain'd with dies which successory are.
Time was not till thou hung'st the Sun on high,
Bidding him run, days arbiter, and eye.
Fishes, birds, beasts, and man, that noble thing,
Had shape and life by thee, their God and King.
Angels, the sparks of thine own flame divine
By thee enabled were to be, and shine:
And (which much better had lain hidden still)
Metals and gemms under each shore and hill,
Thou close did couch, for use to the worlds end,
When man would more on means then God depend:
Or to adorn thy house, the house of prayer,
Where nothing should be seen but bright and fair.
For either in thy Churches gold does best,
Or gold, of all things, is the most unblessed.
. 2.
THis all is creation, Gods Hexameron,
That six days work he could have done in one,
Or, as he shall consume it in a trice,
So could have raised the whole edifice,
This Architecture of th'huge Universe
(Whose nobler parts who is it can rehearse
With equal praise to their creations state?)
This mass which one soul does inanimate,
This goodly greatness, this fair Arc of things,
Borne up in God, which my Muse sums, not sings,
The work of our redemption does exceed,
Both in the worth, and honor of the deed,
As infinitely as Gods mercy stands,
Above all the works of his celestial hands
Obnoxious man, whose benefit it is,
Cease o to be ungrateful, tend to this;
For thou art bound; if benefits may bind,
And benefits of so transcendent kind.
For better had the glories we behold,
Remained in Chaos, up together rolde,
Heavens azure glass vnblowne-out into spheres,
And every suit which mother Nature wears,
Been absolutely void, no acrie screene,
The conuex globe, and hollow skies between,
Better had that fine bubble, Lordly Man,
Whose sin so gored Christ, our Pelican,
Better, o better had high God forborne
To make him out of molde, and to adome
Our Microcosm in Adam Protoplast,
With gifts divine through his foul lapse defaced,
Better that nothing still had stood for all,
Unless a world were made which should not fall,
Had not redemption in her lap received,
What Furies had of man's first state bereaved.
To build a palace, worthy of a Prince,
For Apes, and Owls is no magnificence;
But prodigality, and bad excess,
And notes the sounder for unworthiness.
Or, if magnificence, then such the cost,
Which the old Egyptians on their Temples lost,
Under their Pharaohs, and their Ptolomees,
From Nile-brancht Delta, to black Meroes,
And Birds, Beasts, Crocodiles, the god-heads were,
Which those Idolaters adored there.
It Is not the pomp, nor Majesty of things,
But the use they serve unto which honor brings.
What glory had it been to the Creator,
Of all things out of nothing to be Author,
If only Sprights, and Goblins there should dwell,
And man for whom he made them damned in hell?
But this was worthy of Gods nature sweet
(With which in man's men doc most rarely meet)
For his own sake rebellion to forgive,
And, for his Courts sake, letting man to live:
Nor only so, but to remove the bar,
His justice put, and by the which we are
For ever disinherited of heaven,
It pleased him his own Son should be given,
A voluntary sacrifice for all.
Thus Adam nothing lost by Adams fall.
He lost Euphrates, and swift Tygris river;
But drinks the water makes him live for ever:
He lost to abide on earth in endless bliss;
Has better joys in other Paradise:
He lost an Eden; but an Heaven has found:
He has a firmament; he lost but ground:
Before, his body never should have died;
But now his body shall be glorified:
As then his body his souls mansion was;
Now soul and body unto glory pass:
As then he trembled at the voice of God;
Now, face to face, in his divine abode,
He God beholds, and shall behold for ever:
As then his bliss did but in sense persevere;
Now in his soul: then happy but in part;
Now in the whole: Adam, how blessed thou art!
As then his objects dainty land-skeps were,
And clear Horizons, May-months all the year;
Now mysteries and types revealed do feed
His happy soul, and time he does not need:
Eua in Edon was his natural joy;
Now supernatural sweets them both employ:
And for the beauties of a blanched skin,
Christ's Spouse they see, whose beauties are within:
His walks were then among fresh trees and flowers;
Now Alleluia sings in heavenly bowers:
The flocks of stars were then above his head;
Now underneath his feet are trauersed:
There were as then no birds, nor beasts of prey,
And Eagles did with Doves together play,
To make his Lordship sport, who Monarch was;
But, where he is, there nothing is so base,
As beasts, or birds, nor needs fond delight:
He reigns now, where every meanest wight,
Does far excel the state of greatest Kings:
The Cherubim now fan him with their wings,
And the head with plumes impalpable do shade,
Against which was brandished a fiery blade:
The streams of Eden had some gemms of price;
Rich stones, and unions wall new Paradise:
There nakedness and sin did make him hide;
Here all things ever cleeere in sight a bide:
The tree of knowledge quite forbidden there;
Is common, and communicable here:
There he for diet was to fruit confinde;
Now hunger is not: God does feed his mind:
And that which is the iustest joy of all,
His whole posterity, who through his fall,
Had reason to lament, as suffering loss,
Now, through th'exaltiue virtue of the cross,
He sees in bliss, without original blot,
And (grace surmounting sin) that they were not,
Nor ever shall be by his act endomaged,
As freed by Christ, who hell for them had romaged:
Gods promised mercy being most complete,
Each Tribe high placed on triumphant seat,
And every Saint distinguished with marks,
Martyrs, Apostles, Virgins, Patriarchs,
Fellows of Angels, friends, and sons of light,
And therefore dearest in their makers sight,
Eua to Aue turned, hard sweat and pain,
To joy and peace. How great is Adams gain!
For in times fullness, the incarnate Word,
Theanthropos, Messiah, Christ our Lord,
(That is, Gods offspring, and himself high God)
Who weilds the Scepter, and the iron rod,
Vonchsafed in the Maidens womb to dwell,
To ransom us from servitude and hell.
Abasing his great Majesty, and came
(O happy coming!) to unite this frame,
This clayie fabric of mortality,
To God the Father. This was by and by
Effected. O the wonder! o the joy!
A riddance clear from all extreme annoy.
. 3.
HE came: before him came the Baptist John,
Herald, and harbinger of redemption,
Whose cries in deserts did so far rebound,
As filled all peopled places with the sound.
Never man's worth such testimony gained
As this great Prophet. Yet there had remained
Among Gods people most exemplar Saints.
Grave Jeremy with gorgeous words depaints
The sacred Order of the Nazarenes,
Whose lives, and doctrines, in his holy Threnes,
To milk, snow, iuory, and to sapphires fair,
Fornutritiue, and pure he does compare.
Nor with small feruor the same pen endites
The praises of th'abstemious Rechabites.
These were of them whom blessed Paul describes
To be the choysest glories of their Tribes,
Clothed in goat skins, without perfumes, or dress,
Wandering on mountains, and in wilderness,
For-borne by wild beasts, but by Tyrants slain,
Stoned in towns whom rocks let safe remain,
And poor distressed from cave to cave did pass,
Of whom the wretched world unworthy was.
And though that Henoch, and Elias were
Most eminent, so that our Master here
Upon mount Thabor did the Thesbite see,
The Baptist was as great as he, or he.
Therefore of him would Christ his baptism take,
And was baptized for examples sake.
Jordan saw this, and where our Savior stood
Came trembling forward, the abashed flood
Unworthy, Christ's most sacred limbs to touch,
Nor could the opening heavens admire too much,
This secret most profound, that Mercies Sea
In narrow river should contained be:
Before this time Christ well declared had,
By arguing with the Doctors, what was clad
In scorned semblant. Natures author he.
How else cold fountain water changed be
(The first of his great wonders) into wine?
Honoring marriage, mystery divine:
But who has words sufficient to express,
The testimonies of his heauenlinesse?
Words are too weak, seeing that other John,
The Gospels Eagle, Christ's beloved One,
A flures us (nor is his assurance vain)
That the wide world could not the Tomes contain
Might written be of miracles he did.
Yet let us touch some. For, enthronized
Although he be, right at his fathers hand,
This monument will to good purpose stand.
. 5.
OVt of pure nothing all the world was raised,
And being somewhat God the Son it pais'd.
God all power gave to him as he was man.
Who wonders at it? He who all things can,
May all things govern well, and so does he.
Evangelists (four of you such there be)
Whom great Ezechiel, poet most divine,
In figures four expressed. As, Matthew, thine,
And thine o Marck, Saint Peter's scholar sworn,
And Luke, and John, on Eagles wings high borne,
Matthew presented in a winged man's image,
Marck in a Lions, Luke, CHRIST'S mothers lineage
Describing, by the winged Ox is known.
Their harmony a perfect Unison.
That what Justinian of the Septuagint,
In Romes laws most authentic instrument,
What Aristaas or the Fathers write
Concerning Scriptures brought in Greek to light,
At Ptolomees command, to enrich the store
Of Alexandria's books, the same much more
Is certain in the Gospels rare concent.
Those first Translatours of the old Testament
Divinely did accord, although apart
They sat in several cells, that so to Art
Their harmony could not imputed be.
By the same Spirit did these four agree,
Their concord worthiest to be most admired,
As most undoubted, and alike inspired,
Not in one place, as were those seauentie two,
Nor at one time, and what they had to do
Was not deriuatiue, but original.
Upon this Quadrate Evangelical,
This rockie Basis, truth her tower does build,
Which, spite of weather, still has stronger held.
Himself writ nothing, nothing did commit,
Or did omit, which the most captious wit
Could charge for sin, or could be better done.
Enough, enough: this shows he was Gods son.
Majesty made him others pens to use,
And Deity his spirit to infuse.
. 5.
MOst wondrous this, that he should be so poor,
As not to have or couch, or homely bowr
In which to rest his venerable head,
Propriety by him unpracticed.
Such as are down in means do feel this state
Most difficult of all to eleuate,
And that a weight of wonder lies therein.
O whither yet from hence did he not win?
Nothing to have, and yet all things to sway?
Apostles twelve, Disciples do obey
Thrice two times twelve to his magistrall will.
These he did cloth, these he with food did fill
Out of his doctrines force. For Lordships he,
And farms had none, though his the whole earth be,
With whatsoever creatures are therein.
The Oeconomie of Hierarchy seen.
They begged not, they lackt nothing, nor took care
For morrowes, a felicity most rare.
He Primate among his, and worthiest, was,
Providing that no day should ouerpasse
To be repented, as in wants dis-spent.
What of the Author of the firmament
Durst men hope less? The blind, the deaf, the lame,
The dumb, sick, dead, who to their senses came
Through his immediate gift were infinite.
He grew authenticke in the peoples sight.
Angels who had been changed from white to black,
From fair to foul, from such as no bliss lack
To such as all bliss want, and others make
To lack alike, he did so thoroughly shake,
That among swine they gladly harbor sought,
Nor could obtaiue, till leave of him was got.
Thus was the Devil trampled under foot,
As God had promised, when in natures root
Man blasted was by his infernal guile.
. 6.
FRom hence let me convert my mounting style
To the last act of his most wondrous life.
His sermons we omit, in Gospel rife,
Rife, and exact, as the rein penned down
By God, who spoke them. And in all the crown
Of auditors, who did not rise admiring?
Or who does read his words, and more desiring,
And thinking more from roading does not rise?
Witness those daily swelling Libraries
Grown out of comments on his sermons made;
Into whose depths no mortal wit can wade,
Nor line can sound th'abysses of his lore.
We often know the less by knowing more,
Abyss begets abyss, mystery mystery,
All schools are blanckt, all eloquence, all history.
Nor lies this hardness in th'Euangelists,
Who weaue their text with most transparent twists,
And on the precious groundwork cause t'appeare
The images of acts so perfect clear,
And with proportion; so exact, and true,
As make no dainty of an open view,
Nor does the Greek with dialects vex the sense,
As th'Hebrew with their words equiualence
To sundry uses; th holy phrase is fit,
As Well for loftiest, as for lowest wit,
And, as much as the largest tongue can be,
To all intents of full capacitee:
Nor stints the marvel here. For, who so dull
That somewhat not conceiues? and who so full,
Whose stores may not increase ten thousand fold?
Gods wisdom in it does the wonder hold.
Abstract from miracles, for weak ones granted
(Who wholly build on them are often scanted)
His parables, his sentences, his speeches,
Are altogether such, as no mind reaches
The fullness of their Anagogicke sense.
Pole is from pole not so far distant hence
As Fathers, Doctors, Counsels are far short,
Not of the truth, but of th'entire purport.
Yet is it written, and that writ is right,
That in his light we faithful should see light,
And from one cleerenesse passing to another,
Last times should open what the first did smother.
O, had we been so happy from on high,
As to have felt the force, and energie,
And most victorious utterance of Christ's words,
Did Scripture, as it substances affords,
The postures of his action show to us,
And gestures grace, which th'artificious
Are so much in, o had we been so blessed,
Rapture could only serve to speak the rest.
Enough to constitute a proof past nay,
That he was God who so could do, and say.
Therefore adore we thee, o Savior sweet,
In whom the lines of all perfections meet.
. 7.
Divine Eschequer, Treasury divine,
Where God our God does all the wealth enshrine
Of SAPIENCE, and of SCIENCE, gifts of his,
Out of that treasures most immense abyss,
Whereof small pieces, scattered here and there
In humane nature, did the heathens rear
To all the splendour which their writings boast,
(Properly ours, theirs but usurped at most)
O cast dear God into my mind, and sense,
Some heavenly sterling, some spiritual pence;
Shower down in donatiue thy missill bounties,
In honor of thy Son, while I dismount ease,
To mount his name, out of all hands to strike
Well worded madness, which the times best like.
Cares from my head; drive weariness from my hands,
Turn scruples into spurrs, the Syrts, and sands
Of perturbations, to firm grounds of sense,
Which Romants more do love then eloquence.
. 8.
MOses Gods acts did sing, and David too.
David, and Moses would have much to do,
Were they his fullest praise to undertake,
For, what a fame does sacred Moses make,
By having brought the Israelites past fear,
When the Erythraean seas disparted were,
Like walls on either side to let them pass,
Closing again as Pharaoh held on chase,
Hoping to charge, with chariots armed for fight,
The trembling sons of Abraham in their flight?
What pomp of style? what ornaments of phrase
Use not Gods Prophets when this act they praise?
Again, whose pen extols not Sinais thunder?
The Deserts Manna? and, what else was wonder,
In that great Captains march to hoped rest?
Which God had promised in country blessed.
Lastly, what wants to express the glorious state
Of Salomons temple? Scriptures do abate
All pomp, all greatness, when compared to it.
The ancient maruailes even to one do fit
Our masters person, office, and renown.
No miracle worth naming but his own.
For, how far substance shadows does excel,
Things done their figures set in parallel,
So far the sacred kernel of CHRIST'S deeds
The gorgeous husk of those great types exceeds.
. 9.
HEre challenge I all Heathen wits, and Worthies,
All Conquerours, and noble pens which for these
Have coniur'd Helicon, called Apollo down,
By monuments t'eternize that renown,
Which they their patrons had by brave deeds gained,
Their Tripods, Sibylls, and their wonders feigned,
To piece with falsehood out their Gods defect:
Here challenge I (let whose will them protect)
Their Jove's, their Marses, and their Mercuries,
Their Dij Penates, and Indigetes,
Or (who were more in worth, though less in fame)
Their Paul's, their Scipio's, and what gallant name
The Arsacid's line, the race of Ptolomees,
The Caesar's vaunted, or, if out of these,
Proud Paganism had oughts more admirable,
Great Alexander, Traian incomparable
(A duanced by wits vanity to the state
Of Demigods) the life t'equiparate,
And words, and works of Moses wondrous man,
Who maruels acted in the Land of Cham,
And terrible things in rosy-colored seas,
Who was true Trismegist, and not Hermes,
Priest, Prophet, Prince, o very Trismegist,
Truly most great. Enter who will the List,
I challenge all the heathen, sure to win.
And to this combat let come also in
Their Mages, Brathmanns, Areopagites,
Their Solons, their philosophies, and rites:
Let China her Confutius also bring,
Her Realms Lawmakers, and does seem a thing
More worthy admiration then what either
Chaldie, or Egypt, Greece, put all together,
Can show for an effect of heathen wit,
The Academ, the most learned Stagyrit;
Bring Simon Magus, and th'impostr'ous mate
Borne at Tyana, whom fond Philostrate
Blasphemoufly durst unto CHRIST compare,
Iannes, and Mambres, and who famous are
For Lady witches, Circe, and that crew;
Pownd all into one dose, yea let hell spew
More black Ingredients, to obtain the prize
By counterfets, and mists, to blind the eyes;
Let th'instances be fabulous, or true,
Gods servant far excels, and does subdue
Seemings with substance, moral with divine.
Nor is this an hyperbole of mine.
All heathen greatness put into one act
Cannot be made so great, nor so exact,
As that by which our Moses Israel freed,
His knowledge being equal to his deed:
And all the heathen learnings, Laws, and Arts
Together put, come far beneath his parts.
Not that the Gentiles natures were not rare,
Their acts not great, their worths not singular,
Their speech not exquisite, their thoughts not high,
Their studies not most noble: to deny
These famous truths were abject, poor, and base,
Yea more (o Christians) to our just disgrace,
We cannot but confess, that they out went,
And far outwent, most of our excellent,
Through our default, whose sloth betrays our powers.
And would to God that in these days of ours,
Their justice, candor, valor, temperance,
And other virtues which did so advance
Their names, and countries under natures Law,
Could now more like them into practice draw:
They are confessed to be heroic high,
Glorious, and what not? and the Deity
Was in their persons prettily resembled.
But at the voice of Moses nations trembled.
The plagues of Egypt want a parallel
Even in their fables. For what one hears tell
(Read all the fictions which their Fasti hold,
Their poems, and their Annals) one so bold,
And blessed withal, who single, ever durst
Enter a Tyrants Court, and he at worst,
Disposed to all injustice, tort, and wrong,
To free six hundred thousand, captive long
(As long as here five hundred years could make)
And force him in the end conditions take,
Not such as Majesty would yield unto,
But such as Moses did compel to do?
Moses in all the Egyptian learnings taught,
What he would work prerogatiuely wrought,
Not with base prai'rs, or with rude force of hand,
But with a force which men could not withstand.
Withstand they did, but did withstand in vain.
Ianues, and Mambres who did then sustain
The persons of the wisemen, and the wit
Of all the heathen (for no Mages yet,
Or them before, had more prestigious skill,
More charms, more spirits, or could more fulfill)
And in their persons, Moses did confound
All the worlds Arts, all which this globous Mound
Of sea, and earth has in it great, or rare,
Set against God, by whom, and whose they are.
Nor do I wonder that it should be so,
Nor is it wonderful. For we must know,
That the first heathen had from us their lights.
By Abraham the Mesopotamites,
And Sages of Chalda^ knew the sky,
The rules, and doctrines of Astronomy;
And Iacoh, and the Patriarchs ( Abraham's seed)
To Egypt brought the plant, which there a weed
Through superstition, and through fraud became:
The plant of Science ground of Joseph's fame,
Joseph the father of Onerocrites,
Jacob of sacred lore, and sacred rites,
And natures secrets (which deprau'd in time,
Filled Mizraim with more monsters then Niles slime
Through Phoebus beams is said to have engendered)
All which to Greece by Plato Egypt tendered.
Plato confesses it, where he brings in
The Priest of Saim, plainly telling him,
That they, the Greeks, were babes, and nothing knew,
No, nor that Priest, though what he said was true
Of Greeks antiquities, which as Greece did want,
So that Priest bragged, making an idle vaunt
Of Acts, of ages, and the Atlanticke I Will,
To glorify his Memphis, and his Nile.
For that no nation this day under sky,
Nor ever could show such antiquity,
As Moses has delivered of the Jews.
And in this faith be confident my Muse.
Nor had the heathen only thus the seed,
And roots of knowledge, but even skill to read.
Letters the invention of the Hebrews were,
Not theirs who dwelt at Sidon, and at Tire,
Two cities of Phaenicia most renowned,
Whose colonies replenisht Carthage ground.
Though Europe at the second hand might have
Letters from thence, which Jews to them first gave.
For th'Hebrewes letters had before the flood.
How prove we that? The proof we have is good.
Iubal, when the earth her first fruit yet did bear,
Nor had, or hills, or Isles, which after were,
So some conceive) as waters ouerswayd,
And an vneuenesse in the even globe made,
Iubal (as most authenticke rolls declare)
Iubal contrived how to tune the aer,
Apt notes inuenting, and to them inuents
The solemn harp, and other instruments.
Which, without letters, how could men devise?
Letters the stays of notes, and harmonies.
So idle those conceits the old heathen tell,
How the first gittarn was a Tortoyse-shell,
Whose sinews dride, and touched did yield a sound,
Or Cyclops hammers to be musicks ground.
Again, before the flowd, that Henoch spoke
Charactered was. Tertullian proof does take
Out of that Author, as Canonical,
And him defends. So of right should all.
For Jude The Apostle Henochs book does cite.
And books were not till learned Clerks could write.
Of doomesday Henoch propheside before,
Heavens cataracts had drowned the earths shore.
Conceit so impious no man entertaines,
As if the Bible were of humane brains,
The politic, or euphantasticke birth,
There can be no such prodigy on earth.
Nor is there Atheist, neither can there be,
Swear it who will, death never shall it see.
Therefore no need to busy me to prove
That in the which it is damned least doubt to move.
For who Gods Church contemn, yet by the shine
Of the works selves must yield the works divine:
Yea, they seem fallen from charity too much,
Who can believe there can be any such.
For though in heart the fool said as he said,
And as a bruit would feign it so have had,
Yet David notes it only for a thought,
And not a Thesis.
Thus letters are the worlds debt to the Jews.
Which Moses most excelled in, best did use.
His Pontateuchus, or five Tomes divine,
Antiquities treasures are, and learnings shrine.
Tribonian therefore wronged Instinian much,
Heathens wronged Christians, calling Homers such.
And, should we grant that Moses did not pass
(Though far he did) what ever glorious was,
Learned, and great in all the world beside,
Yet, whatsoever was the cause of pride,
Of gloriation, or of largest fame
Among the noblest Heathens, all the same
Christians have right to, not as Isreal's Tribes
To Aegypts jewels (their departures bribes)
But because God was Natures Lord, and she
Their Goddess, but our selves Gods children be,
They are but bastards, or, as hirelings, base,
To Moses they, Moses to Christ gives place.
Moses the Hebrews through red seas did guide;
Christ through hell-fires: Moses dampt Pharaohs pride;
Christ Lucifers; Moses did Manna give;
Christ the Eucharist, which makes us ever live:
Moses led Jews but unto Palestine,
Himself not entering; Christ to land divine,
Himself first entering, did conduct his flock,
Salomons Temple, whose brave worths did mock
All the worlds wonders, a poor semblant was
Of that Jerusalem, to which they pass
Who through the red seas of CHRIST'S blood do go,
Or through their own, as Martyrs great, or so.
JERUSALEM, in her most happy days
Compared with that City, whose heavens rays
The Apocalypse describes was but base,
A petty village, void of power, or grace:
Silver was as street-stones in Salomons time;
But in Christ's city precious stones the clime
Do paue throughout, and deck the glittering gates.
More odds between their persons then their states.
. 10.
MOst wonderfu'l was that which does remain,
Who might have reared to himself a reign,
A Monarchy, such as th'Assyrian never,
Nor Medes, nor Persians, Greeks, nor Rome had ever,
Fled from the people would not be a King,
Because he infinitely was a greater thing;
Fled from the people, neither would command
But as a God, maker of sea, and land,
Because his errand was to bear heavens wrath,
Which God All-mighty to all sinners has,
And pay the utmost farthing of man's debt.
He who is own death with one word could let,
And could, as Gods Word, have refused to be
This wtetched thing called mortal man, even he
Contented was to fall into soes power,
Suffering himself, during the dismal hour,
To be, in body, his own vassalls thrall,
To Herod's palace tossed from Pilats hall,
And hurried to and fro, from bad to worse,
Annas and Carphas both within Gods curse.
. 11.
ANd why? my God, and why, Redeemer dear,
Did thou submit thy self to such things here?
O, and alas, what was there in vile man,
Which should inuit thee to endure such pain?
Was all the world of creatures so much worth,
As that thou therefore should a man come forth?
Flow ye my tears, sighs open break my breast,
O sorrows! o let others tell the rest!
Verily, God, all that this frame has fair,
All it has rich, all that the earth, or aer,
Water, or fire, are bubbles in respect.
Do not, ah do not thine own self neglect,
Go back to heaven, let us to hell sincke rather,
Then thou endure thus much. But God, our Father,
Would have it so. And could there be, in God,
So great regard of us? Let any rod,
Let and plague afflict old Adams seed,
Rather then Christ. But God has it decreed.
What God has once decreed no power can bar.
But, is it possible that men so far
Should fall from grace, as to reduce them home,
Thou must from heavens height like a stranger come,
And be held prisiner, buffeted, abused,
Scorned, spet upon, scourged, and with cudgels bruiz'd?
From Gabatha be shown, and Bar-abbas
(Thou to the cross called upon) let pass?
O is it possible that this should be,
And thou Gods Son? or (which more wounds thee)
That, after all this, man should live ingrate?
It Is possible. Ah, what can eleuate
The groueling souls of mortals? what can rear
Their down-cast minds? Thou did vouchsafe to bear,
And we thee bless for bearing. Men, aspire,
Your center is not earth, but some thing higher.
To make us free thy self becam'st thus bound.
To make us children, heirs of better ground
Then Canaan, or Fdens self had any,
Thou lay'dst aside thy robes, and glories many,
Thy crown of stars, scepter of diamonds bright,
Thy chair of state, thy chambers floor'd with light,
Thy galleries of saphyr, gardens green,
Adorned with musiue works, and flowrets sneene,
Through which pure crystal flows, on whose fresh banks,
Angels sing carcls, and immortal thanks,
And all the solaces which heavens afford,
To be a servant, and a worm abhord.
. 12.
Muse, time will come when I shall celebrate
The residue of his great acts, and state,
And most of all that love, whose golden shafts,
Wounded him so, that 'spite of all the crafts,
And policies, and stratagems of hell
To hinder it, did work so wondrous well,
As plainly vanquished with his Spouses eyes,
He came among us in that base disguise,
And poor and friendlesse founded such a might,
As conquers all the world, and does by right
Break Realms of enemies as towrs of glass.
This miracle all miracles does pass.
Meanewhile my Decasyllabons rest in peace,
The way to hold out is a while to cease.
MELOS. VI. To the noble young Gentlemen of Great BRITAIN.
COme away, Dear, come away,
Let not light songs make you stay.
Noble souls, leave, leave at large,
What will one day come in charge,
Time ill spent, and good hours squandred,
While your thoughts have sweetly wandered,
In the dreams of elues, and faeries,
After beauty which but aer is,
Leesing God, and selves the while.
Glorious wits, what does beguile,
What so sowly you bewitches,
With the shows of worth, and riches,
Lovely shapes, and forms of pleasure,
Strongly phansied as if treasure,
That you thus leave Sion quite,
Where true Muses, day, and night,
Honor beauties fading never,
And at Helicon persevere?
Come away, Deate, come away,
Let not light songs make you stay.
Minds divine, and Spirits haughty,
Here, behold, my Muse has taught ye,
Hippocren to be but muddy.
Cedrons quick brook once made ruddy,
By our Saviors sacred wounds,
Waters has which have no grounds,
Dreggs that settle in the bottom,
Aer not troubled with an Atom,
Heavenly wholesome to it has,
As not Buxton, Flint, or Bath.
Such a Lady, such a beauty,
Queen of Muses there to suit ye,
Each with loves, and each with Graces,
As no forests, woods, or Chases,
Where rank Satyrs, lewd Fawnes wanton,
Into all Saints turning Pantheon.
Come away, Dear, come away,
Let not light songs make you stay.
DEO GRATIAS.
SOLI DEO HONOR ET GLORIA,
AMEN.
THE PRISONERS O.
O CLAVIS DAVID, ET SCAEPTRVM DOMVS ISRAEL.
The Prisoners O.
THe key of the abyss under which the prince of hell was shut, was (says the
Apocalypse) in the custody of an holy Angel his iaylour: but the key, which did
first open the kingdom of heaven to all believers, was in thy custody, o thou
Son of DAVID, being formed out of that sacrificing iron, with which thy
immaculate flesh was in five places peirced. Thy victorious agony was the
Potarrh which blew up the brazen doors of hell. Nay, thou thy self art the
key as thou art the door, and the way. Open thy gates, o my foul, that the
King of glory may come in Who is the King of glory? o who? It is he without
whose key all graces are locked up in thee, as wares without use, and without
whom the gates of heaven in self are for ever shut against thee.

A mystery, a very great mystery is in this Apostrophe.

O KEY OF DAVID, AND SCEPTER OF THE HOUSE OF ISRAEL:
This is the mystery, that the keys are herein joined with the scepter of
the house of Israel. For who has not heard that there appeared, to Great
Constantine, our Lords name in Greek cipher? The capital letter whereof, P,
passing perpendicularly through the midst of the capital letter, X, a figure
was produced representative of the cross in a part, and significatiue of the
crucified in the total, as thus:

And what was this else but an Hiereglyphicke of the keys, and scepter
conjoined? These characters are capable of such a position, and, as they are
capable, so certainly is it their proper also. The place of Roh, in that
celestial proportion in Brachigraphie, is the place of the Scepter, and the
place of the Keys is the place of Chi: And, let them be so configured, trust
to me never, if the mystery be as not authentic, as superlatiuely important.

The keys of his Preisthood do lock, and unlock heaven, and his Scepter,
passing through them, protects what it vpholds, and gouernes as well above, as
here. It is a rod of many names. It is a rod of direction, it is a rod of
correction, it is a rod of power, and the only treble mace by which heaven,
earth, and hell are awed, and regulated. So that in respect of those two chief
authorities, preist-hood, and regalitie, meeting in the person of our Savior,
King of Kings, and Prince of Priests we may most aptly change this of Virgil,
Rex Anius, rex idem hominum, Phaebique sacerdos,


Into this Monostichon, full of most venerable truth,

Rex CHISTVS, reu idem hominum, Dominique sacerdos.

But I had much rather hear this mysteries reason in the words of the most
learned Doctor of the Lattin Church, by occasion of this saying of CHRIST, in
Matthew: Data est mihi omnis potestas in caelo, and in terra. Power was given
to him (says S. Hierome) who but a little while before was cruciside, who was
buried in a tomb, who had lain dead, who afterward rose again. And power was
given to him in heaven, and in earth, that he who before did reign in heaven,
might reign also in the earth by the belief of the faithful.

The true proprietarie, and owner of two such ensigns of Sovereignty, and
Sanctimonie, as the keys, and scepter, is more worthy then that all the
Hierarchies can sufciently praise; is more worthy, then that the heavens, the
most beauteous of visible creatures, should be worthy enough to be his
mansion; is, to conclude, more worthy then that his dwelling should any where
be worthy of him, but only within himself. Above the greatness of his
Majesty is the sweetness of his clemency. Humbly confident in that, I
therefore say: Let thy golden keys, o CHRIST, unlock thy treasures of spirit,
and grace, and out of them store my soul with furnitures, for entertainment of
so divine a Visitant, and let thy golden Scepter brandish it self by thy hand
ouerall my faculties, and drive from thence, and from about, all perturbations,
and deformities, that Memory, Reason, Imagination, set at liberty, may obey to
the purest part of my mind, and so concur to the receipt and hospitage of
mine incarnate God.

But o, my dearest souls, how captive, and how caitiue am I, who doubly am in
prison? Behold, material walls, and locks, and bolts about me, and other
iouisible within me. The canopie which shrowds me is not Jonas his Gourd, but
the shadows of death and darkness. Come, o come the rather holy Patron,
enfranchize thy slave from the ties, and shackles of vanity, and then is
captivity the caitiue. For freedom is not empeacht by prison, but by sin,
because nothing can make any man guilty but his conscience. I feel the feruor,
and strength of meditation decay within me. The breath of frailty is short in
the race of things divine. The house of a prison is as the house of a prisoner,
solitary for comsort, if not for company. Grace is not invited by
affectations, but by sincere affections, and them, Lord CHRJST, thy self can
only give. To our selves we cannot make them. Thou bring thy furniture with
thee, and thy peace. It is enough for oranment and enfreement, if thou afford
thy presence. Thou single do superabound to all. What thine ESAIAS propheside,
thou holy, and true have fulfilled. Upon thy shoulders the key of David was
couched. For, says Scripture, in the person of God the father:

Dabo CLAVEM David super humerum eius. A mighty key and a weighty, which
should need thy back to bear it Thy Cross was that key, which charged on
thy shoulders discharged all the world of burden. I second mine admiration
with petition. I admire thy Majesty, implore thy mercy. Bound, and in
darkness, and in the darkness of death. There is my states description. Come, o
Lord IESV, come, and I am as I would, and should be. And that is the work of
thy favor.

MELOS. VII. Upon this verse in David's Psalms.
Redimeme Domine a CALVMNIIS hominum vt custodiam mandata tua.
COme, let us sing, that God may have the glory,
Some noble act; and let mine auditorie
Be of the best: my Lyra now is strung,
And English, which I sing in, is a tongue.
The victory Saint Michael did obtain
Against the Dragon in the open plain,
And moving champaine of the triple aer,
As brave a subject as high heavens are fair.
I see those captains, and their armies try
The quartell in all regions of the sky;
I see thick mists, winds, whirle-windes, drizling dew,
Cold meteors next above, and how fires flew,
And all the state of those parts troubled quite:
Was never seen so great and strange a fight.
And whither Decasyllabons will you go?
Great was the combat, great the overthrow
Which our Saint George did to this Dragon give,
Whose fame in Spensers Red-crosse Knight does live:
Thither repair who love descriptions life,
There hangs the table of that noble strife.
The spirit, and the sense of things our care is.
Wisdom is Queen, who fares not with Faeries.
The Archangels battle is a truth divine,
And that brave picture which Great Constantine,
Caused to be limn'd over his palace-gate,
And which Eusebius so does celebrate
Had secret reason. There that Prince does tread,
Under his feet, a Dragon prostrated,
Not upon ground but upon surging sea,
Saluations ensign for a canopie.
Bring under me, sweet God, that Dragons head,
Which Doeg, and his likes so long have fed,
Against mine honor, and mine innocence,
With worlds of lies through madness and offense:
O free me once from wrongs, once lift me high
Above the jaws and reach of Calumny,
Whose voice barks louder then all Seylla's dogs,
And breath is fowler then are all the foggs
Of Seygian fenne, that in a clear renown
My soul may mount with joy to virtues crown,
Nor hide my praise for better were I dye,
Then that my glory in the dust should lie.
MELOS. VIII. Of solid WISDOM.
BEware, who Wisdoms children strive to be,
Of titulary Wisdom. That Is not she
Can make you happy, nor whose caskets hold
That sovereign good you seek, more worth then gold.
Search not for that rich medicine of the mind,
That true Philosophers stone, which they who find,
And rightly use are forthwith curde thereby
From earthly thoughts, and taught Entelechy,
Among the old Pagans, Saracens, or Jews,
And for this cause all Sectaries refuse.
Wisdom dwells not in souls peruersely blind,
She hates the earthly, loves the heavenly mind.
MELOS. IX. Of conceiptfull WISDOM.
HOrace, whose poems in all praise exceed,
Admire not but for wit, which he indeed
Has excellent, but his maine doctrine shun.
Felicity is lost, and thou undone,
If that felicity, which he propounds,
To please the senses, be among the grounds,
And reasons of thy way in this high Quest.
Yet has that Master such rare points expressed,
As their chief oracles did never reach.
But other lines destroy what they do teach.
Who better speaks for temperance? or who
For modesty? But when we lay heereto
His bestialities of words, and deeds,
The contradiction such a judgment breeds:
Horace well shows that moral schools he knew,
But in his life did other rules pursue.
Spiritual banquets, dalliances divine,
Happy excesses, sweets of heavenly wine,
And all good wantonness of bliss all state,
Poor man he knew not, and now knows too late,
Nor do I herein from his wit detract,
Which was a prime one, and as well compact
As Rome had any, great, polite, or brave:
And now we of his manners too much have.
But as the laws of charity do bind,
Service to England, office to the mind,
Which I so feign would fair to God maintain,
And toward man, I needs must be thus plain,
As to give warning, least while wit we love,
We do with all Voluptuaries prove.
Affect not wit too much, nor fame for wit.
Have somewhat solid, fancy is but flit.
And they who nourish fine conceits too long,
Their reason greatly, and their honor wrong.
For while in them the world expects the man,
They still are babes, and nothing noble can,
Nor dare to can, in so strong chains the mind
Those sweet enchantments of false glory bind.
Perpetual motion upward is the thing,
Which does to Wisdom, and true greatness bring.
To flag in regions low, and rest in sense,
As Horace does, is dangerous diffluence.
Beware of Horace, and his likes, the more
Their Art, and wit are great, and GOD adore.
MELOS. X. COSMOPOEA. The Creation of the world: In the Majesty of
Decad-stanza's, or Stanza's of ten lines.
I.
THE Immutable, who in Almighty mind
Conceived had the Arthetype divine,
From matter base the nobler parts refinde,
Adorning it with many a golden sign,
And as his residence did bid it shire,
Which in the abysles hidden were before,
As veins of metal in the deepest mine,
And wrapped in vnpurified ore,
The dross whereof he cast not out of sight,
But on the center in a globe it pight.
II.
Four sundry suits then to the ground he gave.
One fair embroydered with flowers in green,
Richly drawn out with many a tinsell wave,
And many a pearl, which on the same is seen,
When early tears bestrow the earth with dew,
Not yet exhaled by the thirsty Sun:
Another decked with fruits of druerse hew,
As apples which as yet no harm had done,
Ripe ears of corn, grapes sowln with store of blood.
Nuts armed with shells, and Pinaes hard as wood.
III.
The third nor bloomes, nor blossoms dignifide,
(Natures true gemms, most pleasing to the eye,
For other gemms the inward earth did hide,
Reserving them for further scrutinie)
Cherries the place of rubies did supply,
And violets for amethysts were taken,
No gold but that which glittered in the sky,
Nothing in all things being yet profane:
And finally, he chrystaled with ice,
The meanest vesture by divine advice.
IV.
Sea, the earths sister, and unstable twinne,
The aer their brother, and ethereal fire
(Which first the rites of marriage did begin,
Loving each other with a love entire,
No cause be fallen to lessen their desire)
Their Father did empeople diuersely.
For creatures finn'd with wings did up aspire,
Without controllment swimming through the sky;
Fish winged with finnes enhabited the deep,
And herds of beasts upon firm land did keep.
V.
Lords over them he also did ordain.
As among beasts the Lion Prince of all,
The Dolphin over sin the Sovereign,
And among birds the Eagle Principal.
He Lord, and Lion, and the King of all,
Created Peers likewise in every kind.
As the huge Elephant, the Camel tall,
Who loyally unto their Lord resignde,
As birds to The Eagle, all things unto man,
As Well the Lion, as Leuiathan.
VI.
Nor did God leave the better parts vnfraught,
Defrauding heaven of forms inhabitant.
For from the radiant plenty of his thought.
His everlasting WORD co-operant,
Armies of shining Angels forth he brought,
Transparent spirits clecrer then the light.
So Cherubim, so Scraphim were wrought:
The essences which never lost his sight.
Thus heaven was builded, thus the earth was decked,
By mere intention of the Architect.
MELOS. XI. Of the Situation of Great BRITAIN.
I.
ANother world, another continent;
About the same so many Isles do swarm,
It self so great, and of so large content,
CAESAR, who gave thereto the first alarm,
Esteemed it, cut from Europa so.
Some of which Isles embuttresse it before,
Other on either side themselves do show,
Like to the Sporades on Grecian shore,
The Orcads, and the scattered Aebudeas,
He thrust behind into the Scottish seas.
MELOS. XII.
ANathema to irreligious minds,
To black deserts;
Anathema to all prestigious signs,
And all false parts;
Anathema to all immodest lines;
Anathema Maranatha to hearts,
Who to our youths corruption bend their Arts.
The fair white tower of gracious chastity,
Mayds sovereign praise,
And wives most duty, by what battery,
By what smooth ways,
Is 't not euerted? Muse the verses fly,
And fly the prose where such lewd baits do lurk,
The poison unawares does ruin work.
Better it were that Printers Art should dye,
Music be dumb,
Better that impudence should dearly buy,
In fight to come,
And all the praise of wit in dust should lie,
English take rust, and Britain barbarous be,
Rather then shameless. Heaven loves chastitee.
Greece had her Sappho, and her spruce old vvagg,
Anacreon;
Rome her Caetullus, and the like some bragg,
Of Albion.
And would to God that herein to seem lagg,
Were not a cause of absurd shame to many,
Court who court list, be not wits Ape to any.
Without that noble Sidney here I tax,
Or Spensers pomp:
And gladly granting Johnson nothing lacks
Of Phoebus stamp.
For never wits were made of finer wax,
Then England has to vaunt of in these times,
But them I tax whose reason's lost in times.
Despair of such as in some books delight,
That shall be namelesse,
Fathers keep children from contagious sight
Of authors shameless,
For they are charms, and nature soften quite:
And such as use them will too soon find true,
That they are blessed who such books never knew.
Anathemaes of other kinds to rear,
Joys God and Man;
Anathema another sense may bear,
As sacred can;
Sacred for hallowed, and the same for dire.
New HELICON for new IERVS ALEM,
Mine HELICON an holy ANATHEM.
DEO GRATIAS.
An excellent old Latin Prayer translated.
Give to me, Lord God, a wakefull heart, which no curious cogitation may draw
away: Give me a noble heart which no unworthy affection may draw downward: Give
me an invincible heart which no tribulation may break. Give me a free heart
which no perverse, nor violent passion may enthrall. Bestow upon me, my Lord
God, an understanding knowing thee; a conversation pleasing thee; a
perseverance faithfully expecting thee; and a confidence finally embracing
thee: with thy pains to be crucifide by remorse; to use thy benefits in the
way by grace: and lastly to enjoy thy bliss, in heaven, by everlasting glory.
Amen.

depiction of two angels or cherubs holding a wreath above a table, altar or
tomb ^ Sacrum Pictati.

APOLLINI, suisque HELICONIADIBVS, vltimum Authoris, VALE.

VOTIS NVNCVPATIS. MVSA damnosas Domino facessens, Et sequi doctus mage
profuturas, THESPIIS sacras posui deabus, Saucius arts.

ARA OFFICII



BONO PVBLICO.
IN discharge of that immortal obligation, in which God, and Nature tie me
unto England, after I was advised, for my healths sake, to grow very remiss,
or rather, for a while, altogether to give over reading, and to solace my self
with the Muses, whose apt sweet notes might cure in me the Tarantula's sting
of whatsoever distemper in the natural state of my affections: I made it my
work to devise, how I might draw the flourishing wits, and affections of all
well-borne, well-bred, and well-giuen young Gentlemen thereof, to see and
taste a more dignity and sweetness in holy, and heavenly arguments, then in
profane, and sensual. According to which desire I have in theve my poems
somewhat endeavored to come near the old Majesty of the ancient Lyricks for
brevity, and to the best examples for piety in all the most famous old
authors, who professing Gnomologie, or some other good matter, founded in
public benefit, have been held worthy to live in their written moniments (for
man kinds sake, and respects of commonweal) to all posterities. So Hesiod
for his poem of husbandry, so Theognis and Phocyllides for their moral
sentences, so Oppian, for his natural History of fishes, in verse, dedicated
to one of the Roman Emperors, and worth to the Author a golden piece for every
line, and by decree of Senate (before whom it was rehearsed) whatsoever else his
heart desired in the Empire, so Aratus for his poem of the stars, so
Dionysius, for the earths description, among the ancient heathen Greeks, of
which Anatus is honored by S. Paul, in his sermon to the Athenians, before the
Areopagites, where, for proof of Gods vbiquitie, and of man's origination
through him, he cites a part of one of his divine verses, though concealing
the name, as contented to have said, sicut and quidam vestrorum Poetarum
dixerunt: So, among the Latins, Cato for his moral couplets (if Cato was their
author, and not Ausonius) so Virgils Georgicks (the absolutely best, and most
complete of all his learned poems) so Columella, so Manilius, and so generally
also all ancient Christian Poets, whither Greek, as S. Gregory Nazianzen, and
Synesius; or Latin, as Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Prudentius, S. Paulinus,
Lactantius, venerable Bede, Inuencus, Arator, Venantius, Falconia Proba (in
whose Cento of Virgils verses applied to Christ, Caiphas his speech, in S.
John. expedit vobis vt vnus moriatur homo pro populo, is admirably hit upon, by
her, in this Hemistichtum. Vnum pro multis dabitur caput --

So the Lady Elpis, wife of great Boethius, the Martyr (whose books of
Philosophical consolation are extant, with universal applause, and, for the
verses in them, are equal to the very best that ever were) and many other of
far more authority, as the hymns of S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory the Great,
and that most famous Churchhymne, Te Deum laudamas, composed by S. Ambrose, and
S. Augustine (as is said) verse after verse, alternatim. All which last, and
many other religions persons of both sexes, had no other scope in their
makings, then to raise the mind by due devotion to the heaven of heavens,
where Jesus Christ our Lord, does live and reign for ever. In like sort there
is nothing in this jewel of mine, which is either profane, or against any
definition of faith, or doctrine of the Orthodox, but, whatsoever is in it,
wholly tends to lift the soul aloft to her Creator, and is either (as Masters
speak) Pathos, to stir up good affections, or Didaskalikon, to instruct in
piety, or in matter of worthy, and honorable learning. The book is very
little, yet greater, by almost half, then from the beginning I meant it should
have been, as remaining very mindful of that in Martials Epigramms, Sapius
in libro mem ratur Persius VNO,
Quam louis in TOTA Marsus Amazonide.


As little also as it is, yet if it had not been from out of much charity to
mine own nation, and of a true Christian feeling of what I every day see
needful among the wits (as they are called) and braueries of this age (so
excellently set forth to the very life, by the pen of the most complete
Drammatick Poet that ever this Kingdom had, Bentamen Johnson, or perhaps ever
shall have) I do assure the world in the word of truth, that I should not have
busied my brains, in the midst of so many great cares, and troubles of this
life, with an exercise so far out of the way of the times, for all honor, and
profit, and which my self have for so many years utterly aucided Not for that
this part of Music is an exercise unworthy of a good or a wise man: for, after
the glorious example of that great Prince, Priest, and blessed Prophet Moses,
of Debora, of Samuels mother Anna, of David, of Solomon, of King Ezechias, of
Jeremy, of Ezechiel, of Simeon, of the blessed virgin Marie, and of
innumerable other the greatest Saints, and friends of God, who used verses and
hymnody, no wellassured man in the world will forbear so holy a delight, for
fear of censure and prejudice, by reason of any baseness in estimation caused
by the baseness of many vulgarrimes, odious to God and man, for impudency and
prodigious ignorance.

Nevertheless, who is he that will unnecessarily fall foul upon any
vniueriall prejudice, such as is, by the extreme abuse of good parts,
conceived against versisiers in English whereof but very few have right to be
saluted Poets) if it be not for the public good, for which the heathen were
forward to hazard any thing, according to that of Horace.

Pulchrum, and decorum est pro patria mori? A sentence more deserving
immortality then all the oracles of his Gods and Goddesses. And whereas some
deceived do think, and therefore do abandon them, that Christian arguments
are not capable of those ornaments, beauties, graces, and delicacies which
Paganicall, or Epicuraean subjects of poems are, I am verily persuaded, and am
in a manner most sure, that it may be made good, that all the Majesty and
praises of their poetry are as infinitely short, or may be made so, of that
which Christianity, is capable, as the persons, places, and all the Topics,
or circumstances of invention, or description are infinitely more, lofty, and
great in Christianity, then in Mytholegae. Which though as yet it be in very
few particulars (if in any) apparent (for the Triumple of Angels, written in
English, was never in print) unless perhaps in the serene Christeis of Hierom
Vida, Bishop of Cremona, and certainly is in that most excellent poem De partu
virginis (I speak of Latin) written by that noble Neapolitan, Sanazzara (for,
how much Posseninus commends Guelfutio his Rosario in Italian, to the honor of
the Blessed Virgin (a work of very many years) is not easily credible, and
Torquato Tasso his Italian Jerusalem has as many admirers, as readers, so
far forth, that if any vulgar tongue were capable of perfect poetry, or of a
perfect poem of state, which Artists call Epich and Heroic, they seem to
carry it clear) the reason why this excellency is not more general, is, for
that (as I conceive) writers make not an entire employment of their poetry, or
are not in love with the pomp, and splendour of magnificent piety, a scrupulous
vaniue for the most part, or are otherwise methodmongers, without any wisdom,
either of worthy free spirits, or of generous breeding.

Concerning the reading of Poets, hear a Platonicall, or a new Eutopian Law,
which it was my chance to find in a manuscript platform, as touching a
Sodality to be erected for heroicke studies, and is: Poetae nulli leguntor
nisi Hymnodi, Lyrici, Epici, Tragidi, Satyrici, ijque casti, and ant Graeci,
aut Latini. In vulgarthus linguis exarata poematia (...) nulla leguntor, nisi
venia disertis verbis, and in scriptis, prius impetrata.

But this Law will not easily find passage if it come to a Committee of the
wits, and seems too severe for the public, howsoever it may stand with the
wisdom of a Collegiall institution. Nevertheless, if the same were received
in public, in some proportion, there would happily be the less cause to say
to many young Gentlemen, and studious Philotimists of England, my dear and
most honored Contrymen, as S. Augustine writ in an Epistle to his Disciple,
Licentius, being one who was enricht with the greatest wit, and otherwise most
exquisitely adorned with all the sorts of honorable humane knowledges: Si
calicem aureum, etc. Had thou found a cup of gold upon the ground, thou
would give it to the Church of God. But thou have received of God a
spiritually-golden wit, and do sacrifice therein to thy lusts, and drinkest,
instead of healths, thine whole self in it to the Devil.

Conclusion.
As therefore a prudent Lapidarie, having (as he persuades himself) a
paragon-stone, or oriental union pearl, for which he ventred very far,
omitted many great bargains, and laid out large quantities of coin, goes not
to find a Chapman for it, into Thames Street, among Carmen and Portars; but to
the Princes, and Cheifes of the Land: so my self, in imitation of that
wisdom, which is founded even in common sense, having a jewel of another
better nature (if at leastwise the estimation of ware rises out of the
consideration of their quality) do shun all incompetent, and incapable
judgments, abounding among the lewd, that is to say, the unlearned (for lewd,
and learned did in old English make a flat opposition, according to that of
Salomons Proverbs, Impius ignorant scientiam) and do seek, and repose all the
credit of my pains, among the competent and capable. So therefore to Gods
Almighty goodness, humbly recommending my self, and these my endeauos, I
devise and leave the commodity, whatsoever it be, to my dearest Ladymother,
noble ENGLAND.

Soli Deo honor, and gloria.
FINIS.

