PSEVDOMARTYR. Wherein OVT OF CERTAIN Propositions and Gradations, This
Conclusion is euicted.

THAT THOSE WHICH ARE of the Roman Religion in this Kingdom, may and ought to
take the Oath of Allegiance.

DEVT. 32.15. But he that should have been upright, when he waxed fat,
spurned with his heel: Thou art fat, thou art gross, thou art laden with
fatness.

JOB. 11.5. But oh that God would speak and open his lips against thee, that
he might show thee the secrets of wisdom, how thou have deserved double
according to right.

2. CHRO. 28.22. In the time of his tribulation, did he yet trespass more
against the Lord, for he sacrificed unto the ^ods of Damascus, which plagued
him.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Walter Burre. 1610.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince JAMES, by the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the FAITH.
Most mighty and sacred Sovereign.
AS Temporal armies consist of Pressed men, and voluntaries, so do they also
in this warfare, in which your Majesty has appeared by your Books. And not
only your strong and full Garrisons, which are your Clergy, and your
Universities, but also ob^cure Villages can minister Soldiers. For, the
equal interest, which all your Subjects have in the cause (all being equally
endangered in your dangers) gives every one of us a Title to the Dignity of
this warfare; And so makes those, whom the Civil Laws made opposite, all one,
Paganos, Milites. Besides, since in this Battle, your Majesty, by your
Books, is gone in Person out of the Kingdom, who can be exempt from waiting
upon you in such an expedition? For this Oath must work upon us all; and as it
must draw from the Papists a profession, so it must from us, a Confirmation of
our Obedience; They must testify an Allegiance by the Oath, we, an
Allegiance to it. For, since in providing for your Majesty's security, the
Oath defends us, it is reason, that we defend it. The strongest Castle that
is, cannot defend the Inhabitants, if they sleep, or neglect the defense of
that, which defends them; No more can this Oath, though framed withal
aduantagious Christianly wisdom, secure your Majesty, and us in you, if by
our negligence we should open it, either to the adversaries Batteries, or to
his underminings.

The influence of those your Majesty's Books, as the Sun, which penetrates
all corners, has wrought upon me, and drawn up, and exhaled from my poor
Meditations, these discourses: Which, with all reverence and devotion, I
present to your Majesty, who in this also have the power and office of the
Sun, that those things which you exhale, you may at your pleasure dissipate,
and annull; or suffer them to fall down again, as a wholesome and fruitful
dew, upon your Church and Commonwealth. Of my boldness in this address, I
most humbly beseech your Majesty, to admit this excuse, that having observed,
how much your Majesty had vouchsafed to descend to a conversation with your
Subjects, by way of your Books, I also conceived an ambition, of ascending to
your presence, by the same way, and of participating, by this means, their
happiness, of whom, that saying of the Queen of Sheba, may be vsu^p'd:
Happy are thy men, and happy are those thy Servants, which stand before thee
always, and hear thy wisedome^ For, in this, I make account, that I have
performed a duty, by expressing in an exterior, and (by your Majesty's
permission) a public Act, the same desire, which God hears in my daily
prayers, That your Majesty may very long govern us in your Person, and ever,
in your Race and Progeny.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subject: JOHN DONE.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS handled in this Book.
CHAP. I. OF Martyrdom and the dignity thereof. CHAP. II. That there may be an
inordinate and corrupt affectation of Martyrdom. CHAP. III. That the Roman
Religion does by many erroneous doctrines mis-encourage and excite men to this
vicious affectation of danger: first by inciting secular Magistracy: Secondly
by extolling the value of Merits, and of this work in special, by which the
treasure of the Church is so much advanced: And lastly, by the doctrine of
Purgatory, which by this act is said certainly to be escaped. CHAP. IIII. That
in the Roman Church the Jesuits exceed all others, in their Constitutions and
practice, in all those points, which beget or cherish this corrupt desire of
false-Martyrdome. CHAP. V. That the Missions of the Pope, under Obedience
whereof they pretend that they come into this Kingdom, can be no warrant,
since there are laws established to the contrary, to give them, or those which
harbor them, the comfort of Martyredome. CHAP. VI. A Comparison of the
Obedience due to Princes, with the several Obediences required and exhibited
in the Roman Church: First, of that blind Obedience and stupiditie, which
Regular men vow to their Superiors: Secondly, of that usurped Obedience to
which they pretend by reason of o^r Baptism, wherein we are said to have made
an implicit surrender of our selves, and all that we have, to the church: and
thirdly, of that obedience, which the Jesuits by a fourth Supernumerary vow
make to be disposed at the Popes absolute will. CHAP. VII. That if the mere
execution of the function of Priests in this Kingdom, and of giving to the
Catholics in this land, spiritual sustentation, did assure their consciences,
that to dye for that were martyrdom: yet the refusal of the Oath of
Allegiance does corrupt and vitiate the integrity of the whole act, and
dispoile them of their former interest and Title to Martyrdom. CHAP. VIII.
That there has been as yet no fundamental and safe ground given, upon which
those which have the faculties to hear Confessions, should inform their own
Consciences, or instruct their Penitents: that they are bound to adventure the
heavy and capital penalties of this law, for refusal of this Oath. And that
if any man have received a scruple against this Oath, which he cannot depose
and cast off, the Rules of their own Casuists, as this case stands, incline,
and warrant them, to the taking thereof. CHAP. IX. That the authority which is
imagined to be in the Pope, as he is spiritual Prince of the monarchy of the
Church, cannot lay this Obligation upon their Consciences: First because the
Doctrine it self is not certain, nor presented as matter of faith: Secondly
because the way by which it is conveyed to them, is suspicious and dangerous,
being but by Cardinal Bellarmine, who is various in himself, and reproved by
other Catholics of equal dignity, and estimation. CHAP. X. That the Canons
can give them no warrant, to adventure these dangers, for this refusal: And
that the Reverend name of Canons, is falsely and cautelously insinuated, and
stolen upon the whole body of the Canon law, with a brief Consideration upon
all the books thereof: and a particular suruay, of all those Canons, which are
ordinarily cyted by those Authors, which maint^ine this temporal Jurisdiction
in the Pope. CHAP. XI. That the two Breues of Paulus the fifth, cannot give this
assurance to this Conscience; First, for the general infirmities, to which all
Rescripts of Popes are obnoxious: And then for certain insufficiencies in
these. CHAP. XII. That nothing required in this Oath, violates the Popes
spiritual Jurisdiction; And that the clauses of swearing that Doctrine to be
Heretical, is no usurping upon his spiritual right, either by preiudicating
his future definition, or offending any former Decree. CHAP. XIII. That all
which his Majesty requires by this Oath, is exhibited to the Kings of France,
And not by virtue of any Indult, or Concordate, but by the inhaerent right of
the Crown. CHAP. XIIII. Lastly, That no pretense, either of Conversion at
first, Assistance in the Conquest, or Acceptance of any Surrender from any of
our Kings, can give the Pope any more right over the Kingdom of England, then
over any other free State whatsoever.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO the Reader.
THough I purposed not to speak any thing to the Reader, otherwise then by way
of Epilogue in the end of the Book, both because I esteemed that to be the
fittest place, to give my Reasons, why I respited the handling of the two last
Chapters, till another time, and also, because I thought not that any man might
well and properly be called a Reader, till he were come to the end of the
Book: yet, because both he, and I, may suffer some disaduantages, if he should
not be fore-possessed, and warned in some things, I have changed my purpose in
that point.

For his own good therefore (in which I am also interessed) I must first
entreat him, that he will be pleased, before he read, to amend with his pen,
some of the most important errors, which are hereafter noted to have passed in
the printing. Because in the Reading, he will not perchance suspect nor spy
them, and so he may run a danger, of being either deceived, or scandalized.

And for my self, (because I have already received some light, that some of
the Roman profession, having only seen the Heads and Grounds handled in this
Book, have traduced me, as an impious and profane vnder-valewer of
Martyrdom,) I most humbly beseech him, (till the reading of the Book, may
guide his Reason) to believe, that I have a just and Christianly estimation,
and reverence, of that devout and acceptable Sacrifice of our life's, for the
glory of our blessed Savior. For, as my fortune has never been so flattering
nor abundant, as should make this present life sweet and precious to me, as I
am a Moral man: so, as I am a Christian, I have been ever kept awake in a
meditation of Martyrdom, by being derived from such a stock and race, as, I
believe, no family, (which is not of far larger extent, and greater
branches,) has endured and suffered more in their persons and fortunes, for
obeying the Teachers of Roman Doctrine, then it has done. I did not therefore
enter into this, as a carnal or ouer-indulgent favorer of this life, but out
of such reasons, as may arise to his knowledge, who shall be pleased to read
the whole work.

In which, I have abstained from handling the two last Chapters upon diverse
reasons; whereof one is, that these Heads having been carried about, many
months, and thereby quarrelled by some, and desired by others, I was willing
to give the Book a hasty dispatch, that it might cost no man much time, either
in expecting before it came, or in reading, when it was come.

But a more principal reason was, that since the two last Chapters depend upon
one another, and have a mutual Relation, I was not willing to undertake one,
till I might persevere through both. And from the last chapter it became me to
abstain, till I might understand their purposes, who were formerly engaged in
the same business. For the first Discovery gives some title to the place, and
secludes others, without the Discouerers permission; And in men tender and
jealous of their Honor, it is sometimes accounted as much injury to assist,
as to assault.

When therefore I considered, that the most Reverend and learned Sir Edward
Coke, Lord chief Justice of the common Pleas (whom, they which are too narrow
to comprehend him, may find arguments enough to love, and admire, out of the
measure and proportion of his malice who has written against him, (since we
ought to love him so much, as such men hate him) had in this point of
Jurisdiction, laid so solid foundations, raised so strong walls, and perfited
his house upon so sure a Rock, as the laws of this Kingdom are. And when I
saw, that as the devil himself is busiest to attempt them, who abound in
strength of Grace, (not forbearing our Savior himself) so an ordinary
Instrument of his, (whose continual libels, and Incitatorie books, have
occasioned more afflictions, and drawn more of that blood, which they call
Catholic, in this Kingdom, then all our Acts of Parliament have done,) had
oppugned his Lordships Book, and iterated and inconculcated those his
oppositions, I could not know whether his Lordship reserved any farther
consideration of that matter to his own leasures, or had honored any other
man, with his commandment, or allowance to pursue it. Till therefore I might
know, whether any such were embarked therein, as would either accept my Notes,
and dignifie them with their style, or submit their Notes to my method, and the
poor apparel of my language, or undertake it entirely, or quit it absolutely,
as a body perfect already, by that form which his Lordship has given it, I
chose to forbear the handling thereof at this time.

One thing more I was willing the Reader should be forewarned of; which is,
that when he finds in the printing of this Book oftentimes a change of the
Character, he must not think that all those words or sentences so
distinguished, are cited from other Authors; for I have done it sometimes,
only to draw his eye, and understanding more intensly upon that place, and so
make deeper impressions thereof.

And in those places which are cited from other Authors (which he shall know
by the Margin) I do not always precisely and superstitiously bind my self
to the words of the Authors; which was impossible to me, both because sometimes
I collect their sense, and express their Arguments or their opinions, and the
Resultance of a whole leaf, in two or three lines, and some few times, I cite
some of their Catholic Authors, out of their own fellows, who had used the
same fashion of collecting their sense, without precise binding themselves to
All, or only their words. This is the comfort which my conscience has, and
the assurance which I can give the Reader, that I have no where made any
Author, speak more or less, in sense, then he intended, to that purpose, for
which I cite him. If any of their own fellows from whom I cite them, have
dealt otherwise, I cannot be wounded but through their sides. So that I hope
either mine Innocence, or their own fellows guiltiness, shall defend me, from
the curious malice of those men, who in this sickly decay, and declining of
their cause, can spy out falsifyings in every citation: as in a jealous, and
obnoxious state, a Decipherer can pick out Plots, and Treason, in any familiar
letter which is intercepted.

And thus much it seemed necessary to me, to let the Reader know, to whose
charitable and favorable opinion^ I commit the book, and my self to his
Christianly and devout Prayers.

Those literal and punctual Errors, which do not much endanger the sense, I
have left to the discretion and favor of the Reader, as he shall meet with
them. The rest he may be pleased to mend thus.

In the Preface,. 24. For Sacerdotes non^ntes. Read Sacerdoturientes.

Pa. Li. Faults. Correct. 3 1 During. Daring. 14 14 Inciting. Auiling. 15 vlt.
Princess. Prince 18 14. To proceed. So proceeds 29 vlt. Churches church. 30
11 Establing. Establishing. 38 28 Genuit Gemunt. 41 8 Vestram Nostram 45 21 I^.
T^ Ibid. 26 Princes. Prince 47 14 calls call 57 2 Emperors. Emperor. 58 22
Profession possession 66 10 Now here. No where. Ibid. 16 Writ. Writs. 68 7
Went. Meant Ibid. 18 Ingenious Ingenuous. 70 20 The Then 71 vlt. After And^
add As. 72 9 Priuatur. priuetur 73 1 End Ends 74 15 Other Others 75 3
Entitled. Instituted 80 vlt. Exemply Exemplify. 100 26 Arises. Arise^ 102 4
After A^e, out out So 107 26 After which, add That Ibid. vlt. Heaued. Heard.
113 25 Not. Now. 152 7 Enlaline. E^lalias 157 28 Your. The. Pa. Li. Faults.
Correct. 169 26 After As put out At 170 18 Thereof for Therefore 172 5 Conduced
Conducted 175 20 Words Word 179 8 Chapels. Chapel 193 1 After Are add Not
195 9 Your The 212 26 VVaine VVaiue 218 7 Extend the Sect. 37. one line into
the. 38 225 19 Your The 228 22 After Oath ^dde Be 229 21 Belong Belongd 233 8
Gave Give. 240 11 To bey To obey ^44 14 The This 265 25 After And add Not 274
8 Re-enuersing renuersing. 275 8 That It Ibid. 14 After B^t add the panegyricke
276 5 Heads Beards 277 6 Hyol Holy 278 17 Fall Fallen 280 13 Certainty
(Certainly) 297 21 After Allege add This 304 27 Name Nature 305 5 Recei^e
Relieve 313 20 God The good. 322 2 There This 324 25 Since Sin 378 21 A^ Us
379 11 Dominium. Domicilium

Those Faults which are in the Margin by placing the Citations higher or lower,
I must leave to the Readers discretion, the rest he may mend thus.

PReface. 8. Pilireade Poli. Fol. 7. lin. 28. add Homil. de David and Saul.
ibid. 24. add Mar. 10.29. fol. 9. lin. 7. for Rauolta read Raccolta. fol. ^7.
lin. 27. for Poss^re. read Possessor. fol. 31. lin. 11. for Hu. read Offi.
fol. 40. lin. 5. add 1. Sam. 24.15. fol. 309. lin. 3. add De potest. Eccles..
6 Nn. 2.

A PREFACE TO The PRIESTS, and IESVITS, and to their Disciples in this
KINGDOM.
I Am so well acquainted with the phrases of Diminution and Disparagement, and
other personal aspersions, which your writers cast, and imprint upon such of
your own side, as depart from their opinions in the least dram or scruple;
as I cannot hope that any of them will spare me, who am further removed from
them: For since Cassander, whom the two Emperour^ Ferdinand and Maximilian
consulted, and called to them; not in any schism between the Emperors and
Popes, about temporal Jurisdiction: in which quarrel, whenever it happened,
the Emperors cause was ever sustained by as learned, and as Religious, and as
many men, as the Popes, but in matters of Doctrine, and for a way of
Reformation, when the Popes themselves confessed, that the Church was in
extreme need thereof: P.R. Trea^. of Mitiga. ^. 6. n. 67.
Since he (I say) is called by one of them but a Grammarian (to which honor,
if he, which calls him so in scorn, had been arrived, he would never have
translated vindiciae contra Tyrannos, revenge upon Tyrants, since vindiciae
signifies a Decree or Order of the Judge, in a cause of Bondage and Liberty
depending before him, by which it is ordered, that the party whose condition is
in question, shall remain either free or bond, till the matter be heard
without any prejudice, if it fall out otherwise upon the hearing:) And since of
Caietane (when he differs from them in the point of the Canon of scriptures)
they say, Idem. c. 1. n. 11 and. c. 5. n. 30.
That though he were well seen in Scholastique subtilties, Gretz. Append 1. ad
l. ^. Bellar. Idem dictum
yet he was not so in the Fathers: though in that very matter the same Author
confess, that Defens. Bella^ l. 1. c. 7. Quare.
Caietane followed Saint Hieromes footsteps: Ibi. l. 2. c. 14. Quod Whitak.
since (because he denies marriage to be proved a Sacrament out of one place of
Saint Paul) they say that he fell into grievous errors in both Testaments,
Hebraizando and Erasmizando: Since, when he distasts the coursenesse of the
vulgar edition, Gretz. Tractat. de no. Translat.. Ait. Sixtus.
they say, that in three or four pages of his Psalter, there are more
Barbarismes and Solaecismes then in the whole vulgar Bible: Since Erasmus
(following the opinion of Driedo and other Catholics, and so denying some
part of Daniel to be Canonical) is called by Bellarmine a Halfe-Christian, De
verbo. Dei l. 1. c. 9.
these men will certainly be more rigid and severe upon me.

2 And if they will be content to impute to me all humane infirmities, they
shall need to feign nothing: I am, I confess, obnoxious enough. My natural
impatience not to dig painefully in deep, and stony, and sullen learnings:
My Indulgence to my freedom and liberty, as in all other indifferent things,
so in my studies also, not to betroth or enthral my self, to any one science,
which should possess or denominate me: My easines, to afford a sweet and
gentle Interpretation, to all professors of Christian Religion, if they shake
not the Foundation, wherein I have in my ordinary Communication and familiar
writings, often expressed and declared my self: has opened me enough to their
malice, and put me into their danger, and given them advantage to impute to me,
whatsoever such degrees of lazines, of liberty, of irresolution, can produce.

3 But if either they will transfer my personal weaknesses upon the cause,
or extend the faults of my person to my mind, or to her purest part, my
conscience: If they will calumniate this poor and innocent work of mine, as
if it were written, either for Ostentation of any ability or faculty in my
self; or for Provocation, to draw them to an answer, and so continue a
Booke-warre; or for Flattery to the present State; which, though my services be
by many just titles due to it, needs it not; or for exasperation, to draw out
the civil sword in causes, which have some pretense and color of being
spiritual; or to get Occasion hereby to uncover the nakedness, and lay open the
incommodious and vndefensible sentences and opinions, of diverse several
Authors in that Church; or to maintain and further a scisme and division
amongst you, in this point of the Popes pretense to temporal jurisdiction: I
have no other shelter against these imputations, but an appeal to our blessed
Savior, and a protestation before his face, that my principal and direct
scope and purpose herein, is the unity and peace of his Church. For as when the
roof of the Temple rent asunder, not long after followed the ruin of the
foundation it self: So if these two principal beams and Toppe-rafters, the
Prince and the Priest, rent asunder, the whole frame and Foundation of
Christian Religion will be shaked. And if we distinguish not between Articles
of faith and jurisdiction, but account all those super-edifications and
furnitures, and ornaments which God has affoorded to his Church, for exterior
government, to be equally the Foundation it self, there can be no Church; as
there could be no body of a man, if it were all eye.

4 They who have descended so low, as to take knowledge of me, and to admit me
into their consideration, know well that I used no inordinate have, nor
precipitation in binding my conscience to any local Religion. I had a longer
work to do then many other men; for I was first to blot out, certain
impressions of the Roman religion, and to wrestle both against the examples
and against the reasons, by which some hold was taken; and some anticipations
early laid upon my conscience, both by Persons who by nature had a power and
superiority over my will, and others who by their learning and good life,
seemed to me justly to claim an interest for the guiding, and rectifying of
mine understanding in these matters. And although I apprehended well enough,
that this irresolution not only retarded my fortune, but also bred some
scandal, and endangered my spiritual re^putation, by laying me open to many
mis-interpretations; yet all these respects did not transport me to any violent
and sudden determination, till I had, to the measure of my poor wit and
judgment, suruayed and digested the whole body of Divinity, controuerted
between ours and the Roman Church. In which search and disquisition, that
God, which awakened me then, and has never forsaken me in that industry, as he
is the Author of that purpose, so is he a witness of this protestation; that I
behaved my self, and proceeded therein with humility, and diffidence in my
self; and by that, which by his grace, I took to be the ordinary means,
which is frequent praier^ and equal and indifferent affections.

5 And this course held in rectifying and reducing mine understanding and
judgment, might justify and excuse my forwardnes; if I should seem to any to
have intruded and usurped the office of others, in writing of Divinity and
spiritual points, having no ordinary calling to that function. For, to have
always abstained from this declaration of my self, had been to betray, and
to abandon, and prostitute my good name to their misconceiuings and
imputations; who think presently, that he has no Religion, which dares not
call his Religion by some newer name then Christian. And then, for my writing
in Divinity, though no professed Divine; all Ages, all Nations, all Religions,
even yours, which is the most covetous and lothest to divide, or communicate
with the Layety, any of the honors reserved to the Clergy, afford me
abundantly examples, and authorities for such an undertaking.

6 But for this poor work of mine, I need no such Advocates, nor Apologizers;
for it is not of Divinity, but merely of temporal matters, that I write. And
you may as justly accuse Vitr^uius, who writ of the fashion of building
Churches, or those Authors which have written of the nature of Bees and use of
Wax, or of Painting, or of Music, to have usurped upon the office of
Divines, and to have written of Divinity, because all these are ingredients
into your propitiatory medicine, the Mass, and conduce to spiritual and
divine worship: as you may impute to any, which writes of civil obedience to
the Prince, that he meddles with Divinity: not that this obedience is not
safely grounded in Divinity, or that it is not an act of Religion, but that it
is so well engrau'd in our hearts, and naturally obuious to every
understanding, that men of all conditions have a sense and apprehension, and
assurednes of that obligation.

7 The cause therefore is reduced to a narrow issue, and contracted to a strict
point, when the differences between us are brought to this; Whether a Subject
may not obey his Prince, if the Turk or any other man forbid it? And as his
Majesty in his Kingdoms, is Religiously and prudently watchful, to preserve
that Crown, which his Predecessors had redeemed from the rust, and dross,
wherewith foreign usurpation had infected it; so is it easy to be observed,
that all the other Princes of Christendom, begin to shake off those fetters,
which insensibly and drowsily they had admitted; and labor by all ways, which
are as yet possible to them, to return to their natural Supremacy and
Jurisdiction: which besides many other pregnant evidences, appears by
Ba^ronius his often complaining thereof; both in his Annals, when he says, To.
11.
That the Princes of this age do exercise so much Jurisdiction over the
Clergy, that the Church suffers some scandal thereby: And in his Apology of
his own writings, Resp. Apolog. cont. Car. Col. Nu. 31.
against the Cardinal Columna, where he notes, That the Cardinals deputed for
the hearing of those causes at Rome, are tired and oppressed in these later
times, with the Messengers and Appeals of Bishops, which in every Country
complain, how much the secular Princes iniure them. And this must of necessity
be understood of Countries, which profess the Roman Religion, because such as
are Apostoliquely reformed, or are in that way, have shut up all ways of
Appellations to Rome, or remedies from thence.

8 And not to speak of the Kingdom of France at this time, because I have
sepos'd and destined a particular Chapter for that consideration, nor of the
fresh History of the Venetians, maintaining their just Laws for this
temporal Jurisdiction: which laws Parsons, P. R. Treat. of Mitig c. 5. n. 41.
without any color of truth, or escape from malicious and gross deceiving,
says they have recalled, when as (not to affright you with any of those
Authors which write on the Venetian part, In monit. pili. in fine.
) you may see an excellent relation of that negotiation, and upon what
conditions the Pope withdrew his censures, in that letter of Cardinal Peron to
his Master the French King, about Cardinal Ioyeuse his instructions, when the
Pope sent him to Venice for that purpose; nor to look so far back, as to
consider what the other States of Italy and of Rome it self have done herein,
which, as an Author which lived in profession of that Religion, Machiauel.
Hist. Flor. l. 1. f. 34. Edit. Picen. An. 1587.
informs us; durst always bravely and boldly defend it self against the
Popes usurpations, though he protested, that if they would but admit him to
enter again into the town, he would deal no more with temporal matters;
and this, at that time when England under Henry the second, and the remoter
parts trembled at him, who trembled at his own neighbors and Subjects, as he
pretended: To omit all these, the Kingdom of Spain, which they call so
super-eminently Catholic; and of whose King, the Cardinal which writes
against Baronius says, Card. Colum. paris. fo. 158.
that he is the only Prince, who bends all the sinews of his power, and all
the thoughts of his mind, not only to oppress barbarous enemies of
Christianity, but to contain christian Kings in their duty: This Kingdom (I
say) has by all means, which it can, expressed how weary it is of that
jurisdiction which the Pope exercises there, in these points which we
complain of: though the Popes have ever been most ready to recompense these
temporal detriments to those kings; as the Donations of the Indyes, and of the
Kingdom of Navarre, and of England, testify at full.

9 And yet if we consider, what all sorts of persons in that Nation have done
against this temporal power, we cannot doubt, but that they travail of the
same child, which our Kingdom and diverse others have brought forth, which is
their liberty from this weakening and impouerishing thraldom. For first, for
Booke-men and Writers, a great Idolatrer of this temporal Jurisdiction in the
Pope, Confesses, Rispost. d' Anto. Bouio a P. Paulonella Rauolta. ^. 196.
That many of the principal Authors of the Spanish nation, concur in this
opinion, that these exemptions and immunities of the Clergy, so much debated,
are not Iuris diuini. And it is easy to observe, what the Collection and
resultanse upon this conclusion will be; Since, if they be enjoyed by the
favor of Princes, though a conueniencie, and a kind of right grounded in the
law of nature, have moved Princes to grant them yet all graunts of Princes
are mortal, and have a natural frailty in them, and upon just cause are
subject to Reuocation.

10 And for the Swordmen, by that hostile Act upon Rome it-selfe, by Charles
Bourbon, which was done at least by the conniuencie of Charles the fifth; and by
that preparation made against the same place, by the express commandment of
Philip the second, under the Duke of Aluaes conduct, and by many other
associations and Leagues against the Pope: It appears how jealous and
watchful, they are upon this Temporal jurisdiction, and how they oppose
themselves against any farther grows thereof. For when in the differences
about the Kingdom of Portugal, the Pope made offers to Ph^lip the second, to
interpose himself for the settling of all pretenses to that Crown, the King,
though with sweet and dilatorie answers, refusd that offer, because
Conestaggio. l. 3. fol. 82.
(says the Author of that Story) he would not by this example, acknowledge him
to be the Judge of Kingdoms. And after this, when the King had proceeded
farther therein, and Antonie was proclaimed, and that a Legate came into
Spain, and offered there, in the name of the Pope, to be a Judge between all
pretenders, though Philip did not doubt the Legates inclination to his part,
because he came into his Country to make the offer, and though he had more use
of such a service then, then before, yet he abstaind from using him therein,
because he thought that the Pope, under color of doing the Office of a common
father, went about to make himself absolute Judge of Kingdoms; and besides
the extraordinary Authority, which he endeavored to draw to his Sea, Idem. l.
6. f. 155
would oblige the Kings of Spain to his house, as ye same Author expresses
that Kings iealousies.

11 And for the politic government of that State even in that Kingdom,
which they pretend to hold of the Church, which is Sicily, they exercise a
stronger Jurisdiction, and more derogatorie to the Pope, then this which our
King claims. And though Parsons^ who is no longer a subject, Answer to the
Reports. c. 5.
and Son of the Church of Rome, then as that Church is an enemy to England
(for in the differences between her and Spain, he abandons ^er) a^erre in one
place, that this jurisdiction is by Indult, and Dispensation from the Pope,
Bar^n. Annal. To. 11.
yet a more credible man then he, and a native Subject to the King of Spain,
has utterly annuld and destroyed that opinion, that any grant or permission
of the Popes, has enabled the Kings of Spain to that Authority, which they
exercise there. And he has not only told his brother Cardinal Columna, that
the matter it-selfe, Is a point of the Catholic faith, Epist. Apolog. nu. 21.
but in his Epistle to King Philip the third, he extols and magnifies that
Book, in which he had delivered that Doctrine, so authentically, as if he
meant to draw it into the Canon of the Scriptures: for do these words import
any less? Epist. ad Philip. 3.
The Book issued from the very Chair of S. Peter, by the commandment of S.
Peter, and is confirmed by S. Peter, and shall without doubt endure for ever.
And he adds this Commination, speaking to the King, Let them which resist
these writings take heed, least they stumble, In hanc Petram, and least they
be utterly trod in pieces, Ab ipsa, ab alto ruente Petra. But of Baronius his
detestation of Monarchy, and ill behavior toward all Kings, as well as his
own Sovereign, I have another occasion to speak. All which I purpose to
euict here, was, that if Parsons have spoken so heretically, in saying, that
this is done by virtue of the Popes Indult; that remains true, which I said
before, that that Kingdom of Spain, endeavors by all ways it can, to redeem
it-selfe from these vsurpation^, and re-inuest it-selfe in her original
Supremacy.

12 For as in one of the Greek States when Nycippus sheep brought forth a
Lion, Aelian l. 1. c. 29.
it was justly concluded that, that p^rtended a Tyranny, and change of the
State, from a peaceable to a bloody Government: so since the Spiritual
principality has produced a Temporal, since this mild and Apostolic sheep
has brought forth this Lion, which seeks whom he may devour: as by his first
Jurisdiction, he would make in this Kingdom a spiritual shambles of your
souls, by corrupt Doctrines: so by the latter, he labors to make a Temporal
shambles and market of your bodies, by selling you for nothing, and thrusting
you upon the Civil sword, Numb. 35.33.
which it is a sin to sheath, when the Law commands to draw it, in so
dangerous cases of polluting the Land. And though it be pretended by you, and
for you; that the Popes have laid both a spiritual and temporal Obligation
upon you: Because, besides their care for instructing your souls; they have
also with some charge erected and endowed some Colleges for your Temporal
sustentation, Aelian. l. 2. c. 17.
who come into those parts: yet, as the wisemen of Persia, being set to observe
the first actions of their new King Ochus, when they marked that be reachd out
his hand at the Table to Bread, and to a Knife, presumd by that, that his time
would be plentiful and bloody, and faild not in their conjecture: So since the
Pope reaches out to you, with his small Collegiate pittance, the Doctrine of
the material and temporal sword, howsoever he may seem to relieve your
misery and penury, which you draw upon your selves, yet it is accompanied
with the presage of much blood, since either his purposes must be executed upon
us by you, or our just Laws for prevention thereof be Executed upon you.

Bosquier. Concio. Quadrag. Conci. 6.
14 One of your own Authors relates, that Anastatius a Monk, had a hundred
Devils appointed to vex and tempt him for four years, and after he had
overcome that trouble, and tamed them, he set them on work to build him a great
Monastery, and to bring Aqueducts, and other conueniencies thereunto, for his
temporal provision: so after the Pope has passed over that little cost which
he is at, to feed you a few years, you are ever after his instruments, to
build up his spiritual Monarchy to the ruin of all others, and your selves
must ciment and mortar the walls with your blood.

15 To let blood in some diseases, Sent. Select. ^x Corn. Celso. l. 2. n. 12.
says the eloquentest Physician, is no new thing; but that there should ^carce
be any disease, in which we should not let blood, is (says he) a strange and
new fashion: So to offer our lives for defense of the Catholic faith, has
ever been a religious custom; but to call every pretense of the Pope,
Catholic faith, and to bleed to death for it, is a sickness and a
medicine, which the Primitive Church never understood. For the implicit faith,
and blind assent, which you were used heretofore to give to the spiritual
supremacy, was put upon you, as Annibal, Frontinus stratagem. li. 2. c. 5.
to entrappe and surprise his enemies, mingled their wine with Mandrake, whose
operation is betwixt sleep and poison: for though it brought you into a
drowsy and stupid adoration of the Pope, and some dull lethargies and
forgetfulnesses of your temporal duties, yet it was not so pestilent and
contagious, but that a civil state might consist with it, though in a
continual languishing and consumption. But this doctrine of temporal
Jurisdiction, is not only a violent and dispatching poison, but it is of the
nature of those poisons, which destroy not by heat nor cold, nor corrosion, nor
any other discerneable quality, but (as physicians say) out of the specifique
form, and secret malignity, and out of the whole substance. For as no Artist
can find out, how this malignant strength grows in that poison, nor how it
works, So can none of your Writers tell, how this temporal Jurisdiction got
into the Pope, or how he executes it, but are anguished and tortured, when they
come to talk of it, as Physicians and Naturalists are, when they speak of
these specifique poisons, or of the cause and origin thereof, which is,
Antipathie.

16 And yet we find it reported of one woman, that she had so long accustomed
her body to these poisons, Forestus de venenis. Obseru. 1. Schol.
by making them her ordinary food, that she had brought her self, and her
whole complexion and constitution, to be of the same power as the poison was,
and yet retaind so much beauty, as she allurd Kings to her embracement, and
killed and poisond them by that means: So has the Roman faith been for many
years, so fed and pampred with this venomous doctrine of temporal
jurisdiction, that it is grown to some few of them to be matter of faith it
self; and she is able to draw and hold some Princes to her love, because for
all this infection, she retains some color and probability of being the same
she was. Lib. 1. c. 1.
And as that Fish which Aelianus speaks of, lies near to the rock, and
because it is of the color of the rock, surprises many fishes which come to
refresh themselves at the rock: so does the Roman doctrine, because it can
pretend by a local and personal succession (though both interrupted) that it
is so much of the color of the rock, and so near it, as Petrus and Petra,
enuegle and entrappe many cred^lous persons, who have a zealous desire to build
upon the rock it self.

17 It is an Aphorism of an ancient Physician, Hippocrates. l. 1. Apho. 22.
that we must not purge raw humors, but such as are matur'd and con^octed,
except they be stirred and moved with their own violence. Such a patience and
moderation this State used toward professors of your Religion; and only
providing some better laws, to have them in a readiness in occasions of much
necessity; the rest of the Statutes were only medicinal and preparatory, to
lead them to Church sometimes, and so to mollify their obduratenes, by making
divine service their physic, since they would not admit it for their ordinary
diet; and so in time to draine them, and deliver them from those inundations of
errors, which the Sea of Rome had degorged upon them. And though it might
seem unseasonable, by any sharper means to have wrastled or contended with
them at beginning, because every sudden remove, even into a better air, is
unwholesome, and the worse, the purer the air is; yet now it is time to work
upon you, being of better experience, since you may have observed the birth and
prosperous growth of this Reformation; and seen, that though diseases affect
and corrupt suddenly and violently, and the cures thereof are orderly and long
in accomplishing; yet this Reformation spent less time then the corruption,
and the Church has recovered more health in one age, then she had lost in a^ie
two: In so firm and constant a state of health, did the Apostles and their
followers, especially the first Bishops of Rome, deliver her over, that she
was able a long time, to resist those infectious, and was likely to have done
it much longer, if her danger had been only intrinsique, by breeding Heresies
in her self, and that she had not received the outward poisons of Riches and
Honor, and the natural companions of those, Avarice and Ambition.

18 If you will consider the occasion of this Reformation, In Epist. ad Tit. c.
1.
which Pope Adrian the sixth (as your Espencaeus relates it) ingenuously
confessed in the Imperial Parliament, That it was occasioned chiefly by the
sins of the Priests and Prelates, whose abuses and excesses had been for
many years abominable, And that all things were peruersly ouerturnd, And that
the Disease was in the head, And that therefore he would provide that the Court
of Rome, from whence all this corruption was derived, should be reformed, since
all the world did hungerly expect it at that time: which Reformation, says
Espencaeus, he died before he could perform, and his successor would not
perform it; Fl^rimond ^emond History de l' Heresy. l. 7. c. 2. and 3.
If you consider by what instruments it took first hold, and that your own
Authors, even when they mean to calumniate these beginnings, say, that the
desire of the French King Francis the first, and of his sister Margaret, and of
the Bishop of Meaux, and the rest of the Lords by their example, to have about
them learned and understanding persons, an^ such as were conversant in the holy
and original languages, gave the first entrance and way to this Reformation:
If you consider with what prosperity and blessing Almighty God has advanced
it; and that in a few years it has produced so many excellent authors in the
Arts, and in Divinity, that neither our Schools nor our Pulpits need be
beholding to them, who deliver no gold without some dross. and that for
temporal blessings he has made us as numerous, and as potent as his
adversaries, the adverse party: If you consider the good health and sound
constitution of the Reformed Religion, and that it is in all likelihood
long-liued, because it neither admits unwholesome and putrefying Traditions,
and Postscripts, after the holy Ghost had perfited his writings; which
Additions enuenome the pure blood inwardly: nor is it outwardly in her practice
deformed with the leprosies and ulcers of admitting Jews and Stews: nor
proposes and iustifies any such books, as your Taxa Camerae Apostolicae is, In
Epist. ad Tit. c. 1.
in which (says your Espencaeus) a man may learn more sin, then in all the
Summists and Casuists: and in which the price of all sins are taxed; so that
one may know before hand, what an Adultery, an Incest, a Parricide, or any
other enormious sin will stand him in, before he resolve to do it: If you
consider how peaceable and compatible it is with secular Magistracy, by this
experience, that more Catholic Princes admit toleration of the reformed
Religion, then princes of our profession, admit yours; out of an assurance of
the turbulency, and tempestuousnesse naturally venting out of the grounds of
the Jesuits: you will then perceive how blind a prognosticator that Dutchman
Prognosticon Windecki.
is, who upon two and forty vain and imaginary reasons, has grownded a
prophecy of the imminent ruin of this Religion; and how hasty that abortion,
and precipitation was in the Frenchman, Florimond. Remond Histoire d^l.
Heresy.
who has written the history of the actual ruin of this profession, whilst
it is yet in her growing estate, and by the mercy of our Saui^ur, every day
more and more advanced.

19 And if you will suffer these things to enter your understanding and
judgment, I cannot doubt of your will to conform your selves: For it is
truly said, Nothing is so contrary to the will and consent, as Error: Dig.
l. 2. Tit. ^. c. Si per errore^.
And whatsoever appears true to the Judgment, seems good to our will, and
begets a desire to do it. But if you shut up that door, and so expose your
selves, that men may possess your Will, without entering by your Judgment,
they enter like Thieves at the window, and in the night. For, though the will
be as a window, somewhat capable of light, yet your selves benight your whole
house, by drawing these Curtains upon your judgment. And in all afflictions
drawn upon your selves by this will or wilfulnes, when you shall say to God,
as his people did by Esaias, Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not?
Esaias 58.3.
we have punished our selves, and thou regard'st it not: God will answer, as
he did then; Behold, in the day of your fasts you seek your will: That is,
you pursue your own stubborn determinations, and have humane and corrupt
respects in all your tribulations.

Ael^a^. l. 2. c. 37.
20 There was a law amongst some Grecians, that if a sick man drunk wine
without advise of his Physician; though that ^aued his life, he should be put
to death, for doing it before he was commanded. O what bitter punishment must
then attend your presumption, who in stead of their wine, take Gall and poison,
and instead of their recovery, endanger your selves to a double perishing; and
are so far from having any direct commandment for it, that you have express
and just inhibitions against it? O what spiritual Calenture possesses you, to
make this hard shift to destroy your selves? If you be fishers of men, why
does he which sends you, first raise storms and tempests of Treason, and
scandal; and expose you to a certain shipwreck? It is a note which one of
your famous Preachers has given; Bosquie^. conc. Quadrag.
That fish will not be taken with a bloody Net; and yet your Fishermen are
sent with no other nets, then such as must be stained with our blood, if they
can get it, or if they miss it, with yours and their own.

21 They are content to teach in other places, That the Pope cannot bind a man
to impossible things; Did. 61. Catinensis.
and to extend the word Impossible to any thing, which cannot justly,
honestly, or conveniently be done; they are content to teach, That the Pope
cannot command somethings, Nauar. Manual c. 23 n 38
though they be naturally good and meritorious, as to iterate a Confession
after it is once made: Only to you they are so rigid and sour, that a Breue
which you are not sure was sent, and you are sure that it ought not to have
been sent, must bind you to an obedience in these Capital dangers; and like
Pythagoras scholars, Diog. Laertius l. 8.
you must suffer your selves to be slain, rather then stir your foot, and
tread down a Bean.

22 And what is your recompense? You shall be Martyrs; and yet Baronius
himself, who is liberal enough of Martyrdom, speaks of your case somewhat
inconstantly and irresolutely, when he says of English and French Martyrs,
Martyrolog. c. 8
Scimus eos esse in Caelo, vt par est credere, We know they are in heaven, as
it is fit for us to believe. Aelian. l. 14. c. 4
But as he which died of the bite of a Weasell, lamented because it was not a
Lion: So consider, it is not the Catholic faith, which you smart for, but an
unjust usurpation, and that it is not the Lion of Judah, for whose service and
honor your lives were well given, but it is for a Weasell, which crept in at a
little hole, and since is grown so full and pamperd, that men will rather die,
then believe that he got in at so little an entrance.

23 How hungerie of poison, how Ambitious of ruin, how peruious and penetrable
to all means of destruction are you, upon whom your Jesuits and other
Confessors, have not only the force of those men, who are said to have been
able to kill men by looking upon them in anger, Gellius l. 9. c. 4.
but of those also, which can bewitch by fair words, and can praise a man to
death? For as the angry eye of the first sort slew some: So do the
comminations and terrors of these Breues, thrust some of you into these
dangers. And as, if the men of the second sort (whereof there were whole
families in Afrique) did but commend Trees, Corn, Cattle, or Children, they
prosperd no farther, but perished presently: So, after these men, with whose
families Europe abounds, do but tell you, that you are borne of Catholic
parents, That only you are in the Arc, That you are in possession of good
estates, fit sacrifices for the Catholic Church, That tyou are remarkable
and exemplar men, by whom your Tenants, and Servants, and Children are led and
guided; That you are chosen by God for pillars to sustain his material
Church, as Priests are for the spiritual: That you are Martyrs apparent, and
attended and staid for in the triumphant Church: you prosper no more, but
wit^er in a Consumption, and having headlongly dissipated and scattered your
estates, you run desperately into the danger of the Law, or sustain a
wretched life by the poor Crummes of others pensions.

24 And that vicious affectation of Priesthood, Bosquior. Monom. Conc. 4.
or of Regular Religion, which one of your Preachers notes out of Cassianus, to
possess many men, whom thereupon he calls Sacerdotes non entes, has bewitched
you with a stronger charm. And as that draws them from their Office of
society, by a civil and Allegorical Death, in departing from the world into
a Cloister, so this throws you into a natural, or unnatural and violent
Death, by denying due Obedience, and by entering into Rebellious actions. Ibid.
Many men, says that Preacher, are carried to this desire by humane respects,
and by the spirit, either of their blood and Parents when they do it to please
them, or by the spirit of giddiness and leuitie, or by the spirit of liberty,
to be delivered from the bondage and encombrances o^ wife and child^en, or else
violently, by adversity and want. And these diseases, which he observed in
them, I know you cannot choose but find in your selves, and in a more dangerous,
and deadly measure and proportion.

25 And if there be not too much shame and horror in such a Meditation, but
that you dare to look back upon all the passages between your Church and
ours, in the time of the late Queen, and his Majesty who now gouernes, you
shall see, that the Rock was here, and all the storms and tempests proceeded
from you, when from you came the thunders and lightnings of Excommunications.
But as in those times, when diuinations and conjectures were made upon the fall
of lightnings, Plini. l. ^. c. 43.
those lightnings which fell in the Sea, or tops of Mountains, were never
brought into observation, but were called Bruta fulmina: so how vain his
Excommunications against Islanders, and dwellers in the Sea, have proved, we
and Venice have given good testimony, as many other great Princes have done,
by despising his Bruta fulmina, when they have been cast upon so great and
eminent Mountains, as their Supremacy is.

26 From you also have come the subtle whisperings of Rebellious doctrines,
the frequent and personal Traiterous practices, the intestine Commotions, and
the public and foraine Hostile attempts, in which, as we can attribute our
deliverance to none but God, so we can impute the malignitie thereof
originally, to none but the devil. Whose instruments the Jesuits (as we in
our just wars have given over long bows for Artillery) being men of rounder
dispatch, then the Church had before, impatient of the long Circuit and
Litigiousnes of excommunications, have attempted a readier way: and as the
invention of Gunpowder is attributed to a contemplative Monk; so these
practique Monks thought it belonged to them, to put it into use and execution,
to the destruction of a State and a Church; through which nimblenesse and
dangerous actiuitie, they have corrupted the two noble Inventions of these
later ages, Printing and Artillery by filling the world with their Libels, and
Massacres.

27 It becomes not me to say, that the Roman Religion begets Treason; but I
may say, that within one generation it degenerates into it: for if the
temporal iuris^diction (which is the immediate parent of Treason) be the
child of the Roman faith, and begot by it, treason is the Grandchild.
Annotat. in Hilarium.
But as Erasmus said of that Church in his time, Syllogismi nunc sustinent
Ecclesiam, we may justly say, that this Doctrine of temporal Jurisdiction,
is sustained but by Syllogismes, and those weak, and impotent, and
deceivable. And as it cannot appear out of all the Authors, which speak of
Saint Peter's remaining at Rome, whether his body be there, or only his ashes:
So can it not be clear to you, that the body of Christian Religion is there,
since it is oppressed with such heaps of ashes, and dead Doctrine, as this of
temporal Jurisdiction; so that diverse other Churches, which perchance were
kindled at that, may burn more clearly and fervently, then that from which
they were deriued^

28 But my purpose is not to exasperate, and aggrieue you, by traducing or
drawing into suspicion the body of your Religion, otherwise then as it
conduces to this vicious and inordinate affectation of danger: Yet your
charity may give me leave to note, that as Physicians, when to judge of a
disease, they must observe Decubitum, that is, the time of the Patients lying
down, and yielding himself to his bed; because that is not alike in all
sick men, but that some walk longer before they yield, then others do;
therefore they remove that mark, and reckon ab Actionibus laesis: that is,
when their appetite, and digestion, and other faculties failed in doing their
functions and offices: so, if we will judge of the diseases of the Roman
Church, though because they crept in insensibly, and the good state of health,
which her provident Nources endued her withal, made her hold out long; we
cannot well pitch a certain time of her lying down and sickning, yet we may
well discern Actiones laesas, by her practice, and by her disusing her stomach
from spiritual food, and surfeiting upon this temporal Jurisdiction: For
then she appeared to be lame and impotent, when she took this staff and
crouch to sustain her self, having lost the ability of those two legs,
whereon she should stand, The Word and Censures.

29 And if the suspicious and quarrelsome title and claim to this temporal
Jurisdiction; If Gods often and strange protection of this Kingdom against it,
by which he has almost made Miracles ordinary and familiar, If your own just
and due preservation, work nothing upon you, yet have some pity and
compassion toward your Country, Examen. Edicti. Anglica. Stanislaus
Christianoni cus. Paris. 1607.
whose reputation is defaced and scandalized by this occasion, when one of your
own Authors, being anguished and perplexed, how to answer these often
Rebellions and Treasons, to put it off from that Religion, lays it upon the
nature of an Englishman, whom, in all professions he accuses to be naturally
disloyal and treacherous to his Prince.

30 And have some pity and compassion (though you neglect your particulars)
upon that cause, which you call the Catholic cause: Since, as we say of
Agues, that no man dies by an Ague, nor without an Ague: So at Executions for
Treasons, we may justly say, No man dies for the Roman Religion, nor without
it. Such a natural consequence, or at least unlucky concomitance they have
together, that so many examples will at last build up a Rule, which a few
exceptions, and instances to the contrary will not destroy.

31 I call to witness against you, those whose testimony God himself has
accepted. Speak then and testify, O you glorious and triumphant Army of
Martyrs, who enjoy now a permanent triumph in heaven, which knew the voice of
your Shepherd, and staid till he called, and went then with all alacrity: Is
there any man received into your blessed Legion, by title of such a Death, as
sedition, scandal, or any humane respect occasioned? O no, for they which are
in possession of that Laurel, are such as have washed their garments, not in
their own blood only (for so they might still remain read and staind) but
in the blood of the Lamb which changes them to white. Reu^l. 7.15.
Saint Chrysostom writes well, that the Sinner in the Gospel bathed and washed
her self in her tears, Homil. 2. in Psalm. 50.
not in her blood: And of Saint Peter, he asks this question; When he had
denied Christ, Numquid sanguinem fudit? No, says he, but he powrd forth
tears, and washed away his transgression.

32 That which Christian Religion has added to old Philosophy, which was, To
do no wrong, is in this point, no more but this, To keep our mind in an
habitual preparation of suffering wrong: but not to urge and provoke, and
importune affliction so much, as to make those punishments just, which
otherwise had been wrongfully inflicted upon us. We are not sent into this
world, to Suffer, but to Do, and to perform the Offices of society, required
by our several callings. The way to triumph in secular Armies, was not to be
slain in the Battle, but to have kept the station, and done all Military
duties. Vegetius. l. 2. c. 17.
And as it was in the Roman Armies, so it ought to be taught in the Roman
Church, I^s legionis fac^le^ Non sequi, non fugere. For we must neither pursue
persecution so forwardly, that our natural preservation be neglected, nor
run away from it so far, that Gods cause be scandalized, and his Honor
diminished.

33 Thus much I was willing to premit, to awaken you, if it please you to ^eare
it, to a just love of your own safety, of the peace of your Country, of the
honor and reputation of your Countrymen, and of the integrity of that, which
you call the Catholic cause; and to acquaint you so far, with my
disposition and temper, as that you need not be afraid to read my poor
writings, who join you with mine own Soul in my Prayers, that your Obedience
here, may prepare your admission into the heavenly Jerusalem, and that by the
same Obedience, Exodus 20.
Your days may be long in the land, which the Lord your God has given you.
Amen.

PSEVDO-MARTYR.
CHAP. I. Of Martyrdom and the dignity thereof.
AS a Depositarie to whose Proprietary: and never returns to his security, out
of these watchfulnesses against other, and reluctations with himself; till he
who delivered this Jewel, resume it again: So, till it please the Lord, and
owner of our life to take home into his treasury, this rich Carbuncle our
soul, which gives us light in our night of ignorance, and our dark body of
earth, we are still anguished and trauelled^ as well with a continual
defensive war, to preserve our life from sickenesses, and other offensive
violences; as with a diverse and contrary covetousness, sometimes to enlarge our
State and term therein, sometimes to make it so much our own, that we may
unthriftily spend it upon surfets, or licentiousnes, or reputation.

2 From thence proceeded that corrupt prodigality of their lives, with examples
whereof all Histories abound; honor, ease, devotion, shame, want, pain, any
thing served for a reason, not only to forsake themselves, or to expose
themselves to vn-euitable dangers, but also to be their own executioners^ yea
we read of the women of a certain town, Gellius l. 15. c. 10
that in a wantonness had brought it up for a fashion, to kill themselves.

3 Which corruption, and Ambition of being Lord of our selves, every sort of
men, which contributed their helps to the preservation and tranquillity of
States, labored against^ as first the Philosopher, who observing that honor
and ^ase did principally draw men into this inclination, because they were
desirous to get a name of during, and of greatness, and to escape the miseries
which every day in this life presents, and heaps upon us; did therefore teach,
Aristot. Eth. l. 3. cap. 7
That nothing was more base and cowardly, then to kill ones self, so to
correct that opinion of getting honor by that Act: and to overthrow the other
opinion of ease, Idem l. 3 ^. 6. Maetalius Metellus, prefat. in Histor. Os^ij.
they taught Death to be the most miserable thing which could fall upon us.

4 And when the Spaniard in the Indies found a general inclination, and
practice in the inhabitants to kill themselves, to avoid slauer^e; they had no
way to reduce them, but by some dissemblings and outward counterfeitings, to
make them believe, that they also killed themselves, and so went with them into
the next world, and afflicted them more then, then they did in this.

5. The Emperors also by their laws and civil Constitutions, Dig. l. 48. Tit.
^9. le 38. and Dig. l. 49. tit. 10. l^. 6
have opposed remed^es against this ordinary disease, by inflicting forfaitures
and infamou^ mulctes upon them which should do it. Council. Antisi. ca. 17.
And the Church has resisted it by her Canons, Conc. Braca^. 23. q. 5. placuit.
which deny them Christian burial, and refuse their oblations at the Altars.
And with what severe laws, other particular States have labored against it,
appears by the law of our nation, which esteems it not only Man^slaughter but
Murder. And by that law in the Ea^ledome of Flanders, which reckons it amongst
the heinous names of Treason, Tholos. Sy^t. l. 36. c. 22. (...). 13.
Heresy, and Sedition.

6 And yet it was observed, that this corruption was so inhaerent and rooted,
and had so ouergrowne our nature, or that corruption which depraues it, that
neither those imperial laws, nor that form of a State which Plato Ide^ted,
De leg. 9.
nor that which Sir Tho. Moore did imagine and delineate thought it possible
utterly to extirpate and root out this disposition, V^op. l. 2. ca. de Serius.
but only to stop and retard the general precipitation therein: And
therefore in their laws they have flattered our corruption so much, as to
appoint certain cases and reasons, and circumstances, in which it might be
lawful to kill ones self.

7 And Almighty God himself, who disposes all things sweetly, has been so
indulgent to our nature, and the frailty thereof, that he has affoorded us a
means, how we may give away our life, and make him, in a pious
interpretation, beholden to us for it; which is by delivering our selves to
Martyredome, for the testimony of his name, and advancing his glory: for in
this we restore him his Talent with profit; our own soul, with as many more,
as our example works upon, and winnes to him. To deny him this, is not only
to steal from him, that which is his, by many dear titles; as Creating,
Redeeming, and Preserving; but at such a time, as his honor has use of such a
service at our hands, then to withdraw our testimony from him, is as much a
betraying and crucifying of him again, as it was in them, who by their false
witness, occasioned his death before.

8 Saint John says, Io. 1.7
that the Baptist was not that light, but (as though that were the next
dignity) he came to bear witness of that light. And when our blessed Savior
re^used to bear witness o^ himself; Io. 5.31.
those, whom he reckons as his witnesses, are all of ^o high dignity, as no
ambition can be higher, then to be admitted amongst those witnesses of Christ;
^or they are thus laid down; First the Bapt^st, then his Miracles, then his
Father, and then the Scriptures.

9 How soon God began to call upon man for this service, by sealing his
acceptance of Abels sacrifice, in accepting Abel for a Sacrifice: for so says
Chrysostom, Abel, in the beginning, before any example, first of all Dedicated
Martyredome. De Martyri Sermon. 7.
And as soon as Christ came into the world, after he received the oblations of
the kings, presenting part of their temporal fortunes; the next thing wherein
he would be glorified, was that Holocaust and Hecatombe of the innocent
children, martyrd for his name.

10 And though we cannot by infinite degrees, attain to our pattern Christ,
the general Sacrifice; yet we must exceed those Typique times, and Sacrifices
of the old law; and be no more covetous of our selves, then they were of their
beasts, when that Sacrifice is required at our hands: for when we sacrifice our
concupiscences, by rooting them out we equal them, who sacrificed their
beasts; but we exceed them, when we immolate our soul and body to God.

11 The blood of the Martyrs was the milk which nourished the Primitive
Church, in her infancy, and shall it be too hard for our digestion now? It was
the seed of the Church, out of which we sprung; and shall we grudge to Tithe
our selves to God, in any proportion that he will accept? As Zipporah said to
Moses, Exodus 4, 25
vere sponsus sanguinum es mihi; the Church may well say to Christ, who looks
for this Circumcision at her hands, and this tribute of blood, which he has so
well deser^ed^ both by begetting the Church by his blood upon the Crosse^ and
feeding her still wi^h the same blood in the Sacrament.

12 But those whom he has pre-ordained to this supreme Dignity of
Martyrdom, God does ordinarily bring up in a nouitiate, and Apprentisage of
worldly Crosses and Tribulations. And as I^stinians great Officer Tiberius,
Paul. Diaco. ad Eutrop Addit. 18.
when out of a reverence to the sign of the Cross, he removed a Marble stone
from the Pauement, and under it found a second stone, with the same Sculpture,
and under that a third, and under all, great plenty of treasure, had not this
treasure in his hope, nor purpose, nor desire before hand, but satisfied
himself in doing that honor to that sign, which those first times needed: So
is the treasure and crown of Martyredome seposed for them, who take up
devoutly the crosses of this life, whether of poverty, or anguish'd
consciences, or obedience of laws which seem burdenous, and distastefull to
them; for all that time a man serves for his freedom, and God keeps his
reckoning, from the inchoation of his Martyredome, which was from his first
submission to these tribulations: which Chrysostom testifies thus; Homil. in
psalm. 95.
That when one is executed, he is then made a Martyr (that is, declared and
accepted ^or a Martyr by the Church) but from that time, when he begun to
show, that he would profess that Religion, he was a Martyr, though he
endured not that which Martyrs do.

13 Saint Paul ^aith of himself, I die daily; 1. Cor. 15.
and Chrysostom of David, He merited the Crown of Martyrdom a thousand times
in his purpose and disposition, and was slain for God a thousand times. And
these persecutions are not only part of the Martyredome, but they are part of
the reward: for so St. Mark seems to intimate, when he expresses Christ
thus; No man shall forsake any thing for my ^ake, but he shall receive a
hundred fold now at this pre^ent, houses Brothers, Sisters, Mothers and
Children, and land, with Persecutions. So that Christ promises a reward, but
not to take away the persecution; but so to mingle and compound them, and make
them both of one taste, and indifferency, that we shall not distinguish, which
is the meat and which is the sauce, but nouri^h our spiritual growth as well
with the persecution, as with the reward.

14 For this high degree of a consummate Martyr, is not ordinarily attained to
per Saltum, but we must be content to ^erue God first in a lower rank and
Order: for as much Kings, as come to the possession of a Kingdom, by a new, or
a violent, or a litigious Title, do use at the beginning to sign their
Graunts, and Edicts, and other publ^que Acts, not only themselves, but admit
the Subscription and testimony of their Counselors, and Nobility, and
Bishops; but being est^blished by a long succession, and entering by an
indubitate Title, are confident in their rights, and come to sign Test me
ipso: So does our Savior Christ ordinarily in these times, when he is in
possession of the world, seal his graces to us by himself in his word and
Sacraments, and does not so frequently c^ll witnesses and Martyrs, as he did in
the Primitive Church, when he induced a new Religion, and saw that, that manner
of confirmation was expedient for the credit and conueiance thereof.

And if a man should in an immature and undigested zeal, expose his life for
testimony of a matter, which were already believed, or to which he were not
called by God, he did no more honor God in that act, then a Subject should
honor the King by subscribing his name, and giving his T^stimony to any of the
Kings Graunts.

CHAP. II. That there may be an inordinate and corrupt affectation of
Martyrdom.
THe external honors, by which the Natalitia, observing their Anniuersaries,
commemorating them at their Altars, and instituting Notaries, to register their
actions and passions) inflamed the Heretics also to an ambition of getting
the like glory. And thereupon they did not only expose and precipitate
themselves into ^ll d^ngers, but also invented new ways of Martyredome; with
hunger whereof they were so much enraged and transported, that some of them
taught, Alfons. Castr. ver. Martyrium
That upon conscience of sin to kill ones self, was by this act of Justice,
a Martyrdome^ upon which ground Petilian, against whom Saint Augustine writes,
canonized Judas for a Prateolus l. 3 cap. 19.
Martyr. The rage and fury of the Circumcelliones, in extorting this imagined
Martyrdom; brought them first to solicit and importune others to kill them;
and if they failed in that suite, they did it themselves. And another Sect
prospered so far in heaping up numbers of Martyrs, Ep^pha. Haeres. 80
that their whole sect was called Martyriani.

2 And a zealous scorn to be overtaken, and ^qual'd in this honor, provoked
sometimes those who write the Acts of the Orthodoxe Martyrs, to insert into
their Histories some particulars which were not true, and some which were not
justifiable: Cap. 2
for of the first sort of these insertions, which proceeded (as he says) out
of too much love to the Martyrs, Baronius in his Martyrologe complains; Did.
15. Sancta Romana
and by the Canon which forbids these Histories to be read publicly in the
Roman Church, it seems they were careful that the people should not thereby be
taught and encouraged, to bring such actions into consequence and imitation,
as, (if the immediate instinct of Gods spirit, did not justify them) would
seem indiscreete and intemperate. Nor were they only, which corrupted the
stories in fault, but out of Binius, the last compiler of the Councels, we may
perceive, that even they which were Orthodoxe pro^essors, had some tincture of
this ouer-vehement affectation of Martyredome: for he says, that the sixeteth
Canon of the Eliberitane council (by which it is enacted, To. 1. fo. 248
That those Christians which attempted to break the Idols of the Gentiles, and
were slain by them, should not be numbered amongst the Martyrs) was made to
deter men from following such examples, as Eulalia, who being a maid of
twelve years, came from her fathers house, Prud^nt^us
declared her self to be a Christian, spit in the Judges face, and provoked
him to execute her. To which they were then so inclin^ble, Bodin Daemonom l. 4.
c. 3. ex Tertull.
that as a Catholic Author has observed, that state which inflicted those
persecutions; sometimes made Edicts, that no more Christians should be
executed, because they perceived how much contentment and satisfaction, and
complacency some of them had in such dying.

3 And although these irregular and exorbitant acts be capable of a good
interpretation; that is, that the spirit of God did by secret insinuations
e^cite and inflame them, and such as they were, to pu^ feruor into others at
that time; yet certainly God has already made his use of them, and their
examples belong no more to us, in this part and circumstance of such excesses.

4 And though this secret and inward instinct and moving of the holy Ghost,
which the Church presumes, to have guided not only these martyrs, in whose
forwardness these authors have observed some incongruity with the rules of
Divinity, but also Sampson, and those Virgins which drowned themselves ^or
preservation of their chastity, Eus^b. l. 8 Hist. Eccl^s. ca. 24
which are also acounted by that Church as martyrs; although (I say) this
instinct lie not in proof, nor can be made evident; yet there are many other
reasons, which authorize and justify those zealous transgressions of theirs
(if any such were): or make them much more excuseable, then any man can be in
these times, and in these places wherein we live.

5 For the persecutions in the Primitive Church were raised either by the
Gentiles or the Arrians; either the unity of the Godhead, or the Trinity of
the persons was ever in question: which were the Elements of the Christian
Religion, of which it was framed and complexioned; and so to shake that, was to
ruin and demolish all. And they were also the Alphabet of our Religion, of
which no infant or Neophyte might be ignorant. But now the integrity of the
belief of the Roman Church, is the only form of Martyrdom; for it is not
allowed for a Martyrdom to witness by our blood, Feuardent^us Theom. Calvin l.
8. c. 13. n. 13.
the unity of God against the Gentiles, nor the Trinity of persons against the
Turk or Jew, except we be ready to seal with our blood contradictorie things,
and incompatible for the time past: (since evidently the Popes have taught
contradictorie things) and for the time present, obscure and irreuealed
things, and entangling perplexities of Schoolmen; for in these, yea in future
contingencies, we must seal with our blood, that part which that Church shall
hereafter declare to be true.

6 This constant defense of the foundation, and this vndisputable evidence of
the truth, was their warrant: And they had another double reason, of making
them extremely tender, and fearful of slipping from their profession; which
was first the subtilties and Artifices of their adversaries, to get them to do
some act, which might imply a transgressing and dereliction of their Religion,
though it were not directly so; and so draw a scandal upon their cause, and
make their simplicity seem infirmity, and impiety: and secondly, the severity
which the Church used toward them, who had done any such act, and her
bitterness and a^ersenes, from re assuming them, even after long penances,
into her bosom. For by the third Canon of the Eliberitane Counc^l, which I
ment^oned before, it appears, that even they whom they called Libellaticos,
because they had for money bargained and contracted with the State, to spare
them from sacrificing to Idolles (though this were done but to redeem their
vexation and trouble) were separated from the holy Communion. But none of these
reasons can advantage or relieve those of the Roman persuasion in these times,
because no point of Catholic faith, either primary and radical, or issuing
from thence by necessary deduction and consequence, is impugned by us; nor
their faith in those points, wherein it abounds above ours, explicated to them
by any evidence, which is not subject to just quarrel and exception; nor are
our Magistrates laborious or active to withdraw them by any snares from their
profession, but only by the open and direct way of the word of God, if they
would hear it nor is the Church so sour and tetricall, but that she admits
with ease and joy, those, which after long straying, not only into that
Religion, but into such treasons and disobediences, as that Religion produces,
return to her again.

CHAP. III. That the Roman Religion does by many erroneous doctrines
misencourage and excite men to this vicious affectation of danger: first by
inciting secular Magistracy: secondly by extolling the value of merits, and of
this work in special, by which the treasure of the Church is so much advanced:
and lastly, by the doctrine of Purgatory, which by this act is said certainly
to be escaped.
The first part of Principallity and Priesthood.
of humane and passionate respects, if when we are admitted to be witnesses of
Gods honor, we love our own glory too much, or the Authority by which this
benefit is derived upon us, too little, which is the function of secular
Magistracy: We are next to consider, by what inducements, and prouocations,
the Doctrine and practice of the Roman Church does put forward, and
precipitate our slipperie disposition into this vicious and inordinate
affection, and dangerous selfe-flatterie.

2 In three things especially they seem to me, to advance and ^oment this
corrupt inclination. First, by abasing, and auiling the Dignity and persons of
secular Magistrates, by extolling Ecclesiasticke immunities and privileges:
Secondly, by dignifying and ouer-valewing our merits and satisfactions, and
teaching that the treasure of the Church, is by this expense of our blood
increased. And thirdly, by the Doctrine of Purgatory, the torments whereof are
by this suffering said to be escaped and avoided.

3 And in the first point, which is a dis-estimation of Magistracy, they
offend two ways. Comparatively, when they compare together that and
Priesthood, and Positiuely, when not bringing the Priestly function into the
balance, or disputation, they give the Pope authority as Supreme spiritual
Princess, over all Princes.

4 When the first is in question of Priesthood and Magistracy, then enters the
Sea, yea Deluge of Canonists, and ouerflowes all, and carries up their Arc
(that is the Roman Church, that is the Pope) fifteen cubits above the
highest hills, whether Kings or Emperors. Extra. de mayor. and Obed. Solit^.
Quinquagesies septies and Centies quadragesies septies and medium, and septies
mesies and septingesies, quadragesies, quater and medium.
And this makes the Glosser upon that Canon, where Priesthood is said to
exceed the Layetie, as much as the Sun, the Moon, so diligent to calculate
those proportions, and to repent his first account as too low, and reform i^
by later calculations, and after much perplexity to say, That since he cannot
attain to it, he will leave it to the Astronomers; so that they must tell us,
how much the Pope exceedes a Prince: which were a fit work for their Jesuit
Clauius, Comment. in Sacro. Bosc. fol. 219.
who has expressed in one sum, how many granes of Sand would fill all the
place within the concaue of the firmament, if that number will seem to them
enough for ^his comparison. But to all these Rhapsoders, and fragmentar^
compilers of Canons, which have only am^ss'd and shoueld together, whatsoever
the Popes themselves or their creatures have testified in their own cause;
Amandus Polanus applies a round, Simphons. 24. T^es. 9.
and pregnant, and proportional answer, by presenting against them the Edicts
and Rescripts of Emperors to the contrary, as an equivalent proo^e at least.

5 And for the matter it self, wherein the Ecclesiastique and Civil estate
are under and above one another, with us it is evident and liquid enough, since
no Prince was ever more indulgent to the Clergy, by encouragements and real
adu^ncing, nor more frequent in accepting the food of the word and Sacrament
at their hands, in which he acknowledges their superiority, nor the Clergy of
any Church more inclinable to preserve their just limits; which are, to
attribute to the king so much, as the good kings of Israel, and the Emperors
in the Primitive Church had.

6 It is entire man that God has care of, and not the soul alone; therefore
his first work was the body, and the last work shall be the glorification
thereof. He has not delivered us over to a Prince only, as to a Physician,
and to a Lawyer, to look to our bodies and estates; and to the Priest only,
as to a Confessor, to look to, and examine our ^oules, but the Priest must
as well endeavor, that we live ver^uously and innocently in this life for society
here, as the Prince, by his laws keeps us in the way to heaven: for thus they
accomplish a Regale Sacerdotium; when both do both; ^or we are sheep to them
both, and they in diverse relations sheep to one another.

7 Accordingly they say, that the subject of the Canon law is Homo dirigibilis
in Deum, and Bouu^ Commune; Reg Iu Possore, in 6. Glos.
so that that Court which is, forum spirituale, considers the public
tranquillity. And on the other side Charles the great, to establish a mean
course between those two extreme Councels, of which Constantin. Ann 754.
one had utterly destroyed the use of Images in Nicenum 2. Anno 787.
Churches^ the other had induced their adoration, takes it to belong to his
care and function, not only to call a Francofur. Anno 794.
Synod to determine herein, but to write the book of that important and
intricate point, to Adrian then Pope; which Donat. Constant l. 2. nu. 60.
Steuchius says, remains yet to be seen in Bibliotheca Palatina, and vrges
and presses that book for the Popes advantage. And in the preface of that
book, the Emperor has these words: Haimius Feldius Decretu. Impp. de
Imaginibus. fo. 91.
In sinu Regni Ecclesiae gubernacula suscepimus; and to proceed, that not only
he, to whom the Church is committed, ad regendum, in those stormy times, but
they also which are Enutriti ab vberibus must join with him in that care: and
therefore he adds, That he undertook this work, Cum Conhibentia Sacerdotum
in regno suo; neither would this Emperor (of so pious affections toward that
Sea, expressed in pro fuse liberalities) have usurped any part of Jurisdiction,
which had not orderly deuolued to him, and which he had not known to have
been duly executed by his predecessors.

8 Whose authority, in disposing of Church matters, and direct^on in matters
of Doctrine, together with the Bishops, appears abundantly and evidently out
of their own Laws, and out of their Rescripts to Popes, and the Epistles of
the Popes to them. For we see, by the Imperial Law, the Authority of the
Prince and the Priest made equal, when it is decreed, Dig. li. 11. Tit. 7. l.
8. Osa.
That no man may remove a body out of a Monument in the Church, without a
Decree of the Priest, or Commandment of the Prince. And yet there appears
much difference, in degrees of absoluteness of power, between these
limitations of a Decree and a Commandment. And Leo the first, writing to the
Emperor Martianus, reioyses, that he found Leo 1. Martia.
In Christianiss mo Principe Sacerdot alem affectum. And in his Epist. 70.
Epist. 75.
Epistle to Leo the Emperor, using this preface for fear least he should
seem to diminish him in that comparison ( Christiana vtor liberate) he says,
I exhort you to a fellowshippe with the Prophets and Apostles, because you are
to be numbered inter Christi praedicatores: He adds, that kings are
instituted, not only ad mundi regimen, but chiefly ad Ecclesiae presidium: and
therefore he prays God to keep in him still, Animum eius Apostolicum and
Sacerdotalem.

9 So for his diligence in the Church government, Simplicius, Simplicius Papa
An. 471. Epist. 14.
the Pope salutes the Emperor Zeno. E^ultamus vo^i^ in esse animum Sacerdotis
and principis: For which respect his successor Ann 486. Epist 14.
Felix the third, writing to the same Emperor, salutes him wi^h his style:
Dilectissimo fratri Zenoni, which is a style so peculiar to those, which are
constituted in the highest Ecclesiastique dignities as Bishops and
Patriarchs, Extra. de Rescript. Ad audic^^iam^g os. verb manifestum.
that if the Pope should write to any of them by the name of Sons, which is his
ordinary style to secular princes, it vitiates the whole Diplome, and makes it
false.

10 And a Conc. Aurelian. 1. Clodu. regi. c. 2
Synodicall letter from a whole Council to a King of France, acknowledges this
Priestly care in the king, thus, Quia Sacerdotalimentis affectu, you have
commanded your Priests to gather together, etc. which right of general
superintendencie over the whole Church, Habetur in Binio To. 2. f. 320. Anno.
516.
Anastasius the Emperor dissembled not, when writing to the Senate of Rome to
compose dissentions there, he called Hormisda the pope, Papam Almae vrbis
Romae, but in the Inscription of the Letter, amongst his own Titles, he writes
Pontifex inclitus.

11 Li. 4. Epist. 32.
Gregory himself (though his times to some tastes, seem a little brackish,
and deflected from upright obedience to princes) says of the Emperours^ That
no man can rightly govern earthly matters, except he know also how to handle
Divine. And in the weakest estate, and most dangerous fit that ever secular
Magistrate suffered and endured, Greg. 7. Duci Sue uiae l. 1. Epist. 19.
Gregory the seventh denied not, that these two dignities were as the two eyes
of the body, which gouernd the body of the Church in spiritual light; which
is more, then the Comparisons of Soul and Body, and of Gold and Lead, as
they are now usurped and detorted, can afford. And the evidence of this truth
has extorted from Binius Binius To. 1. fol. 831. A.
(a severe and heavy depresser of kings,) thus much (though but in a marginall
note) Imperatores Sacra and secularia ex aequo curant. Joan. 8. Pap^ Ann. 873.
Epist. 87.
And so much did pope John the eight willingly acknowledge to Lodouic the son
of Charles, That he was Cooperator sui certaminis. And as Balsamo says upon
the fourth general Council of Chalcedon, Balsamo. in Conc Chalced. can. 17
that it belongs to the Emperor to design the limits of Diocesses, and to
erect a Bishopric into a Metrapolitane seat, and to appoint who shall
possess them. Council. Quinosen in Trullo. ca. 69. Anno 692.
So to that Canon in the Council of Trullo which forbidding all Lay persons to
come within a certain distance of the Altar, does not extend to the Emperors,
Si quidem voluerit Creatori dona offerre ex antiquissima consuetudine: And to
Balsamoes Notes thereupon, that Orthodoxe Emperors, because they are Christi
Domini, have also Pontifical Graces from God, and by Invocation of the holy
Trinity, they create Patriarchs, they come unto the Altar, Et sufficient sicut
and Antistites: Notes in hunc can. To. 3. par. 1. fo. 156. A.
Binius opposes no more, but that the Canon was made in flattery of the
Emperor, which is not enough to defeat the Canon, nor eneruate the credit
thereof, since that Canon was not introductory then, but Declaratorie of an
ancient custom, as the words thereof do fully euict and prove.

12 And not only Councels submitted their Decrees to the Emperors for
Authority, and supplemen^ of defects, but the Popes themselves con^ul^ed the
Emperors before hand, by their Letters, in matters of greatest difficulty and
importance: So Leo the first writes to Martianus the Emperor, Leo, Martiano
Epist. 64.
about the establishing of Easter, in which point the Church suffered more
storms and schisms, then almost in any other, that did not concern the
Trinity, and at this time nothing was certainly determined and decreed
therein. Thus then he writes to him, Cupio vestrae Clementiae studijs adiuuari,
That so no error may be committed in the observation thereof. And Leo the
eight, Leo 8. Epist. 87.
exhorts the Sons of Charles, as partners in his Pastoral care to employ
Baculos redargutionis. And concerning some spiritual matters, then to be
determined, he ends his Epistle thus, The pen must first be dipped in the
fountain of your heart, and then my Hand shall frame the Characters. And so
when a Bishop of Constantinople stood out in some things against the Emperor,
Leo 1. ad Martia^. Epist. 70.
the Bishop of Rome, who at that time had justly acquired a great reputation in
the Catholic Church, writes to the Emperor, That if that Bishop persevere in
such courses, as displease God, and the Emperor, Salua Mansuetudinis vestrae
Reuerentia, vtar in e^m liberiori Constantia. So that having first asked the
Emperor leave, he offers him his assistance.

Grego. 1. li. 3. Epist. 20.
13 And though Gregory the first (whom we may justly call a border-pope,
because though he made no deep roades into the jurisdiction of Princes, yet
he extended his own to the vtte^most inch, and sometimes transgressed a little
beyond) though he, I say, suspended one, to whom Orders were given by the
Emperors commandment, yet he does not this absolutely, but because he knew
(as he said) the Emperors mind therein, and that particular parties
unworthiness; he suspended him, until he might understand from his Responsall
with the Emperor, whether that pretended Commandment from the Emperor were
not subreptitious.

14 And when this correspondence was intermitted, as it appears often to have
been, to the prejudice of the whole Church, the Emperors were ever forwardest
to labor a reunion and concurrence of their powers, to the benefit and peace
thereof; Anastas. Imp. Hormisdae Papae. Binius. To. 2. fo. 315. A.
as Anastatius testifies thoroughly in a Letter to Hormisda, in these words;
Before this time, the hardness of them, to whom the care of this Bishopric,
which you now govern, was committed, made us abstain from sending any
Letters; but now, since their runs a sweet opinion of you, it has brought
back to our memory, the goodness of a fatherly affection, that we should
require those things, and so forth. By which, all these circumstances appear,
That the Emperors did use to write, and that the fault which induced a
discontinuance thereof, proceeded From the Pope; and that the Emperor
pretermitted no opportunity of resuming that custom; and that where he writ,
he did it out of a fatherly care, and by the way of ^equiring. And how much joy
Hormisda conceived by this Letter, Hormisda Epist. 2.
ap^^ares by his phrase of expressing it, Sacros affatus congrua veneratione
acc^pimus.

Bi^ius To. 2. so. 335. B.
15 With like care Justinius the Emperor exhorts the same Pope, to a Peace and
Union with the Eastern Church, by his Letters which he calls Diuinos Apices.
And scarce by any one thing does this care of Princes, and obsequiousness of
Popes appear more, then by the Letter of Pelagius the first (who was little
above 550. years from Christ) to Childebert King of France, in these words.
Pelagius 1. Epist. 16. and 25. q. 1, Satagendum.
We must endeavor, for the taking away of all scandal of suspicion, to present
the obsequiousness of our Confession, unto Kings, to whom the holy Scriptures
command even us to be subject. For Ruffi^^s, your Excellencies Ambassador,
asked from us confidently, as became him, that either we should signify to
you, that we did observe in all points the Faith, which Leo had described, or
send a Confession of our Faith in our own words. And ^o accordingly he
perfor^es both, as well binding himself to the Faith of his predecessors, as
exhibiting to the King another form of the same Faith, composed and digested
by himself; which, if the Bishops of that Se^ would accept now, I do not
perceive wherein there could be any Schism.

16 And as the Emperors were careful assistants of the Popes, that that
mother Church at whose breast most o^ the Western Churches sucked their
spiri^u^ll no^rishment, should be infected with no poison, because it might
easily be derived from thence to the other members; so did they not attend the
leisure of that Churches resolution, nor the incommodity of General Councels
but used their own power to govern their Churches, by constitutions of their
own; for so Cod. l. 1. Tit. 3. l. vltim. in fine.
Justinian the Emperor says of his own law, by which he priu^ledges certain
religious houses; We offer up this Divine law as a fair and convenient
sacrifice to Christ. So that either that attribute Diuinum was then affoorded
to civil Constitutions, or the ^mperour made Ecclesiastique laws, if that
word belong only to such. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 2. le. ^3.
The Emperors took it into their care, to dispose of their estates which
entered into Monasteries; Cod. l. 1. Tit. 3. l. 20.
And of thei^s also which dyed in Monasteries; so that neither the pu^pose of
entering, nor the act, nor the habit, and pe^seuerance deuested the Emperor
of his right, or hindered the working of the Law. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 3. l. 4. and
27.
The Emperors also by their laws appointed which of their subjects might not
take Orders, Ibid. le. 9.
and at what age Orders might be conferred; and that no woman after a second
marriage might be Diaconissa; Ibid.. Diaconissa.
which was, to make a law of Bigamy.

17 Yea they commanded and instructed in matter of Faith; for so Cod, li. 1.
Tit. 1 l. 6.
Justinian says of himself, we are forward to teach, what is the right ^aith
of Christians, and we Anathematize Apollinarius Cod. lib. 1. Tit. ^. l. 2.
. So also Honorius and Theodosius inflict the punishment of death upon any
Catholic Minister (for then neither that name was abhorred by Priests, nor
they exempt from criminal laws) which should re-baptize any man; and yet this
was a mere spiritual offense. And so Cod. l. 1. Tit. 9. lib. 6.
Valentinian, and his Co-emperours pronounce marriage between Jews and
Christians to be adultery. And Cod. l. 1. Tit. 2. l. vlt.
Justinian interprets how a Testator shall be understood, when he appoints
Christ, or an Angel, or a Saint to be his heir.

18 Nor deal they only with temporal punishments upon Ecclesiast^que
persons, which is farther then is affoorded them now, but they inflict also
spiritual censures: for Gratian and his Co-emperours pronounce against
Heretics, (that is, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1. ^. 2
Impugners of the Nicene council) That they shall be utterly secluded from the
threshold of the Church: And in the next law, which is against Nestorians, they
say, If the offenders be Laymen, Anathematizentur, if Clergy men, Eijciantur
ab Ecclesijs. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 3. ^ 7. Presbiter^.
And another of their laws does not only inflict temporal and ignominious
punishment upon Clergy men, but Ecclesiastique censures also in these words: If
a Clergy man be guilty of falls witness in a pecuniary cause^ let him be
suspended three years, and in a criminal, let him be deprived. Ibid. ^e. 17..
Interdi^imus.
And another susspends for three years, even Sanctissimos and venerabiles
Episcopos; if they do but look upon players at Tables: and that law
authorizes him, under whose power that offender is, if he appear penitent, to
abbreuiate his punishment; Ibid. l. 19.
and of Bishops which will not forsake women, it pronounces thus; Abiiciantur
Episcopatibus. And in the matter of establishing and ordering Sanctuaries,
Simancha. de R^pub. l. 8. c. 40.
one of the writers of the Roman part has presented civil constitutions
enough, to teach us that, that was within the care and Jurisdiction of secular
Princes.

19 Simplicius Zenoni. Ep. 14.
And when an Emperor had created a Bishop of Antioch, contrary to the form
prescribed in the Nicene Council, of an entire observation, whereof the
christian Church was extremly zealous, the Pope proceeds not by anullings and
vociferations, but writes thus to the Emperor: We may not dissallow that which
you have done holily and religiously out of a love to peace and quietness: by
which we see that Canons of Councels, though they were Directions, yet they
were not Obligations upon Princes for their government. By all which it
appears, that those Christian and Orthodoxe Emperors, justifying their
inherent right, by these frequent and vn-interrupted matters of fact,
apprehended not this vast and incomprehensible distance between secular and
ecclesiastique power, but that they were compatible enough, and conduced, and
concurred to one perfection, and harmony of the whole state.

20 And it is related by Espen^aeus. Com^n Tim. l. 2. page 275.
an Author of great estimation in the Roman profession, that Gregory the
seventh was author of a new scisme, dividing and tearing priesthood and
principality. Index Expur. Belg. fo. 15.
And it is evident that Bertram a priest under Carolus Caluus, almost eight
hundred years since, writing of that Divine and abstruse mystery, De corpore
Domini, submits his opinion to the judgment of the King and his Counsel, as
competent Judges of that question: and Pref^tio in Histor. de act. and Script.
Lutheri.
Cochlaeus says, that Luthers doctrine was condemned for heretical by an
edict of the Emperors, with the common assent of the Princes and the States.
And the holy Ghost had well intimated the concurrence of their two powers in
Deuteronomy. 17.11.
Deuter. if those words which are in the Text, Nolens obedire sacerdotis
Imperio, and Decreto Iudici, moriatur; were not changed by the vulgate
edition, into Ex Decreto; and thereby only the priest made Judge of the
controversies, and the Magistrate only executioner of his Sentences.

21 For certainly these two functions are not in their nature so distinct, and
Diametrically oppo^ed, but that they may meet in one matter, yea sometimes in
one man, and one man may do both: for amongst the Gentiles, it was so for the
most part: and sometimes amongst the Israelites. And in late times Epist.
Maximil^. ad B^ro. Leichtensteni Habetur. in Monit. polit. edit Franct. Ann.
1609. so. 33.
Maximilian the first, a Catholic Emperor, thought it belonged to the
Empire, to have also the Papacy united to it: and therefore when Julius the
second lay desperately sick, he endeavored to bring to execution, that which
he had often meditated, and consul^ed, and received as approved from some great
persons of dignity in that Church, which was to be elected Pope in the next
Conclaue, and to restore the Papacy (as he thought or pretended) to the
Imperial Crown.

22 Ceremoniae Sacrae. Cap. de Ordinatione.
And if a Layman be elected Pope, he need not presently be made Priest, but he
may, if he will, stay in Subdiaconatu. And to that degree they seem to admit
the Emperor, when he comes to be crowned at Rome; Idem. ca. de Coronat.
for at the Communion he administers to the Pope in the place of Subdeacon. And
this in the Primitive Church was not (as Alfon. Aluares specul. vtriusque Dig.
c. 10. nu. 3.
themselves confess) Ordo Sacer: though of late it be grown to be such a
perplexed case, whether it were or no, that of those commissioners, which two
Popes made to suruay the Decretals, one company expunged, the other reassumed
Extra de bigam. non Ordin. Super eis. glos. verbo Sacros.
one place in that book, which denies this to have been amongst holy Orders.

23 The Emperor also puts on a Surplis, and is admitted as a Canonick not only
of Saint Peter's Church, but of Saint John Laterane; to which particular
Churches (of which the Pope is Parson, as he is Bishop of Rome, Metropolitan
of Italy, patriarch of the West, and pope of the world, all those blessings and
privileges which are ordinarily spoken of the Catholic Church are said by
Aluares specu. vtri. Digni. ca. 1. nu. 40.
some to be irremoueably annexed and appropriate: hereupon some of their own
lawyers say, Cassanaeus^ par. 5. consid. 24. art. 59. and 181.
That all kings are clergy men; and that therefore it is sacrilege ^o dispute
of the authority of a King.

24 But howsoever these two functions, since the establing of Christianity,
have for the most part been preserved distinct, and ought so to be; yet they
are at most, but so distinct as our Body and Soul: and though our Soul can
contemplate God of herself, yet she can produce no exterior act without the
body. Nothing in the world is more spiritual and delicate, and tender then the
conscience of a man; yet by good consent of Divines, otherwise diversely
persuaded in Religion, the civil laws of Princes do bind our consciences:
and shall the persons of any men, or their temporal goods, be thought to be of
so sublimed, and spiritual a nature, that the civil constitutions of Princes
cannot work upon them? Nor do we therefore decline the comparison, so much
urged by the Romans, Be^lar. de P^^t. To l. 5, c. 6.. Est igit^r. E^ Nazi^^z.
that the Clergy exceed the Laiety as much as the body the soul, when it is
so conditioned and qualified, as the authors thereof intended it; That is, that
the seals and instruments of Gods grace, the Sacraments, are in the dispensing
of the Clergy, as temporal blessings are in the Prince and his laws, strictly
and properly, though concurrently both in both, (for the execution of the most
spiritual function of the priest, as it is circumstanced with time and place;
and such, is ordinarily from the Prince)^ But we are a little afraid, that by a
literal and punctual acceptance of this comparison, we may give way to that
Supremacy, which they affect over Princes; because their Sepulueda says,
Sepulueda de regn. and reg. Hu. l. 1.
That the soul does exercise over the body, Herile Imperium, vt Dominus in
seruum^ and so by this insinuation should the pope do over the prince.

25 Howsoever in their first institution Popes were mere Souls, and purely
spiritual, yet as the purest Soul becomes stained and corrupt with sin,
as soon as it touches the body: so have they by entering into secular business,
contracted all the corruptions and deformities thereof, and now transfer this
original disease into their successors. Council. Nice. 2. Actio 5.
And as in the second Nicene Councell^ when the Bishop of Thessalonica a^err'd
it to be the opinion of Basil, Athanasius, and Methodius, and the Universal
Church, that Angels, and Souls were not merely incorporeall, but had bodies^
The Council in a prudent con^i^enc^e, fo^bore to oppose any thing against that
asseueration, because it facilitated their purpose then, of making Pictures and
representations of Spirits (though Binius now upon that place, To. 3. Par. 1.
fol. 399.
say, his Assertion was false and injurious to the Church:) So though in true
Divinity the Pope is merely spiritual, yet to enable him to depose Princes,
they will inuest and organize him with bodily and secular Jurisdiction, and
auerre that all the Fathers, and all the Catholic Church were ever of that
opinion. For the Pope will not now be a mere Soul and Spirit, but Spiritualis
homo, 1. Cor. 2.15.
qui iudicat omnia, and a nemine iudicatur. Maynardus de Priuileg. Eccles. Art.
9. n. 1.
For so a late writer styles him, and by that place of Scripture enables him to
depose Princes. No^ will this serve, but he must be also spirit^alis Princeps;
of which we shall hereaf^er have occasion to speak.

26 And as a cunning Artificer can produce greater effects, upon matter
conveniently disposed thereunto, then nature could have done, (as a Statuarie
can make an Image, which the Timber and the Axe could never have ef^ected
without him: And as the Magicians in Egypt could make living Creatures, by
applying and suggesting Passive things to Active, which would never have met,
but by their mediation:) So, after this Soul is entered into this Body, this
spiritual Jurisdiction into this temporal, it produces such effects, as
neither power alone could work, nor they naturally would unite and combine
themselves to that end, if they were not thus compressed, and thronged together
like wind in a Cave. Such are the thunders of unjust Excommunications, and the
great Earthquakes of trans^er^ing Kingdoms.

27 And these usurpations of your Priests have deserved, that that stygmaticall
note should still l^e upon them, which your Canons retain, Did. 50. Et
Purgabit. glos. verb. Domo.
That all evil proceeds from Priests. For though Index. Expur. Belg. fol. 306.
Manriqe whom Sixtus the fifth employed, had removed that gloss, yet Faber to
whom Gregory the thirteenth committed the survey of the Canons, re^aines it
still. 24. q. 3. Transferunt.
And (if the Text be of better credit then the gloss) the Text has auerred
Saint Hieromes words, That searching ancient Histories, he cannot find, that
any did rent the Church^ and seduce the people from the house of God, but those
which were placed by God, as Priests, and Prophets, that is, Ouersee^s; for
these are turned into winding Snares, and lay scandals in every place.

28 Even the Name of King, presents us an argument of pure, and absolute, and
independent Authori^ie^ for it e^presses immediately, and radically his Office
of governing, wher^s the name of Bishop has a metaphorica^l, and
similitudinarie deriuation, and being before Christianity applied to Officers,
which had the ouerseeing of others, but yet with relation to Superiors, to
whom they were to give an account, deuolu'd conveniently upon such Prelates, as
had the ouerseeing of the inferior Clergy, but yet gave them no acquitance
and discharge of their duties to the Prince.

29 And God has dignified many races of Kings, with many marks and
impressions of his power. For by such an influence, and infusion, our kings
cure a di^ease by touch, and so do the French Kings work upon the same
infirmity. And it is said that the kings of Spain cure all Daemoniaque and
possessed persons. Valdesius de Digni^^te regum Hispa c. 16.
And if it be thought greater, that the Pope cures spiritual Leprosies, and
lamenesses of sin, his Office therein is but accessorie and subsequent; and
after an Angel has troubled our waters, and put us into the Poole, that is,
after we are troubled and anguished for our sins, and after we have washed
our selves often in the river Jordan, in our tea^es, and in our Saviors blood
upon the Cross, and in the Sacrament, then is his Office to distinguish
between Leaper and Leaper, and pronounce who is cleansed: which all his Priests
could do as well as he, if he did not Monopolize our sins by reseruations.

30 And this is as much as seems to me needful to be said of their auiling
Magistracy, in respect of Priesthood: for, for us private men it must content
us, Joan. de Lapide^ Casus missa^. cap. 6. Ar. 5. Quo^unque.
to be set one (...) higher then dogs; for so they say in their Missall
cases, that if any of the consecrated wine fall down, the Priest or his
assistant ought to lick it up; but if they be not prepared, any Layman may be
admitted to lick it, least the dog should. And of the comparison of these
two great functions^ Principality and Priesthood, I will say no more, least the
malignity of any mis-interpreter might throw these aspersions, which I lay
upon persons, upon the Order. And therefore since we have sufficiently
observed, how near approaches to Priest hood the Christian Emperors have
justly made, and thereby seen the injustice of the Roman Church, in deiecting
Princes so far under it: we will now descend to the second way, by which they
debase Princes, and derogate from their authority.

31 For it is not only in comparisons with Priesthood, that the Roman writers
diminish secular dignity, but simply and absolutely, when they make the Title
and Jurisdiction of a king so smoakie a thing, that it must euaporate and
vanish away by any lightning of the popes Breues or censures, except they will
all yield to build up his Monarchy, and make him heir to every kingdom, as he
pretends to be to the Empire: for Azor. par. 2 l. 10. c. 9.. Caeterum.
of that (says a Jesuit) now there is no more controversy. Aluares specutr.
Dign. ca. 56. nu. 12.
And if the electors dissagree in their election, then the election belongs to
him. And whether they agree or no, Idem. ca. 16^ nu 15.
this form of Election is to continue but so long, as the Church shall think
it expedient. And if he had such title to all the rest, that Monarchy might in
a vaster proportion extend it self, as far as one limme thereof, the
Iacobins, do in Paris: Ren. Choppinus de Iure Monast. l. 1. Tit 1. nu. 15.
to whom Philip le long, gave a Charter for their dwelling in that City, in
these words: A porta eorum, ad portam Inferni, inclusiue.

32 And how easily and slipperily Princes incur these censures, may be
collected by Nauarrus, who says, Nauar. Manual. c. 27 nu. 13.
It is the Catholic faith, without firm belief whereof, no man can be saved;
that no Prince can erect or extinguish a benefice without the Pope; and to
think the contrary (says he) does taste of the English Heresy.

33 Scarce any amongst themselves can escape that excommunication Dormant,
which they call Bullam Caenoe; in which Nauarrus reckons up so many hooks, with
which it takes hold, that every honest man, and good subject with us now, ought
to be affraide, least he have not incurred it, since all they are within the
danger thereof, that adhere to any, who has bu^ offended a Cardinal: of whose
safety the popes are grown so careful, that in the later Decretals it is made
treason, even in a stranger and no subject; In septimo. Tit 4. c. 3.
If he have any kind of knowledge, or coniectu^e of any harm, intended to any
of them. Hiero. Gigas de laesa ma. l. 1.
And the Emperor himself if he abett, or receive, or favor, or countenance
any that does, or intends personal harm to a Cardinal, Rubr. 4. q. 5. nu. 10.
becomes a traitor. For they are the eldest sons of the Church, Ibid. nu. 2.
and partake of the Majesty of their father. Nor are they brethren to any of
less rank, but to such, their style is but vester vti frater, Ante. librum
Schultingij^ To. 1
as Baronius writes to Schultingius his abbreuiator. And though Bishops and the
Emperor swear fidelity to the pope; yet, Vbi supra. n. 6.
says Gigas, the Cardinals do not take that oa^h, because they are parts of
his body, and his own Bowels.

34 And not only all princes are bound to a reverend respect of them, but
Paris crassus De ceremo. Episcop. li. 2. ca. 42
in solemn processions, the Image of Christ must look backward, if a
Cardinal follow; and God himself in the Host, must give them place: for at
the Coronation of the pope, Cerem. Sacrae. cap. de consecrat. fo 36.
when they provide twelve horses for the Pope, and one gentle one for the Host,
the dignity of the place being measured by the nearenesse to the Popes person;
the Cardinals place is, to ride between the Host and the Pope. And in their
mysterious passages upon Ash Wednesday, Par. crass l. 2. c. 43.
when the Pope lays the ashes upon a Cardinal, he says not to him, as to all
others, Memen^o homo, quia Cinis es, but quia puluis es: Intimating perchance,
that they are never so burnt to ashes, but that the fires of lust or ambition
are still alive in them. To which, I thin^e there was some regard had, when it
was so wisely provided, Idem. l. 5. c. 27
that when a Cardinal did celebrate mass, there might enter no woman, nor man
without a beard.

35 Nor does the Pope improuidently, in advancing them with these dignities and
privileges, nor in multiplying their number, so directly against the Council
of Basil, Conc. Basil. Sess 23. cap. de num^. et qualit. Card.
which limits them to twenty four (except, upon uniting the Greek Church, it
might be thought fit to add two more) and forbids expressly any Nephues of the
Popes to be admitted. For no excess in number, Aluares sp^cutr Dig. c. 1.24.
n. 15
(though they were returned to two hundred and thirty at once, as they are said
to have been in Pontianus his time; and though he should pile them up, and
throw them down, as fast as those Popes which created six and twenty in one
day, Theod. a Niem. de sc^sm. l. 1, cap 12. and 57.
and executed six in another) could disadvantage that Sea of Rome, if they
might be provided out of the states of other Princes (as in a great measure
they are) since the Church is their heir, and they are all but stewards for
her. Of which the Pope gave a dangerous instance, when he put in his claim for
the kingdom of Portugal, Conestaggio della union di port. Et custig. l. 3.
in princip.
because the last king was a Cardinal. These p^inces, no secular prince may
dare to offend, nor subject adhere to him, if he do, upon danger of that Bull:
and yet they are made Judges of the actions of all Princes, R^sp. ad Card.
Colum. nu. 31.
as Baronius says; and so oppressed with infinite suits against Princes, that
it may be fitly sa^d of them, which Job says, Job. 26, 5.
Ecce genuit gigantes sub aquis, and qui habitant cum eis: which words the
Cardinals will not thank Baronius for applying to them, if they consider that
Lyra interprets this place of Giants drowned in the flood, and now damned and
lamenting in hell. But now, a Cardinal cannot choose but be a person of great
holiness and integrity, Inseptimo. Tit. 4. ca. 4.
since there is a Decretall in a gen^rall Council, and a Bull of Leo the
tenth, which do not only Hortari, and Mouere, but Statuere, and Ordinare, that
every Cardinal shall be of good life.

36 And as these censures and Excommunications of the Pope, inuolue all causes,
so do they all persons, except the Pope himself, and such company, as the
Canons have appointed him in this e^emption, which are, Nauar. Manu. ca. 27. n.
13.
Locusts, ^nfid^ls, and the Devil. For these, and the Pope, says Nauarrus,
cannot be Excommunicated: Yet as in their exorcismes of persons possessed, it
is familiar to them, when the Devil is stubborn, to call him Menghi. Flagel.
Daemo. fo. 42.
Heretic, and fo. 79.
Excommunicate, so some Popes have kept him company in both those titles. And
as they call their Hermits Locusts (because as it is in Solomon, Prou. 30.27.
They have no Kings, yet they go forth by bands) and accordingly the Hermits
are subject to no Superior, and in that sense Locusts, as their own Glosser
styles them: 16. q. 1. qui uere. gl^s. verbo. ^ere.
so may they prodigally extend the name and privilege of Ine^communicable
Locusts, to many in the other Orders, since as the Hermits have no kings, so
many of the others wish, that none else had any King, and do their best
end^uour by au^ling them, to bring them into contempt, and to an nihilate their
dignity and them.

In Epist. cius ms
37 He that should compare the style of Thomas Becket to his King ( Olim seruus,
nunc in Christo Dominus) with that of David, after he knew Saul to be reproved
by God, and himself anointed, ( After whom is the King of Israel come out?
After a dead Dog, and after a Flea?) Would suspect that this difference of
st^le, was not from one Author. Saint Chrysostom notes, that even to
Nabuchonozor, Chrisost. ad Pop. Antioch. Ho. 23.
who persecuted them for their faith, they which were condemned, said: Notum
sit tibi Rex; and would not offer to the Tyrant, that contumelious name. And to
profane and irreligious Princes, God himself in his Books, affoords one of
his own names, Christ.

38 What high styles did many Christian and Orthodoxe Emperors assume to
themselves? The Law styles the Emperor, Dlg. li. 31. Ti. 1. l 87.. Imperator.
Sanctissimum Imperatorem. And his privileges, Dig. l. 1. Tit. 4. Le. 3.
Diuinas Indulgentias. So Gratian and his Colleagues in the Empire, in the
first Law of the Code, call their Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1. L. 1.
Motus animi, Caeleste arbitrium. And Theodosius and Valentinian making a Law
with a non obstante, preclude all dispensations, which the Emperors themselves
might grant, in these words, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 2. Lc. 10.
Si Caeleste proferatur Oraculum, aut Diuina pragmatica Sanctio. So also
Theodosius and Arcadius, when they make a Law for dispatch of Suites, begin
thus, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 4 L. 3.
Nemo deinceps tardiores affatus nostrae Perennitatis expectet. And Justinian
in the inscription of one of his own Laws, ins^rts amongst his own Ti^les,
Cod l. 1. Tit. 15 Le. 3.
S^mper Adorandus Augustus. And in a Law of Monasteriall, and Matrimonial
causes, (which are now only of spiritual Jurisdiction) he threatens, that if
any Bishop infringe that Law, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 3. L. 55. His ita.
Quam nostra sanxit Aeternitas Capitis supplicio ferietur. In which style also
Theodosius and Arcadius join, Cod. l. 11. Tit. 9. l. 2.
Adoraturus aeternitat^m vestr^m di^igatur. And an other proceeds somewhat
further, Cod l. 1. Tit. 2. Leg. 8.
Beneficio numinis nostri. And Theodosius, and Valentinian deliver it more
plainly, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1. L. 3.
Vt sciant omnes, quantum nostra Diuinitas auersatur Nestorium; and so in
favor of the purity and integrity of Christian Religion, in contemplation
whereof, it seems they were Religiously exercised, even at that time, when he
assumed these high st^les, they proceed in the same Law, We anathematize all
Nestorius followers, according to those things which are already constituted A
Diuinitate nostra. And Constantius, and Irene write themselves Di^os; and the^r
own Acts, Diualia^ And this, Pope Adrian, to whom they writ, r^prehended not;
Carol Mag. l. 1. c 1. and 3.
but the Emperor Charles did, and another phrase of as much exorbitance, which
was, Deus qui nobis conregnat.

39 The highest that I have obser^ed any of our Kings to have used, Glouer de
Nobilit. fol. 75.
is in Edward the fourth, who in his creation of Marquis Dor^e^, speaks thus
of himself, Cum n^stra Maiestas, ad Regium Culmen subl^^ata existat; and
after, Tantum sp^endoris nostri nomen. Cassanaeus catal Glor. par. 5. consid.
30.
But a little before his time Baldus gave as much to the king of France, as
ever any had; Alu^res specul. vtri Dign. Epist. ad Mariam
for he said he was in his kingdom, Quidam Corporalis Deus. And in our present
age, a Roman Author in a Dedication of his book, thus salutes our Queen Mary:
because your Highness is the strongest bul-warke of the Faith, Tua N^mina
supplex posco; Oration Coesarij a Branhed^ro in subscriptione.
which is also at^ributed to the Emperor in a late Oration to him, and to
other Princes. And in some Funeral Monuments of Queen Mary's time, I have
read this inscription; Di^is Philippo and Maria Regibus, Bell. R^cogn. fo. 2.
which word Di^us, Bellarmine values at so high a rate, that he repents to have
bestowed it upon any of the Saints; and therefore in his la^e Recognition blots
it out: which tenderness in him, another Ies^ite since disallowes, and
iustifies the use of the word against Bellarmines squeamish abstinence;
S^rarius litaneuticus. l. 2. q. 6
because the word, says Se^arius, may be used as well as temple or as fortune,
which are also Ethnique words. But by his leave he is too hasty with the
Cardinal, who does not refuse the word, because the Ethniques used it, but
because they appointed it only to their Gods; Bellarmine insimulates al them,
which allow that word to Saints, of making Saints Gods.

40 And though in some of these Ti^les of great excess, which these Emp^rous
ass^^^'d to themselves; we may easily discern some impressions of Gentilisme,
which they retained sometimes, after Christian Religion had received root
amongst them; as they did also their Gladiatorie spectacles, and other
wastefull prodigalities of men's lives; and Bondage and seruility, and some
other such: yet neither in them, nor in other Princes, is the danger so great,
if they should continue in them, as it is in the Bishops of Rome. For
Princes, by assuming these Titles, do but draw men to a just reverence, and
estimation of that power, which subjects naturally know to be in them: but the
other, by these Titles seek to build up, and establish a power, which was ever
litigious and controuerted, either by other Patriarchs, or by the Emperors:
for Bellarmine having undertaken to prove the Pope, De Pont. To. li. 2. c. 12.
to be Peter's successor in the Ecclesiastique Monarchy (which Monarchy it self
is denied, and not only the popes right to it) labors to prove this
assumption, by the fifteen great names, Ibid. ca. 3^.
which are attributed to the Popes.

41 And the farthest mischief, which by this excess Princes could stray into,
or subjects suffer, is a deuiation into Tyranny, and an ordinary use of an
extraordinary power and prerogative, and so making subjects slaves, and (as the
Lawyers say) Personas Res. But by the magni^ying of the Bishop of Rome with
these Titles, our religion degenerates into superstition; which is a worse
danger: and besides our temporal fortunes suffer as much danger and detriment,
as in the other; for P^inces by their laws work only upon the faculties and
powers of the soul, and by reward and punishment, they incline or auert our
dispositions to a love or fear. But those Bishopps pretend a power upon the
substance of our souls, which must be in their disposition, for her condition
and state in the next life. And therefore to such as claim such a power, it is
more dangerous to allow and countenance any such Titles, as participate in any
significa^ion of Divinity.

42 For since they make their Tribunal and Consistory the same with Christ,
since they say Epist. ^ij 2. ad Norinbergenses
It is Heresy and Treason to decline the Popes judgment, per ludibria
friuolarum Appellationum, ad futurum Concilium, as one Pope says; since they
teach, Maynardus De priuileg. Eccles. art. 27. n 15
that one may not appeal from the Pope to God himself; Par. Crassus de
Ceremo. Episcop. and Card. l. 1 c. 5 and cap. 22.
since they direct us to bow at the name of Jesus, and at the name of the Pope,
but not at the name of Christ; for that being the name of Anointed, it might
induce a reverence to Princes (who partake that name) if they should bow to
that name; since they esteem their laws Divine, not as Princes do, by reason
of the power of God inherent in all just laws, and by reason of the common
matter and subject of all such laws (which is public vtility and general
good) but because their laws are in particular dictated by the holy Ghost, and
therefore it is Blaspemy and sin against the holy Ghost to violate any of
them; 25. q. 1. violatores.
since themselves make this difference between the name of God, as it is given
to Princes, and as it is given to them: that Princes are called Dij laicorum,
and they Dij principum; since to prove this, Maynard^ de priuileg. Eccles. ar.
14. nu. 1
they assume a power above God, to put a new sense into his word, which they
do, when they prove this assertion out of these words in Exodus; Dijs non
detra^es, and principi populi non maledices, Exo. 22
for by the first, they say, the popes are understood, and by the second
princes; when as Saint Paul himself applies the latter part to the high
priest, and their expositor Lyra, Act. 23.5. Lyra in ^unc locum and Eman. Sa.
and the Jesuit Sa, interpret the first part of this Scripture of Judges:
Since, I say, they entend worse ends then Princes do, in accepting or assuming
like Titles; and since they work upon a more dangerous and corruptible
subject, which is the Conscience and Religion; since they require a stronger
assurance in us by faith; since they threaten greater penalties in any which
doubt thereof, which is damnation; the popes cannot be so excuseable in this
excess as princes may be. And yet princes never went so far as the popes
have done, as we shall see, when we come to consider the title and power of
spiritual princes.

All this I say, not to encourage princes to return to those styles, which
Christian humility has made them dis-accustome, and leave off, and which
could not be reassumed without much scandal, but to show the iniquity and
perverseness of those men, who think great Titles belong to Kings, not as
Kings, but as Papisticall Kings.

43 For so at a Consultation of Jesuits in the Tower, in the late Queens
time, I saw it resolved, that in a Petition to be exhibited to her, she might
not be styled Sacred. Serarius Litaneutic. l. 2. q. 4. n. 4.
Though one of their own Order have observed that attribute to be so cheap,
that it was usual to say, Sancti Patres conscripti, and Sacratissimi Quirites,
and Sanctissimi Milites. And our English Jesuits use to aggrauate her
defection much, by that circumstance, that she had been Consecrated, and
pontifically Anointed, and invested at her Coronation, and therefore was Sacred.

44 How great a detestation they had of her Honor, and of all Princes which
profess the same Religion that she did, appears in no one such thing more,
then in Quirogaes expurgatorie Index, where admitting all the reproachful
calumnies of Eunapius against Martyrs, Index Expurg. Hispan. fo. 92.
whose relics he calls Salita Capita, with other opprobrious contumelies, they
have only expunged an Epistle of Iunius to her, in which there was no words
concerning Religion, but only a gratulation of her Peace, and of her Learning;
which also they have done in Serranus his Edition of Plato. Ibid. fol. 150.
And as God has continued his favors showen to her, upon her successor, so
have they their malice: For in the second Tome of that work, Ibid. fol. 151.
they have taken away an Epistle Dedicatorie to his Majesty, that now is.

45 And as in many of their Rules, for that Dissection and Anatomising of
Authors, they have provided that all Religion, and all profane knowledge
shall depend upon their will: So have they made a good offer, that all carriage
of State business shall be open to them, Instruct. circa. lib. corrig.. 10.
by expunging all such sentences, as instructor remember Princes, in that
learning, which those Rules calls Rationem status, and which (because Italians
have been most conversant therein) is vulgarly called Ragion di stato. For
this Ragion di stato, is, as the Lawyers call it, Ius Dominationis; And as
others call it, Arcana Imperij. And it pretends no farther but to teach, by
what means a Prince, or any Sovereign state, may best exercise that power
which is in them, and give least offense to the Subjects, and yet preserve the
right and dignity of that power.

46 For it is impossible, that any Prince should proceed in all causes and
occurrences, by a downright Execution of his Laws: And he shall certainly be
frustrated of many just and lawful ends, if he discover the way by which he
goes to them. And therefore these disguisings, and auerting of others from
discerning them, are so necessary, that though, In Genere rei, they seem to
be within the compass of deceit and falsehood, yet the end, which is,
maintenance of lawful Authority, for the public good, iustifies them so
well, that the Lawyers abhor not ^o give them the same definition (with that
Addition of public good) which they do to deceit it self. For they define
Ragion di stato to be, Cumaliud agitur, aliud simulatur, bono publico.

Soto de teg. secret. memb. 3. q. 3 Ad tertium.
47 And the Roman Authors do not only teach, that deceit is not Intrinsece
malum, but upon that ground and foundation, they build Equivocation, which is
like a Tower of Babel, both because thereby they get above all earthly
Magistracy, and because therein no men can understand one another. Nor can
there be a better example given of the use of this Ragion di stato, then their
forbidding it^ Because nothing conduces more to the advancing of their
strength, then that Princes should not know, or not use their own, or proceed
by any ways removed from their discernings. Indeed those books of
Expurgation, are nothing else but Ragion di stato: That is, a disguised and
dissembled way, of preferring their double Monarchy. And they that fordid
Princes the lawful use of these Arcana Imperij, practice for their own ends,
even Flagitia Imperij, which are the same things, when they exceed their true
ends (which are just authority, and the public good) or their lawful ways
to those ends, which should ever be within the compass of virtue, and religion.

48 Of which sort are all those enormous dispensations from Rome, which no
interpretation nor pretense can iustifie^ as (to omit some sacrilegious and too
immodest licenses) that of Gregory the third is one, who writ to Boniface his
Legate in Germany, Carranza Sum. Council. fo. 353.
that they, whose wives being overtaken with any infirmity, would not reddere
Debitum, might marry other wives: which Binius has wisely left out.

49 But they are in these expurgations injurious also to the memory of dead
princes: for Hispanic. Ind. fo. 148.
they will not admit our k. Edward the sixth, to be said to be Admirandae
indolis, nor the Duke of Ibid^m.
Wittenberg praeclarus. They will not allow Idem. fo. 93.
Vlrichus Huttenus to be called A learned Knight: no, Id. fo. 148.
neither him, nor Oebanus Hessus to be so much as good poets. But with the same
circumspection, that the Ind. Belg. ^o. 146
Belgique Index could add to Borrhaeus writing upon Aristotle's politiques, in
this sentence, Religionis cura semper pertinuit ad principes, this clause, and
Sacerdotem; the Ind. Hisp. fo. 158.
Spanish Index does mutilate Velcurio upon Liuy, and from this sentence (the
fifth age was decrepite under the Popes and Emperors) takes out the Popes, and
leaves the Emperors obnoxious to the whole imputation. And as with extreme
curious malignity, they have watched that none of our side be celebrated, so
have they spied some invisible dangers, which the Popes honor might incur:
and therefore as the Fol. 93.
Spanish Copy, has before Luthers name expunged the letter D, least it might
intimate Doctor, or Diuus; so the Fo. 154.
Duch Copy, having found nothing to quarrel at in Schonerus the Mathematician,
expunges in many places a great D. at beginning of Divisions, because in it (as
ordinarily those great initiall letters, have some figure) there is imprinted
the popes head, and by it the devil, presenting him a Bull.

50 But this inhumanity of theirs has not deterred Thuanus from his ingenuity,
in giving to all those learned men, whom he has occasion to mention, the
attributes an^ epithetes due to their virtues, though they be of a diverse
persuasion in Religion from himself: But those other men, who in a proud
humility will say brother Thief, and brother Wolf, Sedulius Apol. pro. lib.
Conform l. 1. c. 12. and l. 3. c. 28
and brother Ass, (as Saint Francis (perchance not vn-prophetically) is said
to have done) will admit no fraternity nor fellowshippe with Princes.

51 And though the Jesuits by the advantage of their fourth Supernumerary vow,
of sustaining the Papacy, by obeying the Popes will; seem to have gone further
herein then the rest, yet the last Order erected by Philip Nerius, Congregatio
Oratorij.
which was said to have been purposed to eneruate the Jesuits; and by a
continual preaching the lives of Saints, and the Ecclesiastique story, to
counterpoise with devotion, the Jesuits secular and active learning, though
they set out late, have aemulously endeavored to overtake the Jesuits
themselves in this doctrine of auiling Princes: Bozius
For Bozius has made all Princes Tributary or Feudatary to the Pope, if not of
worse condition. Gallonius de Cruciat. Martyrum.
And Gallonius seems to have undertaken the History of the persecutions in the
Primitive Church, only to have occasion by comparison thereof, to defame and
reproach the laws, and Government of our late Queen.

52 But Baronius more then any other exceeds in this point, for obeying his
own scope and first purpose to advance the Sea of Rome, he spares not the most
obedient child of that mother, the Catholic King of Spain: for, speaking of
the Title which that King has to the Kingdom of Sicily, Baron. Annal. To. 11.
Ann. 1097. n. 18
he imputes thus much to Charles the fifth, that being possessed with
employments of the field, he gave way to an Edict, by which, Grande piaculum
perpetratur against the Apostolic authority and al Ecclesiastqiue laws were
utterly dissipated: And that he joined together temporal and spiritual
iurisdiction^ and pretended a power to excommunicate and to absolve even
Cardinals, Nu 28
and the Pop^s Nuncioes, and so, says he, has raised another Head of the
Church, pro monstro, and ostento. He adds with extreme intemperance, that
this claim to that Kingdom was buried a while, Nu 87.
but revived again by Tyrannical force, by violent grassation, and by the
robbery of Princes, who commanded that to be obeyed as reasonable, which they
had extorted by Tyranny. And least he should not seem to extend his bitterness
to the present time, he says, Nu. 88.
those Princes which hold Sicily by the same reasons, do imitate those
tyrants. And so he imputes upon all the later kings of Spain, as much
vsupation of Ecclesiastique Jurisdiction, and as monstrous a Title of head of
the Church, as ever their malice degorged upon our king Henry the eight.

53 And though in some passages of that history, he has left some ways to
escape, Card. Colum. fo. 158. paris.
by laying those imputations rather upon the kings officers then upon ^he king,
yet that Cardinal who has censured that part of his work, espies his
workemanshippe and art of deceiving, and therefore tells him, that he has
inuayd against Monarchy it self, and all defenders thereof; and that as many,
and as great things might be spoken against him^ Nor does Baronius repent that,
which he has spoken of those kings, but in his answer to this Cardinal; he
says, that if the King were impeccable, if he were an Angel, if he were God
himself, yet he is subject to just reproof. Nu. 19.
And in his Epistle to Phil. 3. in excuse of himself, though he seem to
spare the present king, yet it is (as he professes) because he hopes that he
will relinguish that Jurisdiction in Sicily; else he is subject to all those
reproofs and reproaches, which Baro. has laid upon his father and Grandfather.

54 And though this were a great excess in Baronius, to lay such aspersions
upon those Princes, yet his malice appears to be more general; for the
reason why he makes this pretense so intolerable, Nu. 28.
is, because thereby (says he) that King becomes a Monarch; and there can be
no other Monarch in the world, Nu. 31.
then the Pope; and therefore that name must be cut off, least by this
example it should propagate, and a whole wood of monarchs should grow up, to
the perpetual infamy of the Primacy of the Church. And so this care of his,
that no Monarchs be admitted, implies his confession, that they which are
Monarchs have right in their Dominions, to all that which those kings claim
in Sicily, which is as much as our kings exercise in England, (if Baronius do
not exceed in his imputation.)

55 But because there is nothing more tender then honor, which as God will
give to none from himself, being a jealous God, so neither ought his
Vic^gerents to do; it shall not be an unseasonable and impertinent, at most,
an excuseable and pardonable diuersion, to observe only by such impressions,
as remain in the letters between the Emperors and Popes, at what times, and
upon what occasions the Clergy of that Sea insulted upon secular Magistacy;
and by what either dilatory circumuentions, or violent irruptions, they are
arrived to this enormous contempt of Principality, as of a subordinate
instrument of theirs.

56 Before they had much to do with Emperors, (for they were a long time
religiously, and victoriously exercised with suffering) we may obse^ue in
Cyprians time, Circa. 240.
that he durst speak brotherly and fellowly to that Sea, and intimate the
resolu^ions of his Church to that, without asking approbation and strength from
thence: for to Pope Stephen, he writes, Stephano fratri; and then Nos qui
gubernandae Ecclesiae libram tenemus: Cypr. Epist. 1. ad Steph.
and after, Hoc facere te oportet: with many like impressions of equality: But
in Fir^ilianus his Epistle to Cyprian, Binius To. 1. fo 191.
written in opposition to Stephanus his Epistle; who was grown into some
bitterness against Cyprian, there appears more liberty: for thus he says;
Though by the inhumanity of Stephen, we have the better trial of Cyprians
wisdom, we are no more beholden to him for that, then we are to Judas for our
salvation. He adds after, That that Church does in vain pretend the authority
of the Apostles; since in many sacraments Diuinae rei, it differs from the
beginning, and from the Church of Jerusalem, and defames Peter and Paul as
Authors thereof. And therefore (^aies he) I do iust^y disdain the open and
manifest ^oolishnesse of Stephen, by whom the truth of the Christian Rock is
abolished. So roundly and constantly were their first attempts and intrusions
resisted, and this not only by this Advocate of Cyprian, but even by himself
also, in as sharp words as these, in his Epistle to Pompeius.

57 And for their behavior to the Empero^s, as long as Zeal and Poverty
restrained them, it cannot be doubted, but that they were respective enough.
The preambulatorie Letters before the Council of Chalcedon, Anno 451.
testify it well: Where the Letters of the Emperors, Binius To. ^ i^ Princip.
yea, of their Wives, are accepted by the name of Diuales, and Sacrae literae,
and Diuinae syllabae. And about the same time, Leo the Pope writing to Leo the
Emperor, he says; Epist 73. Anno 457.
Hanc Paginam necessariae supplicationis adieci; And in the next Epistle but
one, Literas Clementiae tuae veneranter accepi, quibus cuperem obedire. So also
Felix the third, to Zeno the Emperor, calls himself Famulum vestrum, Epist. 2.
Circa 527.
and such demissions as these; Liceat, venerabilis Imperator, exponere; And,
Per mei Ordinis paruitatem audias, are frequent in him. Anno 530.
And in Justinians time, which was presently after, that Church sensible of the
use and need, which it had of his favor, so he would be content to extend to
their benefit, prescription, which before was limited in thir^ie years, to a
hundred, never grudged at the phrase and language of his Law, Autent. Coll. 2.
prefa^^o (...).
by which he affoorded the Church that privilege, though it were very high;
Being willing to illustrate Rome, Lege specialj nostri Numinis, That that
Church may eternally by this, remember the providence of our Government, we
grant, etc.

58 And Gregory the first was, out of his wisdom at least, ^. 2. Epist. 62.
if not Devotion, as temperate as the rest, when he w^it to the Emperor
Maurice, to sweeten and modifie that Law, which forba^ some persons to enter
into Monasteries; For there he calls himself Famulum, and Seruum: And adds
this, Whiles I speak thus with my Lords, What am I, but dust and worms? To.
2. fo. 770.^.
And though Binius is loath to pardon him this duetifulnesse, and respect to his
Princes, and therefor says, That he protested in the beginning of that Letter,
that he spoke not as a Bishop, but Iure priuato, An. 593. n. 17.
And so out of Baronius, he says, That he plaide another part, as upon a
stage: Yet, if he wore this mask and disguise clean through the Epistle, then
he spoke personately, and dissemblingly, as well with Christ, as with the
Emperor, when he says: I, the meanest of Christ's s^ruants and yours. Nor do I
think that Binius or Baronius would say, that he spoke personately of the
Execution of the Emperors Law, but that he had truly done as he said: I have
done all which I ought to doe^ for I have both performed my obedience to the
Emperor, and I have uttered that which I thought fit concerning God. And he was
wisely careful that his Letter to the Emperor, concerning his opnion of the
iniquity of that Law, should not come to the Emperors inopportunely, nor as
from a person of equal rank to him; and therefore he forbids his own
Responsall (for the dignity of a Nuncio, was not yet in use) to deliver it,
but sends it to the Emperors Physician, because says he, ^. 2. Epist. 65.
Theodo. Medico.
Vestra Gloria, may secretly, at some conueniet time, offer him this
suggestion; And that this Physician might be confident in this employment, he
assures him of his affection and Allegiance to his Prince, by this Confession,
God has appointed the Emperor to rule, not only Soldiers (which were the
persons forbid in that Law) but also Priests (whose privileges seemed to be
impayr'd thereby.)

59 With like respect does one of his successors Vitalian, Epist. 2. An^o. 655.
write to Vaanus, who was Cubi^ularius, et Chartularius Imperialis, to mediate
and provide, that a Bishop unjustly deposed, might be restored. And to him
the Pope affoords this style, Celsitudo vestra, and addresses the deposed
Bishop, Ad vestra ambulaturum vestigia, and promises that they both shall all
the days of their lives, pray to God for the prosperity, and long living Suae
excellentissimae Charitatis.

60 And in all this course of time, the Popes, some out of a just contemplation
of their duty, some out of the need, which they had of the Emperors, from
whom they received daily some additions to their immunities and exemptions,
were agreeable and appliable enough to them. And when Italy suffered a
dereliction, by the absence of the Emperors in the East, and thereby was
prostituted and exposed to barbarous Inuaders, the Bishops of this City,
which was the fairest mark to inuit the Lumbards and the rest, solicited
those Eastern Emperors to their succor, with all sweetness and humility;
but at last, desperate of such relief, casting their eyes upon the mightiest
kingdom of the West, they invited the French to their succor.

Epist. 2.
61 And at this time came from them those lamentable supplications, which
Stephen the third sent to Pipin and Carloman: In the first whereof, he vrges
them with their promise of certain lands, by them vowed to the Church: And
having called them, Dominos excellentissimos, and spiritualem Compatrem, and
prepared them with words of much sweetness, Mellifluam bonitatem, Mellifluos
obtutus, and such, he comes to the point: That which you have offered to Peter
by promise, you ought to deliver him in profession, least when the Porter of
heaven, the Prince of the Apostles, at the day of judgment shall show your
handwriting you be put to make a more strict account with him. So therefore he
felt and lamented their slackenes in endowing the Church; yet at that time he
would not undertake to be the Judge, nor make the Camera Apostolica the Court;
but he referres it to Saint Peter, and to the last day, and only remembers
them, That Dominus per meam humilitatem, mediante B. Petro, vos vnxit in reges.

62 The next letter written in the person of the Pope, and all the Roman
people, and Roman army, et omnium in afflictione positorum, is an earnest and
violent coniuration; per Deum viuum vos coniuro, Save us, most Christian
Princes before we perish; the souls of all the Romans hang upon you, and so
forth. And when all this did not effectually stir them to come, as the letter
solicited, Cum nimia festinatione; then came a third letter in the name and
person of Saint Peter himself, Epist. 4.
in this style: I Peter the Apostle, and by me all the Catholic Roman
Church, Head of all the Churches of God, vobis viris excellentissimis. I Peter,
exhort you, my adopted Sons, to defend that house, where I rest in my flesh:
and with me Marie, with great Obligations, Aduises, and Protests, and so forth.
And whatsoever you shall ask of me, I will give you. If you do not perform
this, know ye, that by the authority of the Apostleshippe given me by Christ,
you are alienated from the Kingdom of God, and from life everlasting.

63 And when Stephen the fourth came to that Sea, and tha^ the sons of these
Princes began to incline to ally themselves by marriage with the Lombards;
the Pope seeing then his whole temporal ^ortune at the stake, neglects no way
of withdrawing them, from that inclination: he says therefore, Saint Peter,
by our unhappiness, beseeches your Excellence: Epist. Steph. 4. ad C^rol. et
Ca^lom. An. 831
and then, vouchsafe to bend your ears, inspired by God, to our Petition, and
to him whom we have sent, ad Regale vestrum Culmen. And then, in an inconstant
distemper, he threatens, and he promises in St. Peter's name, as bitterly, and
as liberally, as his predecessor had bid S. Peter himself to do, in the
former Epistle.

64 And when these Princes after much entreaty, had delivered Italy from the
infestation of the Lombards, and divided the profit and spoil with the
Church, and that that Sea had reco^ered some breath and heart, then their
Bishopps began to reprehend with some bitterness, the Eastern Emperors: And
then came that notorious letter of Nicholas to Michael the Emperor; Nichol.
Epist. circa. 874.
In which though he style him, Superatorem Gentium, pr^ssimum filium,
Dulcissimum, Tranquillissimum (for as yet he doubted that he might be
necessary to him) yet he calls him also Golias, and himself Hymnidicum Dauidem.
And part of the quarrel was, because the Emperor had written Insolentia
quae^am, cert^ine unusual phrases: which were, ^ussimus, vt quosdam ad nos
mitteretis: for, says Nicholas, Honorius said to Boniface, Petimus; and other
Emp^rours, Inuitamus, and Rogamus, and Constantine and Irene, Rogamus, magis
quidem Dominus Deus rogat: which phrase, though Charles the great, at that
time, (...) 1. ^ 4.
when it was written, rep^ehended, and allowed a whole Chapter in his book for
the reproof thereof, yet not only that Pope dissembled it, but this draws it
into example and precedent.

65 And in this letter the Pope gives the Emperor some light, that he is not
long to enjoy the style of Roman Emperor; for he having despised the Roman
tongue as Barbarous, (as every Prince loves to be saluted in his own, or in an
equal language) the Pope replies: That if he call the Roman tongue
barbarous, because ^ee understands it not, it is a ridiculous thing, to call
himself Roman Emperor.

66 And thus having at once received and recompensed a benefit, by concurring
in the advancement of the French to the Empire, they kept good hold upon that
Kingdom, by continual correspondencies, and by interceding with those Kings,
for p^rdons and favors, when any delinquents fled over to them, and by
aduising them in all emergent causes, and by doing them many services in Italy,
and so establishing the Empire in that family, upon good conditions to them
both. For so John the eight writes to Charles, as well to refresh his benefit
in his memory, as the reasons that moved him to confer it. Well knows your
Kingly Highness, Epist. 216.
that I was desirous a long time, for the profit and exaltation of the
Apostolic Sea, to bring you Ad Culmen Imperij. And as we with all our
endeavor, have desired to give perfection to your Honor and glory, you also
must perform those things, which are profitable to the vtiliti^ and exalt^tion
of that Seat. And there he adds, That for Conference about that, he came to
meet him at Rauenna, leaving his own Church in the cruel hands of enemies.
And in the next Epistle, he sends to the same purpose his Nephew Faru^fus,
Epist. 217.
Deliciosum consiliarium nostrum; Because, sa^es he in anoth^r place, We desire
greedily to accomplish this. And yet at this very time, Epist. 230.
for his better indemnitie, he practiced with the Esterne Emperor, and kept
fair quarter with him also, as appears by his Letter to him.

Epist. 251.
67 Having thus established a stronger reputation, and laid earnest Oblig^tions
upon France, and by example and authority thereof, in other places also, they
began to feel their st^ength, and to draw their swords as far as they
would go, which was to excommunication, even in France it self.

68 But because in the excommunications issuing in ^hese times, and in the
ti^es between this, and Gregory the seventh, and perchance in some before this
time, there is found often mention of punishment after e^communication^ which
has occasioned some to err in an opinion, that besides spi^ituall c^nsures,
temporal penalties were al^o inflicted upon p^iuate persons, and consequently
eradication upon Princes, we w^^l arrest, and stay a little upon the style and
phrase of some of those excommunications, by which it will appear, that they
intended nothing but spiritual punishment.

69 The first which I have observed, is a letter of Innocent the first, Epist.
30.
to Arcadius the Emperor, whom he thought guilty of the eiecting and of the
death of Chrysostom: His words are; Ego minimus and peccator, segrego te a
perceptione mysteriorum Christi. This then went no farther then to deprive him
of spiritual food, and the Pope (if tha^ Epistle be genuine) was very hasty
in it; for the Emp^rour discharged himself presently, by pleading ignorance of
the fact; which that Bishop ought to have tried, before he had proc^eded to
excommunic^tion. Chrysostom himself, whose quarrel it was, De verb. Esaiae.
Hom. 4 To. 1. ^o. 207.
had taught s^fficiently the limits of that iurisdict^^n; for he said, When the
Pri^st had reprehended Ozias, De spreto Sacerdotio, he could do no more; for
it is his part only to reprove, and to persuade, not to stir war: and he
adds, that God himself (to whom only it belongs to punish so) inflicted a
leprosy upon the King, in which (says he) we see Humanitatem Diuinae
ultionis, who sent not lightning, nor shaked the earth, nor moved the Heavens:
So far was Chrysostom from counsayling any such punishment, as should be
accompanied with tumult.

70 And so a just estimation, and true understanding of their liberties, in
Ecclesiastique causes, were the Fathers in the Council at Ephesus arrived,
Binius To. 1. ^ol. 803.
when in that Synodicall Letter to the Emperor, which they call, Libellum
supplicem, they make this protestation, The scope of our profession prouides,
that we be obedient to all Princes and Potentates, as long as that obedience
brings no detriment to our Soul^^ health; but if it come to that, we must dare
to use our liberty, Aduersus Regium fastigium. And how far, may this courage
and liberty carry us, if the Prince command any thing in detriment of our
soul? As far, as those Fathers durst adventure upon that ground, which they
expressed thus to the Emperor, If you approve the banishment of C^rill and
Memnon, which were banished by persons Excommunicate, then know you, that we
are ready, with that alacrity which becomes Christians, to undergo any danger
with them, that is, to suffer as they go.

71 But about this time of John 8. it was very frequent, that Excommunications
had a farther comminatorie clause. Ep^st. 123.
For so, against a Bastard of Lotharius, who had broke an Oath made to a French
King, he says, We deprive him of all Christian Comunion, Ep^st. 165.
L^i^^es^ido.
and if he persevere, let him know, that Anathematis vinculis innodabitur. So to
an Earl and h^s Lady, which had seduced a Nun from her profession, ^e says,
We separate them from the body and blood, and all fellowship with Christians,
and if they neglect to restore her, Anathemate innodamus. So in the next
Epistle he threatens a Bishop, Epist. 166. V^iberto.
that refused to come to him, Know that you are to be Excommunicate, and if you
persevere, A Communione alienandus. And against another Bishop, and his whole
charge he pronounces Privation from the Communion, separation from the Church,
and except they convert, Maioris damnationis sententiam, and with such as
these, his time abounds.

72 And his predecessor Adrian the second, Epist. 18.
had gone thus far toward the King of France, when he attempted to invade
his Brothers Dominion, We admonish you, by our Apostolic Authority, and by
all spiritual means, which we may use, we persuade you, and in a Fatherly
effection command you to forbear; els^, we will perform that which belongs to
out Ministry. Epist. 24.
But in another letter to his Nobles, he threatens them, That if they aid the
Father to war against the Son, who was then in his displeasure, They shall
not only be enwrapp'd in the bands of Excommunication, but cast into hell,
Vinculis Anathema^is. And this John the eight, Ep^st 28.
at the same time when he alowes him all due attributes, and desires him to
incline his sacredeares to him, Epist. 42.
threatens Charles himself, that if he restore not certain things, taken from a
Nunnerie, by a certain day, He should be Excommunicate till restitution, and
if, being thus lightly touch^d, he repented not, Durioribus verberibus
erudie^dus erat.

73 So that whether this farther punishment were no other, then that which is
now called excommunicatio Mayor, or that which is called in the Canons Anathema
maranatha, the denouncing of which, and the absoluing from it, was acted with
many ^ormalities, 21. q. 3. cum aliquis.
and solemnities, and had many ingredients, of burning tapers, and diverse
others, to which none could be subjected without the knowledge of the
Arch-Bishoppe, 11. q. 3. Nemo.
it appears that it now here extends to temporal punishment, or forfaitures
and confiscations.

Anno 1063.
74 Of which there appears to me no evidence, no discernable impression, no
just suspicion, till Gregory the seuenths time: And then, as it may well be
said of Phalaris his letters, that they were al writ for execution, and of
Brutus his letters, that they were all Privy Seals for money: so may we ^ay
of Gregory's judging, by the frequency thereon, that they were all cholerique
excommunications; and that with Postscripts worse then the body of the letter;
which were Confiscations, never found in his predecessors, which should have
been his precedents.

75 And for this large and new addition of Eradication, I. 2. Ep. 5.
he first threatened it to the Fench King, and then practiced it effectually
upon the Emperor. To the Bishops of France he writes, That their King Philip
is not to be called King, but a Tyrant, which by persuasion of the Devil is
become the cause and the head of all mischief: Therefore (says he) all you
must endeavor to bow him. (And thus far his Pastoral care might bind him)
And to show him, that he cannot escape the sword of Apostolic animadu^rsion
(and thus far his jealousy of his spiritual Primacy might excuse him.) But
when he adds, Depart from communion with him, and obedience to him, forbid
Divine Service throughout all France, and if he repent not, we will attempt to
take the Kingdom from his possession they are words of Babel, Li. 2. Ep. 18.
which no man at that time understood: yet he writes in the same tenor to the
Earl of Poicton, That if the king persevere, both he and all which give any
obedience to him, shall be sequestered from the communion of the Church, by a
Council to be held at Rome. So assuredly, and confidently could he pronounce
before hand of a future determination in a Council there.

76 And of his own severity, used toward the Emperor, whom upon severe
penances he had resumed unto the Church, he blushes not to m^ke an Historical
Narration, to the Bishops and Princes of Germany, thus: He stood three days
before the gate, despoiled of all Kingly ornaments, miserable and barefoo^e;
till all men wondered at the unaccustomed hardness of our minds. And some cried
out that this was not the gravity of Apostolic severity, but almost the
cruelty of Tyrannique savageness.

77 And when Rodulphus whom he had set Li. 4. Ep. 12.
up against the Emperor, Lib. 9. ^p. 3.
was dead, seeing now, as himself confesses, almost all the Italians inclined
to admit the Emperor Henry, even they whom he trusted most (for so he says,
^ene omnes nostri fideles) he protests that Rodolphus was made without his
consent, Li. 9. Ep. 28.
Ab vltramont^nis, and that he went to depose him, and to call those Bishops to
account which adhered to him^ And then he writes to certain Prelates, L. 9.
Ep. 3.
to slacken the Election of a new Emperor, and gives instruction what kind of
person he would have to be elected; One which should be obedient, humbly
devout, and profitable to the Church: and that would take an oath to do any
thing which the Pope would command him, in these words: Per veram
obedientiam; and that he would be made a Knight of Saint Peter, and of the
Pope.

78 But although many watchful and curious men of our Church, and many
ingenious of the Roman, have obse^ued many enormous usurpations, and odious
intemperances in this tempestuous Pope Gregory the seventh, and amongst them,
almost anatomized every limme of his Story; yet it may be lawful for me, to
draw into observation, and short discourse, two points thereof, perchance not
altogether for their unworthiness, pretermitted by others: Of which the first
shall be the form of the excommunication against Henry, because by that it
will appear what authority he claimed over Princes: And the other ^ha^^ be
^is lette^ ^o a Bishop, w^o desired to draw from him, some rea^ons by which he
might defend that which the Pope h^d done; because by that it will appear,
upon what foundations he grounded th^s pretense and author^ty.

79 The exco^munica^ion is thus delivered; Con^tradico ei, Binius. To. 3. fo.
1282. A.
I deny him the government of all the kingdom of Germany, and of Italy: and I
absolve all Christians, from the band of the oath, which they have made to him,
or shall make: and I forbid any man to serve him as his king: for it is fit,
that he which endeavors to diminish the honor of the Church^ should loose his
own honor. And because he has contemned to obey as a Christian,
participating with excommunicated persons, and despising my admonitions, and
seperating himself from the Church, I tie him, in vinculo Anathematis.

By which we see, that he begins with Confiscation: And because it had never
been heard, that the Popes authority extended beyond Excommunication,
therefore he makes Deposition a less punishment then that, and naturally to
precede it: for he makes this to be reason enough, why he should forfait his
dignity, because he attempted to dim^nish the Dignity of the Church: But for
his Disobedience to the Church and him, he inflicts Excommunication as the
greater, and g^eatest punishment which he could lay upon him. And it is of
dangerous c^nsequence, if Excommunication b^ of so high a nature, and of so
vast an ex^ent, that wheresoever it is justly inflicted, that presupposes
Confiscation and Deposition.

80 And another dangerous prejudice to the safet^e of all Princes, arises out
of this p^ecedent, which is, that he absolues the Subjects of all Oaths of
Allegiance, which they shall make after that Denunciation: For if his
successor that now gouernes, shall be pleased to do the same in England at
this time, and so give his party here such leave to take the Oath of
Allegiance; does he not thereby vtte^ly frustrate and annihilate all that,
which the indulgence of a merciful Prince, and the watchfulness of a diligent
Parliament, have done for the Princes safety, and for distinction between
traiterous and obedient subjects? Yet both this Deposition, and this Absolution
of subjects and this Interdiction were all heaped, and amassed upon a
Catholic Prince, before the excommunication it self, or any other fault
intimated the d^minishing of the honor of that Church, ^^. S. Sp. 21. Episco.
Met^nti
and participating with excommunicated persons.

81 And now we may descend to the suruay of that letter, which he writes to a
Bishop, who desired to have something written by him, whereby he might be
helped and armed against such as de^yed that by the authority of that Sea, he
could excommunicate that Prince, or absolve his subjects. First therefore he
says, That there are many, and most certain Documents in the Scriptures to
that purpose, of which he cites, (...) which are ordinarily offered, as Tu es
Petrus, and Tibi dabo Claues, and Quodcunqe ligaue^is: and then he asks,
Whether Kings be excepted? But, Kings are not excepted; but this proceeding
against Kings is excepted: That is, it is not included in that Commission, as
has been enough and enough proved by many.

82 Then follows that t^stimony of Gelasius a Pope, That Priesthood is above
Principality, and that the Bishop of Rome is the chief Priest, If we allow
both Testem, and Testimonium, yet the c^use is safe; he may be ^boue all, in
some functions, yet not in temporal.

83 His next authority, is Julius, another Pope, who expounding the words,
Tibi dabo Claues, to certain Eastern Bisho^pes, says, Shall not ^e that
opens heaven, judge of the earth? But this does as much destroy all Judicature
and all Magistracy, as justify the deposing of ^ings.

84 After this, he cites (though not as Gregory's words are) a privilege
granted by Gregory the first, to a Monastery and deprivation from secular
dignity, and excommunications to any that in ^ringe that privilege. And this
privilege Bellarmine also produces, to prove the Popes sovereignty in
tempo^all mat^ers. It is the pr^uiledge of the Monastery of S. Medard, De
Ponti^ l. 1. c. 7.. Quar^^m
which is in Gregory's Epistle: and it is cyted by this other Gregory, L. 2.
post. Ep 38.
it makes deposition the lesser punishment, and to precede excommunication, for
he says; That Gregory though a mild Doctor, did not only depose, but
excommunicate the transgressors: But both this Pope that cytes it, deceiues us,
by putting in the word Decreuit, as though this had the solemnities of a Popes
Decree, which presumes an infallibility, and Bellarmine deceiues us, by
mutilating the sentence, and ending at that word Honor priuetur: for he that
reads the whole sentence, shall see, that all this Decree of Deposition and
Excommunication, was no more then a comminatory imprecation, to testify
earnestly the Founders affection to have those privileges observed, and
deter men from violating thereof; as the vehemence and insolent phrase of the
Instrument do intimate, by a bitterness unusual in medicinal excommunications:
For all the curses due to Heretics; and all the torments which Judas endures
are imprecated upon him; and it is subscribed not only by Gregory, with 30.
Bishops, but by a King and a Queen, no competent Judges (in this Gregory's
opinion) of faults punishable by excommunication.

Li. 11. Ep. 10.
85 And the same Pope in erecting of an Hospital, and endowing it with some
immunities, uses the same language, that the infringers thereof, should loose
all their power, and honor, and dignity, and after be excommunicate; and yet
this is never produced, nor understood to confirm his temporal sovereignty.

(...). 96. Constantinus.
86 The Donation of Constantine, which was not much less then 300. year before
this, end in like words: If any man violate this Donation, let him be eternally
condemned, let him find Peter and Paul in this life, and in the next his
enemies, and le^ him perish with the Devil and all the reprobate, burning in
Inferno inferiore. And will they from this argue in Constantine a power, to open
and shut hell gates? And will they endanger al those Catholic authors to this
eternal damnation, which have violated this Donation of Constantine by
public books?

87 And ^uch a Commination as this of Greg^ry appears in a Canon of the first
Council at Paris, An. 553. ca. 5 Sumna Carranze.
not long before his, where it is threatened, that whoso^uer shall ^eceiue a
person suspended from the Communion, himself shall be separated A concordia
fratrum, and (as we hope, or trust) shall sustain the wrath of the eternal
judge for ^uer. And (not to insist long upon examples of such imprecations)
about 160 year after Gregory, Paulus 1. erecting a Monastery in his own
house, ma^es this Constitution; Baron.^ Annal. To. 9 fo. 319. Anno 761.
If any of the Popes, our successors, or any mighty or Inferior person, of
what dignity soever, alien any of these things, let him know, that he is
anathematized by Christ and Peter, and estr^nged from the Kingdom of God: and
that he shall give an account thereof to the Saints, in the day of judgment:
For (says he) I desire the Judge himself, that he will cast upon them the
wrath of his power, that their life may be laborious and mournful, and they
may die consuming, and may be burnt eternally with Judas, in hell fire, in
voragine chao^ And that they that observe this Constitution, may enjoy all
blessedness at the right hand of God.

88 And when in the behalf of the Kings of Spain, the same argument is made
for them, that because there are many Diplomes extant in Sicily, by which the
Kings Anathematise in^ring^rs of their Constitutions, that therefore they
exe^cised Spiritual Jurisdiction: Vbi supra.
Baronius says, that this argument is ridiculous, because i^ is hard to find
any instrument of Donations from Princes, or from private men, or from women;
in which these bitter forms of excommunication are not: Which (says he) do
not contain any sentence of excommunication, but Imprecations to deter
other, as every man was at liberty ^o do, when he made any such graunts. So
that Baronius has laughed out of countenance this argument upon Medardus
privilege, which has been so o^^en, and so solemnly offered and iterated.
And it appears hereby that the punishments mentioned in these Constitu^ions,
were not such as the makers thereon could inflict, but only such as ^hey
wished to fall upon them that offended: and such I doubt not, was Gregory's
Imprecation, in his successors interpretations, that is, that he wished all
Kings to be deprived.

L. 4. Ep. 2.
89 His next reason why Princes may be deposed by Priests, is the diversity of
their Beginning and first Institution^ for, as before he had said to another
Bishop of the same place, Regal Dignity was found out and invented by humane
pride, but Priests were entitled by the Divine piety, So here he repeates it
with more contumely; Who knows not that Kings had their beginnings from those
men^ who being ignorant of God, and provoked by the prince of the world the
Devil, through Pride, Rapine, Perfidiousnesse, Murder, and all wickedness,
affected a government over their equals, by a blind Ambition, and intolerable
presumption.

90 Then he proceeds to the examples, of Innocent who excomunicated Arcadius,
and of Zachary who deposed Childerique. The first of which is not to the
purpose, Except Excommunication presume Deposing which Innocent intended not.
And the second has been abundantly, and satisfactorily spoken to, by very
many of ours, and of their own authors, who determine it roundly, 15.9. b.
Alius. glo^^er. Deposuit.
Deposuit, id est, Deponentibus consensit.

91 And therefore insisting little upon these, he makes have to that wherein
he excels, which is, to reproach and debase the State and Order of Kings. For
he says, That even Exorcists (which is no sacred order) are superior to
Princes. Nor is his intemperance therefore excessive, because he subjects men
to such as are in the way going toward Priesthood, for that will be still
upon the old ground, that priesthood is in an incomprehensible distance and
proportion above principality, but his reasons why Exorcists are above
Princes, discouers more malignitie to Princes absolutely; which is, That since
they are above the Devil himself, much more are they Superior to those which
are subject to the devil, and members of the devil. Nor could his argument
have any life or force here, except he presumed Kings to be poisoned and
corrupted by the very place, and by the order it self; for otherwise, if he
meant it only of vicious Kings, why should he institute this comparison of
Exorcists and Kings, since it ought to be of Exorcists and vicious men? And
therefore (as he says after in this Ep^stle,) That he finds in his own
experience, that the Papacy either finds good men, or makes them good, and
that if they want goodness of their own, they are supplied by their
predecessors, and so, Aut Clari eriguntur, aut Erecti illustrantur: So he
thinks either, that only members of the devil come to be Kings, or that
kings grow to be such, when they are kings. For so much he intimates even in
this place, when he says, In Regal dignity very few are saved, and from the
beginning of the world til now, we find not one King equal in sanctity to
innumerable Religious men. What King has done any miracles? To what King have
Churches or Altars been erected? How man^ Kings are Saints? Whereas, only in
our Sea there are almost a hundred.

92 And thus I thought it fit to run over this Letter, because here s^emes
the first fire to have been given, and the first drop of poison to have been
instil'd of all those virulenc^es and combustions, with which the later
Authors in that Church, are inflamed and swollen up, in this point of auiling
Princes. Of which rank, this Pope had respect to none, but those who were
really profitable to him: Nor have I observed any words of sweetness in him
toward any of them, but only to our King the Conqueror, and to one King of
Spain. To ours he says, L. 1. Epist 70.
We account you the only man amongst Kings, that performs his duty, and
this he ^ayes, because ^e should grant more to God, and Saint Peter, and Saint
Stephen, and be vigilant upon Saint Peter's estate in England, that he might
find him a propitious debtor. ^. 9. Epist. ^.
And to the king of Spain he says, The present which you sent me, is so
ample, and so magnificent, as became a King to give, and Saint Peter to
receive; and you show by your present, how much you esteem him.

93 And such Princes as these he was loath to loose: For he accounted that a
loss, which now they call the only perfection, that is, to enter into a
Religious and regular Order. L. 6. Epist. 17. Abbati Clunia^.
For this Gregory chides an Abbot bitterly, for admitting a Prince, who might
have been profitable to his state, into the Cloister. For he says: To do so,
is but to seek their own ease; and now, not only the Shepherds depart from
the care of the Church, but the Dogs also; which he speaks of Princes. He
tells him, That he has done against the Canons, in admitting him: and that he
is therein an occasion, that a hundred thousand persons do lack their guide.
And therefore says he, Since there are scarce any good Princes to be found, I
am grieved that so good a Prince, is taken away from his mother; That is from
the Church, as it must necessarily be intended in this Epistle. So pliant and
serviceable to his uses, would Gregory make Regal dignity, or else break it
in pieces.

Binius To. 3. pa. 2 fol. 1196.
94 And where could our later men find better light in this mischeiuous and
dark way, then in this Gregory's Dictates, of which, these are some, That
only the Pope may use Imperial Ornaments; That all Princes must kiss his
feet: That only his Name must be rehearsed in the Church; That there is no
other Name in the world, with many such transcendencies. And accordingly he is
well second^d by others, Cassanae. Catal. G^or. pa. 4. Consid. 7.
which say, that he is Superillustris; and may not be called so neither, because
he is so much above all Dignity, that our thought cannot extend to his
Majesty: And to prevent all opposition against it, Baldus in a choler says,
That he that says the contrary, Lies.

95 And upon what place of Scripture may ^hey not build this supremacy, and
this obedience to it, after a Pope, who is heir to an Active and Passive
infallibility, and can neither deceive nor be deceived, L. 4. Epist. 2.
has extorted from Samuel, so long before the Apostolic Sea was established,
a testimony, That not to obey the Apostolic Sea, 1. Reg. 15.
was the sin of Idolatry, test Samuele: which he iterates again, and
again in diverse other Epistles.

96 From this example, and from this liberty proceeds that malignity,
wherewith the later writers wrest every thing to ^he disgrace of Principality.
By this authority Symancha draws into consequence, E^chird. Ind. Tit. 21. n. 9.
and vrges as a precedent to be imitated, the example of the Scythians, who
killed their king for admitting some new rytes in divine worship; Which
(says Simancha) was justly done; for the Subjects of heretical Princes are
delivered from their Jurisdiction. And in like manner, Schultingius an
Epitomizer of Baronius, Schultingius. Thesaur. Antiq. Eccles. To. 1. c. 8. and
243.
finding in him out of Strabo, that in Egypt the Priests had so much authority
over the Kings, that sometimes by a bare message they would put one King to
death, and erect another: and repeating the same gloriously and triumphantly a
second time; at last in a Marginall note he claims the same authority for the
Pope, when he notes, and says thereupon, The supreme authority of the Clergy,
is proved against the Caluinists: So that we may easily discern, by these
examples which they propose for imitation, what authority they aim at. But
Schultingius might also have observed, as a prophecy of the ruin of their
usurpation, Diod. Sicul. Bibliot. l. 4. ca. 1.
that as soon as a learned and understanding king Ergamenes, came amongst
them, he took away that custom.

Bell. de Pont. l. 2. c. 2.. Nec ualet.
97 From this liberty, Bellarmine also, to the danger of any Prince, differing
in any point from the integrity of the Roman profession, has pronounced, That
Heretics are deprived of all ^urisdiction, even before excommunication. I Would.
d^ Council. ^t Eccles. l. 1. ^. 2. Esse autem.
And that therefore an Emperor cannot call a Council, because that must be
done in Nomine Christi: and that Princes have not their precedencies, as they
are members of the Church, for so Ecclesiastique Ministers are above them. Id^.
de^aicis. l. 3 c. 17. In quem


98 And this has made a Contry-man of ours deliver as mischeuous doctrine,
Say^ Thesaur. C^s. Consc. par. 1. l. 1. c. 6. nu. ^0
that the power of excommunication, is got by prescription; And so says
another great Patron of that greatness, the Priests obeyed the Kings of
Israel, but contrarily our Priests do prescribe over the temporal power.
Stephanus De (...). p^d. pont c^. 16. quare
And Sayr proceeds further, and says, that though Panormitane be of opinion,
That one can prescribe in no more then that which he has put in practice, yet
if he have so exercised any one act of Jurisdiction (as excommunication is) as
that he had a will to do all, he prescribes in all. And there is no doubt, but
that when Pius the fifth excommunicated, he had a good will to Depose also.

99 From this also have proceeded all those enormous deiections of Princes,
which they cast and derive upon al Kings when they speak them of the Emperor:
for though the later writers, are brother with the Emperor, and chose rather to
exemply in him, then in any other Sovereign Prince; upon this advantage, that
they can more easily prove a Supremacy over him, by reason of the pretended
translation of the Empire, yet it is a slippery way and conueyance of that
power over all other Princes; since in common intendment and ordinary
acceptance, no man can be exempt from that, to which the Emperor is subject.
And of the Emperor they say, Hiero. Gigas de laesa may. l 1. Rubr. 4. q 2. n.
5.
That not only he may be guilty of ^reason to the Pope, Ibid. q. 4. n. 2.
but if a subject of the Pope offend the Emperor, the treason is done to the
Pope. Yea, Ib. q. 1. n. 8.
if it be the Emperors subject, and the injury done to the Emperor, yet this
is treason to the Pope: So that the Emperor does but bear his person; for in
his presence he must descend: and in Ceremo. Sacr. Ca. de Council.
a Council his ^eate must be no higher, then the Popes footstool, nor any
State he hunge over his head.

100 And from hence also has grown that Distinction, Superstitious on one
part, and Seditious on the other, of Mediate and Immediate institution of the
two powers: for Eccl^siastique authority is not so immediate from God, that he
has appointed any such certain Hierarchy, which may upon no occasion suffer
any alteration or interuption: Nor is secular authority so mediate, or
dependant upon men, as that it may at any time be extinguished, but must ever
reside in some form or other. And Bellarmine himself confesses, That as Aaron
was made Priest over the Jews, D^ tr^nsl^t. In p. l. 1. ^. 8. in p^^^cip.
and Peter over the Christian Church, immediately from God, so also some Kings
have been made so immediately without humane election, or any such
concurrence: So that Regal Digni^y has had as great a dignification in this
point from God, as Sacerdotall; and to neither has God given any necessary
obligation of perpetual enduring in that certain form. So that, that which
Bellarmine in another place says to be a special observation, De Pont. l. 2.
c. 17.. Obseruandum.
we acknowledge to be so: which is, That in the Pope are three things; His
place, his person, and the union of them: the first is only from Christ, the
second, from those that elect him, and the third from Christ, by mediation of a
humane act.

And as we confess all this in the Pope, so has he no reason to deny it to
be also in kings: he adds further, That the Cardinals are truly said, To
create the Pope, and to be the cause why such a man is Pope, and why he has
that power; but yet they do not give him that power: as in generation, a
father is a cause of the union of the body and soul, which yet is infused
only from God. And in all this we agree with Bellarmine; and we add, that all
this is common to all supreme, secular, or Ecclesiastique Magistrates.

101 And yet in Hereditary kings, there is less concurrence, or assistance of
humane means, then either in elected kings, or in the Pope himself: for in
such secular states, as are provided by election, without all controversy the
supreme power, in every vacancy, resides in some subject, and inheres in some
body, which as a Bridge, unites the defunct, and the succeeding Prince. And how
can this be denied to be in the College of Cardinals, Theod. a Ni^m de sc^^sm.
l. 3. c. 1.
If (as one says) the dominion temporal be then in them, and Sayr These. Cas
consci. par. 1. l. 2 c. 20. nu. 20.
that they in such a vacancy, may absolve any, whom the Pope might absolve. If
therefore in all the cases reserved to himself, as namely in deposing Princes,
and absoluing subjects, he proceed not as he is Pope, but as he is spiritual
Prince, as Bellarmine says, De Pont. l. 5. ca. 6
and we shall have occasion hereafter to examine; If that College may absolve
subjects as he might, this supreamacy and spiritual Principality resides in
them, and is transferred from them to the Successor.

102 Certainly all power is from God; And as if a company of Savages, should
consent and concur to a civil manner of living, Magistracy, and
Superiority, would necessarily, and naturally, and Divinely grow out of this
consent (for Magistracy and Superiority is so natural and so immediate from
God, that Adam was created a Magistrate, and he derived Magistracy by
generation upon the eldest Children, and (as the Schoolmen say) if the world
had continued in the first Innocence, yet there should have been Magistracy.)
And into what manner and form soever they had digested and concocted this
Magistracy, yet the power it-selfe was Immediately from God: So also, if this
Company, thus grown to a Commonwealth, should receive further light, and
pass, through understanding the Law written in all hearts, and in the Book of
creatures, and by relation of some instructers, arrive to a saving knowledge,
and Faith in our blessed Saviors Passion, they should also be a Church, and
amongst themselves would arise up, lawful Ministers for Ecclesiastique
function, though not derived from any other mother Church, and though different
from all the diverse Hierarchies established in other Churches: and in this
State, both Authorities might be truly said to be from God. 1.2 ae. q. 103.
ad 3
To which purpose Aquinas says express^ly and truly, That Priesthood (that is
all Church function) before the Law given by Moses, was, as it pleased men, and
that by such determination of men, it was ever derived upon the eldest Son;
De Pont. l. 1. c. 9. Potest etiam.
And we have also in the same point Bellarmines voice and confession, That in
that place of S. Paul to the Ephesians, Ephe. 4.11.
which is thought by many to be so pregnant for the proof of a certain
Hierarchy, The Apostle did not so delineate a certain and constant
Hierarchy, but only reckoned up those gifts, which Christ gave diversely, for
the building up of the body of the Church.

103 To conclude therefore this point of the distinction of Mediate and
Immediate Authority, a Council of Paris under Gregory the fourth, An. 829.
Binnius To. 3. ^ar 1. fo. 562. ca. 5.
and Lodouicke and Lotharius Emperors, which were times and persons obnoxious
enough to that Sea, has one express Chapter, Quod Regnum non ab hominibus,
sed a Deo detur. There it is said, Let no King think that the Kingdom was
preserved for him, by his Progenitors, but he must believe that it was given
him by God. For he which is King of men, had not this Kingdom from men, but
from God: And so he proceeds to apply many places of Scripture to this
purpose, to the shame and confusion of them, who to overthrow, or subject
secular principality, detort Scriptures for the advancement of Ecclesiastique
immunit^es: As in the Septimes, that new limme of the body of the Canon Law,
those privileges are proved to be Iure Diuino, In 7. l 2. Tit. 1. De for.
comp. Ca. 1. glos. verbo, cu ipso.
out of the word of the Psalm, Nolite tangere Christos meos, which was spoken
of all the Children of Israel, as they were protected in their passage to the
land of Canaan, and cannot be appropriated to Priests only.

104 And from this liberty which men of this Religion, have taken to speak
slightly, and malignantly of the Person and dignity of Kings, a long and
inue^erate custom has so wrought upon them, that it has carried them farther,
and made them as bold with the word of God himself. Out of which they can
deduce principal and direct Prophecies for every passage in Saint Francis his
story. For Sedulius. Apol. cont. Alcora. Francisca. l. 2. C. 1.
the Dream of Pharoes officer (A vine was before me, and in the Vine were
three branches) signifies Saint Francis, Genesis 40.10.
and the ^hree Orders derived from him, says the Book of Conformities, and
Sedulius the fresh Apologer thereof. So he says, Sedul. l. 2. c. 1. Luc. 12.32.
Christ prophesied of this Order; and it is fulfilled in this Order which he
said, Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure, to give you the
Kingdom. And Sedul. l. 3. c. 13 Psalm. 118.
of these it is spoken, says he, The sound of them is gone into all Nations.
Of these prophanations the examples are too frequent; for as they have fitted
all other things spoken of Christ, to Saint Francis in the Book of
Conformities, so does l. 1. Ca. 18.
Sedulius maintain the giving to him, the title of Jesus of Nazareth, King of
the Jews.

105 So also must the Scriptures afford prophesies for every ragge and inch of
the Sindon, which wrapped our Savior in the Sepulcher. For in Mallonij Notae
in Paleotum de Syndone. l. 1. C. 1. Nu. 18.
that Liturgy or Office, (as they call it) which is appointed by the Pope to
be said in the Chapel where this Sindon is preserved, all those places of
Scripture, which speak of Christ's body sprinkled with blood, are referred and
said to be intended of this Sindon. And therefore says the Author thereof,
Since the Pope has so applied them, this exposition thereof cannot be
reprehended.

106 By this license they give all the names of Christ to the Pope; Extraua.
Io. 2^. Cum inter. glos. in fine.
yea the name of God himself; And of Liter Leo. 10. p^r B^nchum. l. 8. Ep. l.
17.
Goddess to our Lady. And by this license did Gretzer. Cont. Hassenmiller. ^o.
141.
Crusius the Jesuit, call Ignatius Constitutions the Decalogue: because says
Gretzer, his fellow Jesuit, Metaphorically and instruction of our life, is
called the Decalogue.

107 Nor can these blasphemous detorsions, and bold mis-applications, besalued,
by Sedulius his guilty excuse, that they Sedul. Apol. pref^t.
are somewhat too freely written, according to the simplicity of the age, And
l. 1. C. 9.
such as some men would rather wish unwritten, and l. 1. C. 18.
Circumspect men wished unsaid; And some things too Ibid. and C. 20.
rawly, somethings too courageously uttered. And these which he so tenderly,
and calmely passes over, with light animaduersion, are such sayings as these,
That S. Franc^s was l. 1. C. 20.
deified; That l. 1. C. 13.
he was made one spirit with God: That Ib. C. 15.
he saw the secrets of hearts: And Ib. c. 18.
that he was more then John Baptist, and better then the Apostles: And l. 2. C.
6.
that God did obey him at a beck in every thing.

108 Nor will Serarius his elegant evasion serve them in this, Serar.
litaneuti. l. C. 13.
That some men too indulgent and careful of their verse, or the delicacie of
the Latin language, may have gone into these excesses. For the first place,
where the Pope is called the Lord our God, is in a place barbarous and loose
enough, which is the gloss upon an Extrauagant. And though Bembus, in whose
letters written for Leo the 10 our Lady is called Goddess, do often stray
in^o profane elegancies (as Epist. Leo. 10. l. 2. Ep. 21.
in another place, when he would expr^sse an inspiration of the Holy ghost in
one, he says, he was afflatus Zephiri caelestis a^ra, And l. 4. Ep. 15.
calls Excommunication, Interdictionem aquae and ignis) yet this will neither
excuse that Pope which signed those Letters, nor those to whose c^re the
expurgation of books, has been committed. So that none of their piae
frauds, with which they emplaster this venomous and contagious wounding the
scriptures of God, and the phrase of his spirit, will acquit or excuse them.

109 And if their mis^applying of Scriptures carried them no further, then to
simple and childish actions (as Saint Francis commanded Massaeus to tumble
round like a child; because, says Sedulius, Apolog. l. 3. c. 1. nu. 3.
it is written, Nisi Conuersi fueritis, and efficiamini sicut paruuli, non
intrabitis): Or if it carried them but to stupid actions (as the penitent which
confessed to S. Anthony, Idem. l. 3. c. 13 nu. 3.
that he had kicked his mother, receiving this answer: If thy foot offend
thee, cut it off, went, and cut off his foot, (but S. Anthony honestly set it
on again,) Or if it carried them but to bold and confident actions (as Saint
Anthony, when his Host set him a Toade upon the Table, and told him that it
was written in the Gospel, Idem. l. 3. c. 28^ nu. 31.
De omni quod tibi apponitur, comedes, he with the sign of the Cross, made it
a Capon ready roasted) silliness or some such disease might lessen the fault.

110 But then is there extreme horror and abominations therein, when God and
his Lieuetenants are at once injured, which is, when places of Scripture are
maliciously or rid^culously detorted to the auiling of Princes: With what soul
then could Pope Alexander say, treading upon Frederick, Psalm. 90.13.
Super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis: of which Act, Ios Stepha. de Osculat.
ped. Po^t. cap. 11.. Ex quo.
a Bishop in that Church says, that it ought to be commended, and that it
was lawfully and worthily done.

And with what conscience could the same servile Bishopp of Sixtus the fifth,
prove the kissing of the popes feet, Esa 49.23.
out of those words of Esaias, Kings and Queens shall worship thee, with
their faces toward the Earth, Ios. Steph. ^. 5.
and lick up the dust of thy feet? how durst he say, that this kissing of
the popes feet, was established in saint Luke, Luc. 7.
when the sinner kissed Christ's feet? Idem. ca. 7.
Because (says he) if it were affoorded Christ^ belongs it not to his Church,
which is bone of his bone? Deuteronomy. c. 1.3.
And out of Deuteronomy he thinks this reverence is euidenly enough
demonstrated, because it is said of God, the saints of God, Idem. c. 10.
are said to be humbled at his feet.

So that whatsoever is applied to the Church, or to God, by this detorsion is
given to the pope: But this Bishop is so transported with this rage of
detorting scriptures, that rather then not mis-applie them, he will apply them
to his own Condemnation: For thus he concludes his Epistle with the words of
the Apostle: Epist. lecto.
Gaudeo sieve per veritatem, sieve per occasionem, Romanae Ecclesiae dignitatem
extolli: so that it is all one to him, whether scriptures be faithfully
applied or no, so it be to the profit and advantage of that Church.

Append. ad lib. de P^^t. respons. ^d lib. Auiso Pia^^uole ca. 2
111 And though Bellarmine seem to deplore and lament that unworthy manner of
handling serious Controversies, of which he accused that Author, which called
his book Auiso Piaceuole, because he cytes some of the Italian Poets against
the Church of Rome, yet is this fashion still in so much use amongst them, that
in their last business with the state of Venice, Nicod. Ma^er de paren: Baro: ad
lecto.
one author, though in a disguised name, that undertook the defense of
Baronius his furious instigation of the Pope, does not only wound and stain
the memory of our late Queen, with impious calumniations, and wrest the
Scriptures, to defame our present King; but he protests that he chooses this
way of doing it, to imitate Socrates, who was (says he) Derisor hominum,
maxim potentum, and exhibites his book as a sacrifice, Risui, and Lubentiae.

112 Where then shall we hope, that these men will stop or limit their
blasphemies? when in the licentious fury thereof, having made it habitual to
them, and an Idio^isme of that Religion, they set (in their account) God
against God; that is the word of God against the Pope, and defame him in their
own Pasquils by the phrase of Scripture. In which kind of profane libelling,
I had thought their malignity, and irreligion had been at the highest, when
they called Lucretiaes bastard, by Pope Alexander, and his son, the holy
Ghost^ till of late we see one of our own nation has drunk so deep of that
cup, that he has swallowed the dregs also; and in a childish and
traiterous itch of wit, at once wounded the Majesty, both of his God, and of
his King, by imputing false faults to the one, that he might misuse the word
of the other.

And by this means, as when they determined to kill the Emperor Henry the
seventh, that they might poison him, they forbore not to poison their own God
in the Sacrament first: so when they purposed to tear and deface the name and
honor, and laws of the King, they first offer the same violence to the word
of God himself.

113 Thus the scriptures serve them for Panegyriques, to advance the Pope;
Psalm. 8.6
Omnia Subiecisti sub pedibus eius: which being spoken of beasts subjection to
men, Maynard^s de p^iuil. Ecc^. Art. 2 ^. 21
they make it of men to the Pope. Thus the scriptures serve them to deuest and
disarme Princes; Luc 22.38
Ecceduo gladij, which being (if we Eman. S^. Scholia in 4. Euang.
believe the Jesuit Sd) no other then those knifes, with which they had cut
up the paschal Lamb, Ext^au. Com de Mayor. and obed. Vnam sanctam,
a pope applies to the spiritual and temporal Jurisdiction.

And thus the scripture serves them for provocation, and incitements to war,
and deuastation: Act. 10.13.
Macta and Manduca: which being spoken of baptizing the Gentiles, In Voto ad
Paul. 5.
Baronius detorts to the excommunication of Christians. Only they are content
to spare scriptures, when they come to defend their late-borne Heresies; for,
for the necessity of believing Purgatory, Invocation, Transubstantiation, and
some others of the same age, they offer no scripture; but they think it
victory enough that Galatine can prove all these out of the Talmud, and Cusanus
out of the Alcoran: For, for the old and new Testaments, they find other
employment. They must serve them against the office and dignity of Princes, to
exhibit them as a prey to their neighbors, and a scorn to their own
Subjects.

Io. 10.30.
114 As Christ asked of the Jews, for which of his good works they would stone
him: Princes may ask of the Roman Church, for which of their benefits they
are so injurious to them? Is it for having established a Primacy upon that
Bishop, above his fellow Patriarchs, which was so long litigious? Or for
withdrawing him from the jaws of the Barbarous deuourers of Italy? Or for
enriching him with a Patrimony, and Privileges almost equal to their own? Is
it for any of these, that you say, Eman^ Sa Apho^ Confess. verb. Clericus.
A Clergy man cannot be a traitor, though he rebell^ because he is no subject?
By which you cut off so great and so good a part, as in your opinion the st^te
without it, is but a mere Carcass, for the Clergy is the soul.

And you extend those immunities, not only to your boys which light your
Candles, Did. 21. Cl^ros,
and lock the Church doors, but to every sullen fellow, that will retire
himself into a wood, without either assuming Orders, Ren. Choppinus de iu^^
Monast. l. ^. Tit. 2. ^u. 25
or subiecting himself to any Religious Rule, or despoiling himself of his
temporal possessions, as you say of your Ermits: Dr Aluin de potest.
Episcoporum c. 3 n. 11.
Yea to Nuns, who though they be not of the Clergy, yet are Ecclesiastique
persons, and yet they are so profane, as they may not be admitted to touch any
thing which belongs to the Altar. Did. 23. Sa^ctimonialis.
And not only the Nuns within profession, have these privileges, but also
their Nouices, who are under no vow: yea they enjoy them, whom you call
Canonicas Saeculares, which may travel, traffic, marry, and do any civil,
or uncivil function: (for of the continency of Regular Nuns ^ am of a better
persuasion, for this reason especi^lly; that the Jesuits by a Constitution,
are forbid to have the care of them: Regula. 47.
and those secular women, which I mentioned, are Ecclesiastici fori (by a late
Decision in the Rota) because though they be not Ecclesiasticae, D Aluinde pot.
Ep^sco. ca. 3. n^. 13.
yet they are Personae Miserabiles, and wear an uniform habit: and to raise
the number, you say, If an injury be done to any kinsman of an Ecclesiastique
person, it is done to him. Paris de ^ut ^o de Synd. ca. de exces. reg. n^. 29
Maynardus d^ pri^ileg. Eccles. Art. 17. nu. 10.
And that if any offense be committed by diverse persons, amongst whom there
is one Clergy man, none of the offenders can be subject to Temporal
Jurisdiction.

115 And not only all these persons, but all which appertains to them,
becomes spiritual: and by a new Alchimy, they do not only extract spirit out
of every thing, but transmute it all into spirit, and by their possessing them,
Houses, Horses, and Concubines are spiritual. But as every thing returns to
his first state and being; and so Rome which was at first built, and governed
by Shepherds, i^ returned to the same form after the decay of the Empire:
Tholosa. synt. l. 15. c. 2. nu. 4.
and as the name of Bishopp, which was at first given to Clerks of the Market,
and Overseers of things to be bought and sold, agrees still with these
Symoniaque Bishops of Rome: so many of these precious Jewels, which are
employed about the Images and Relics, which were at first temporal, and then
by this tincture grown to be spiritual, return again to their temporal
nature, when any of the Popes ^ake ocsion to serve their pleasure, Theod. a
Niem. de schism. l. 1. ca. 22.
or foment dissensions amongst other Princes, and schism amongst themselves,
by coining the Images, as Vrbanus did, in such a case.

116 But the greatest injury that is done to Princes in this matter of
Exemption, is, that they will not be beholden to Princes for it: but plead
their Ius Diuinum, not only the positive Divine Law, by which, they say, that
the Popes if they had not found these men naturally exempted, and if Princes
had not granted these exemptions, might by their Constitutions, have exempted
them, without asking leave of Princes, but they pretend text of Scriture,
though detorted and misvs'd, to prove this Exemption. And for the Persons they
pretend many; but with no more directnes, then that by which they prove
exemption of their goods, Laelio Medico. contra. Venet. fo. 196. Nella Raccolta.
from secular charges and burdens, which is, Domini est terra, and plenitudo
eius, and since it is the Lords, it is theirs.

117 But all Princes grow weary and jealous of that claim; Risposta di Ant.
Bouio al. Paulo. Nella Raccolta fo. 50.
and a Catholic Writer has observed, that many of the Writers of the Spanish
Nation in these later times, have resisted that opinion, of which he names
Medina, Victoria, Soto, Ledesma, and Bannes.

And if that Nation grow into iealousies, and feel her right, as France has
done before, all the Italian Writers, will be but weak evidence, to prove this
exemption to be Iure Diuino. But as though all this were not enough, and that
the states of Princes were not enough infirm'd by withdrawing of all these,
they teach, Bell. de Clericis l. 1. c. vlt.
That a Subject by removing into another Province has deuested his allegiance
and subjection: And that every man is free concerning his own person: And that
the band is stronger between a Creditor and a Debtor, then between a Prince and
subject. Upon all which, what mischievous conclusions will follow, is evident
and obuious enough.

118 To conclude therefore this point this Ecclesiastique immunity which they
claim, is the debasing of Princes; And the defense of this immunity, and
consequently of this deb^sing of Princes, is so just a cause of Martyredome,
that Baronius says; Martyrolog. To. 29. December.
The Students in the English College; have good title to two Crowns of
Martyrdom, because they return into England, both to defend the Catholic
faith, and the immunity of the Church. Where we will content our selves, till
we come to a ^urther exagitation of that point, with this confession from
Baronius, that they are by your doctrine received in that College, incited to
Martyredome, for the Immunities of the Church, which himself in the same
place distinguishes from the Catholic faith. And thus far I was willing to
extend this point, That the Roman Doctrine by extolling Church Privileges
above Princes, and by an absolute and direct auiling them, does mis-prouoke her
disciples to a vicious affectation of imaginary Martyrdom. In the two other
points of Merit and Purgatory, which produce the same effect, I may have leave
to contract my self, into a shorter room, because of those, many others have
spoken more abundantly, then of this last point which I undertook.

THE SECOND PART OF MERIT.
THe next Doctrine which I noted to mis-incite Bell. de Indul. l. 1. c. 2.
propos. 1.
In every good work, you say, there is somewhat of merit, and somewhat of
satisfaction. The first is said to belong to our selves, and that by it we
establish our salvation: So that the passion of our Savior is but as Baptism
to us, and our own works, as Confirmation: Idem de Confirmatione c. 11 Duplex.
Which Sacrament you say, confers more grace then baptism does, for
strengthening us against the Devil: Ibid ca. 2.. Sed r^spond.
And that the holy Ghost is given more fully therein.

And accordingly you teach, that justice of works does give the form and life
to faith. And the second, which is Satisfaction, is reserved in the common
stock, the treasury of the Church, and husbanded and dispensed by the general
steward thereof the Bishop of Rome.

2 But for that Merit, which you teach, to say That our works of their own
nature, Bell. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 17.. Nobis.
without considering any Covenant or Contract with GOD, deserve Heaven, does
not only diminish CHRIST'S Passion, by associating an Assistant to it, and
determine his Priesthood, which is everlasting, by usurping that office our
selves, but it preferres our work before his, because if we could consider
the passion of Christ, without the eternal Decree, and Covenant, and Contract
with his father, his work (saving the dignity which it had by Acceptance, by
which the least step of his humiliation might worthily have redeemed ten
thousand worlds) had not naturally merited our salvation.

3 Now betwixt God and us there is no such Covenant; our best plea is, The
sinner must repent, and God will blotte out his sins. If a Prince should so
far prostitute his mercy, as to proclaim a venial Pardon, by which for
certain money, any Malefactor might be pardoned, no such Malefactor as by the
nature of his fault, had at that instant forfaited and confiscated all his
estate, should have benefit by that pardon, because he had nothing to give.
All these dis-aduantages and infirmities oppress us; no good work is
naturally large enough to reach heaven; no promise nor acceptance of God has
changed the nature of a good work: And lastly, we can do no perfect good work;
for original sin has poisoned the fountains, our hearts: and those degrees
and approaches, which we seem to make toward good works, are as if a
condemned man would make a large will, to charitable uses. For, as that which
he gives is not his own, so that goodness of good works is not ours; and as
it is in the Princes pleasure and allowance, whether his will shall take any
effect, or no; so is it in the pleasure of God, whether any works of ours shall
be accepted.

4 Yet there is more Devotion in our Doctrine of good works, then in that of
the Roman Church, because we teach as much necessity of them as they do, and
yet tie no reward to them. And we acknowledge, that God does not only make our
faith, to fructify and produce good works as fruits thereof, but sometimes
begins at our works: and in a man's heart morally inclined to do good, does
build up faith: for if an Angel could transport Abacuc, for Gods service, by
only taking hold of his hair, God can take such hold of our works, and
carry us further by them. And fu^ther then this I see not that moderate men
may go: and they startle too easily that dare not come so far. And if it
had been expedient for Bellarmine, to have spoken plain, I think he would
have come to that, when he was so near toward it, as to say, That it is the
safest way to place all our confidence in the only mercy of God, De
Iustific^t. l. 5. c. 7. Proposit. 3.
by reason of the incertainety of our own righteousness, and the danger of
vainglory: for he seems else where to be so far from doubting, that a man
may not be sure of his own righteousness, that himself had such an assurance
of righteousness in another man, that upon his Oath before a public Notarie
he affirms, Ceparius. de vit. Go^zag. l. 3. c. 2.
That he verily believes that Gonzaga, (who left the dignity and inheritance
of a Marquisate) never committed mortal sin, and that from his age of seven
years, he is certain of it.

5 The Doctrine of good works in the Reformed Churches, is uniform and
consonant. For though Luther, to relieve and succor the doctrine of faith,
which then languish'd desperately in the Roman Church, for just dignification
thereof, sometimes omitted, sometimes spoke remissely of good works, yet
between those, who severely adhere to him, and other Churches, which in some
other things depart a little from them, in this point, I have observed no
dissension.

6 But the Roman Church at this present is tempested with a violent storm in
this ma^ter: that is, by what way and means, man can be enabled to do any
meritorious work. In which Controversies, after the Dominicans and the
Jesuits, had with much earnestness provoked, ^enius de Controuersia, de lib.
A^b. and Dei aux^l. in^er Catholicos. Epist. ad Cle. 8.
and with much bitterness replied upon one another, Benius in a book as
moderate and elegant, as any these later ages have affoorded, proiecting a way,
in his Epistle to Clement the eight, how these dissentions might be reunited,
and reconciled, observes that all the Controversies between them, arises out
of presuming a false ground and foundation to be true, which is the famous
Distinction of Sufficient and Efficient Grace. And so he does not only
demolish all that they had diversely built thereupon, Li. 1. de great. and lib.
arb. ca. 11.
but defeats and destroies that foundation, which Bellarmine himself was most
confident in, and euicts that that distinction, which that Church has used of
late years against all opposition, is neither containd, Fo. 4.
nor conveniently derived, either from Scriptures, Councels or Fathers, but is
refeld and resisted by the Council of Trent it self. Fo. 91.
No^ can they extenuate this matter, as though it were o^ ^ma^l consequence;
since neither small matters should produce amongst Religious men, so much and
so bitter Argumen^ation: nor can it be in it self esteemed a small matter:
upon which Benius says, Fo. 2.
the questions of Predestination, Justification, Merit, Perseverance,
Glorification, and many more depend, and that all Divinity is shaken therein.

7 And if they think, howsoever they suffer an intestine war, to make us
believe that all is peace, and that this variety is only De modo, they must
remember, that that for which they burn and damn men, which is
Transubstantiation, is but a question De modo, which may be somet^mes so
essential, That if the Arrians had agreed with the Orthodox, of the manner of
the generation of the So^, or the Greek Church would agree yet with the
western^ of the manner of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, there could be no
diffrence in t^ese points and therefore these d^ffre^ces and controuersi^s, and
irresolutio^s in the Roman Church cannot be ^xcu^'d or diminished by this, that
they are De modo, since they are not De modo prob^tionis, which is when a
certain truth is illustrated by diverse ways of proof, but they are so De
modo essendi, or existendi; So, as if you remove these ways, by which they are
said to be, they are not at all.

8 And howsoever those Doctors, whom they style Seraphicos, VVilloti A^benae,
Orthodox.
and Illustratos, and Irrefragabiles, and Fontes vitae, with which transcendent
Titles, they enamell so many of the writers in the Franciscan Families, so are
in so high a pi^ch as dazles us, or diue so low, as we cannot discern what
they ^old in this matter of Merit; yet what the vulgar doctrine is in this
point, the Expurgatory In^ices shall suffic^ently inform us: for no opinion of
any Father, or Doctor, or of any university, can be of so much credi^e, and
authority, as those books; since they are compiled by a commission issuing from
the Pope himself, who was either authorized or entreated to that office, by a
general Council. Ex Con^. Trid. Bull. Pij 4. de Ind libro.
So that in these books there are all these approaches to an infallibility,
that they were determined and provided by a Council, executed by a Popes Bulls,
and justified by him, when they were perfited and accomplished.

9 And those books have not bestowed so much diligence, upon any point, as
this, that nothing remain in any Author, which may pref^rre Christ's passion
before our merits. And therefore, to omit innumerable instances to this purpose)
Index Hispan. fo. 149.
in that Catholic book, Venet. 1575.
imprin^ed in a Catholic state, which is styled, Ordo Baptizandi, and Modus
Visitandi, they have expunged these words: Do thou believe to come to
glory, not by thine own merits, but by the virtue and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ? And a little after they have cut off this question; Do thou
believe that our Lord Jesus Christ died for our salvation, and that no man can
be saved by his own merits, or any other way, but in the merit of the passion
of Christ? And though they might have excuse to extol our merits, yet they
might have spared the first part of the sentence, and given us leave to
believe, That our Lord Jesus Christ died for our salvation.

10 Amongst these great works, pregnant both of Merit for our selves, and
satisfaction for others, Martyrdom is in the^r Doctrine, that Opus
priuilegiatum, which takes away al sin; by occasion of which words, To take
away, I cannot for^beare to warn you in this place, of one ordinary indirect
dealing in Bellarmine; which is, tha^ in his Indices, and Tables, he presents
wordes^ ve^ie f^r^e from the sense of the place to which they relate. As in
this point of merit, where his Index says, Martyrium tollit peccata, S.
Hierome, out of whom the Text, ^o which he relates, is drawn^; s^ies only per
martyrium peccata non imputantur; B^ll de Iusti^i. l. 2 c. 9.. Sanct^s
Hieron^mus.
which is nothing to the natural condignit^e of the wo^^e it self. And I
should have neglected to have noted Bellarmines Index, but that I observe that
they are so severe upon the Indices, made by some of their own Church, that
pretending st^ll to have rased nothing in the body of the fathers, they expunge
in the Indices many sentences, though the very words be in the Text it self:
as in t^is point of Merit, Epist. ante Ind. Belg.
Iunius has no^ed, that these words, Meritum nullum, nisi quod a Christo
confertur, are cut out of the Index to Chrysostom, though the same words be
in the text.

11 To proceed then, for the dignity of this wo^ke, Bellarmine against So^o,
and Ledesmo maintains, that martyrdom does save a man, De baptism. l. 1. c. 6.
ex opere operato. And that there is required in the martyr, no further
disposition, nor other preparation, then in one who is to be baptized. For
(says he) though Charity be required, it is not precedent Charity, but it is,
because a Martyr cannot depart without Charity, because by a covenant from God,
Grace is inf^s'd, and so Charity: and therefore it abolishes original sin,
and actual sin, and both eternal and temporal punishment belonging
thereunto. De Indulg. l. 1. c. 2.. Qu^nto.
And in another place Bellarmine says, That it is evident that martyredome is
so full a satisfaction, that it expiates all guiltiness, contracted by all
sins, how huge soever the number, or haynousnes thereof be: and if any milder
man of that Church would say otherwise (as Ferus does directly, the Passions in
this life, L. 3. Com. in Mat. 20.8
are not worthy of future glory) he must be detorted to the other sense, Sext
Sen. Bibliot Sanct. l. 6. Anno^. 89.
(as Senensis says of this place, I am of opinion, that Ferus his words might
be deflected to the other sense:) Or if the words will not confess upon
that rack, they must be utterly expunged, as we noted of others before.

12 And upon this superabundant value of the merit of Martyredome, De Indulg.
l. 1. ^. 2.. Quinto.
Bellarmine builds that conclusion, which we now condemn; which is, That
because many martyrs have but few sins of their own, and their passion is
of a large and rich satisfaction, a mighty heap of Satisfaction superabounds
from martyrs. And so they being sent hither, as Factors to increase that bank
and Treasury, it appears, ^ think, sufficiently, that this doctrine of
merit^s, does mis-prouoke and inordina^ly p^^forward inconside^ate men, to
this vicious ^ffec^ation of Martyrdom. To which also the Doc^^ine of Purgatory
contributes as much persuasion.

THE THIRD PART OF PVRGATORY.
AS Morbizan the Turk, being moved by a Pius 2. by which he granted
Indulgences to all the^, Historiae and ali^ impressa. ante Alcoran. fo. 99.
that would take Arms against him, by a Letter to the Pope; required him to
call in his Epigrammes again: Casabonus pre^atio de libe^. Eccl.
And as a great learned man of this time calls Panlus the fifts Excommunication
against the Venetians, De purg. L. 2. c. 18. Ad quint. Hymno de nouo lumine
pasch. Sabba.
Dirum Carmen: And as Bellarmine says of Prudentius, when he appoints certain
Holydaies in Hect, Paenarum celebres sub styge feriae, That he did but play
More poetico: So all discourse of Purgatory seems to me to be but the
Mythologie of the Roman Church, and a moral application of pious and useful
f^bles.

2 To which opinion Canus expresses himself to have an inclination, when he
says, L. 11. c. 6.
That men otherwise very grave, have gathered up rumors, and transmitted them
to posterity, either too indulgent to themselves, or to the people: and that
Noble Authors have been content to think, that that was the true law of
History, to write those things which the common people thought to be true: And
this censure he forbears not to lay upon Gregory, and Bid, by which two, so
many fabulous things were conuaied to posterity. To which ingenuity in Canus,
Lypsius his Champion says, Pal. estrita Honoris. Anastas Cochelet. fo. 285.
That he preferres Gregory and Bid before Canus, for opinion and iudgement^
But in this, only their discretion, and an abstinence from a slippery and
inconsiderate creduli^ie is in q^estion: and even in matter of judgment, in as
good judgment as this Author hat^, Canus w^l^ justly enough in that Church
have a good ^oo me. And if this Author, as he pre^ends ^n that pl^ce, acc^pt
none of these fables, but such as the authority and judgment of the Church
has approved, either many of the Stories must loose their credit, or else the
Popes that approved them.

3 Who have been wisely and prouidently most liberal, and careful to afford
most of that sustentation of Approving, to those things that were of themselves
most weak and indeffensible^ so: so S. Brigids Revelations are not only
approved by Boniface the ninth, Paleotus de Syndone, par. 1. Ep. lectori.
but confirmed by Martin the fifth: Both which having concurred to her
canonization, one reason why it was done, on her part, Revel. Brigid. Bull
Canone. Bonif. 9.
is, because at her marriage, being at thirteen years of age, and her husband
eighteen, she vowed one years continency; and the reason on the Popes part
was: That there might some goodness proceed out of the North for she was o^
Swethland. Par. Crassus de cerem. Epis. and Cardin. l. 1. c. 39^
According to which superstition, in their Mysterious ceremonies, when the
Gospel is song, all other parts being done toward the East, he must turn to
the North, from whence all evil is derived, and where the Devils dwell.

But for all their barbarous and profane despite and contumelies, which they
impute (not to the Devil) but to Princes, and all sort of people beyond their
Hills, their Stories are full of the memory of Benefits which Sea has
received from Northern Princes, To. 3. par. 2. fo. 1052. B.
and Binius confesses, that the remote and Northern people, did so much honor
the Roman Church, that whomsoever they hea^ed to sit in that Chair, and to be
Pope, though but in name, without any discussion of his entrance, they
reverenced him as S. Peter himself, which (says he) is a wonderful thing to
be spoken. Which imputation since Binius lays upon Northern Catholics, they
are fairly warned to be more circumspect in their obsequiousness to that
Church, without discussing the persons, and the matter which is commanded them.

4 But to return to this Comique-Tragicall doctrine of Purgatory, if Canus
weigh nothing with them: Epist. Rutbalo. Reg. Secret. ante Dial. Luciani.
Sir Thomas Moore, of whose firmness to the integrity of the Roman faith,
that Church need not be ashamed, intimates as much, when he says, That he
therefore vn^ertooke to transl^te Lucianus Dialogue Philopseudes, to deliver
the world from superstition: which was crept in under Religion: For (says he)
superstitious lies have been told with so much authority, that a Cosoner was
able to persuade S. Augustine, thog^ a grave man, and a vehement enemy of lies,
that a tale which Lucian had before derided in this Dialogue, was the^ newly
done in his days. Some therefore think^ (says he) that they have made Christ
beholden to them for ever, if they invent a fable of some Saint, or some
Tragedy of hell, to make an old woman weep or tremble So that scarce the
life of any Martyr or virgin ^ath escaped their lies, which makes me suspect,
that a great part of those fables, has been ins^rted by Heretics, by
mingling thereof to withdraw the credit due to Christian Histories.

5 And in our days, Philip Nerius the Institutor of the last Order amongst
them, who was so familiar in heaven, whilst he lived upon earth, that Vita
eius. fo. 17. and 24. and 57.
he was feign to entreat God to depart further from him, And fo. 33.
to draw back his mind from heavenly matters, and turn them upon earthly,
before he was able to say Mass, And fo., 83.
could hear the Music and Symphonie of the Angels, And could distinguish any
virtue, or any vice, by his smelling, This man I say was ever an enemy to
these Apparitions: and used to say, That God would not take it ill, fo. 107.
not to be believed, though he should truly appear to us in any shape. And to
a Scholar that told him that our Lady appeared to him in the night, fo. 108.
he said, next time she comes, spit in her face, which he did, and found it to
be the devil. Nor did he easily believe possessions, fo 229.
but referred it commonly to the indispositions of the body: and suspecting
justly the same diffidence in others, which he found in himself, fo. 488.
he prayed to God, that he would work no miracles by him.

6 So that not only for fear of illusions, and mistaking bad spirits for
good, (for for that, their greatest Authors which have writ of that subject,
even in these clear and curious times, are still confident, that An evil
spirit, what shape so ever he appear in, Binsfeldius. de confel. Sa^ar. fo.
67. and 68 Menghi. fust. Daemo. c. 8.
may be known by his feet or hands, And that he is ever notoriously deformed
either by a Tail, or by Horns, And that he will van^sh, if one use him, as
Friar Ruffin did, Ibidem.
who when the devil appeared to him ordinarily in the form of Christ
crucified, by S. Francis his counsel, said to him: Open thy mouth, and
implebo stercore, and thereupon was delivered from that apparition. And some of
their saddest Divines, have eased them thus much in any such perplexity,
Vasques de Adorati.
that to worship the devil himself in such a form, with opinion that it were
God, is not Idolatry,) not only for these inconveniences, but even for a
general infamy and suspicion, that these apparitions which begot Purgatory
have in them, the more moderate sort of Catholics have declined from any
great approving of them.

7 Yea Serarius, though of that order that has lost all ingenuity, confesses
from Baronius and Villa Vincentius, Litan. l. 2. ca. 2. N. 3.

Ibid. N. 4.


that in these legends, in their Histories there are vain and vicious
relations, and that the pictures of those Saints, are but Symbolicall. Sedul.
Apol. pro libro. Con^or. l. 1.^.20. N. 7.
And Sedulius acknowledges, that, that story in the book of Conformities,
that S. Francis was seen to go out of the wound in Christ's side with a
banner, and a great Army, is but figurative. Of which, says he, there are
many so highly mysterious, that it is not fit to discover and explicate them to
the wicked. So that these Mirabilarij and Mythologistes of that Church, will
solemnly reserve these their Arcana Ecclesiae to themselves, and shall without
any envy from us.

8 And yet I deny not, but that in sober antiquity, and in the grauest
Fathers, there are some impressions, which occasioned this error, of purifying
souls after this life, As Bellarmine says truly, De Pont. l. 4. c. 8. Q^ia.
that for the most part, lies have their foundation upon some truth; For it was
very long in the Church of God, before the state of the soul after our death,
was clear, and constant and uniform: the Fathers being divided in their
opinions, whether our souls enjoyed perfect happiness presently, or expected
and attended it till the general judgment. And the phrase and language, in
which sometimes they spoke of the last consummation of our happiness, in the
reunion of the body and soul, being obscure, and various, gave occasion of
doubting, that they reserved and adiourn'd all our happiness till that time.
And that which they meant of that perfect and consummate happiness, not to be
enjoyed till then, has been misunderstood, or detorted to the soul alone.
And by such irresolution in some, and perplexity in collating their opinions,
and misapplying their words, have been imprinted indelible characters of
Purgatory, and of prayer for the dead, of whose condition in the next world,
they were not t^roughly assured.

9 If any of the Fathers have strayed farther then so, to speak doubtfully of
some such thing as Purgatory: We will not say, as you do, In^. Expurg. belg.
fo. 12.
Let us excuse it, or extenuate it, or deny it by some devise, or feign some
other convenient sense, when it is opposed in Disputation. Did. 4 statuimus.
gloss.
Nor dare we obtrude a contrary exposition, as you do, when you make Pope
Telesphorus instituting the Quinquag^sima for the Clergy, by his word
Statuimus, to mean Abrogamus; Did. 12. quis nesciat glos.
Or when Pope Innocent writes to Decentius a Bishop, that it is not read, that
in all Italy, France, Spain, Affrique, and the Islands, there was Alius
Apostolus prae^er Petrum, to make him mean by Alius Contrarius; which the
gloss upon the gloss in the Margin mis-likes, because no Apostle was
contrary to Peter, and therefore makes the Pope to mean; that there was no
other Apostle in those places, then Peter, or such as he sent. Ind. expur.
belg. fo. 18.
We dare not correct so boldly as to make Bertram, who for 800. years together
had said Visibiliter, now to say Inuisibiliter. We dare not hope to escape with
such a small insertion, Index. Hisp. ^o.. 66.
as Non, which you have intruded to the destruction of Didacus Stellaes sense,
in his Commentary upon Saint Luke, and in Eucherius his Commentary upon
Genesis. Idem. fo. 92.


We dare not steal out that little particle, to alter the whole intention of
him that has it; as Bellarmine has done, De Matrimo. l. 1. C. 5.. vbi tamen.

27. q. 2. Cum societas.


out of a sentence cited by Gratian, out of Leo, by which Marriage is no
Sacrament, if, Non, be admitted. We will not be so unnatural to the Fathers,
as Bellarmine makes the Pope to be, De pont. l. 2. c. 27.. ^espond^o i^^as.
when being pressed by Nilus, to follow in the question of the Primacie, the
opinion of the Fathers, says, that the Pope has no Fathers in the Church, but
that they are all his Sons. Nor can we exceed Bellarmine in dis-esteeming
the Fathers, who has called in question some books of almost every one of
them, as Clement, Anicetus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome,
Damasus, Damascen, Basil, Iustine, Nyssene, Honorius, Eusebius, Chrysostom and
others.

And when Damascene cites out of Palladius, That a dead scull being asked,
whether our Prayers did them any good in hell, answered, that it brought them
some ease and relaxation, Bellarmine says, This is false, and Apocryphal, and
that there is no such thing in Paladius: De Purgat. l. 2. C. 18. preterea. and.
Ad quartum.

De verbo Dei. l. 3. C. 10.. dic^ns.


So ill a Patron is he, of Damascenes credit herein. Nor does he only
indefinitely say of the Fathers, That it is evident that some of the chiefest
of them have grievously erred, but as of Tertullian, who imputes Montanisme to
Pope Zephirine, he says, De Pont. l. 4. c. 8.. respondeo.

De penitent. l. 1. c. 1.. igitur.


There is no faith at all to be given to him, And in another place somewhat
more sharply; We do not reckon Tertullian amongst the Catholics, So does he
to very many of the other Fathers, boldly impute such errors, as would vitiate
any Author not to have but observed them, and for touching whereof the
Centuriators are by him accounted profane and blasphemous. So also does Medina
say, De Sacro. homin. Orig. and contin. l. 1. ^a. 5.
That Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Theophilact, and others, were of the same opinion as Aerius was,
and the Waldenses, and Wickliffe.

36. q. 2. placuit.
10 But as Gratian preferred Hierome before a Council, because he had
Scripture on his side, And as your Expurgatorie Index (which I cite so often,
Ind. Hispa fo. 146.
because no book of equal authority, does show so well your corrupt
doctrine, that is, what you cannot endure to hear, and your indirect practice,
to make Authors speak your words) adds to one Author in the Margin, We must
give no credit to these words of Eusebius, Fo. 147.
and after; This opinion of Justin, and of Epiphanius, is not true: So, if for
the defense of Purgatory, in the full sense of the Trent Council, you obtrude
any Father (which yet I profess that I have never seen) if that Father be
destitute of the support of Scripture, you must allow us, some of that liberty
which you take, since we are more modest in the use thereof then you are.

11 For we need not (even by your frequent examples,) bind our selves to that
seruility, which your Azorius subjects himself unto: Moral. In^tit. Par. 1. l.
11. C. 14.. Secundo quaeritur.
who disputing of the immolation of Iepthes daughter, confessing, That it is
not evident, that she was killed, nor likely; nor that she could be
comprehended in that vow, any more then any unclean thing which might have met
him, and That the contrary is more Analogall to the other places of Scripture,
and that the Rabbines, Lyra, and some other Catholics, deny her death, yet,
says he, because we are bound (that is, by the oath of the Trent Council) to
expound Scriptures according to the sense of the Fathers, I think we ought to
adhere to the opinion that she was slain. But if the sense of the Fathers did
not stand in my way, to confess the truth, I should approve the other opinion,
because that delivers so great a person as Iephthe was, both from rashness and
foolishness in making the vow, and from impiety and cruelty in keeping it.

12 This bondage and yoke we need not cast upon our selves, but may lawfully
take Chrisostomes liberty, D^ militia spirituali Ho. 4. To. 5. fo. 209.
(since our cause is better then his, for he dis-approued all Oaths) Never
produce to me, says that Father, this Saint or this chaste man, or this mild
man, or this Priest; for if you tell me of Peter, and Paul, or of an Angel
from Heaven, you shall not thereby terrify me with the dignity of the persons.

13 The Fathers which must govern in these points, must not be the Fathers of
the Society; but they must be Patres Patrati; Fathers which have Fathers; that
is, whose words are propagated from the Apostles. Of which sort of Fathers, in
my poor reading, I never found any that consented with the Doctrine of
Purgatory now established.

14 In which, that which we principally complain of at this time, is, that it
incites to this false martyrdom. Not but that they confess, that there are
also some other ways besides martyrdom to escape Purgatory; else how got
Lypsius so soon to heaven? Pa^^^tri^a Hono^is fo. 1.
for as soon as his Champian Cochelet calls him, Lypsius aunswers, We that
are received into heaven, do not despise our fellows: And that powerful
Indulgence (which, though Saint Francis obtained immediately from Christ,
Sedulius Apolo. contr. Alcura. l. 1. C. 16. N. 4. and 6.
yet Christ sent him to ask it again, at the Popes hands, because, says
Sedulius, he would not derogate from the power, which he had delivered to his
Vicar) delivers as many as do but come to a certain place, from all sin,
and danger of Purgatory. All which die in that Order, l. 2. c. 9. N. 1.
are saved; l. 2. C. 11. N. 4.
yea, All which love that Order heartily, how great a sinner soever he be, shall
have mercy. l. 1. C. 19. N. 3.
And yearly on his birthday, all which are in purgatory, especially of his
Order, fly up to heaven. And he himself carried above 1000. away with him
from thence, Ibidem.
when he went. At one Mass, at the Commemoration of the Dead, a Friar saw
souls fly from Purgatory as thick as sparks from a furnace. l. 3. C. 21. N.
4.
and this Mass he celebrated every day, and so did infinite others. Ibid. N. 7.
If then that Friar made a true relation of the state of Purgatory in his
time, That of 5000 which died in the world since his coming thither, there
came but three to that place, there is no great use of heaping so much
treasure, for that employment, since by these computations, neither the Number
can be great, nor the st^y long.

15 And if the authority of this Sedulius seem light, In fi^e libri.
yet his book is dignified with this Approbation, That the impudency of
Heretics, may be beat back, with most firm arguments, and with most clear
reasons) Soto might weigh more; 4. Sent. did. 19. q. 3. ar. 2.
who considering the intensnes of the fire of Purgatory, thinks none shall
remain there above ten years. But for all this Bellarmine says, That by
most certain apparitions it is evident, De purgat. l 2. c. 9.. Preter^a.
that some souls already there, De Indulg. l. 2. c. 2.. Sed primu^
shall remain there till the day of judgment: And though he make an
impertinent doubt, De Indulg. l. 1. c. 9.. Respontio.
Whether ever any Popes have granted Indulgences for many thousand years, yet
in another place he assigns certain reasons, why conveniently the Popes may do
so; because the penitential Canons inflict many years punishment, for diverse
sins which many men commit often every day. But of this the Popes are so
lib^ral (though it is impossible they should keep any just Audit, or account
since they neither know what they receive, nor what they lay out) that they
will put in 1000. years more rather the^ remit that six pence, which you must
pay, not for the pardon, but for the paper. Turselinus Jesuit Histor. laurel.
l 1. C^. 22.
And therefore Martin 5. had a just and proportional respect to the nature of
this ware, when he appointed a yearly Fair, and yearly Indulgence, both of
three months continuance, to be kept together at Loretta; and that the Priests
and Merchants should open and shut up shoppes together.

17 But Martyrdom is of much more value, then these Indulgences, because it is
infallible for, some incapacity, and indisposition in the party, may hinder
the working of an Indulgence, but Martyredome cannot fail of the effect, to
work our deliverance, as appeared by that which we cyted out of Bellarmine in
the end of the last part of Merit. And therefore that doctrine, which teaches
such a Purgatory as you speak of, incytes to such a Martyrdom, as we speak
of, and disapproue.

18 Having therefore proceeded thus far, That the purest and acceptablest
Sacrifice which we can offer to God, which is our lives, may be corrupted and
enuenomed with di^tastefull mixtures, and that even in the deuotedst and safest
times, it fell out, not seldom to be so; And that our corruption now is more
obnoxious and apter to admit and inuit such poys^nous ingredients, and
temporal respects, then in those purer times, especially in the Roman Church,
which misinflames the mind to false Martyredome, both by depressing and
trampling upon the dignity of Princes, and maintayning every litigious clause
of Ecclesiastique immunity with our blood; And also by extolling our own
Merits, and encouraging us thereby, to trafique, though with loss of our
life, for the benefit and advancement of the treasury of that Church; And
lastly by the certaine^y, seuerenesse, and length of Purgatory, which are
infallibly hereby avoided: the next thing which I present to your discourse,
and consideration, is, That the Jesuits more then any other Order, claim to
themselves a greater forwardness, and alacrity to this, and are therefore
busier and apter to provoke severe laws, against themselves, and to incur
the dangers thereof.

CHAP. IIII. That in the Roman Church the Jesuits exceed all others, in their
Constitutions and practice, in all those points, which beget or cherish this
corrupt desire of false-Martyrdome.
TIll the Jesuits have a Pope of their own, it will be (I hope) no Heresy,
to doubt, or call in question their sanctity: they may be content yet to
afford us (since our cause is safer) the same excuse which is allowed for
Origin, Obseruationes in Cassian^m. ^o. 739. Ex Collat. 19.
Chrysostom, Hierome, and Cassianus, even for maintaining a lawfulness in
lying, That the Church had not then determined the contrary. They may favor
our weakness with the same help, which they apply to a Pope himself, Bell.
de pont. l. 4. C. 14.. Respo^deo. De Joan. 22.
That it was then lawful, without danger of Heresy, for him to believe in
earnest, that our souls should not see God, till the resurrection, because
there was no Definition o^ the Church in that point.

Their Charity may relieve us with the same Indulgence, which they afford to
Senensis, who reiects some part of the Canonical Scripture, after the
determination of the Trent Council, Because he did not reach and attain to the
force of that Canon, says Gretzer, Gretzer def^n^ Bellar. To. 1. ^o. 362..
Namquod
who allows him all these escapes, That he did it either by negligence,
inconsideration, a fore conceived persuasion, or some other cause, which is
large enough.

2 But if ever a Jesuit come to be the Church, that is, the Pope, we shall
soo^e be precluded by the Churches Definitions. And as now to doubt whether the
Pope without a Council, Bell. de Po^t. l. 1. c. 2. Ex h^s.
may teach an Heresy, is Haeresi proximum, and so is Semi-haereticum, when a
Jesuit is Pope, it will be Hyper-haereticum, and Sesqui-haereticum: for we
have been already taught, that something may be more thenheresie, when by a
new Decretall of Paul the fourth, they say, In septimo. l. 5. tit 3. c. 9.
That any great person falling into Heresy or Schism, shall for the first
offense be esteemed relapsed, and be in the same desperate state, as if he had
formerly iuridically abiurd the same heresy. At least, when a Jesuit comes to
that Throne, as in this last volume of the Canon law, In septimo tit. 4.
we have a new title presented, De Cardinalibus, which was in none of the rest,
where they are called, Ibid. ca 3.
The principal members of the Church, constituted by the holy Ghost, And the
most noble part of the Popes body, And the clearest lights, and most special
children of the Church; Ibid. c. 2.
where, to take any thing from them is called Sacrilege, and to favor any
which has dis-fauoured them, Ibid. c. 3.
or hurt them, is made Trea^on, so without doubt the Jesuits will be as
indulgent to their own Order, and we shall have at the next croppe, when there
is a new Harvest of ripe Decretals, a title, De patribus Societatis Jesus.

3 As at their first institution they were thus near the Papacy, Histor. Ordi.
Jesuit resut. a Gr^tz^ro. ^o. 45.
that the Order of the Theatines, of which Paulus fourth (who was at that time
Pope) was either the author, or a principal man, desired to be united to
them, by which means they might have compassed the Papacy in their Cradle, so
have they of late made suspicious approaches thereunto, by admitting Cardinal
ships, and other Dignities.

4 Those of their Order, who heretofore refused offers of that Dignity (as you
say Laynez did from Paulus the fourth, R^badencyra de Scrip^^. Jesuit. fo. 100.
and fo. 60.
and Borgia from Julius the third) did it Constantissime: and, I beleeeue with
such constancy in resistance, Tolet and Bellarmine might have prevailed. He
which gives rules for the institution of Monks, forbiddes not only
Bishopp^ickes, but all acquaintance with Bishops: By all means (says he)
let a Monk avoid women and Bishops, Cassia^us l. 11. c. 17.
because both hinder Divine Contemplation; which Rule when Iesui^es broke, and
came to live in secular and Ecclesiastical Courts, they showed that they were
not stubborn and inexorable against these preferments.

5 And if ever they attain the Papacy, they have already laid good
foundations for the entailing thereof upon their own Family, Instit. Moral.
to. 2. l. 4. C. 5. S^cundo.
by Azorius his disputation, what the authority of the Pope is in designing a
Successor: for he delivers it, as the common opinion, that the form of
electing the Pope being founded upon the Canons, it may at his pleasure be
changed. So that the Pope may establish the Prouincials of the Jesuits to be
the Electors.

And then descending to another question, whether the Pope himself may design
his Successor, Ibid.. Tertio.
he says, that the Canons against it cannot prejudice him, because he is
above them, and that it is not forbid Iure Diuino; and that for matter of fact,
he believes S. Peter did choose Clement: but least the Popes should have nothing
to auert them from this course, before any Jesuit were Pope, and so work an
exclusion, he says, It is not lawf^ll, Iure Naturae: that is, says he,
because natural reason informs, Ibid.. Ex ploratum.
that it were inconvenient for the Church: And, but for that inconvenience, he
says, they might cast lots for the papacy: But this inconvenience depends upon
such reasons, and circumstances, as are alterable, and when they cease, this
law of nature ceases too.

Ribadeney. vbi supra.
6 And though Laynez in the vacancy after Paulus the fourth, is said by you to
have had twelve of the best voices for the Papacy, though he were out of the
College of Cardinals; And in one Conclaue, Bellarmine also is said, to have
had some, yet if any Jesuit had voices enough, would his Supe^iour allow him the
Religion of his vow, by which he ought to refuse it, Cerem: Sacr. Cap. De elect
pont.
or his natural liberty, by which, any man that is chosen Pope, may, if he
will refuse it?

7 If it were once come to that, as you are content yet, ^o seem as modest as
the Carthusian, who says, Petr^i Biolioth. Carthusia. ^o 304
that he believes it to be a singular blessing of God, that no Carthusian has
been Pope: you would make good have, to reckon with the forwardest Orders, how
many Popes you had had: And quickly in these accounts ouergoe the Franciscans
themselves, Sedulius Apolog cont. Al^ora. l. 2 c. 11. Innocentius.
who reckon of their Order, not only Popes and Martyrs, and such po^sible
things, but are so precipitate and transported with this fury, that they
reckon, how many of the Apostles, Prophets, and Patriarchs they have had of
their Order; So, as I thought, whilst I read it, they would never have
stopped, till they had told us, how many Adams and Eues had been of their
Order, and how many Jesus Christ's besides S. Francis: For I understand not by
what other figure they use this anticipation, and call these ancients
Franciscans then that by which Serarius the Jesuit says Herod was a great
Machiauellian: Serarius. Tri^aeres. l. 2. Cap. 24 Grego. de Valent. De purgat.
C. 8.
and Gregory de Valentia, that Plato might learn the doctrine of Purgatory
out of the book of the Machabees, which was written after his death.

8 But besides that the Jesuits decay in the hearts of Princes (which Philip
the second of Spain testified well, P^erre Mathieu His^^ire de France. l 2.
Nirrat. 4.
because though he had great use of their service, he never did any thing for
them) this also makes me doubt that they will never have Pope, because it is
already reueil'd by Christ to S. Francis: S^du^ius. Apol. l. 2. c. ^2. a. 8.
that Antichrist shall come out of the family of the Franciscans.

9 This also increases my suspicion, that they could never compass, that which
is much less then a Pope, Catalog Glor. Par. 4. Consid. 7.
which is a Saint, in their family. For the Authority of the Pope is greater,
then of a Saint, says Cassanaeus: And in his Indulgences he does as familiarly
command Angels, as the younger Prentizes, the Exorcists, do devils: To whom they
use this language, when any spirit possesses a body, I command Lucifer, Menghi.
Flagell. Demon. fo. 9.
and all the Furies in hell, to precipitate you into hell fire presently,
indispensably and ^ternally, till the day of judgment: I Would. fol. 105.
And I forbid the Air to have any power to receive you.

Mat. Tortus supra la I ettera di Palmieri Romito. Raccolta. fol. 126.
10 And though Tortus say, That the time of the Canonizing of the founder of
that Order is not yet passed, and therefore he may be Canonized in good time
(which is a poor comfort, since I never found any such limitation, nor that a
Saint apparent, as Ignatius is, may be superannated, and grow too old to be
Canonized) yet since those two great Princes, Philip the second of Spain, and
Henry the fourth of France, either out of devotion to the Order, or for their
own ends, have both pretended the solicitation of Ignatius his canonizing to
belong to them, and both affected the honor of procuring it, the pursuit and
effecting thereof has been intermitted and retarded. And howsoever for
Ignatius and for Xauerius, who was also a Nauarrois as well as Ignatius, it
might please those Princes, for respect to one another to forbear any
solicitation in their behalfes, yet the King of Spain had very many subjects
in that Order, to whom no other Prince pretended any such precontract or
interest: and yet he procured the canonization of D'Alcala a Franciscane,
Pierre Mathieu. Histoire de fran. l. 1. Nar. 4.
and Pennafort a Iacobin, and neglected the Jesuits. And though the present
Pope Paulus the fifth, have been much solicited for the Canonizing of Gonzaga
the Jesuit by the Princes of that Family (the memory of his exempler life
being yet fresh, Ceparius de vita Gonzag. Epist. Dedic.
and his worthiness certified (as the custom is in preparing Canonization) by
Cardinals which had commission to search therinto) yet he has allowed him no
other title then Beatus: which might have been given him without that Rescript
of the Pope, as Ignatius and many other have it: since, as Serarius says,
Litan eut. l. 2. q. 7
Custom gives that Title to those, of whose salvation there is a strong
opinion, and yet are not adorned with the public testimony of the Church.

11 Nor do I perceive that they are in any great forwardness, to get a Saint,
since in canonizings after the consideration of the truth of the miracles, they
fall in the Consistory to another consideration, of the sufficiency of them.
And besides that, De procurand. Indo. Salut. l. 2. c. 9.
your own Acosta makes us doubt of the truth of those miracles, which are
related, because he spends a Chapter in giving reasons, why in our age, in
preaching the Gospel in the Indies, there is not that strength of miracles,
which was in the primitive Church, since, as he says there, It would prevail
very much, if it might be, those which are said to be done by you, are for the
most part so poor and beggarly, and silly things in respect of the
Franciscans, as between yours and theirs there is as much difference, as
between Iugling and Coniuring.

12 Me thinks you should offer no more to play at that game, after you have
believed (as I hope you do, since so fresh, and so well approved an author as
Sedulius gives new life to these miracles) That S Anthony when the heretics
refused to hear him preach, Sedul. Apol. l. 3. c. 13. Nu. 8.
went to the Sea side, called the fish, which came of all sorts, staide in
peace, put their heads above water to hearken, and at the end of the Sermon,
some spoke, Idem. l. 3. C. 28. N^. 30.
and some did but bow their heads, and so the Heretics were converted: or
that Friar Andrew to correct his appetite of eating birds, at the Table, by the
sign of the Cross, commanded them to fly away, though they were roasted.

13 And how much more luxuriant of Miracles would their History be, Id. l. 3
c. 24 n. 25 26.27.
if they had not commanded Friar Conrade to do no more Miracles after his
death, because he was buried out of their College: And if Saint Francis had
not enioyn'd Friar Peter, upon his Grave, Per sanctam obedientiam, that he
should do no more Miracles, because they were thereby disquieted with concurse
of people. Of which kinds there are many Commandments, which lessons their
number of Miracles.

14 And this Philip Nerius, founder of the last Order, Vita. Nerij. fol. 488.
feared in himself, and therefore he told Baronius, that he had entreated God
that he might do no Miracles.

15 You can therefore in nothing equal that order of Franciscanes; for if you
think to overtake them in number, you will be far short. Saint Francis saw
at the first Chapter or meeting, Sedul. Apol. l. 2. c. 2. n. 3.
six thousand Friars, and eighteen thousand Devils, which Ignatius could
never get near, An. 1608. they were 10581. Ribad. scrip. Jesuit. in fin.
except he made it out in Devils. For the whole number of his society, does
not much exceed ten thousand yet.

16 But that which is truly proper and peculiar to you, you do earnestly and
intensly, and you excel in it; which is, in kindling and blowing, begetting
and nourishing ielowsies in Princes, and contempt in Subjects, dissension in
families, wrangling in Schools, and mutinies in Armies; ruins of Noble
houses, corruption of blood, confiscation of States, torturing of bodies, and
anxious entangling and perplexing of consciences. And to facilitate your way to
these effects, you are in your institution mixed and complexioned of all
Elements, and you hang between Heaven and Earth, like Meteors of an ominous
and incendiarie presaging. You pretend to forsake the world, and to look all
upward; But, says Cassianus, Such renunciation is threefold; Of all temporal
fortunes, and of our manners and conditions, and of our minds from all present
things. But all your labor is to understand the present state of Kingdoms,
and where any ouerture is given for the Popes advantage, and where any
interposition or hinderance is interiected against his purposes. And therefore
that saying of Saint Basil to a Senator, Cassian. l. 7. c. 19.
that seemed to renounce the world, and yet retained part of his state, Thou
have spoiled a Senator, and have not made a Monk, belongs almost to all of
this Order. For you are but as Eunuchs; you have lost your apprehension and
capacity of worldly Estates, yet the lust, and itche, and concupiscence, to be
conversant therein, remains with you still.

Iesuitar. regula Commu. Cap. Examinator.
17 For this purpose you have care in admissions, That none be received whose
Parents be poor, (which your Examiner has in charge) least that should
divert them from the integrity of this service. For this purpose it is, That
the Superior himself cannot dispense to admit any deformed person, Regulae
P^ouincial. 56.
because you will have men sociable, acceptable, and agreeable to company. For
this purpose your Superiors and Rectors must write every week to the
Provincial, Cap. de formula scribendi.
not only of their own state, but of all things done amongst strangers, by
the service of this society. For this purpose you must have a Proctor general
at Rome, Cap. pro curator Gener.
who must buy and study all the Rules of that Chancerie, and all the Breues,
and Bulls, which the Popes send forth. Pier. Mathieus. histoire de Fran. To. 2.
l. 7. Nar. 4.
And to this purpose was that attempt of the Jesuit, who (if a Catholic
Historiographer relate truly) published at Rome, That Confession by letters
was Sacramental and effectual. Into which opinion though Vide Soto de teg.
Secr^t. memb. 3. q. 4. Dub. 4. and Zambran. Cas. Cons^i. cap. 4. de poenit.
Dub. 2. Sect. 5. vbi etiam est hoc Decretum ^lem. 8. Nu. 31.
some before had straied, yet it had received no such strength and authority as
at that time, when it was so hotly pursued, that Clement 8. was forced to
oppose a direct Decree against it, and to condemn it as false, rash, and
scandalous at least. For if this opinion had been believed and authorized, the
secrets of all states, and passages of all Courts, had had no other Register
then the breasts of Jesuits; who are so wise Apothecaries of penances, and
have so plentiful shops of those druggs of Indulgencies, that all those
Princes, to whom any of them had been Confessor, would neither open their
disease, nor seek their physic at any other place: when they might be
delivered of the painefullest part of Confession, which is the personal shame
of accusing ones self.

18 And that they may attend this service of Intelligencers: First, they have
one Rule of State, which is, Reg. Commu. 38.
That they let no stranger understand their Rules and Privileges, And their
Superiors have the prerogative to interpret and extend, and limit the
constitutions; Sedul. Apolo. l. 2. C. 3. N. 2.
whereas, for the Rule of the Franciscans, Christ himself was heard in the
air, saying to S. Francis, This Rule is mine, not thine, and I will have it
observed, Ad literam, ad literam, sine glossa, sine glossa.

Bulla tertia Gretzer in Hateum. fo. 168.
19 And then by one Bull they are enabled (for at their first institution they
were not so) to hear Confessions, and to change vows; And by another Bull,
D'Auila de Censur. par. 2. Ca. 7. Disp 3. Dub. 8.
they have privilege to absolve from all censures, except those of Bulla
Caenae. And by Bulla 18. Gretzer in Hatteum. l. fo. 211.
another, they are licenced to practice Physique, which does not only give
them access to Deathbeds, which is one of their chiefest Scenes, but excludes
all others, because they are competent for all offices. And I wonder that they
have not procured a Bull, that they might be Midwifes.

20 To this purpose also of spying, Jesuit Constitut spirit. 4.
their constitu^ion binds them to no ordinary penances, nor disciplinary
m^cera^ions of the body: yea, that which they are content to call Indiscretam
castigationem^ which others magnify so much, is so much forbid amongst them,
Reg. 48.
that they are bound to deliver it in confession, if ever they transgress into
it. And the Rector is to provide, not only against these Mortifications, but
Reg. Com. ca. Rector reg. 8.
against too much Devotion, as Impedimen^s which call them from their studies
And the charge which is given to him who is president over their spiritual
matters, is to see, Cap prefect. Rer. spirit.
That whilst they have too much desire of Devotion, they do not impair their
strength: and therefore that Gonzaga of whom it is often C^parius Jesuit. de
vita Gonz^g. fo. 58. and saepe.
said in his life, that he shortened his life with such discipline, Fo. 84.
laying sharp chips between his sheets, Fo. 83.
whipping himself with Iron chains, and Fo. 84.
putting spurs between his Dublet and his flesh, before he came into the
Rules of the Jesuits; won, and overcame his Father and Mother, to incline to
his purpose of entering this Order, because they saw, Fo. 154.
That this Order would be wholesome for his body, and not allow him such
severity.

21 For privileges of Addition, they have by Bulla. 13. Gretz fo. 195.
one Bull all the immunities of the Mendicants, which are very many and
aduantageous, because thereby they must be received, as they travel into any
religious house: And by Bull. 17. Gretz fo. 207.
another Bull, at one liberality, the privileges of all Orders, are extended
to them.

22 And for Exemptions, they are delivered by Bull. 15. fo. 197.
one Bull from keeping their hours in the Chapel; and by Bull. 19 f. 217.
another from attending at Procession: and by Bull. 7. fo. 186.
another dispensed from fastes, and forbidden meats: and by their Re^u^^ ^
^^ouincial. 84.
Rule bound to no habite^ and by Bull. 16. fo. 198
another Bull, licensed to read all books; which is so great a liberty in
that Church, that in the Septims, there is In s^ptimo. l. 5. Tit. 4. c. 6.
a Decree of Gregory the thirteenth forbidding even Archbishops, and Kings,
and all persons, but the Inquisitors, to read Heretical books, upon pain of
Heresy.

23 If therefore, as in their Constitut. spirit. 36.
Constitutions they call themselves, they be but Cadauera, they are either such
corrupt and putrified carcasses^ as in^ect and enuenome all places where they
reside, or such Carcasses, as evil spirits have assumed to walk about in: and
if they be (as they say there) but Bacula senis, This old man is the pope, whon
they cannot put off, and they are such staves, as have swords sheathed in them,
and such as wound and bruise, even the inwardest marow of Kingdoms.

24 For this purpose is that obedience to their Superiors, wherein Ignatius
wills his Disciples to exceed ( Let Epist. Ignatij ad fratr in Lusita.
us, says he, suffer our selves to be exceeded by others, in fastings, and in
watchings, and such; but let our mark be, an abdication of the will, and
judgment.) And so he gives them good blind Counsel, for their belief, and
for their actions: As to believe what the Catholic faith teaches, so be you
carried with a blind violence of obeying, whatsoever your Superior commands.
And though their Superior command nothing expressly, yet they are bound once in
a week, to say one Mass, to the Intention of the General, Reg. Commu. ca.
Missa.
though they know not what it is. And of this general intention the Center,
and Basis is, the advancement of that Sea, about which these plane^a^y Mon^es,
have their course and reuolutions.

25 Old Monks were used heretofore to be but Coasters, houering about their
own Cloister; fur^h^r then the Contemplation of Heaven, which was the Bible,
and of the stars, which were the devout interpreters thereof, guided them,
they did not easily venture: except some storm of dispu^ation or passion
transported them: But the Jesuits in this laterage have found the use of the
Compass; which is the Popes will, and ^ow they have not the patience to be
Fishers of men^ but they are Merchants of Kingdoms, and Pirates both of
spiritual and temporal tre^sure. But the eyes of a fool, Pro. 17.24.
are in the corners of the world, says Solomon. And even the desire of going
^o the Indies (which is their best pretense) if we believe the life of Nerius,
was corrected in him, Vita Phil. Nerij fo 110.
by an apparition of S. John the Euang. who told him, Rog^la B^nedict. c. 1.
That Rome was his Indies, for there was matter enough for his instruction, and
his example to work upon.

26 And of four sorts into which they use to divide Monks, which are
Caenobites, who keep their Cloister, Eremites who adventure into a Solitude,
Sarabaits, who by their works keepi^g still their contract with the world,
have dissembled with God, per tonsuram, and lastly, Gyrouagi, who all their
lives wander through diverse Provinces, the Jesuits seem guilty of
transg^essing in both the last ways. For, besides the Palaces, and abundant
possessions, which they have as they are Corporations, Only they of all sorts,
are not in their particular incapable of inheritances which deuolue upon them,
by their triple vow made before the Governor of that Convent, till they
confirm it again in a general Chapter. Ren. Choppinus de iu^e Coe^obi..2.
tit. 3. n. 9.
Quod ita iudicatum, (says a French Lawyer) Mirabundus accepi.

27 The Franciscane Friar Giles, did so much abhor all temporal provisions,
Seduli. Apolo. l. 2. c. 6. n. 7.
that he told Saint Francis, he did not like the Antes, because they took
such pains to provide victuals for Winter. And when a Friar told Saint
Francis, Ibid. n. 14.
that he came, A Cella Tua, when he heard the word Tu^, he would lie no more
there. But the Jesuits have not so much deuested themselves of Propriety, but
that they may have propriety in tempor^ll possession: Yea, they will have
Propriety in Treas^n; and will have proper and singular Plots of their own,
and not join with your Priests, Watson and Clarke, in their Plot, nor be
Traitors in common with them.

28 This is their arrand; and for this, like him, who imployes them, Job 2.2.
They compass the Earth, too and fro. Nor are they more like the Circulatores,
and Circumcelliones, Danaeus in Aug. de Haeresib. c. 69 Prateolus verbo
Circu^tares Alf. Castro. verbo Ecclesia, and Martyrium.
a limme of the Donatists, in this their uncertain running about, then in that
other quality of theirs, to urge and importune, and force men to kill them,
and if they could not extort this from others, then to kill themselves, and
call all this Martyrdom. For only of this vicious inclination of Jesuits to
an imaginary Martyrdom, I purposed to speak in this Chapter; but that being
occasioned by the way, to deal with men of a various uncertain Constitution
and Nature, I have taken part of their fault, and as a Physician coming to
cure, sometimes receives some of the Patients infection, so spe^king of their
running and wandering, I have strayed somewhat from the directnesse, and
strictness of my purpose.

29 Therefore to pursue it now, they are so much more intemperate and
importunate upon this Pseudo-Martyrdome, then any others; by how much they are
more severe maintainers and encreasers of those Doctrins of the Roman Church,
which we noted to beget this inclination. For when the spirit of God awaked
certain Reformers of his Catholic Church, of which the Roman Church had
long time been the head, that is, the Principal and most eminent, and
exemplar member (for I am ever loath, to seem to abhor, or abstain from
giving to that Church, any such St^les and Titles, as she is pleased and
delighted in, as long as by a pious interpretation thereof, her desire may
thereby be satisfied in some measure, our Churches not injured nor prejudiced,
and the free spirit of God, which blows where it pleases, not tied nor
imprisoned to any place, or person) at that time, I say, these servants of God,
and of his Church, had no pu^pose ^o run away from her, and leave her
di^eases to putrify and ^ester within her bowels. Nor did they uncover her
nakednesse^ out of any petulancy of the^r own, nor proclaim her filthiness
to defame or diminish her dignity. But with the li^ertie of a Midwife, or
Phisician, or Confessor, they suruey'd her secre^est infirmities, they drew to
the outward and visible parts, that is into consideration, her inwardest
corruptions, and so out of that duty, were enfo^ced to look into and be
conversant about her Ordures, and other foulenesses, and could not dissemble
nor forbear, earnest, and bitter informing her of her own distemper and
danger, which was a work of more zeal and humility, then those childish
obediences, which you so much extol in your Disciples, of sweeping Cobwebs and
washing dishes.

30 And they proceeded so wis^ly, and temperately, and blessedly herein, that
in a short time many of her swellings were allayed, and her indurations
somewhat mollified, as appears by the Colloquies, and consultations in many
places, ^or a moderate and manerly way of purging her corruptions. For
certainly her diseases were not then so much in question or doubt, as whether
it were for her honor, to be beholden to so mean Persons for health, as these
beginners were: Or for her ^afetie to trust her self in such Phisicians hands;
for now diverse secular ^r^nces were come to give their ass^stance. And as some
diseases produce so violent and desperate Symptoms, as the Physician must
sometime neglect the maine original Dise^se, and attend only to cure the
Accidents: So, though the Doctrine of Purgatory, were at that time no member
of the body: That is, no part of the Catholic faith^ but served that body
only for Nails to scrape and scratche together, Those spiritual Physicians
busied themsel^es much, to pair those Nails which defaced the beauty and
integrity of the whole body, and so to slacken that griping hold, which they
had taken upon men's estates and Consciences, by ^he terror of Purgatory, and
ver^ue of their indulgences.

31 And as to both sides, there appeared evidently in the Doctrine of Merits,
as the Schoolmen (which then Governed ^n the Church, by reason of the
discontinuance of Councels) had sawced and di^guis'd it, many abominations,
derogatorie to the Passion of our Blessed Savior: So did they all confess, in
^he Doctrine of Purgatory so many mixtures of coniecturall, incredible,
impossible fables, as might have scandalized and discredited any certain
truth by their Addition. But when on the one side, the Reformers encouraged by
this entrance, thought they might proceed fu^ther, and so offered to dissect
and anatomize the whole Church, and thought to fill every vein, and restore
and rectify every Sprane and dislocation, and to take off every Mole, and
pair away every Wemme, and to alter even the fashion of her clothes, so that
all, both substance and ceremony came in question: And the Roman Church on the
other side, foresaw her precipitation, that if they stopped not at the top,
they could not at the middle of the hill, thought it better not to begin,
then not to know where to end, and so mistaking the medicine to be worse then
the disease, departed from further consultation, justified their corruptions,
and by excommunications put away those servants, which had done them these
offices, and whom now they call Schismatiques and Heretics, for departing
from that Church, which would afford them, not only no wages, but no other
room, then a fire.

32 And then, as all recidiuations and relapses, are worse then the disease,
upon this relapse, came the Council of Trent, which did cover and palliate
some of these ulcers, and promised the cure of the rest, though they never went
about it yet; And then the Jesuits, who cry that all there is health and
soundness, and that there is none any where else yea that the Church was borne
thus, and that she is as well, as she was in her Cradle, and that whatsoever
she thinks, or says, or does is by a divine power, inherent in her; as though
there had been sowed in her at first certain seeds of Iure Diuino, which now
in our age, by the cultiuating, and watering, and industry of the Jesuits must
fructify and produce in her, all these effects. For they will abate nothing;
their consciences are as tender and delicate, Baron. Martyrolo. 21 Oct. ex
Lind^no.
as the ground at Coleyne, where some of S. Vrsulaes eleven thousand Virgins
are buried, which will cast up again in the night, any that is enterred there,
except she were of that company, though it be a child newly baptized: So the
Jesuits stomaches cannot endure this, that the Popes should be great by
Privileges of Princes, or Canons of Councels: but all must be Iure Diuino. So
that that note, which the law casts upon some Advocates, will lie heavy upon
the Jesuits, Par. de puteo. De Syndic. c. de excess. Aduocator nu. 15.
They are too careful of their cause, and therefore they are presumed to invent
falsehood.

33 For though it be hard for any man to go further on the left hand, then the
Council of Trent has done, in these two doctrines of Merit and Purgatrry,
and every Catholic be bound to that Council, yet as in most other Doctrines,
so in these also, Pelargus has noted the Jesuits to have gone beyond others,
Pelargus de Nouo Iesu^tismo
and therefore more then others, they incite, in these points, to a false
Martyrdom.

34 But as the late invention of Artillery and Gunpowder, though it have much
horror and aff^ightment in it, yet ha^h not done so much harm, as it
threatened, because the fury and violence thereof, has occasioned men to study
more ways of defense and auoidance, so that we see the wars devour fewer
men now, then before this invention came: so has the impetuous rage and
pertinacy of the Jesuits, in oppugning every thing which they find not to be
at Rome encouraged other Churches to oppose strong defenses against them, and
superstition swallows fewer men now, then before these new Enginers labored
to promote and advance her: And as those instruments of battery which the
ancients used in the wars, were more able to ruin and demolish, then any
which are made out of this new invention, but were left off, and dis accu^tomed
only because they were not so maniable and tractable, and apt for
transportation, as these are; So certainly the Arguments and books of the
Friars, and Schoolmen of the Roman Church, which is the Arsenall from whence
the Jesuits provide and ^urnish themselves, have as much force against the
truth, as the subtilties of the Jesuits, but that these men a^e by their Rule
and Constitutions, apter for conueyance and insinuation, then the dull
cloysterall Monks can be.

35 For there are diverse poisons which cannot work, except they be eiaculated
from the creature it self that possesses it, and that his personal and
present lively malignity concur to it, and give it vigor; for which these
vbiquitary Monks have the advantage of all others.

36 Nimietates sunt aequalitates, says Cassianus. And so, two extreamities,
have made the Schoolmen and the Jesuits equally valiant: for the Schoolmen
out of an ignorance of danger, having never come to hand-blowes, would venture
upon any piece of service, and any employment, and pierce through and spy,
even into Gods secret Cabinet of his Essence, and of his Counsails, as a fresh
Soldier will go with alacrity to any breach. And then because these sublime
and ayrie meditations must have some body to inhere in, they used to
incorporate their speculations of God, in the Pope; as it were to arrest and
conserve them the better, being else too spiritual and transitory. And so
they have so much exemplified them, one in the other, that they have made them
so like, and equal in their writings, as though they were but one.

37 And the Jesuits out of a desperate necessity must maintain their station,
because if they yield one step, they will be the less able to stand in the
next; but after they have confessed that the Church has erred in one thing,
thinking that will subject her in all, no place of Scripture is so abundantly
and evidently pregnant, no reason or consequence so directly and necessarily
deduced, and concluded, no History nor matter of fact so faithfully presented,
and so certainly and religiously testified, but they will stand stubbornly, and
desperately to oppugn and infirm it.

38 What wound so ever they receive in this battle, they disguise and hide
from their Disciples, by ^orbidding our books. And as Ribadeneyra says of
their Father Ignatius, l. 4. C. 18.
That he halted of the wound which he received at Pampelune, but so little,
that the most curious could scarce discern that he halted, So by some
euasions, or supplements, or concealings, they ever dissemble their maimes and
deformities.

39 To which purpose they have one round and dispatching way, which is, not
only to neglect, but to brag of all which we impute to them for so one of
them says, Spongia pro Iesuitis. cont. Equit. Polon. fo. 20
That it is the greatest Argument of Innocence, to be accused by us: And that
he cannot be guilty of error in Religion, whom an Heretic condemns. For, as
it was part of the Oath of the Grecians, against Xerxes, that those Temples
which the barbarous Army had demolished, Muretu^. Variar. L^ct^on. l. 3. C. 10.
they would not reedifie, that thereby there might be a continual testimony
remaining of the impiety, So I think the Jesuits flatter themselves with some
such resolution, by leaving unanswered the books and arguments of so many
reverent persons, which have spoken plentifully and prosperously, of these
points of Merit and Purgatory.

40 But of their other Doctrine, by which more then others, they provoke to
this lavish, and contemptuous expense of life, which is, The auiling of the
dignity of Princes, there can never enough be said. For all other Orders may
consist, and execute and perform all their vows, without any iniu^ie to
Princes: They may be as poor as they will, till they come to that state, if
they desire it, Vita eius. ^o. 591.
which Nerius begd of God, That he might lack a penny, and no body might give
it him, They may be as chaste, Gretz. in Hasenmill. fo. 118.
as that Jesuit which Gretzer says he knew, who being not able to escape from
a woman which tempted him, and held him, anointed his own face, retrimentis
suis, that thereby she might abhor him, They may be as obedient as Cassianus
says the Tabennentiotes we^e, De Institut. Renuntiant. l. 4. C. 10.
who durst not presume, without leave of their Superior, Naturali necessitati
satisfacere; Or as that Friar John, Idem. l. 4. c. 24.
who at his Abbats command, planted a dry withered stick, and twice a day,
for a whole year, fetched water two miles of, to water it, sparing no
festival day, nor apprehending any impossibility in it; Sedul. Apolo. l. 2. c.
5. N. 5.
Or as Saint Francis his Nouice, who at his bidding set plants, with the head
downward. These things they may do, and yet be good subjects. But the
Supernumer^ry Vow of the Jesuits, by which they do especially oblige
themselves to the Popes will, does in the nature, and Essence, and scope
thereof, make them enemies to the digni^ie of all Princes, because their
Sovereignty cannot consist, with that temporal Supremacy which the Jesuits
must maintain, by the obligation of that vow, by which they are bound, with
expense of their life's, to penetrate any Kingdom, and instill Sedition into
their Disciples, and followers.

41 How fast this infection works in them, as by many other Demonstrations, so
by this also it appears evidently, that there are extant more Authors of that
one Order, that have written of Secular businesses, and of Jurisdiction of
Princes, then of all the rest, since their beginning. For, their Casuists,
which handle Moral Divinity, and weigh and measure sin (which for all that
perplexity and entangling, we may not condemn too hastily, since in purest
Antiquity there are lively impressions of such a custom in the Church, to
examine with some curiosity the circumstances, by which sins were aggrauated
or diminished) do not only, abound in Number, especially of the Spanish
Nation, but have filled their books with such questions as these, How Princes
have their jurisdiction, How they may become Tyrants, What is lawful to a
private man in such a case, and of, like seditious nature. So that they have
abandoned the stale, and obsolete names, of positive Divinity, or Controuerted,
or School Divinity; and have reduced all to Crown Divinity.

42 And yet they account the handling of these points, to be but a dull and
obuious learning in their Colleges, as though any man were able to resolve
questions against Princes^ ^
for they have a Rule, that they which are unapt for greater studies, shall
study cases of conscience.

43 So also of the Immunitie of the Church, out of which, if it be denied to be
by the Indulgence of the Prince, issues and results presently the dimunition of
the Prince, they have written abundantly, and desperately. So have they of the
Institution of a Prince; Mariana de R^ge. l. 1. c. 7.
of which, one of them writing and presuming and taking it as vulgarly known,
that it is lawful in some cases to kill a King, is careful to provide, least
when you go about to kill him, by putting poison in his meat or drink, you
make him, though ignorantly, kill himself. So have they also of Military
institution many Authors; and of as many sciences as concur to public
affairs.

44 And with such books as these they allure and catch ambitious wits; which
having had a lower and darker breeding in schools and universities, have some
hunger of reading state learning, in any form, much more, where they shall
find it more freely debated upon, then if they had had place at twenty
Council Tables, or Conspiracies. And as Auerroes is said to have killed
Auicen, Bin^feld. de Confess S^g^^um. fo 216.
by anointing the book which he knew the other would read, with certain
poison: and as it is said, that what^oeuer flew over the Jews Targum, Pet.
Galatin. de verit. Christ. l. 1. ^. 3.
whilst the author thereof was compiling it, was scorched with the beams
thereof, so do these books of theirs enuenome and catch hold of all such, as
bring in themselves any desire to come within too near a distance of them.

45 And of all these kinds of books, without doubt we should have had many
more, but that, as the gatherer of all the writers of the Carth^sian Order, not
daring to slip and leave out the present General Bruno, Petrei Bibliothe.
Carthus fo. 35.
and finding no books of his making, says, That since he has an excellent
wit, and singular learning, ^e could write many books if he had leisure, and
in the mean time, he took care that the missall should be printed in a fair
character and delicate paper: So the Jesuits, since ^hey have a vow to bind
them to it, and a na^urall disposition to incline them, could wri^e more booke^
to this purpose, but that they are continually exercised in disposing actual
plots: And yet in the mean time they take care, that the Popes Breues be
procured, promulged, concealed interpreted, or burnt, as the cause may be most
benefited and advanced.

46 And I do not remember, that I have found in the Approbation of any Jesuits
book, this clause which is so ordinary, in most of the works of other men,
Nihil fidei contrarium, aut bonis Moribus, aut Principibus: Spongia contr.
Equit. po^on. f. 78
And yet they say, that in printing their books, there is great caution and
diligence used, and that they pass the hands of men most intelligent, and of
mature judgment: but, as it seems by this remarqueable omission, no good
subjects nor favorers of Princes.

47 If they do thus much when they are Serui papae, what will they do when
they are famuli? which diffrence I learned out of the Missal, Missal. Roma. ex
Decret. Con. Trid. restitut.
where a Bishop must pray, vnd cum me indigno Seruo tuo; but the Pope,
Famulo: For he may well be said to be in Ordinary with God, since he is one
Ordinary with him; Specul. vtriusque Dignit. c. I. n. 34 Idem. c. 18. n. 7.
for so says Aluares, God and the Pope have one Consistory: and in another
place, All cases reserved to God, are reserved to his Vicar: so that by that
Rule, what ever God can do, in disposing the matters of this world, the Pope
also can do: for there he says, out of Hostiensis, that that direction, Dic
Ecclesiae, if the Pope sin, who cannot be complained of, is meant, Dic Deo, vt
conuertateum, aut Dic Ecclesiae Triumphanti, vt oret pro eo.

48 So when Bellarmine who had done sufficiently for the Pope, whilst he was
but a Servant, that is an Ordinary Jesuit, came to his familiarity, and
household service, by being a Cardinal in the Consistory, and so grew more
sensible of the Papacy, being now himself, as they speak, Papabilis, he takes
al new occasions, to extol his Master, and his Throne and Sea: And having
many years neglected his own defense, and answered such great men as opposed
him, only with such Proctors as Gretzer, and Eudaemo-Ioannes, unprovoked he
rises up in the Venetian, and in the English cause, to establish by new books,
the new Article of Temporal authority in the Pope. And since that, Binius To.
4. fo. 512.
as Aeneas Syluius, retracted all which he had written before for the Basil
Council, when he came to be Pope: so Bellarmine when perchance he would be
Pope, has made a new ^uruay and Recognition of all his works; in which, as
though he had been too moderate before, in all those places, which concern
this question, he has expressed a supple and variable conscience, a deiect
slavery to that Sea, and a venomous malignity against Princes; of which it
seems to me expedient to present a few examples.

49 I allow not now, says Bellarmine, that which I said before, De pont. l. 4.
c. 8.. probatur.
That Infidel Princes may not be deprived by the Church, of that Jurisdiction
which they have over Christians: for though Durandus do probably teach so,
against Saint Thomas, and I then followed his opinion, yet now the authority of
S. Thomas preuailes more with me. Yet he had seen and considered both their
reasons before.

50 In another place he says, Now I allow not that which I said before, that
Paul appealed to Caesar, as to his Judge. De pont. l. 2. c. 29. secundo. De
Clericis l. 1. c. 16. postea.
And after, Whereas I said, that Popes used to be chosen by Emperors, the word
Emperor, potest and forte debet deleri: For (says he) I followed Gratians
Canons, which, as I learned since, are not approued^ And again, when I said
That the Pope was subject to the Emperor, De Council. l. 1 c. 13. Quarta.
as to his temporal Lord, I meant De facto, not De iure: and this course he
holds in that book of Recognitions.

51 And here we may conuen^ently conclud^ this Chapter, of the Jesuits
special advancing all those doctrines, which incite to this Martyrdom, after
we have produced some of their own testimonies of their inordinate hunger
thereunto, and of the causes for which they affect it.

52 One of their spiritual Constitutions is, That every one of that Order must
think that Christ spoke to him when he said, (...). 4.
he that does not hate his own life, etc. And so they make an obligatorie
precept, to bind at all times, of that which was but a direction for our
preparation and readiness to suffer for his sa^e.

53 Ribadeneyra names two Jesuits in the ^n^dies, which being sick in bed,
when they might have escaped, Catalog. Sc^^p. Ies^it. ^o 100.
came forth half naked, and voluntarily offering their throats, were slain.
And he says that Simon Acosta (one of the five brothers, who were all of this
Order) declared himself to be a Jesuit, when ^e was not known, that he
might be put to death. And so Aquauiua, being pursued, refused a horse, by
which he might have escaped, F^. 196.
and chose rather to die, then ride. And yet this was amongst Infidels, where
the Harvest was great, and the worke-men few: which kind of intemperance has
been formerly condemned out of their own authors.

54 But of this point it is enough to relate the words of him, who speaks in
the person of all the Jesuits; who calls himself Clarus Bonarscius, but is
unmasked and disanagrammatiz'd by his fellow, who calls him, Carolus
Scribanius, Ribadeneyr. Catal. Script. Jesuit
he says, That the Scaeuolaes, the Catoes, the Porciaes, and the Cleopatraes,
are nothing to the Jesuits: For they (says he) lacked courage, Amphitheatrum
Honoris l. 1. c. 4. Primo.
Ad multas mortes, And in a few years, he says, they have had three hundred
Martyrs: Therefore he says, that they of that Order do violently tear out
Martyrdom, rapiunt spontanea irruptione; Fo. 41.
and, Crederes Morbo adesos: and for what causes do they this? Least the rest
of their life should be barren of merits, and pass away empty of glory: and
then he passes to them who have died in England; and as in these men, this
hunger of false-Martyrdome, goes ever together with blasphemy against Princes,
there he heaps Eulogies upon Campian, and reproaches upon that sacred Prince,
for treason to whom he perished, whom this wretch dares call Anglicanam Lupam,
and after, Saeuientem Caluinianam lupam: Fo. 44.
and after this he says, That when they come to this Order, they bargain upon
this condition, vt liceat prodigere animas, hostili ferro. In which, I think,
he relates to that Oath, which they take in the College at Rome, by a
Constitution of the Pope; that they shall return into England, Baron.
Martyrolog. December. 29.
to preach the Catholic faith publicly there: which Oath Nauarrus says
binds them so strictly, that they are disabled to enter into any rule of
stricter religion, though that were a further degree of perfection, Nauar. De
Regular. Consil. 1.
but must necessarily return into England: Of which oath we will say no more,
but only repeat Baronius his Panegyrique, and incitatorie encouragement,
speaking thereof: The holy society in her safe sheep-folds has fatted you, as
innocent lambs for this Martyrdom, and she sends you forth to triumphs, and
aduances you to Crowns. Be therefore courageous and valiant, you who have
vowed and betrothed your blood by an Oath: for my part, I envy you, that are
designed and apparent martyrs, and wish that my end may be like yours. And
what he assigns for one cause of this Martyrdom, to which he prouokes them,
and congratulates their interest therein, we declared out of his words before
in the shutting up of the last Chapter, which was Defense of Ecclesiastique
immunity; that is debasing, and diminishing of Princes.

And thus we have gone one step further: and to the former, which were, That
the desire of Martyrdom might be vicious, and that, as the Roman authors
observe in the first times, it had beeene so; and, That by the Roman doctrine
it must of necessity be so, we have added now, that the Jesuits more then
any, inflame thereunto.

CHAP. V. That the Missions of the Pope, under Obedience whereof they pretend
that they come into this Kingdom, can be no warrant, since there are laws
established to the contrary, to give them, or those which harbor them, the
comfort of Martyrdom.
IN the end of the second Chapter, I mentioned a Canon of the Eliberitane
Council; And as in that place it had this use and office, to show that the
intemperate and inopportune affectation of Martyrdom, needed a restraint in
some, too aemulous thereof, by Eulalines Example, So may it very properly and
needfully have a place here, because it shows the reasons, why certain men
were not received for Martyrs, by the Church.

2 And the Authority of this Council is of great force, as well by reason of
the purity of the time, in which it was celebrated, which was about three
hundred and five years after Christ, and twenty year before the Nicene
Council, as especially, in this point of Martyrdom, because it was held in
continuing Persecution, and when the danger was imminent in those parts, in
which the people needed direction and instruction^ And also, because now there
is no doubt of the genuine integrity of this Council. De Imagine. l. 2. c. 9.
For, though Bellarmine imputed some errou^s to it, as being too severe against
such as had slipped in time of Persecution, and Baronius spoke sometime of it,
Ann. 55. n^. 119.
Somewhat freely au^ sh^rpely, saye^ Binius, yet after that, Ann. 305 nu. 42.
he changed his opinion, and he, and Biniu^, have now redeemed all the Canons
of that Council from any imputation.

3 Of which Canons, this is the sixtieth: That they which break the Idols of
the Gentiles, and are sl^ine by them, shall not be received in^o the number of
Martyrs. Because, this is not written in the Gospel, nor found that it was
ever done by the Apostles. So that by the opinion of that Council, that only
is a sufficient cause to entitle and interest a man in the Crown of
Martyrdom, Which was found written in the Gospel, or practiced by the
Apostles. And is there any thing found in either of them, which may be a
precedent to this mission? Mat. 3.14.
Christ appointed twelve, whom he might send to Preach; but what? Luke 9.2.
The Kingdom of God. And as soon as Saul had an inward mission, the Text
sayes^ Straightwayes he Preached even in the Synagogue. Act 9.12.
But what? He Preached Christ; And what did he Preach of him? That he was the
Son of God; And that it was he that was ordained of God, Act. 10.42.
a judge of quick and dead: And^ as himself says, of his practice after, We
preach Christ crucified. But this mission from Rome, 1. Cor. 1.23.
is not to Preach Christ, but his Vicar: Not his kingdom of Grace, or Glory,
but his title to Temporal kingdoms: Not how he shall judge quick and dead
at his second coming, but how his Vicar shall inquire, Examine, Syndicate,
Sentence, Depose: yea, Murder Princes on earth: Not Christ crucified,
languishing for us under Thorns, Nails, Whippes and Spears, but his Vicar
enthroned, and wantonly groaning under the weight of his Keys, and Swords, and
Crowns.

4 Christ said to those whom he sent, What I tell you in darkness, Matthew.
10.27.
that speak you in light, and what you hear in the ear, that Preach you on
houses, and fear not them that kill the body. And if no other thing were told
you in darkness, and whispered into your ears, at your missions hither, then
those which our Savior delivered to them, you might be as confident in your
public Preachings, and have as much comfort of Martyrdom, if you died for
executing such a Commission. But what your instructions delivered in
darkness, and told in your ears, are, appears now enough, by Inspection, by
Confession, Martyrolog. December. 29.
by Testimony, by Practice, by Analogy of your doctrine, and by Baronius
words, That you are sent hither to defend the immunities of the Church, which
delivers you from all subjection to the King, and from being Traitors
whatsoever you attempt: as also to defend the Catholic Faith, which first
makes it heresy to depart from the subjection to Rome, and then makes it a
forfeiture of all Jurisdiction to incur that heresy. Except this be written
in the Gospel, or practiced by the Apostles, you cannot be Martyrs for this.

5 But to descend to reasons of a lower nature, of the law of Nations, Alf.
Aluares spec. vtri. Dig. c. 31. N. 1, 2, 3, and 12.16, 17. and ca. 41.12. Azor.
Mor. Just. par. 2. l. 4. c. 18. and par. 1. l. 8. ca. 24.
and conueniency and decency; since all those which maintain the Spanish
Expeditions, and proceedings in the Indies, by the strength of the Popes
Donation, concur in this, That into what place soever the Pope, or any
Princes may send Priests, they may also send Armies for the security of those
Priests, and them whom they have reduced: and since it is evident by all your
Writers, that the Pope has more Jurisdiction over Christian Princes relapsed
from Rome, then over Infidels, might he not for safeguard of his Apostles,
send Fleetes and armies hither? and is it not the common and received opinion,
which Maynardus delivers, that in all cases where the Pope may enjoin, De
priuileg. Eccles. Ar. 10. n. 25
or command any thing, he may lawfully proceed by way of war, against any
that hinder the execution thereof. If then such armies and Fleets were sent to
conduct you, and were resisted in their landing, or defeated in battle; had
not they as good title to Martyrdom as you? and may not the Pope as well
Canonize the whole Spanish Fleet, which perished in 88. for your Catholic
faith, and Ecclesiastique immunitie? since in many cases, Commen. in Mat 1. in
fine.
as in the Innocent children (of whom Hilary says, that they were exalted to
eternity, by Martyrdom) one may be an implicit Martyr, though he know not
why he died, so he have no actual reluctation against it.

6 And it is very probable, that their title was b^tter then yours, for this
point of sending, because they were under the obedience of them which sent
them: but for you, (not to dispute now whether the cause be enough for
Martyrdom, or whether your obedience can give it that form, and life, and
vigor) you are so far from being sent, or from exercising any obedience in
this act, that your first step, which is going out of the kingdom, is
absolutely and evidently disobedience to your Prince, before you have any
color of having submitted your self to any other superior; and then you
enter into the College, upon condition that you may return, and you ta^e an
Oath before hand that you will return: So that you return not hither in
obedience of your Superior, but in performance of your own unjust, and
indiscreete Vows: both which, in all Vows, are Annulling or vitiating
circumstances. Neither does this Oath so far bind you to return, (though
Nauarrus say so) but that one of the learned of the Jesuits, thinks, If
that be forborne, and some Order of Religion embraced in stead thereof, Azor.
par. 1. l. 11. c. 5.. Animaduertendum.
the oath is better performde.

7 And, if these laws which take hold of you, when you return hither, had
been made between the time of your vow, and your returning: and if they had
been made directly to that end, to interrupt and preclude the performance of
this Vow, yet naturally they would work the same effect upon this Vow of
yours, and make it void, because something was now interposed, which may
justly, yea ought to change your purpose: For if that law had been made
before, your Vow had been unjust from the beginning; which is the case of as
many of you, as have gone since the making of those prohibitory laws. For a
law which forbidds upon pain of loss of goods, Sayr. Thesau. Cas. Consc. l.
3. c. 7 nu. 25.
death, banishment, or such, binds a man upon pain of mortal sin; and
therefore no Vow can justify the breach thereof.

8 All this, if the laws be just, is evident and without question, and how
could it be evident to all those young Scholars which went over, and made this
vow, that these laws were unjust? What infallible assurance could they have
of this, to excuse them of disobedience in going, or indiscretion in swearing?

9 Their own men teach, that the laws of Princes are not therefore
necessarily unjust and void, Alf. Castro de potest. l^gis. l. 1. c. 5. Docuna.
1.
because the Prince had an ill intention in making them. As if the Prince
propose and purpose particular gain, by exacting the penalty of the law, or
revenge upon certain persons, by executing thereof; this makes not your law
void, so that it be profitable to the body of the Commonwealth: much less
were our l^wes in this case, subject to that ^railty, and de^eseablenesse,
because they were made (to omit in this place the principal inducement, for
the glory of God, and preserving his Gospel i^purity and integrity) in such
necessities, as without such defense, the person of the Prince, and the civil
and Ecclesiast^que state, must have ^uffered daily, and dangerous fluctuations,
and perils of shipwreck; which dangers continue upon us yet; and therefore the
same physic must be continued.

10 For Lawyers teach us, that the word Potest, does often signify Actum:
Bartol. Dig. Indi. Sol. le. 4.. Sireus.
And what the Pope may do, their books threaten in every leaf: and then
against such a man a^ uses to do as much as he threatens: Aluares spec. v^r
Dignit. c. 41. n. 10 ex multis alijs.
the Lawyers tell us, any defense is lawful, even to the taking away of the
threatners life: For he which has injured one, has threa^ned many^ And
against such all ways of defense are just, Gent. de Iure belli. l. 1. c. 14.
when any danger (to use the extent of Lawyers) are Meditated, Prepared,
Likely, or Possible, for it is a beggarly thing, rather to be beholden to
others modesty and abstinence, then to our own Counsel and strength for our
security. So that, as when the three Emperors, Cod. Theodos. de Ep. and cler.
^^. 20.
Valentinian, Valens and Gratian, had made a law, that no Ecclesiastique
person should have any capacity to receive from noble women, who were then
observed to be profu^e in these liberalities, to the detriment o^ their own
estates, and of the public, Saint Hierome (...), Epist. ad Nepotia
He did not grieve that such a law was made, but that the covetousness of the
Clergy had occasioned these most religious Princes to make that law: So you
ought rather to lament, that the Doctrine and practice of some of your
principal men, has raised these iealousies and suspicions in a Prince, out of
the conscience of his own equality naturally confident, then murmr at the
law, or dis-councell the obedience to it.

11 For in these cases of natural preservation, it is not only lawful to
make new laws, but to break any other, which are not directly Divine. And if
you impute the worst condition of these laws, which malignitie can object to
them, which is, that those Catholics, which are innocent, which merely out
of conscience, abstain from communicating with us, in the Word and Sacraments,
shall be utterly starued and deprived of all spiritual sustentation, if the
laws which forbid all Priests to enter, should be still executed; yet that
inconvenience will not annull and make void a law, so far, as that to do
against it shall be a just cause of Martyrdom: for in making of laws, those
evils which do occasionally or consequently a^ise from the execution thereof,
Aluares spec. vtr. d^g^i. c. 41. n. 7.
must not be considered, but what the principal intention of the lawmakers
was: Which, in our case was, the preservation of the public.

12 And yet the Catholics in England shall for all this be in as good
condition here, as they should be in any Catholic Country, which were by the
Popes displeasure under a local Interdict; which the Popes do often impose,
with small respect to the Innocents^ for in the late business between the
Church and the State of Venice by the Popes Breues, the whole Dominion was
Interdicted, because the Senate, which only was excommunicated, did not within
three days do all those acts, which were so derogatory to the Sovereignty of
that State. And so, that punishment, which is so severe, by the Canons, that as
Boniface the eight observed, De sent. Excom. Alma matter in sexto.

Verbo, In^urgunt


It occasions many Heresies and indeuotion, and many dangers to the soul: And,
as the Gloss says there, by experience it appeared, that when a place had
lien long under an Interdict, the people laughed at the Priests, when they came
to say Mass again; was inflicted upon many Millions of innocent persons: all
which, if that State had not provided for their spiritual food by staying the
priests, had bin in as ill case by that Interdict, and euocation of the
Clergy, as the Catholics in England were by those laws of interdicting
their entrance, considering with how much lenity in respect of their extreme
prouocations, they were executed. And if that relief which Vgolini gives to
comfort the Venetians consciences, be of any strength, which is; that that
which they loose in spiritual sustenance, De Int^^d. Ver.. 1. nu. 11.
they gain in the Merit of obedience, it may as effectually work upon
English Consciences, as it could upon theirs.

13 No^ is it so harsh and strange, as you use to make it, that Princes should
make it Treason, to advance some Doctrines, though they be obtruded as points
of Religion, if they inuolue Sedition, and ruin or danger to the State; for
the Law says, Dig. ad Ley. int. May. tit. 4. l^ ^
That is Maiestatis crimen, which is committed against the security of the
State; and in that place, it calls Security, Tranquillity: And whether our
Security and Tranquillity have not been interrupted by your doctrine, your
selves can judge, and must confess.

14 These Laws against which you complain, drew not in your Priests which
were made in Queen Mary's time, though they were Catholic Priests, and
exercised their Priestly function; and though they had better means to raise a
party in England, because they were acquainted with the state, and knew where
the seeds of that Religion remained: But in that Catholic Religion of which
they were Priests, they found not this Article of Tumult and Sedition, and
withdrawing Subjects from their obedience.

15 Is there not a Decretall amongst you, I^ 70. tit. 4. c. 3.
by which it Is made Treason to offend a Cardinal? which is a Spiritual
offense; For it is also Sacrilege. And is ^here not another b^ which A^^
practisers by Simoney in a conclaue, Ibid. tit. 3. c. 3.
though they be Ambassadors of other Princes, are punished as Traitors? And if
their Masters seize not their goods, confiscate by this Treason, within a
certain time, the Church may. Does not one of your own Sect v^ge a Statute
in Poland, against a Gentleman of that Nation, Spongia Contra. Eq. Polon. fo.
29.
That whosoever shall be infected or suspected of heresy, shall be apprehended
as a Traitor, by any man though he be no Officer? And we Dispute not now
whether your Doctrine be Heresy, but whether such points of Religion, as are
no Articles o^ Faith, nor derived from them, if they be Seditious, may not be
punished as Treason, and properly enough called Treason. Epist. ad Norimbergens.
In which Pius the second ha^h cleared us and given us satisfaction, who says,
That to appeal to a future Council, is not only Heresy, but Treason. And
Simancha concurres to that purpose, when he says, Ench^rid. Ind. tit. 56. nu.
5.
That they which have been teachers of Heresy, cannot be received though they
recant in Judgment, because it is enough to forgive one fault, but such are
guilty of two deaths, and must be punished, as enemies to the State; And that
therefore he which attempts to corrupt the King or his Queen, or his Children
with Heresy, is guilty of Treason.

16 And that there is a Civil trespass in Heresy, as well as a Spiritual,
appears by confiscation of their goods in your Courts; which goods and
temporal detriments, though the offenders be pardoned, and received into the
bosom of the Church, and so the Spirituall^ offense be remitted, are never to
be restored^ no^ repai^d. If therefore the Canon Law can extend to create
Treason in a Spiritual cause^ If amongst you, as it is Heresy to believe, ^o
it is Treason to teach, that there is no Purgatory, shall it not be lawful to
a Sovereign and independent State, to say by a Law; That he which shall teach,
That a Priest cannot be a Traitor though he kill the King: and except a King
profess entirely the Roman Faith, he has lost all title and Jurisdiction,
and shall corrupt the Subjects with such seditious instillations as these,
shall be guilty of Treason?

17 The Parliament of Paris in that Arrest and sentence, by which it condemned
^he Jesuits Scholar Cha^tel, who attempted to murder the King, makes it
Treason to utter those scandalous and seditious words^ which he had spoken,
and which he had received from False and damnable instructions (where^n it
intim^tes the ^esuites, whom the ^entence in other pl^ces, name, directly)
which words are expressed or impl^ed almost in all the Jesuits Boo^es of State
matters: That sentence also pronounces all the Jesuits Cor^upters of youth,
^roublers of the Peace, enemies of the King and State, And if they depart not
within certain days, Guilty of Treason. And this sentence pronounces, That
if any of the Kings Subjects, should send his Son out of the Realm, to a
Jesuits College, he should incur treason.

18 And though your Expurgatorie Index can reach into all Libra^ies, and eat
and corrupt there more then all the Moathes and Worms, though you have been
able to expunge, yea euert, and demolish the Pyramid erected in detestation of
you by this Arrest, yet your Deleatur will never stretch to the scarre in the
Kings face, nor your Inseratur restore his Toothe, nor your expunctions arrive
to the Records which preserve this sentence.

19 And came it (think you) ever into the opinion of the Catholics of
France, that if a man by virtue or example and precedent of this Arrest, had
been Executed as a Traitor, for speaking those forbidden words, or for sending
his Son to the Jesuits, he should have been by the Catholic Church reputed
a Martyr?

20 When the Jesuits were lately expelled from Venice, and when other Priests
which stayed there, were commanded by Laws to do their functions, did either
the Jesuits apprehend this opportunity of Martyrdom, and come back, or did
the Priests find such spiritual comfort in transgressing this Law, that they
offered to go out?

21 And in all our differences, which fell out in this Kingdom between our
Kings, and the Popes, when so many capital Laws were made against Provisions
and Appeals, (not to dispute yet whether de Iure or de facto only, or whether
by way o^ Introduction, or Declaration) do you find that the Catholics then
used the benefit of those laws, to the procurement of Martyrdom? or has the
blood of any men executed by those laws, died your Martyrologes with any
Rubriques? And yet those times were apt enough to countenance any defender of
Ecclesiastique immunity, though with diminution of Civil and Secular
Magistracy, as appears by their celebrating of Becket: ye^ I find not that
they affoorded the title of Martyr to any against whom the State proceeded by
the Ordinary way and course of law.

22 Why therefore shall not the French, and Italian, and old English laws
give occasion of Martyrdom in the same cases, as these new laws shall? At
least why should Campian, and those which were executed before these new
statutes, be any better Martyrs then they? since they were as good Catholics
as these, and offended the common law of England in the same point, as these.
But if the Breach and violating of the later statutes, be the only or
liueliest cause of Martyrdom, then, of Parsons, who every day of his life does
some act to the breaking thereon, it is very properly said by one of his own
sect, R^baden. Catal. scrip. Ies^it. ^o. 109.
That he is per totam vitam martyr.

23 And this may suffice to remember you, that you intrude into this
emploiment, and are not sent, and that our Laws ought to work upon your Oath,
of returning to the annihilation thereof, because both the necessit^e of the
making and continuing ^hereof and the precedents of our own, and other
Catholic Kingdoms, give us warrant to make seditious Doctrine Treason, and
your own Canons and I^dica^^re give us example, and (if we needed it)
Authority to proceed in that manner.

CHAP. VI. A comparison of the Obed^^nce due to Princes, with the several
obediences required and exhibited in the Roman Church; First, of that blind
Obedience, and stupiditie, which Regular men vow^ to their Superiors:
Secondly, of that vsurpe^ Obedience to which they pretend by reason of our
Baptism, wherein we are said to have made an implicit surrender of our selves
and all that we have, to the Church; And thirdly of that Obedience, which the
Jesuits by a fourth Supernumera^ie vow, make to be disposed at the Popes
absolute will.
THere has not been a busier disquisition, nor subject to more perplexity,
then to find out the first original root, and Source, which they call
Primogenium subiectum, that may be so capable of Power and Jurisdiction, and so
invested with it immediately from God, that it can transfer and propagate it,
or let it pass and naturally deri^e it-selfe into those forms of Government,
by which mankind is continued and preserved; For at the resolution of this, all
Qu^stions of Subjection attend their dispatch. And because the Clergy of the
Roman Church, has with so much fierce earnestness and appearance of
probablenesse, pursued this Assertion, That that Monarchall form, and that
Hierarchy, which they have, was instituted immediately from God; Many wise and
jealous Advocates of Secular Authority, fearing least otherwise they should
diminish that Dignity, and so preuaricate and betray the cause, have said the
same of Regal power and Jurisdiction. (...) Ciu^. nu. 3.
And even in the Roman Church a great Doctor of eminent reputation there,
agrees (as he says) Cum omnibus sapientibus, That this Regal Jurisdiction and
Monarchy (which word is so odious and detestable to Baronius) proceeds from
God, and by Divine and natural Law, and not from the State or altogether from
man. And as we have it in Evidence, ^o we have it in Confession from them, that
God ^ath as immediately created some Kings, as any Priests. And Cassanaeus
thinks this is the highest Secular Authority that ever God induced: Catal.
Glor. (...) Consid. 23.
For he denies That old or new Testament have any mention of Emperor.

2 But to mine understanding we iniure and endanger this cause more, if we
confess that that Hierarchy is so Immediately from God as they obtrude it,
then we get by offering to draw Regal power within the same Privilege. I had
rather thus far abstain from saying so of either, that I would pronounce no
farther therein, then this, That God has Immediately imprinted in man's Nature
and Reason, to be subject to a power immediately infused from him; and that he
has enlightened our Nature and Reason, to digest and prepare such a form, as
may be aptest to do those things, for which that Power is infused; which are,
to conserve us in Peace and in Religion: And that since the establishing of the
Christian Church, he has testified abundantly, that Regal Authority, by
subordination of Bishops is that best and fittest way to those ends.

Tannerus de ^^bert. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 5.
3 So that, that which a Jesuit said of the Pope, That the Election does only
present him to God, we say also of a King; That whatsoever it be, that
prepares him, and makes his Person capable of Regal Jurisdiction, that only
presents him to God, who then inanimates him with this Supremacy immediately
from himself, according to a secret and tacit covenant, which he has made
with mankind, That when they out of rectified Reason, which is the Law of
Nature, have begot such a form of Government, he will infuse this Soul of
power into it.

4 The way therefore to find, what Obedience is due to a King, is not to seek
out, how they which are presumed to have transferred this power into him, had
their Authority, and how much they gave, and how much they retained; For in
this Discovery none of them ever went farther, then to Families; In which,
they say, Parents and Masters had Jurisdiction over Children, and Servants; and
these Families concurred to the making of Towns, and trans^err'd their power
into some Governor over them all.

5 But, besides that this will not hold, because such Sauadges as never raised
Families, or such men as an ouerburdned kingdom should by lot throw out, which
were pieces of diverse families, must have also a power to frame a form of
Government, wheresoever they shall reside, which could not be if the only
root of Jurisdiction were in parents and masters; This also will infirm and
overthrow that Assertion, that if parents and masters had not this supreme
Sovereignty, which is requisite in Kings, they could not transfer it into
Kings, and so Kings have it not from them: And if they were Sovereigns they
cold not transfer it, ^or no Sovereign can deuest himself of his Supremacy.

6 Regal authority is not therefore derived from men, so, as at that certain
men have lighted a King at their Candle, or transferred certain Degrees of
Jurisdiction into him: and therefore it is a cloudie and muddie search, to
offer to trace to the first root of Jurisdiction, since it grows not in man.
For, though we may go a step higher then they have done which rest and
determine in Families, which is, that in every particular man considered alone,
there is found a double Jurisdiction of the soul over the body, and of the
reason over the appetite, yet those will be but examples and illustrations, not
Roots and Fountains, from which Regal power does essentially proceed.
Sepulueda, whom I cited before, says well to this purpose; De regn. and reg.
offi. l. 1.
That the soul does exercise, Herile Imperium upon the body: and this can be
no example to Kings, who cannot animate and inform their Subjects as the soul
does the body. But the power of our reason upon our appetite, is, as he says
pertinently, Regale Imperium; and Kings rule subjects so as reason rules that.

7 To that form of Government thereof for which rectified reason, which is
Nature, common to all wise men, does justly choose, as aptest ^o work their
end, God instills such a power as we wish to be in that person, and which we
believe to be infused by him, and therefore obey it as a beam derived from
him, without having departed with any thing from our selves.

8 And as to the end of this power, is always one and the same, To live
peaceably and religiously, so is the power it self though it be diversely
complexioned, and of different stature; for that natural light and reason,
which acknowledges a necessity of a Superior, that we may enjoy peace, and
worship God, did consent in the common wish and tacit prayer to God, and
does rest in the common faith and belief, that God has powered into that
person all such authority as is needful for that use; Therefore of what
complexion soever the form of government be, or of what stature soever it
seem, yet the same authority is in every Sovereign State: thus far, That
there are no Civil men, which out of rectified Reason have provided for their
Peaceable and religious Tranquillity, but are subject to this regal authority,
which is, a p^^er to use all those means, which conduce to those ends.

9 For those diffrences which appear to us in the diverse ^ormes, are no^ in
the essence of the Sovereignty, which has no degrees, nor additions, nor
diminutions, but they are only in those instruments, by which this Sovereignty
is exercised, which are ordinarily called Arcan^, and Ragion di st^to, as I
noted before^ and as the soul it self, has as good understanding in an
Idiote, and as good a memory in a L^thargique person as in the wises^ and
liueliest man; So has this Sovereignty in ^^^ry state equal vigor, though
the Organes by which it works be not in all alike dis^osed. And therefore the
gouerne^e^t amongst the Jews before Sa^le, was fully a Kingdom in this
accep^ation: nor did they attend any new addition to this power, Sepul^ed. de
regn. and reg. offi. l. 2. ^o. 91.
in their solicitation for a King: but, because they were a people accustomed
to war, they wished such a Sovereign as might lead their Armies; which
office their Priests did not; and they grudged that their enemies should be
conduced by better persons then they were.

10 And so, though some ancient Greek states, which are called Regna Laconica,
because they were shortened and limited to certain laws, and some States in
our time seem, to have Conditional and Prouisionall Princes, between whom
and Subjects, there are mutual and reciprocal obligations; which if one side
break, they fall on the other, yet that sovereignty, which is a power to do
all things available to the maine end^s, resides somewhere^ which if it be in
the hands of one man, erects and perfects that Pambasilia of which we speak.

11 For God inanimates every State with one power, as every man with one soul:
when therefore people concur in the desire of such a King, they cannot
contract, nor limitte his power: no more then parents can condition with God,
or preclude or withdraw any faculty from that Soul, which God has infused
into the bo^dy, which they prepared, and presented to him. For, if such a
company of Sauadges, or men whom an ouerloaded kingdom ^ad avoided, as we
spoke off before, should create a King, and reserve to themselves a liberty to
revenge their own wrongs, upon one another, or to do any act necessary to
that end, for which a King has his authority, this liberty were swallowed in
their first act, and only the creation of the King were the work of
rectified reason, to which God had concurred, and that reservation a uoide and
impotent act of their appetite.

12 If then this give us light, what and whence the Kings Jurisdiction is; we
may also discern by this, what our obedience must be: for power and subjection
are so Relative, as since the King commands in all things conducing to our
Peaceable and Religious being, we must obey in all those. This therefore is
our first Originary, natural, and Congenite obedience, to obey the Prince:
This belongs to us as we are men; and is no more changed in us, by being
Christians, then our Humanity is changed: yet has the Roman Church extolled
and magnified three sorts of Obedience, to the prejudice of this.

13 The first is, that which they call Caecam obedientiam: which is an
inconsiderate and vndiscoursed, and (to use their own word) an Indiscreete
surrendering of themselves, which profess any of the rules of Religion, to the
command of their Prelate and Superior; by which, like the unclean beasts, They
swallow, Deu. 14.
and never chaw the cudde: But this obedience proceeding out of the will and
election of them, who apply themselves to that course of life, cannot be of so
great authority and obligations, as the other which is natural, and borne in
us; and therefore, farther then it agrees with that; it is not out of rectified
reason.

14 And though it seem scarce worthy of any further discourse, yet I cannot
deny my self the recreation of suruaying some examples of this blind and
stupid obedience, and false humility, nor forbear to show, that by their
magnifying thereof, and their illations thereupon, not only the offices of
mutual society are uncharitably pretermitted, but the obedience to Princes
preiudic'd and maimed, and the lively and active, and vigorous contemplation of
God clouded and retarded.

Cassian. Collat. 24. c. 9.
15 For when a distressed Passenger entreated a Monk to come forth, and help
his Ox out of the Ditch, was it a charitable answer to tell him, That he had
bin twenty years dead, and in his grave, and could not now come forth? Yet it
may seem excusable in them to neglect others, if this obedience make them
forget themselves; as certain youths whom their Abbot sent with Figs to an
Ermit, Id^m de Instit. Ren^n^. c. 40. l 4.
loosing their way, sterued in the Desert, rather then they would eat the
Figs, which they were commanded to deliver. Ibid. l. 4. c 27. and 28.
Is it likely that when Mucius a Monk, at the command of his Abbot, who bid
him cast his crying son into the river and drown him, did in the feruor of
obedience obey it, God should reveal, Idem. Collat. 4. c. 20.
That in that act, he accomplished Abraham's work?

16 Are these wholesome instructions, That it is a greater pride to do a good
work against the Superiors command, then a bad, because they are vices under
pretense of virtue? Climachus Scala. parad. Grad. 4.
or this, That it is better to sin against God, then our spiritual Father,
because he can reconcile us to God, but no body to him? Which doctrine it
seems Heli had not accepted, when he said, If one man sin against another,
the Judge shall judge it, bu if a man sin against the Lord, 1. Sam^ 2.25.
who will plead for him? How many grea^er matters must they of necessity leave
undiscussed, that profess such tendern^sse and scrupu^osity of conscience,
Cepacius de eius vita. fo. 196.
as the late Jesuit Gonzaga, w^o doubted that when he had said he would go,
Ad Domum professorum, he had sinned in an idle word, since he might have been
understood well enough though he h^d left out the last words? Fo. 242.
or that he had sinned in answering affirmatively to his S^periours question,
whether he would go to a certain place, because he ought to have left it all
to his Superiors will, without any affirmation? Was it due and necessa^y
obedience, when desirous to be instructed in that point of Predestination, Fo.
244.
and his Superior turning to a place in S. Augustine, and bidding him read
there, being come to the end of the page, but not of the sentence, he durst not
turn over the leaf, because he was bid to read there?

Apol. l. 3. c. 1.
17 Sedulius seems glad that he had examples enough to furnish a Chapter, De
simplicita^e Minoritarum; and he seems to have much comfort that he is of the
same order, as Friar Ruffin was, who out of simplicity cut off a living Ho^ges
foot, to dress for a sick body, and ^odde his Birds in the feathers: who
also out of his humility, desired that he might stink when he was d^ad, and
that he might be eaten with dogs. Idem. l. 2. c. 2. n. 2.
And he says that Friar Juniper was so simple, I Would. l. 3. c. 14. n. 2
that a Doemoniaque possessed man, ran seven miles from him, because the
devil could not abide Patientiam Iuniperi.

L. 2, c 5, n. 7.
18 Was it not Prodigium Obedientiae, as Sedulius justly calls it, in Friar
Ruffin to go preach naked? And were there not some degrees of spiritual pride
in Gonzaga, Vita eius fo. 100
who is praised because he had a pair of patched hose in Delicijs? and that he
refused to put on a pair of old boots, Fo. 306.
because a worshipful man had worn them? Fo. 326
and that when his hands did cleave with cold, he would put on no gloves? Was
there not some measure of stupid insensiblenesse in him, when he durst not spit
in any necessity at his prayers; Fo. 225.
and that he knew not how many brothers he had? Fo. 191.
And of desperate provocation, when he heard of a plague likely to be in those
parts, to make a vow to visit those which were infected? Fo. 360.
And of murmuring, when he grudged and grieved, Fo. 220.
That he could find out no venial sin in himself? And of Inhumanity, when
he was sorry, Fo. 346.
if any body loved him? And of a seared and shameless Stubornenesse, Fol. 335.
when he therefore desi^'d to speak in public, because he had an vng^acious
and ridiculous imperfection in pronouncing the letter R. And asked leave, Fol.
288.
E suggestu dicere, (which, I think, is to Preach) in Spanish, because he was
sure to be laughed at by that means, being imperfect in that language? Fol.
187.
And does it not taste of an unnatural Indolencie in him, to say no more at
the news of his Fathers death, but that now nothing hindered him from saying,
OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN; As if it had troubled his conscience, to say so
before?

19 Who would not have been glad, Sedul. Apolo. l. 3. c. 6. n. 1.
that such a Preacher should give over, as when Friar Giles a Lay man, called
to him, Hold your peace Master, for now I will Preach, gave him his place? Who
would wish S. Henry the Dane any health, Engl. Martyro. Ianua. 16.
that had seen him, When worms crawled out of a corrupted Ulcer in his Knee,
B. Dorotheus. Doctrina. 7a.
put them in again? Or who would have consented to the Christian burial of
that Monk, which Dorotheus speaks off, if he had died of that Poison, which
he saw his Servant mistake for Honey, and put it into his Brothe, and never
reprehended him, before nor after he had eaten the Soppes: But when his Servant
apprehended it, and was much moved the master pacified him with this, If God
would have had me eat Honey, either thou should have taken the Honey, or
he would have changed the Poison into Honey. Relatione di Diego Torrez. Edit.
Venet. 1604 fo. 5.
Who would ever have kept company with the Jesuit Barcena, after he ha^ told
him, as ^e told another Jesuit, This Jesuit died in Cusco An. 1598
That when the devil appeard to him one night, out of his profound humility,
he rose to meet him, and prayed him to sit in his Chair, because he was more
worthy to sit there then he? Who would wish Father Peter alive again, Sedul.
Apolo. l. 3. c. 24. n. 26.
since being dead, he is so afraid of disquieting his fellows, that he will
give over doing of Miracles, for their ease? Or who would not wish them all
dead, who possessing and filling all good places in their life, will be
content to give some room after their death; Id. l. 3. c. 25. n. 1^
as Friar Raynold, who having been three years dead, when another Holy man was
brought to be buried in the same Vault, rose up and went to the Wall, and stood
upright there, that the other might have room enough.

Id. l. 2. c. 5. n. 8.
20 This is that Obedience by which they say, If a man were dignified so much as
to talk with Angels, if his Superior called him, he must come away; Yea, one
of them Being in discourse with our Lady, when an inferior Friar called him,
unmannerly quitted her. And of this Obedience is Ignatius himself especially
caref^ll, Epist, ad fratres in Lusitan.
Least (says he) that famous simplicity of blind Obedience should decay. But
this Obedience, and all other, are subordinate to that natural Obedience to
your Prince, Extra. de Iu^, Iur. su^ficiat. Glo.
as Sovereign controller of all: For in all Obligations the Authority of the
Superior is ever excepted.

21 And this Obedience must not be so blind, but that it may both look upward,
what God, in his Lieuetenant appoints to be done, and also round about to see,
wherein they may relieve others, and receive from them. They may be
circumspect, though they must not be curious. For Abbayes, at first
institution, were not all Chapels but Schools of Sciences, and Shops of
manufactures. Now they are come to that, that they cannot work, Regul.
Benedict. c. 48. Declarat.
Quia Officia longa. They have indeed so many Offices, and so many Officers,
that they need not work. But this strict obedience was imposed upon them
then, because they were great confluences of men of diverse Nations,
Dispositions, Breedings, Ages, and Employments, and they could be tied together
in no kno^ so strongly, nor meet in any one Center so concurrently, and
uniformly, as in the Obedience to one Superior; And what this Obedience was,
and how far it extended: Aquinas, who understood it well, 22. ae. q. 104. Ar.
5. ad 3m.
has well expressed, That they are bound to Obey only in those things which
may belong to their Regular conversation. And this use and office, that
obedience which is exhibited in our Colleges, fulfils and ^atisfies, without
any of these unnatural, childish, stupid, mimique, often scandalous, and
sometimes rebell^ous singul^rities.

22 Any resolution which is but newborn in us, must be abandoned and
forsaken, when that obedience which is borne with us, is required at our hands.
In expressing of which truth, Saint Bernard goes so exceeding far, Ser. 3.
de R^surr. Domini.
as to say, That Christ gave over his purpose of Preaching, at the increpation,
Mulieris vnius, and fabri pauperis: And because his Mother chid him, when she
found him in the Temple, from twelve years to thirty, we find not, says he,
That he taught or wrought any thing, though this abstinence were contrary to
his determination. So earnest is that devout father, to illustrate our Blessed
Saviors obedience, to a iurisdicton which was Naturally Superior to him. And
therefore this submission, by our own Election, to another Superior, cannot
derogate from the Prince, nor infirm his Title to our Allegiance or obedience.

23 Another obedience derogatorie to Princes, they have imagined, connaturall,
and congenite with our Christianity, as this is with our Humanity, and
conducing to our Wel-being, and ou^ euerlastingnesse, as this does to our
Being and temporal tranquillity; which is, An obedience to the Roman Church,
and to him, who must be esteemed certainly the Head thereof, Azor. Mor.
Instit. To. 2. l 4. c. 7. Deinde.
though sometimes he be no member thereof.

24 Certainly the inestimable benefits which we receive from the Church, who
feeds us with the Word and Sacraments, deserves from us an humble
acknowledgement, and obedient confidence in her: yea, it is spiritual Treason,
not to obey her. And as in temporal Monarchies, the light of nature instructs
every man generally, what is Treason, that is, what violates or wounds or
impeaches the Majesty of the State, and yet he submits himself willingly to
the Declaration and Constitutions, by which somethings are made to his
understanding Treason, which by the general light he apprehended not to be so
dangerous before; So in this case of spiritual Treason, which is Heresy, or
Schism, though originarily, and fundamentally, the Scriptures of God inform
us, what our subjection to the Church ought to be, yet we are also willing to
submit our selves to the laws and decrees of the Catholic Church her self,
what obedience is due to her. He therefore that can produce out of either of
these Authentic sorts of Records, Scripture, or Church, that is, Text or
Gloss, any law, by which it is made either High Treason, Heresy, not to
believe, that in my baptism I have implied a confession, That the Bishop of
Rome is so monarch of the Church, that he may depose Princes; or petit Treason,
that is Schism, to adhere to my natural Sovereign against a Bull of that
Bishop, shall draw me into his mercy, and I will ask Pardon, where none is
granted, at the Inquisition.

25 Else it is most reasonable (and that is ever most religious) to rely upon
this, That obedience to Princes is taught by Nature, and affirmed and
illustrated by Scriptures. If the question be, how much this obedience must be,
I must say, all, till it be proved, either that Peaceable and religious being
be not all the ends, for which we are placed in this world, or that the
authority of Kings, exercised by the Kings of Israel and the Christian
Emperors, is not enough to perform these ends. For, to say that a King
cannot provide for means of salvation of souls, because he cannot preach, nor
administer the Sacraments, has as much weakness, as to say, he cannot
provide for the health of a City, because he cannot give physic.

26 Till then, I shall be deterred from declining to this second obedience, by
the contemplation of many inconueniencies, and impieties resulting from thence;
first, by the vastnes of that Jurisdiction: For since they have taught us to
say so, Extrau. Com. de Mayor: and Obed. vnam sanctam Addit.
we may say, Dominus non esset discretus, vt cum reuerentia eius loquar, if he
had laid the cure of the whole Church and the judgment of all matters
emergent, Bertr^^ Respondeo and dico.
of fact and faith, upon one man; which he has done, if Pesantius say true,
That the Pope is, Iure Diuino, directly Lord of all the World: which book is
dedicated to the present Pope, Alex. Pesant. de immunit. Eccles. and potest.
pont. page 44
who by allowing it may justly be thought to favor that opinion.

27 How much it is, that they would entitle him to, Ind. Belg^ fo: 86
appears by their expunction of a Sentence in Roselli a Catholic, though a
Lawyer, That it is heretical to say, that the universal temporal
administration is, or may be in the Pope: upon which book mine eye falls often,
because you have been so lavish and prodigal in those expunctions, that a man
might well make a good Catechism, and an Orthodox Institution of Religion, out
of those places, which you have cast away. And by this one place we see what
you would have, For if the universal administration of temporal matters be in
the Pope, what need is there of Kings? Simancha de Rep. l. 3. c. 7. ex Stobao.
You would soon forget kings, or remember them to their ruin; and look that
kings should do to you, as condemned men are said to have done to the kings of
Persia, to thank them that they were pleased to remember them. Azor. To 2. l.
4 c, 19. Mihi
And Azorius will not pardon their modesty, that say, that the Pope in dealing
with temporal matter^ uses but a spiritual power (though this in effect work
as dangerously) but he uses (says he) Absolutely and simply a temporal
Jurisdiction.

28 And what can impeach this Universal Jurisdiction, since al matter and
subject of Jurisdiction, that is, all men, may by their Rules be under him, by
another way, that is, by entering into Religion: for first, De libert. Eccles.
l, 2: c: 1
Tannerus the Jesuit says, If Princes had their authority immediately from
God, yet the Pope might restrain that authority of theirs, Maynardus de
priuileg. Eccles. Ar. 16. Nu 2.
that it should fall only upon Laymen: For, says another, He may take from
the Emperor, all his Jurisdiction, therefore any part thereof. And as many as
will (says Bellarmine) may without the consent of their Prince, Bell. de Cler.
l 1 c. vlt
yea though he resist it, thus deuest their Allegiance, as they might resist
their parents if they should hinder them.

29 And in contemplation of this Universal Jurisdiction, which might be, if it
be not, in the Pope; Tannerus l. 2. c. 12, in fine:
the Jesuit whom we first named, breaks out into this, congratulation: If at
this instant all the Princes and all their subjects, would enter into Religion,
and transfer all that they had into the Church, would it not be a most
acceptable spectacle to God, and Angels, and Men? Or (as he says before) if
their estates were so transferred to the Church, though not their persons,
could not Ecclesiastique Princes rule and govern all these lay men, as well as
they do some others already? But because, as he doubts in that place, Hoc in
aeternum nunquam fiet, that all Laymen will come under them, they have provided
that all Clergy men which be under them, shall be safe enough, De Institut. l.
1: c: 10
as welll by way of Counsel (for so Mariana modefies his Doctrine, that the
Prince should not execute any Clergy man, Aphor. confess. verb. clericus
though he deserve it) as by positive way of Aphorisms, as Emanuel Sa does,
That they are not subjects, nor can do treason: and by way of Fact, and
public troubling the peace of al Christendom, as appeared by their late
attempt upon Venice for this Exemption.

30 And as the immensnesse of this power auerts me from believing it to be
just, so does this also decline me, that they will not be brought to tell us,
How he has it, nor How he got it. For as yet they do but stammer, and the
Word sticks in their jaws, and we know not whether, when it comes, it will be
Directly, or Indirectly. And they are as yet but surueying their Evidence; they
have joined no issue; nor know we whether they will plead Divine Law, that is,
places of Scripture, or Sub divine Law, which is interpretation of Fathers, or
super divine law, which is Decretals of Popes. But Kings insist confidently,
and openly, and constantly upon the law of Nature, and of nations, and of God,
by all which they are appointed what to do, and enabled to do it,

31 Lastly, this infames and makes this Jurisdiction suspicious to me, to
observe what use in their Doctrine and Practice they make of this power. For
when they have proceeded to the execution of this Temporal power, it has
been either for their own real and direct profit and advantage, as in their
proceeding with the Eastern Emperors: And drawing the French Armies into
Italy, and promouing and strengthening the change of the family and race of the
Kings in France, or else the benefit has come to them by whose advancement
that Church grows and increases, as in the disposing of the Kingdom of
Navarre; Or at least, the example and terror thereof magnifies the dignity,
and reputation of that Church, and facilitates her other enterprises, for a
good time after, as a Ship that has made good way before a strong wind, and
under a full Sail, will run a great while of her self, after she has
stricken sail.

32 When any of these reasons inuit them, how small causes are sufficient to
awake and call up this temporal Authority? The cause why Childerique was
deposed, 15. q. 6. Alius.
was not, says the Canon, for his Iniquities; but because he was Inutilis. And
this was not, says the Gloss, because he was Insufficient, for then he
should have an assistant, and coadiutor; but because he was Effeminate. So
that the Pope may depose upon less cause, then he can give an assistant. For
to be Insuficient for the Government, is more directly against the office of
a King, then to be subject to an infirmity, which concerns his humanity,
not his office.

33 And when the officers and Commissioners of the Roman Court, come to
Syndicate Kings, they have already declared, what they will call Enormities and
Excesses, Paris de puteo de syndi^. Ca. de Excess^ Regum.
by inuoluing almost all faults, whether by Committing or Omitting in general
words; As, When he does not that for which he is instituted; when he uses his
prerogative without just cause, when he vexes his Subjects; when he permits
Priests to kiss his hands; when he proceeds indiscreetly, and without just
reason; And lastly, For any such hunting as they will call intemperate. To
which purpose they cite against Kings generally those Canons which limit
certain men, and times, and manners: And which, as the Gloss says of some of
them, Did. 86. qui venatoribus.
are meant De venatione arenaria, When men out of vainglory, or for gain,
fought in the Theaters with wild beasts. And least any small error in a King
might escape them, they make account that they have enwrapp'd and packed up all
in this, That it is all one, Par. de Put. ca. Rex autem.
whether a King be a Tyrant, or a Fool, or Sacrilegious, or Excommunicate, or
an Heretic.

34 This obedience therefore which we neither find written in the tables of our
Hearts, nor in the Scriptures, nor in any other such Record, as either our
adversary will be tried by, or can bind us, must not destroy nor shake that
obedience which is Natural and Certain. In Io. l. 12. c. 56.
Cyril has made this sentence his own, by saying it with such allowance, It
is wisely said, That he is an impious man, which says to the King, thou do
unjustly. Much more may we say it of any, that affirms a King to be
naturally impotent, to do those things for which he is instituted; as he is,
if he cannot preserve his Subjects in Peace and Religion, which the Heathen
kings could do; whose Subjects had a Religion, and Ministers thereof, who
wrought upon men to incline them to Moral goodness here, and to the
expectation of future blessedness after death, though not by so clear nor so
direct ways as Christian Religion does.

35 The king therefore defends the Liberties of the Church, as the nature of
his office, which he has acknowledged, and Declared, and sealed to his
Subjects by an Oath, binds him to do, if he defend the Church of England from
foraine usurpation. And a most learned and equal man has observed well,
Casub. de lib. Eccles. fol. 46.
That in the differences between Gregory the seventh, and the Emperors, the
defense of the liberties of the Church, was the title and pretense on both
sides^ Azor. Instit. Moral. To. 1 l. 5. c. 14. in fine.
And since a Jesuit has affoorded us this confession, That the Prince has
this Authority over Bishops, that he may call them as Peers of ^is Realm,
And since their Clementines, or the Glosser, De sent. and re indic. Pastoralis
Glossa.
yeeldes to us, That a Church Prelate may be a Traitor, because he holds
some temporalities: how can they escape from being ^ubiect in all other cases;
since their natural and n^tiue obedience is of a stronger obligation, then the
accepting or possessing of these Temporalities: for, if ^ure Diuino, the
Character of Order, did obliterate and wash out the Character of civil
Obedience, and subjection, the conferring of any temporal dignity or
possession, could not restore it; for under color of a benefit, it should
endammage and diminish them, when a little Temporal honor or profit shall
draw their spiritual estate and person to secular ^u^i^d^ction: ^or, as
Azorius will prove to us, the king may call a Bishop as a Baron to the
Parliament, and as the Canonist will prove to us, he may call him to the Bar
as a Traitor.

36 To recollect therefore now, and to determine and end this point, the title
which the Prince has to us by Generation, and which the Church has by
Regeneration, is all one now. For we a^e not only Subjects to a Prin^e, but
Christian Subjects to a Christian Prince, and members as well of the Church as
of the Commonwealth, in which the Church is. And as by being borne in his
Dominions, and of parents in his allegiance, we have by birthright interest
in his laws and protection: So by the Covenant of Almighty God to the faithful
and their Seed, by being born of Christian Parents, we have title to the
Sacraments; which the king (to whom, as all the kingdom is his house, so all the Clergy are chaplains) ta^es care, that they duly administer to us which
are his sons, and ^eruants.

37 Nor does the king and the Church direct us to diverse ends, one to
Tranquillity, the other to Salvation, but both concur in both: For we cannot
ordinarily be saved (which seems to be the function of the Clergy) without the
exercise of moral virtue here in this life, nor can Christians do those moral
virtues (which seem to be the Princes business) without faith, and keeping
the right way to salvation, because a Christian must do them Christianly.

38 For though Theologall virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, are infused from
God, yet all religious worship of God is moral virtue. As therefore the
office of all Heathen Princes, was to conserve their subjects in the practice
of moral virtue, so far as it was revealed to their understanding; So is it
now the office of Christian Princes to do the same. For God has now so far
enlightened us to the understanding of moral virtue, that we see thereby, that
after God has infused Faith, we make sure our salvation, by a moral
obedience to the kings Government, and to their Ministry who^ his providence
appoints over us for our instruction. So that Christian subjects need no higher
power then kings are naturally endued and qualified withal, to direct them to
Salvation; but^ because moral virtue is now extended, not in it self, but ^o
our vnderstanding^ or pe^chance perfited (for the Fathers deny often, that the
Philosophers had any true moral virtues) Christian kings must now provide
laws, which may reach as far in their d^rection, as moral virtue reaches now;
and Ministers, that may teach us how far that is, and to conserve us in the
observation thereof: For as, when all things are in such sort well composed and
establ^shed, and every subordinate Wheel set in good order, we are guilty of
our own damnation, if we obey not the Minister, and the Minister is guilty of
it, if he neglect to instruct us, so is the Prince guilty of our spiritual
ruin, and eternal perishing, if he do not both provide able men to give us
spiritual food, and punish both their negligence and our transgressions: So
that he is to account to GOD for our souls, and therefore must have natural
means to discharge that duty well, or else could not be subject to such a
reckoning for his transgressions therein.

39 The last Obedience which I intimated, as prejudicial to this of kings, is
that which the Jesuits vow to the Pope; which is not the same blind
Obedience, which I spoke of before for the Jesuits swear that also to their
Superiors, before they come to the perfection of this: But, as that is blind
out of darkness, so this is blind out of dazeling. For they must be
instruments in matters of State, and disposing kingdoms.

40 When some Priests in England were examined, what they would think of the
Oath of Allegiance, if the pope should pronounce that it were to be held De
fide, that he might depose Princes, they desired to be spared, because they
could not pronounce De futuris Contingentibus. But these votaries, the Jesuits
are not so scrupulous; They can resolve to execute whatsoever he shall
command: perchance they think the Pope so much God, (for Jesuits must
exceed in euerything) that in him, as in GOD, there can be no Contingency.
And therefore vowing their travel and labor, to the corrupting and aliening
of subjects, to the combustion or translation of Kingdoms, to the auiling and
eradication of Princes, they do not vow De futuris Contingentibus, but of
things ever constantly resolved in the Decree, and Counsel, and purpose of the
Bishop of Rome.

41 Though therefore Mat. Tortus: be no Jesuit himself, S^pr^. la. le^tera de
palmieri Romilo.

Nella Roccolta fo. 183.


yet in respect of his Master, who was one, I wonder he durst say, That the
Jesuits made no other vow of obedience to the Pope, then other religious
Orders did; which is such an excuse in their behalf, as no accusation could
offend them so much; since their ambition is to serve the Pope by a nearer
Obligation then the rest: which appears evidently enough, in the Bull of Paul
the third, where this fourth vow is repeated.

42 And is it not a stange precipitation to vow their help to all his errors?
of which they confess he may commit many in matter of Fact, by
misinformation. So that they swear to execute that, which they are not bound
to believe to be well commanded: yea they are not bound to believe, that he
which commands them, is that person whose commandments by their vow they a^e
bound to do, and yet they must do them. Simancha. Ench^r. Iud. Tit. 5. nu. 3.
For though they be bound to obey the Pope, Yet they are bound to believe that
Paul the fifth is Pope: because those Elections have many vitiating
circum^tances, which annuls them. For if they could be certain, that the
Election were free from all other corruptions, yet that Decretall in the
Septimes, Li. 1. To. 3. c. 1.
of Simoniacall Election, must of necessity keep all indifferent men in
continual anxietie and perplexity. For, if any thing by any Cardinal, were
given, or promised before, though the Election be by way of Assumtion and
Adoration, when all concur in it, which they call, Viam spiritus Sancti, and
therefore not subject to error, Yet there is a Nullitie in this Election, and
the holy Ghosts confirmation works nothing upon it, And the Person elected,
has neither spiritual nor temporal Jurisdiction, but looses all the
dignities which he had before, and becomes incapable ever after; And no
subsequent Act^ of Inthroning, Oaths of Obedience by the Cardinals, nor
possession, though of long time, can make it good: And even those Cardinals,
which were parties to the Simony, may at any time after, depart from his
obedience, and all the rest of the Cardinals, which do not, forfeit their
dignities.

43 It is scarce possible to be hoped, that in Elections there should be no
degrees of that corruption, which this Decree labors to preclude, and which, it
takes knowledge, to be so clandestine, and secretly carried, that coming to the
point of annulling all those promises which were so made^ your Law expresses it
thus, Cum quauis Inexcogitabili solennitate and forma iurata. And if ever it
should break forth, that any such thing were committed at Paul the fifth his
Election, then he was never Pope: Which, though perc^ance it will not make
void all his Acts, for some civil and convenient reasons, does yet show the
injustice, and indiscretion of such a vow, as binds the Votarie to do some
acts, which were not lawful for him to do, except an assured Authority of
the commander did warrant it.

44 And if that measure which Aquinas gave before of Blind obedience, 22. e. q.
104. Art. 5. ad 3m.
must also serve in this, which is; That they must obey in all things, which
belong to their Regular conuersations, that is, In all things to which their
Rule, and Vow obliges them, then as no Sea can wall any kingdom against their
entrance: So no watchfulness can arm any breast against their violence, since
the increasing of that Monarchy which they must advance, grows from the decay
of others.

45 But I forbear Exasperation; and will here end this Chapter; by which, I
hope, it appears, that no latter band of Obedience, can slacken this first,
which was borne with us. For, though amongst Lawyers, To commit my self or my
cause, Par. de put. de Synd. fo
179.
Liberae voluntati hominis, or to be used by him, 192.
Prout voluerit, amount very far, and create a large power in him, yet they
conclude, That, 193.
In nullo arbitrio, How large so ever, any thing is included which was formerly
prohibited. And of these three Obediences which we have handled, though all the
three essential proper^ies o^ all Oaths and Vows be wanting in them all, yet
the blind obedience to your spiritual Superior, does especially want
discretion, and the implicit Obedience, imagined to be vowed to the Church in
Baptism, does lack Truth, and that seditious and servile Obedience vowed by
the Jesuits to your Popes will, does want Justice.

CHAP. VII. That if the mere execution of the function of Priests in this
Kingdom, and of giving to the Catholics in this Land, spiritual
sustentation, did assure their consciences, that to die for that, were
Martyrdom; yet the refusal of the Oath of Allegiance does corrupt and
vitiate the integrity of the whole Act, and dispoyle them of their former
Interest and Title to Martyrdom.
WE speak of Martyrdom now, in the proper and restrained sense and
acceptance, that is, of Consummate Martyrdom, and so, as Aquinas takes it,
when he says, 22 ^. q. 124. Ar. 4
Mors est de ratione Martyrij. I know the Primitive Church denied it not to
them, whom the lat^er Church has called Confessors; So Epist. 8. ad Polycarpum.
Ignatius writes himself Martyr; and so does 1. Cor. 15.31.
Saint Paul say, that he dies daily. And sometimes, when the Church enjoyed
her ease, and was pampered with security and rest, to excite men to a public
confession of their Faith, if there arose any case wherein it was needful, the
Ministers of that Church, which was ever apter and forwarde^ to suffer
Martyrdom, when any long persecution had accustomed her to the expectation and
patience and glory thereof, then in the times of dull abundance and
tranquillity, would afford the Title of Martyrs, to any persons who suffered
any persecution for the testimony of Christ, though they died not: Aquin. ibid.
As the Church celebrates the Martyrdom of Pope Marcellus, who died in
Prison. So also sometimes their indulgence alovved that Name, for some
abstinencies and forbearings, if they conduced to the depressing of Idolatry.
For so Saint Chrysostom says, Aduers. Iudaeos. Ora^. 5.
If thou refuse to be cured by Magique, and die of that sickness, thou art a
Martyr

De Pu^gat. l. 1. c. 7. Q^into.
2 Devotion is apt to ouerualew other men's actions; And Bellarmine confesses out
of Sulpitius, That the people did long time deuoutely celebrate one for a
Martyr, who after appeared, and told them that he was damned. Extrau. d^
Reliquij. Audiuimus.
So also were those men inclined, whom Alexander the third reprehendes, For
giving the honor of a Martyr to one that died drunk. So does another Jesuit
prove Hyrcanus to be an Heretic, Ser^rius Trihaeres. l. 2. c. 28.
whom Albertus Magnus has put into his Litany, and so drawn into continual
Invocation ever since. And when Gregory the thirteenth made Commissioners to
suruay the Martyrologe, Binius To. 1. f. 490
they found the Histories of Pope Felix the second, so various and repugnant,
that they were determined to expunge his name, but that opportunely there was a
Marble Coffin found, with such an Inscription as alterd them, and relieved the
Popes fame. Bellar. vbi supra
And one principal inducement to the Pope, to come to these solemn
Canonizations, is, because before the people did often mistake.

3 And this medicine, Ibid. c. 8.. Dices
as it was very late applied (for Bellarmine cannot find, that the Popes
canonizd any in eight hundred years after Christ:) So neither has it, nor can
it naturally extinguish the disease. The most that it can work, is an
Assurance, that they which are publicly canonized are true Saints: for
Bellarmine says, That it is the opinion of Heretics, that the Pope can err
in such Canonizations: Ibid. c. 9.. 1.. T^rtio.
and yet, to prove it, he argues but thus: If we believe that there was such a
man as Caesar, why should we not believe that which God testifies by miracles?
But how shall we believe that these miracles are from God, or that he does
them in testimony of that man's sanctity? For that miracles are done, is not
enough to constitute a Saint, Extra. de Reliq. gloss. verb. miraculis.
for wicked men may do them, say your Authors: And in this case they can
proceed no farther, then to an Historical belief, that Miracles are done.
And I had thought that Bellarmine had required a better faith at our h^nds,
then Historical, and such as assures us, that Caesar was, to ground Invocation
of Saints, and to constitute an Heresy.

4 And though not in Bellarmine, yet in the Pope himself, there appear some
scruples of diffidence, and frailty, and fallibility in this act of
Canonizing, Ceremon. Sacrae. Cap. de Canoniz.
because, after all his several Inquisitions and searches which depend upon
matter of Fact, and after his diverse iteration of prayers, That he may not
err, and That he may not be permitted to err, he makes at last a public
protestation, That he intends not by that act, to do any thing against Faith.

5 But if this can be certain, That those, and none but those, which are so
Canonized, may be publicly Honored as Saints, yet that disease, of which we
spoke before, is not cured hereby. For it is still lawful privately to
worship any, of whose sanctity I have an opinion. Nor is this private
worship, De Purgat. c. 10.. 1.
so private in Bellarmines account, that it may not be exhibited before
others; but only so private as it may not be done, In the name of the Church,
and as though it were instituted by the Church. So that whole Multitudes, and
Congregations may err still: and this, by the authority of the Canon it self.
For thus Bellarmine reasons, with more detortion and weakness then becomes
the cause or his gravity: Extra. de Relig. C. 1. and ^.
In the two Canons, says he, Audiuimus, and Cum ex eo, the Pope forbiddes
public worship; and therefore, a Contrario, permits private. If then, that
worship which in those two Canons he forbiddes to be publicly exhibited,
may privately be given, and this priuatenesse exclude not whole Congregations,
then whole Congregations may lawfully worship as a Saint, a man slain in
drunkenness, which is the case of the first Canon, and lawfully worship
venall and uncertain Relics, which is in the second Canon; since the
forbidding of this in public, has permitted it in this large and open
private, by Bellarmines ^ashion of arguing; who says also ^or this, That the
Doctors do commonly affirm it.

6 And whatsoever is said here of Saints, holds as well in Martyrs, for with
the same faith, that I believe a man to be a martyr, I believe him to be a
Saint: And so, it seems, does that Catholic Priest, who has lately
published a History of English Martyrs: For that which in the Title he calls
Martyrologe, in his Advertisement he calls Sanctiloge. And therefore it
becomes both our Religion and Discretion, to consider thoroughly the
circumstances of their History, whom we admit to the honor of Martyrdom.

7 All Titles to martyrdom seem to me to be grounded upon one of these three
pretenses, and claymes. The first is, to seal with our blood the profession
of some moral Truth, which though it be not directly of the body of the
Christian faith, nor expressed in the Articles thereof, yet it is some of those
works, which a Christian man is bound to do. The second is, to have
maintained with loss of life, the Integrity of the Christian faith, and not to
suffer any part thereof to perish or corrupt. The third is, to endeavor by the
same means to preserve the liberties and immunities of the Church.

8 By the first way they entitle S. John Baptist because he died for
reprehending a fault against a moral Truth: and that truth being resisted, the
Author of truth is despised: And therefore all truth is not matter convenient
for the exercise of this virtue, as the conclusions of Arts and Sciences,
though perfectly and demonstratiuely true, are not; but it must be such a
truth, as is conversant about Christian piety, and by which God may be
glorified: which cannot be, except he might be injured by the denying thereof.
So, the Evangelist when our Savior spoke of S. Peter's Martyrdom says, Ioh.
21.19.
He signified by what death he should glorify God: For all Martyredome works
to that end. And this first occasion of martyrdom seldom falls out in
Christian Countries, because in Christ, the great Mirror of all these truths,
we see them distinctly and evidently. But sometimes with Heathen Princes,
before they arrive to this rich and pregnant knowledge, men which labor their
conversion, begin, or touch by the way, some of these Moral duties; and if
they grow odious, and suffer for that, they are perfect Martyrs, dying for a
moral Truth, and in the way to Christ.

9 By the second claim, which is the Integrity of Catholic Religion, the
professors of any Christian Church, will make a specious, and apparent Title,
if they suffer persecution in any other Christian Church. For the Church of
Rome will call the whole total body and bulk of the points of their
profession, Integrity of Religion, and the Reformed Churches call, soundness,
purity, and incorruptnesse, integrity. The Roman thinks Integrity hurt by
nothing but Maimes, and we, by Diseases. And one will prove by his death, that
too little is professed, and the other, that too much. But this advantage we
have, that by confession of our adversaries, all that we affirm, is True, and
Necessary: and upon good ground we assure our selves, that nothing else is so,
and we think that, a propensenesse to die, for profession of those points,
which are not necessary, will not constitute a Martyrdom, in such a person
especially as is of necessary use.

10 Amongst other things which our Blessed Savior warnes his followers, this
is one, That none of them suffer as a busy body in other men's matters, 1. Pet.
4.15.
but if he suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God. And
in another place, he calls them blessed: If others say all manner of evil of
them, falsely, and for his sake. Matthew. 5.11.
So that the prohibition forbids us, to suffer for those things which do not
certainly appertain to us; And the instruction ties the reward to these
conditions, That the imputations be false, That they be imputed for Christ's
sake, that is, to dishonor him, and that we suffer because we are Christians.

11 Since therefore some of you, at your Executions, and in other conferences,
have added this to your comfo^t, and glory of Martyrdom, That because the
Kings mercy has been offered you, if you would take the Oath, therefore you
died for refusing the same, (Though your Assertion cannot lay that upon the
State, who has two discharges; One, that you were condemned for other
Treasons, before that off^r; The other, that the Oath has no such Capital
clause in it) yet since, as I said, you take it upon your Consciences to be
so; Let us Examine, whether your refusal of the Oath, be a just cause to Die,
upon this point of Integrity of Faith, by that measure which our Savior gave
in his Prohibition, and in his Instruction.

12 Is it then any of your matters, or does it belong to you, by your
Doctrine, and by your Example, in refusing the Oath, to determine against
Princes Titles, or Subjects Allegiance? If this be any of your matters, then
you are not sent only to do Priestly functions; And if it be not, then you
suffer as busy bodies in other men's matters, if you suffer for the Oath.

13 And then, what is imputed to you, which is false (which is another
condition required by Christ) if you be called traitors then, when after
apparent transgressing of such laws as make you Traitors, you confirm to us a
perseverance in that Traiterous disposition, by refusing to swear Temporal
Allegiance? Wherein are you less subject to that name, then those Priests
which were in Actual plots, since mental Treason denominates a man as well as
mental heresy? You neither can nor will condemn any thing in them, but that
they did their treason, before any Resolution of the Church: and have you any
resolution of the Church, for this, That the King may be deposed, when he is
excommunicated? If you have, you are in a better forwardness then they, and
you may undertake any thing, as soon as you will, that is, as soon as you
can. For you have as good opinions already, and as strong authorities, That a
King of another Religion then Roman, is in the state of an excommunicate
person, before Sentence, as you have for this, That an Excommunicate King may
be deposed; And would you think it a just cause of Martyrdom, to auerre, that
the King is already under excommunication?

14 And (to proceed farther in Christ's Instruction) are these things said of
you for Christ's sake? Are you (if you be called Traitors for refusing the Oath)
reproved for any part of his Commandments? If it were for exercising your
Priestlie functions, you might have some color, since all your Catholic
Religion, must be the only Christian Religion. But can that state which
labors watchfullie and zealouslie for the promouing of Christ's glory in all
other things, be said to oppose Christ, or persecute him in his Members, for
imputing traiterous inclinations to them, who abhor to confirm their
Allegiance by a just Oath?

15 Lastly, can you say, you suffer as Christians, that is (as Christ there
intended) for Christian faith, which is principally the matter of Martyrdom?
Aquinas cites this, 22 c. q. 124. Art. 2. ad 1m.
out of Maximus, The Catholic faith is the mother of martyrdom. And he
explicates it thus, That though martyrdom be an act of fortitude, and not of
faith, yet as a civil man will be valiant to defend Justice, as the Object of
his valor, so does a Martyr, faith. If then to refuse this Oath, be an object
for a Martyrs fortitude, it must be because it opposes some point of faith, and
faith is that, which has been believed ever, and every where; And how can
that be so matter of faith, which is under disputation, and perplexity with
them, and the contrary whereof we make account, that we see by the light of
Nature and Scriptures, and all means conducing to a divine and moral
certitude?

16 Leo the first, Epist. 24.
in an Epistle to the Emperor, by telling what has been, informs ^ummarilie
and soundly, what should be a just cause of Martyrdom. None of the Martyrs,
says he, had any other cause of their suffering, but the confession of the
true Divinity, and true humanity in Christ. And this was then the Integrity
of faith, in both acceptations; All, and sound. Which is neither impaired in
the extent, nor co^rupted in the purity, by any thing proposed in the Oath.

17 But as Chrysostom expounding that place of Jeremy, In Marc. Hom. 13. To.
2. fo. 270
Domus Dei facta est spelunca Hyaenae, applies it to the Priests of the Jews,
as hardest of all, to be converted, so may we apply it to the Priests of the
Romans, who abhor the Oath, and deter their Scholars. For, the Hyena, says
Chrysostom, has but one back bone, and cannot turn except it turn all at
once. So have these men, one back bone, the Church; (for so says Bellarmine,
if we were a greed of that, we should soon be at an end:) and this Church is
the Pope; And they cannot turn, but all at once, when he turns; and this is
the Integrity of the faith they talk of. And, as that Father, adds of the
Hyena, Delectantur cadaueribus; they are delighted with impious prouocations to
the effusion of blood, by suggesting a false and imaginary martyrdom.

18 The third and last just ground of martyrdom, of those which we mentioned,
is Ecclesiastique Immunitie, which is of two sorts; one inhaerent, and Native,
and connaturall to the Church, and the other, Accessory, and such, as for the
furtherance and advancement of the worship of God, Christian Princes, in
performing a religious duty, have afforded and established. Of the first sort
are, preaching the word, administering the Sacraments, and applying the
Medicinal censures. And if any, to whose charge God has committed these, by
an ordinary calling, loose his life in the execution thereof, with Relation to
the cause, we may justly esteem him a martyr. And so in the second kind, if
only for a pious and dutiful admonition to the Prince, to continue those
Liberties to the Church, without which she cannot well do her offices, he
should incur a deadly displeasu^e, he were also a Martyr.

19 And if the Roman Priests could transfer upon themselves this title to
Martyrdom, due to defenders of either of these Immunities, yet by refusal of
this Oath, which is an implied affirming of some doctrine contrary to it, they
forfait that interest by ob^ruding, as matter of Ch^istian faith, that which is
not so: For Baronius himself (as once before we had occasion to say)
distinguishes the defense of the liberties of the Church, from the Catholic
faith; and yet he and many others, makes the defense of these immunities the
object of Martyrdom: so various and uncertain is the doctrine of defending
those privileges, whose ground and foundation they cannot agree upon.

20 And as all right to the crown of Martyredome, growing from any of these
three titles, perishes by their refusal, for the reasons before expressed: so
does it also upon this ground, that he which refuses to defend his life by a
lawful act, and entertaines not those ouertures of escape, which God presents
him, destroies himself, especially if his life might be of use and advantage
to others. For when the Prison was opened to Paul and Silas, Acts 16.
the learned Expositors excuse his stay there, by no other way, then that it
appears, that he had a revelation of Gods purpose, that he should convert the
Keeper; for otherwise not to have hastened his escape, had been to abuse Gods
mercy by not using it.

21 Those laws from which these conclusions are deduced, Par. Put. Syndic.
fol. 484.
that if a man receive a Corporal injury, and remit the offense, yet the
state may pursue it against the trespasser, because no man is Lord of himself:
and that a covenant from a man, that if you find him in your ground you may
beat him, is void upon the same reason, Intimate thus much to this purpose,
That no man by law of nature may deliver himself into a danger which he might
avoid.

22 How many acts of good and meritorious nature, if they had all due
circumstances, have been vitiated by Indiscretion, and changed from
nourishment to poison? Collat. 2. ca. 5.
of which Cassianus has am^ss'd many useful examples, and made all his second
collation of them. Of which I will remember one h^pning about his own time.
Hero^ which had lived fifty years austerely in a Desert, trusting
indiscreetely an illusion of an evil spirit, threw himself down into a Well;
and when he was taken out, and in such torment with those bruses, as killed him
within three days, yet he believed that he had done well, though the rest
believed him to be as Cassianus says, Biothanatum, a sel^e-murderer.

23 How deeply, and how irremediably does this indiscretion possess many
others, whom themselves only, and a few illuders of their weaknesses, esteem
to be Martyrs, for provoking the execution of just laws against them? For
what greater Indiscretion can there be, or what more treacherous betraying of
himself, then to die in despite of such a Princes mercy, as at once directs
him to understand his duty to himself, and to his Prince: and shows him,
that his own preservation is a natural duty; and that he may not neglect it
in any cause, but where it appears evidently, Catholiquely, and indisputably
(amongst them to whose instruct^on he ought to submit himself) that God may
be glorified in it; And that his obedience to the King was borne in him, and
therefore was once, without all question, due, and could not be taken away,
without his consent, who is damnified by the loss of a Subject; at least by
such a li^igious Authority, as is yet in Disputation, What it is, whence it
comes, and how it resides in him, and how it is executed.

24 For as a man may be felo de se, by destroying himself by our Law; And fur
de se, by departing, and stealing himself away, from him to who^ his service
is due, by Imperial law: so he may be proditor de se, by the law of Nature, if
he descend from the Dignity of humanity, and submit himself to an
usurpation, which he ought to resist, which is; All violence and danger which
he might avoid.

25 And since, if the King would pardon him, upon doing of any act, which
depended upon his own will, he were guilty of his death, if he refused it,
he is so also in this case, since he can propose to himself no such restraint
as binds his will; For scruples, and things in Opinion and Disputation, do not
bind in this c^se; Of which we shall have proper occasion to speak in the
next Chapter.

26 Let us then proceed further, to that which gives the form, and measure,
and merit, even to Martyrdom it-selfe, which is Charity. And this is not
meant only of Charity, as it is a Theologall virtue, and unites us in an
earnest love to God, which is, Charitas patriae, but also as from that
fountain is derived upon all his creatures, which is Charitas viae: For so
Saint John says, of this charitable act of which we speak, Greater love then
this no man has, Io. 13.^15
when he bestows his life for his friend: Which also appears out of that
History recorded of Nicephorus: Metaphra^t. in Nicepho. Mar.
who being brought to the place where he was to receive the Crown of
Martyrdom, and seeing Sapri^ius, between whom and him, there had before some
bitternesses and enmity broke forth, fall down before him, and beg a
Pardon and reconcilement, was so much elated with this glory of Martyrdom, that
uncharitably he disdained to admit any reconciliation. In punishment of which
uncharitableness, he lost his whole hope and victory: For the spirit of God
forsook him, and he Apostated from his Faith: So that Charity is justly
esteemed the form of Martyrdom.

27 And is there any Charity in this Doctrine, or in this act of Refusal? Is
there any to your self? (For, at least in spiritualibus, Charity begins at
home) when at once you divorce that body which your Parents prepared, from that
Soul which God infused and married to it: and so lea^e, not only to be men,
and to be Subjects, but to be Priests, and benefactors to that cause, which you
hinder by this pretense of loving it. How much opportunity of Merit, even in
advancing the Catholic cause, which to you is so certain, do you loose, by
exposing your self to certain ruin, upon uncertain foundations? Is there
any charity to the Church, or party, or faction, which you have in this
Kingdom? toward whom the King brought with him so much tenderness, that he
cast in a dead sleep all bloody laws, and in a slumber all pecuniarie laws
which might offend, and aggrieue them. Is it charitably done toward them, that
by your unnecessary act, their peace be interrupted, his Majesty's sweetness
distasted, his softness endured, and those fair impressions which he had
admitted, That civil obed^ence might consist with your Religion, defaced and
obliterated? And that to all these should succeed, iealousies in him,
imputations upon them, and dutiful solicitations from his Parliament, and
Co^nsaile, and Subjects of all ranks, to awaken his laws against these
suspicious men?

28 Was it charitably done of that Priest, Ieruase.
who apprehending a general inclination of taking the Oath, advanced it so
far, as to make a Declaration that it was lawful, and never re^ract^ng that
opinion, yet would die in the ^efusall the^eof, because it seemed not expedient
to him, to take it then; and so to cast snares and tortures upon their
consciences, who were before in possession of a peaceable, and (by his own
testimony) a just ^esolu^ion?

1. Co^. 6.12. and 10.23.
29 When S. Paul uses that phrase, he expounds the word Expedient, by Profitable
and by Edifying: And has the example of his death profited and edified that
Church as much, as the perplexities certainly grown in Catholic consciences
thereby, and those exasperations, and bitternesses occasioned, by all
probability in the state, by that perverse and peevish behavior, may shake
and tempest it?

30 I do not think that they would have denied him to have been a Martyr, if
he had been executed upon the Statute against Priests, though he had before
taken the oath. If therefore the taking of the oath cannot vitiate and annull
martyrdom, the ^efusing it cannot const^tute martyrdom.

31 And if you will make the difference only by reason of the Popes Breue,
which perchance came between his first resolution, and his last, then you
reduce your Martyrdom to a more slipperie and more dangerous ^istresse then
before: For as before you quitted all your benefit and interest to martyrdom,
for having exercised Priestly functions, and procla^med and solaced your self
wi^h this, that you dyed for refusing the oath; so now you wa^ne that, and
stick to a worse title, which is, obedience to an ^ncertaine and suspicious
Breue; For, for your first ti^le, which is preaching of the Catholic faith,
you have the entire and vnamine consent and concurrence of the whole Christian
Church; which always confesses, that the profession of the Catholic faith,
is, a true and just cause of Martyrdom; though she do not confess, that that
which you teach, is that Cathol^que Faith, but for that Title you had also the
consonance and agreement of all the Roman Church. And for your second claim,
which is, the defense of the Popes temporal Jurisdiction, by refusing this
oath, you had some voices of great authority in that Church, to encourage you,
though far too weak, either to blot out a natural truth, or to make an
indifferent, or perplexed point so necessary to you, as to die for it. But for
this third title to martyrdom, which arises from obedience to the Breues,
which are matters of fact, and subject to a thousand infi^mities and nullities,
who ever justly grounded a necessity of dying, upon the^, or added the comfort
of martyrdom to such a precipitatio^?

32 Thus does Aquinas argue against a far better Title to martyrdom, then
this is: Though virginity be more precious then life, 22 ae. q. 124. ar. 4. ad
2.
yet if a virgin should be condemned to be deflowred, Occasion fidei
Christianae, because she was a Christian, though all those conditions, which we
noted in our Sauiors prohibition, and instruction, concurred in her case, That
she were no busy body in provoking, That she were persecuted, and that
unjustly, And with relation and despite to Christ, and so she suffered a^ a
Christian, yet, says he, this were no Martyrdom. Yet he assigns not the
reason to be, because she died not, but because Martyrdom is a testimony, by
which it is made evident to all, that the Martyrs love Christian faith above
all things, and it cannot appear by this act of hers, whether she suffer this
for the love of Christian faith, or for contempt of chastity. But in this act
of dying for obedience to the Breues, there is by many degrees less
manifestation, that they die for Christian Faith, which is not in question; and
there appear evident impressions of humane respects, which would vitiate a
better title to martyrdom, and of such unnatural dereliction of themselves, as
I do not see how they could escape being selfe-murderers, but that their other
^reasons, and condemnations for them, make their executions just.

De Not. Eccles. l. 4. c. 2. Item.
33 And besides that, Bellarmine makes this hard shift, and earnest
propensenesse to die, no good sign of a good cause, or of a true martyrdom
(for thus he makes his gradations, That the Anabaptists are forwardest, and the
Caluinists next, and the Lutherans very slack: So that he makes the vehemence
of the p^ofessors, in this kind, some testimony of the illness of the Religion)
we may also observe, that all circumstances (except the maine point, with which
we intercharge one another, which is Here^ie) by which they labor to deface
and infirm the zeal of our side in this point^ and to take from them, all
comfort of martyrdom, do appear in them directly or implicitly, in this
denying of civil obedience.

34 And because we may boldly trust his malice in gathering them, that he will
omit none we will take them as they are objected against us in Feuardentius the
Minorite: A man of such dexterity and happiness in conuer^ing to the Roman
Faith, that all Turquy and the Indies would not be matter enough for him to
work upon one year, if he should proceed with them in the same pace, as he
does with the Minister of Geneua: For meeting him once upon a time by chance,
and falling into talk with him, in the person of a Catholic Doctor, he
dispatches a Dialogue of some eight hundred great leaves, and reduces the poor
Minister, who scarce ever stands him two blows, from one thousand four hundred
Heresies: And as though he had but drawn a Curtain, or opened a box, and
showed him catholic Religion, he leaves him as ^ound, as the Council of
Trent.

35 First therefore in this matter of Martyrdom, Theomachia Calumist. l. 8. c.
18. nu. 1.
he takes a promise of the Minister, That he will be dilig^nt hereafter, from
being amazed at the outward behavior of men which suffer death. By which
d^rection and good counsel, the confident fashion and manner of any Jesuit at
his execution, shall make no such impression in us, as to produce argu^ments of
his innocence. After this, he says, that our men are not martyrs, Ibid. nu. 3.
Because they have departed from the Church, in which they were baptized, and
have not kept their promise made in Baptisme^, but are therefore Apostats and
Antichrists. Nu. 1.
Another reason he assigns against them, because they have been put to death
for conspiracies, rebellions, tumults, and civil Wars against lawful
Princes, and that therefore they have been proceeded against in Ordinary form
of Justice, Nu. 6.
as Traitors. And again, he says, They have been justly executed for
making, and diuulging libells against Princes. And for Acts against a Canon of
the Eliberitane Council, Nu. 10.
of which I spoke before. And lastly, this despoiles us of the benefit of
Martyrdom in his account, Because we offer our selves to dangers, and
punish^ents, seeking for honor out of misery, and blown up with ambition and
greediness of vain glory. Thus far Feuardentius charges us.

36 And is it not your case also, to for^ait your Martyrdom upon the same
circumstances? Are not many of youd parted ^ro^ your promise in baptism to our
Church? or did those which undertook for you, ever intend this forsaking? and
this act of depar^ing is by Feuardentius, made an Essential circumstance,
abstract, and independen^ and incohaerent with that of the Catholic Church,
for that is another alone by it self.

37 And have not you been proceeded with, in Ordinary course of Justice, as
Traitors, for Rebellions, and Conspiracies, and Tumults? And after so many
protestations so religiously deliue^ed, so vehemently i^erated, so prodigally
sealed with blood, and engaging your Martyrdom upon that iss^e, that you never
intermedled with matters of state, nor had any other scope or mark of all your
desires and ende^ours, but the replan^ation of Catholic Religion, has not
the Recorder and mouth of all the English Jesuits, confessed^ (upon a
mistaking, that the evenness of his Majesty's disposition might be shaked by
this insinuation,) Judgment of a Cathol^que of the Apol^g^e of the O^th. Page
91.
That in the Sentence of Excommunication against Queen Elizabeth, the Popes
relating to a statute in England, respected the Actual right of his Majesty's
mother, and of him, and proceeded for the remouall of that Queen, whom they
held an usurper, in favor of the true inheritours oppressed by her, not only
by spiritual, but temporal arms, also, as against a public Malefactor, and
^ntruder. And having thus like an indiscreete Advocate, preuaricated for the
Pope, does he not as much betray all his own accomplices, when he adds, This
does greatly justify the endeavors and desires of all good Catholic people,
both at home, and abroad, against her, their principal meaning being ever
known to have been, the deliverance and preferment of the true heir, most
wrongfully kept out, and unjustly persecuted for righteousness sake. Did you
intend nothing else, but Catholic Religion, and yet was the desire, and
endeavor of all good Catholiq^es at home, and abroad, to remove her, and plant
another, and that by virtue of a statute in England? Did the Popes in their
Bulls, intimate any illegitimation, or usurpation, or touch upon any such
statute? Or d^d they go about to advance the right Heir in the Spanish
^nuasion? or was the way of the right Heir Catholiquely prepared by Dolemans
book?

38 Or was the Author thereof no good Catholic? For these Conspiracies, and
for the same Authors monthly Libels, which cast foul aspersions upon the
whole cause in defense whereof they are undertaken, and published, are your
pre^ences to Martyrdom unjust and inualid, if your Feuardentius gives us good
rules. So are they also because you seek it against the Eliberitane Council;
That is, By ways not found in Scriptures, nor practiced by the Apostles: And
last of all, because you see^e it with such intemperate hunger, and
vainglory, Cultum ex Miseria quaerentes (as your Friar accuses our Churches)
and hunting and pursuing your own death; First, over the tops of mountains,
the Popes Spiritual power, then through thick and entangling woods, without
ways in or out, that is his Temporal power, and then through dark caves and
dens of his Chamber Epistles, his Breues, ready, rather then not die, to de^end
his personal defects, and humane infirmities. And all these circumstances^ are
virtually and radically enwrapt in this one refusal of the Oath, which
therefore alone does defeat all your pretence^ to Martyrdom.

39 And though it may perchance truly be said by you, that all those persons
which the Reformed Churches have Enregistred in their Martyrologies, are not
certainly and truly Martyrs, by those Rules to which we bind the
signification of the word in this Chapter, and in which you account, all which
die by way of Justice, for advancing the Roman Doctrine or Dignity, by what
seditious way so ever, to be true Martyrs, yet none of them has ever
transgressed so fa^re, as your Example would warrant them. For, not to speak
of Baronius his Martyrologe, where very many are enrolled, which lived their
Natural time, and without any external persecu^ion for their faith, and where
very many of the old Testament are recorded, besides those which a^e
canonized in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Ca. 11.
and many which are mentioned in that Epistle are left out by him, not only
Enoch, Noe, and such other as suffered not death in their bod^es, as Martyrs,
but even Abel whom he might have been bold to call a Martyr^ to omit him, I
say, why does our Countryman amongst you, which has lately co^piled an English
Martyrologe, present a Calender^ in which of almost 500 whom he names, scarce
6^ are Martyrs; and of the rest, some were not of our Nation, as Constantine
the Emperor, whose fe^stiuall he appoints ^1 of May; And some never saw this
Country, as Pope Gregory, whom he celebrates 25 December. And of those which
did suffer death the credit and estimation of as many as died, within 200
years of Gregory the I. is much impaired by one to whom I think, 3.
Conue^sions. Par. 3. Chap. 1. N^. 19.
he will subscribe, who says, That in that 200 years, our Nation had no
Martyrs, that commonly are known. And those whom he reckons, must of
necessity be known to them, whom that knowledge concerns, as it did Parsons,
when he writ that book, since the knowledge thereof was so obuious and easy,
that this Author professes, that all their Histories are in Authors approved or
permitted by the S^a Apostolic, and that he cites no Apocryphal legend, nor
fabulous History, that may be suspected of the least Note of falsitie, or
error whatsoever. But he which shall suruay his Catalogue of Authors, will
find it safer not to believe him, then to be bound by him, to believe all
them to be free from the least note of falsitie of error. For we shall be
somewhat hard to believe this extreme innocence, and inte^gritie in Surius, and
in Saunders, or in Cornelius Tacitus. And many of his own profession will
hardly believe that Gregory, and Bid were free from all falsitie or error, And
himself, I believe, would not stand to this, if we should press him with some
places, out of Parsiensis, and Westmonasteriensis, and Walsingham, and Polidore
Virgil: all which have been tried in the furnace o^ this Divine Critique, and
are pronounced by him free from the least note of falsitie, or error
whatsoever. But if these Authors were known to Parsons, and that he
pronounced truly, that that 200 years was without Martyrs, then, not only
the Abbess of Elies hear^sman, S. Alno^h, sla^ne about 670 in hatred of
Christian Religion, and celeb^ated 27 Febru. but the first Christian King of
the Northumbers, S. Edwyn, slain al^o in hatred of our Religion Anno 634. and
observed 4. October. with diverse other after that time, must be expunged out of
this new Martyrologe. So also must that Author confess himself to have been
too forward, in canonizing S. Hugh for a Martyr, July. 27.
whom at 10 years of age, the Jews crucified at Lincoln, Anno 1255. since
Parsons had told him before, that after Becket, which was An. 1171. our Church
had no more Martyrs in 400 years. Ibid. Nu. 21.


39 But for all this, it is not your error, and vicious example which shall
excuse us, if at any time we have inserted such, as Martyrs, which were not
precisely so. For if we have committed any such slip in story and matter of
fact, there is not that danger in our transgression, which is in you, because
you, by giving them that title, assure the wo^ld of a certain and infallible
present salvation, by virtue of that suffering, and that they have title
thereby to our Adoration, and are in present possession of the office of
Aduocation for us. Out of which confidence, I have seen at some Executions of
Traiterous Priests, some bystanders, le^uing all old Saints, pray to him whose
body lay there dead; as if he had more respect, and better access in heaven,
because he was a stranger, then those which were familiar, had.

CHAP. VIII. That there has been as yet no fundamental and safe ground
given, upon which, those which have the faculties to hear Confessions, should
inform their own Consciences, or instruct their penitents; That they are
bound to adventure the heavy and Capital penalties of this Law, for refusal
of this Oath. And that if any Man have received a scruple against this Oath,
which he cannot depose and cast off, the Rules of their own Casuists, as this
case stands, incline, and warrant them, to the taking thereof.
SInce by refusal of this Oath, which his Maiest^e has rather made an
Indulgence then a Vexation, by withdrawing some clauses of bitterness, and of
strict inquisition into the whole Catholic party, which the ^resh
contemplation of the Powder Treason, had justly urged the Lower House of
Parliament to insert therein: And studying to find a way by which he might
discharge both duties to God and his Kingdom, would in his Princely and
Pastorall^ care, provide a trial, by which those which were corrupted with the
poison which broke out in those Treasons, might be distinguished from
Catholics of better temper and more due^ifull affections toward him, and
our Peace, from which sort of Catholics, after so many prouocations, by
persons of the same persuasion in Religion, he seemed loath to withdraw those
favors and graces, which he had ever since his coming expressed toward them.
Since, I say, by refusal thereof, both the Catholics lay a heavy scandal,
and dangerous aspersions upon the cause, and declare themselves more slavish to
the Pope, and consequently apter to defection from the Prince, then the
Subjects of foreign States now are, or the Subjects of this Kingdom were
heretofore, And also his Majesty, and all those which affect his safety,
which not only inuolues but procures and causes theirs, may justly incline at
last to think, that the very ground, and principles of that Religion nourish
these rebellious humors, and so find it necessary for preservation of the
whole body, to apply Medicines more corrosiue and sharp to that member which
appears so corrupt and dangerous, And every Catholic in particular, to whom
this Oath is offered, by re^usall ^orfaits his liberty, and by per^inacie
therein, incurres other mulcts and penalties, It is therefore the duty of
every Catholic, out of his religious zeal to the cause, drawn into
suspicion thereby, and out of his Natural obligation for preserving his life,
fame, and fortune, all which are endangered by this refusal, not to adventure
the loss of th^se, but upon Evidence of much clearenesse, and grounds of
strong assuredn^sse, and constancy.

2 And as it is certain, that at the first promulging of this oath, they had
no such ground, nor Evidence (for then, that light must have been upon them
all, and so many good and earnest maintain^rs of that Religion, would not have
inclined to the Oath, if they had had such Evidence against it) so also after
some scruples were iniected, and the tenderness of some consciences vitiated
and distracted with some doubts, and that it had been submitted to
Disputation, and consulting amongst themselves, and so passed all those
furnaces of Examination, it was held lawful, and accordingly many took it. So
that neither by the Evident and undeniable authority of Nature, or Scripture,
nor by Deductions and conclusions necessarily derived and issuing from thence,
any Conscience had su^ficient assurance, to incur these dangers.

3 If since, by some arguments of probability, and of Conueniencie, or by some
propositions propagated and deduced from those first principles o^ Nature, and
Scripture, by so many descents and Generations, that it is hard to try whether
they do truly come from that root, or no, any Conscience have slackned it
self, and so be straied, and dissolved, and scattered, by this remi^nesse, and
vacillation, it ought rather to recollect it self, and return to those first
ingraf^ed principles, then in this dissolute and loose distraction, to suffer
an anxious perplexity, or desperately to arrest it self upon that part, which
their own Rules given to reduce men in such deuiations, and settle them in
such wauerings, cannot assure him to be well chosen, nor deliver and extricate
him, in those laborinths.

4 For, let the first root and parent of all propositions in this matter of
Obedience, be, that which we know by nature, That we must obey such a power, as
can preserve us in Peace and Religion, and that which we find in Scr^ptures,
Let every Soul be subject unto your higher powers; To. 13.1.
And let us draw down a Pedigree, and Genealogy of reasons and conclusions
derived from this. The eldest, and that to which most reverence will belong,
will be the Interpr^tation of the Fathers upon this place, Carninus de potest.
l^g. Him. Par. 1. C. 6.
which is (as your own men confess,) That the Apostle speaks rather of
Regal and Secular power, then of that which you call Ecclesiasticke.

5 Let us then pursue the line, of which the first end is; Kings must be
obeyed. It follows, Therefore they must be able to command justly; therefore
they must have some to enable and instruct them; therefore they must do
according to their instruction; therefore if they do not, they are subject to
their corrections; therefore if they be incorrigible, they are no longer Kings;
and therefore no subject can swear perpetual Obedience, to his person, who by
his own fault, and his superiors Declaration, may grow to be no King.

6 Now, as no man can believe the last of these propositions, as roundly and
constantly, as the first, because though it seem to be the child of the
first, yet in it self, or in some of the mean parents by the way, there may be
fallacies which may corrupt and abastard it; so is there no other certain rule
to try it, but to return to the first principles, and see if it consist with
them. For if it destroy the first, it degenerates and rebels, and we may not
adhere to it. And if the first may still consist without it, though this may
seem orderly and naturally deduced from thence, yet it imposes not so much
necessity upon us, as the first does; for that binds us peremptorily; this, as
it is circumstanced and conditioned.

7 And though these circumstances give it all the life it has, so that to make
it obligatory, or not so, depends upon them, yet it is impossible to discern
those circumstances, or vnentangle our consciences by any of those Rules, which
their Casuists use to give, who to stengthen the possession of the Roman
Church, have bestowed more pains, to reach how strongly a conscience is bound
to do according to a Scruple, or a Doubt, or an Opinion, or an Error, which
it has conceived, then how it might depose that Scruple, or clear that Doubt,
or better that Opinion, or rectify that Error.

8 For, That we may at once lay open the infirmity, and insufficiency of their
Rules, and apply the same to our present purpose; What use and profit, can
those Catholics, which doubt whether they may take that Oath, make of that
Rule, that they must follow in doubtful points, that opinion which is most
common and general? For, though this be understood of the opinion of such men
as are intelligent and understanding, and conversant in the matter in question,
yet oftentimes, amongst them, both sides say, This is the common opinion; and
who can judge it? Yea many circumstances change the common opinion: Instit.
Mora. To. ^. lib. 2. c. 12. si quando.
For (says Azorius) it falls out often, that that which was not the common
opinion a few years since now is; And that that which is the common opinion of
Divines in one Country, is not so in another; As in Spain and Italy, it is
the common opinion, That Latreia is due to the Cross, which in France and
Germany is not so. And Nauarrus s^ies, That at Rome, De Iudicijs Ca. Nouit.
no man may say, that the Council is above the Pope, nor at Paris, that the
Pope is above the Council. Which division also there is amongst them, in a
maine point which shakes their Doctrine, Ibid.
of the Popes being immediately from God, since they cannot agree, Whether at
the Popes death, his power remain upon the earth, or fly up to heaven. He is
a Catholic, Carni^us de pot^st. l^g. (...). par. 1. c. 6.
and a temperate discreet Author, which notes, That the writings of
Catholic men, have something in them which must be allowed to the times when
they writ, which being more diligently examined by them which follow, are found
exorbitant from the soundness of faith: which he speaks of those that deny,
that the laws of civil Magistrates do bind the conscience. Idem. par. 2. c.
2.
And after, ^peaking against them which think, That if we undergo the
penalty of ^he law, we do not sin in the breach thereof (he says) it was the
opinion of some Schoolmen, who thought it a glorious matter, and fit to raise
them a name, to leave the common and beaten ways; having perchance a delight
sawcily to provoke, tognaw, to calumniate, and to draw into hatred those powers
and authorities which made those laws.

8 And if of late days, The opinion of refusing the Oath, become the more
common opinion, it is upon some of these circumst^nees, that at these times,
when Catholics are called to profess civil obedience, in this place, where
Jesuits are in possession of most hearts, to get reputation, or to auile
secular Magistracy, they have suddenly made it the more common: for they can
raise the Exchange in an hour, and advance and cry down an opinion at their
pleasure.

But to determine of mortal sin (as the taking of this Oath must be, if it
be matter enough to adventure these dangers for it) the same Author says
well, Par. 1. c. 6.
does not so much appertain, Ad pulpita Canonistarum, as it does ad Cathedras
Theologorum: and therefore it ought to be tried by the principles of Divinity,
not by the circumstanciall rags of Casuists.

But, to go forward with them, if this Common Opinion were certain, and if it
were possible to discern it, yet it does not so bind us, but that we may
depart from it, when another opinion is safer: And from that opinion which is
safer, we may also in many cases depart. For which those examples, which
Carbo a good Summist alleages, may give us satisfaction, which are, Summa
Summarum. To. 1. par. 1. c. 14.. Tertium.
If I doubt of my title to land, I am not bound to restore it (though that were
the safest way) because in doubtful matters, Melior est Conditio possidentis.
And, but for this help, I wonder with what conscience, the Catholics keep
the possession of such lands as belong to the Church; for they cannot be
without some scruples of an unjust title, and it were safest to restore the^.
Another example in Carbo is, If my superior command a difficult thing, and I
doubt whether he command lawfully or no, though it were safer to obey, yet I am
not bound to do so. And he gives a Rule, which will include a thousand
examples, That that Rule, That the safest part is to be embraced, is then only
true, when by following this safer part, there ensues no notorious detriment.
And Soto extends this Doctrine farther, for he says, De ratio. ^eg. Secret.
memb. 3. q. 2. Sed contra
Though yo^ believe the precept of your Superior to be just (which creates
Conscientiam Opinantem) yet you may do against it: Because (says he) it is
then only sin to do against your conscience, when to do according to your
conscience, is safe, and that no danger to the state, or to a third person,
appears therein. So that Tutius in a spiritual sense, that is, in a doubtful
matter rather to believe a thing to be sin, then not, must yield to T^tius
in a temporal sense, that is, when it may be done without notorious detriment;
For when it comes to that, we shall find it to be the common opinion of
Casuists, which the same Summist delivers, That there is no matter so weighty,
wherein it is not lawful for me, to follow an opinion that is probable, though
I leave the opinion which is more probable; yea though it concern the right of
another person: as in our case of obedience to the King or the Pope. And then,
wheresoever I may lawfully follow an opinion to mine advantage, if I will leave
that opinion with danger of my life or notorious loss, I am guilty of all the
damage I suffer. For these circumstances make that Necessary to me then, which
was indifferent before: the reasons upon which Carbo builds this Doctrine of
following a probable opinion, and leaving a more probable, which are, That no
man is bound, Ad m^lius and perfectius, by necessity, but as by Counsel: And
that this Doctrine has this commodity, that it delivers godly men, from the
care and solicitude, of searching out, which is the more probable opinion^ show
evidently, that these Rules give no infallible direction to the conscience, and
yet in this matter of Obedience, considering the first native certa^ntie of
subjection to the King, and then the damages by the refusal to swear it, they
incline much more to strengthen that civil obedience, then that other
obedience which is plainly enough claimed, by this forbidding of the Oath.

So that in these perplexities, the Casuists are indeed, Heb. 12.1.
Nubes Testium: but not in that sense as the holy Ghost used the Metaphore. For
they are such clouds of wi^nesses, as their testimony obscures the whole
matter. And they use to deliver no more, then may beget farther doubts, that so
every man may from the Oracle of his Con^fessors resolution, receive such
direction, as shall be fit at that time, when he gives the aunswe^e^ Which
Nauarrus expresses fully, Ca^ Confraterni^as. 12. q. 2.
when he confesses, That having been consulted fifty years before, whether
they who defrauded Princes in their customs, were bound to restitution, he
once gave an answer in writing: but having recovered that writing back
aagaine, he studied twenty years for his own satisfaction, and found no
ground whereupon he might rest: And all that while he counseled Confessors, to
absolve their penitents, upon this condition: That they should retain a
purpose to do so, as they should understand hereafter to be just.

These spiritual Physicians are therefore like those Physicians, which use to
erect a figure, by that Minute in which the pat^ents Messenger comes to them,
and ther^by give their judgment. For the Confessors in England, in such
resolutions as these, consider first the Aspects, and Relations, and diverse
predominancies of Superiors at that time; and so make their determinations
seasonable^ and appropriate.

Euchirid. Iudi. Tit. 35. n. 41.
But to insist more closely upon this point in hand, your Simancha speaking out
of the law, says; That that witness which deposes any thing upon his
knowledge, must also declare and make it appear, how he comes to that
knowledge. And if it be of a thing belonging to the understanding, he must
make it appear by what means, and instrument his understanding was instructed.
And that which he assigns for the reason, must be of that nature, that it must
certainly, and necessarily conclude and prove it. If then you will subscribe
with your blood, or testify by incur^ing equivalent dangers, this Doctrine
upon your Knowledge, you must be able to tell the Christian world, how you
arri^'d to this Knowledge. If you will say, Bull. Pij. 4. de ^erm. Iur.
you have it Ex Iure Diuino, and mean by that, out of the Scriptures, you must
remember that you are bound by Oath never to accept nor inter^rete Scriptures,
but according to the vnanime consent of the Fathers. And can you produce such a
consent, for the establishing this Doctrine, in interpreting those places of
Scripture, which are off^ed for this matter? Responsio ad Docto. Venet.
proposit. 5a. ad rations.
If you extend this Ius Diuinum, as Bellarmine does, not only to Scriptures,
but to Natural light and reason, and the Law of Nature, (in which he is no
longer a Divine, as he uses to profess himself, but a Canonist, who gave this
large interpretation of Ius Diuinum, whereas Divines carry it no further, To.
2. l. 4. c. 18. Deinde.
then to that which God has commanded or forbidden, as Azorius tells us) this
cannot be so strong and constant, and inflexible a Rule, but that the diverse
objects of sense, and images of the fancy, and ways of discourse, will alter
and vary it. For though the first notions which we have by the light of nature
are certain, yet late conclusions deduced from thence are not so.

If you pretend common consent for your ground, and Criterium, by which you
know this truth, and so give it the name of Catholic Doctrine, and say that
Faith is to be bound to that, and Martyrdom to be endured for Faith, you must
also remember, that that which is so called Catholic, is not only a common
consent of all persons at one time, but of the Catholic Church ever. For,
Quod vbique, quod semper, is the measure of Catholic Doctrine. And can you
produce Authors of any elder times, then within six hundred years, to have
concurred in this?

And in these later times, is not that Squadron in which Nauarrus is, of
persons and voices enough, to infringe all reasons which are grounded upon this
universal consent? He proclaims confidently, That the Pope, Nouit. de Indic.
Nu. 41.
take him despoiled and naked, from all that which Princes have bestowed upon
him, has no tempo^all power, Neque supremam, neque mediam, neque infimam.
Marsilius contr. respons. Bellarm. Ad Gener. Inquisitor. venet.
Do no^ some Catholics confess, that they are ready to swear to the
integrity of the Roman faith, according to the Oath of the Council of Trent,
and yet pro^est against this temporal i^risdiction? And does not another
Catholic say, That when a lay man swears Obedience to the Pope, Barclaius de
potest. pont. ca. 2. in princip.
according to that Oath of Pius the fourth, it must be restrained, in his
understanding, only to his spiriuall power? Herein therefore is no universal
consent.

And are not they which seem to maintain this temporal power, so divided
amongst themselves, that in a mutiny, and civil dissension, they rather wound
one another, then any third enemy, when they labor more, to o^erthrow the
way, by which this temporal jurisdiction is claimed, then to establish the
certainty of the matter it self? And though such things as appear to us,
evidently, and presently out of the Scriptures, bind our assent, and belief,
though we may dispute about the way and manner, (as no man denies the
conception of our blessed Lady, though it be disputed, whether she were
conceived with original sin, or without it) And though those things which
appear to us out of the first intrinsique light of Nature and reason, claim
the same authority in us (as no man doubts whether he have a soul or no,
though many dispute whether ^e have it by infusion from God, or by propagation
from our parents) yet in things further removed, and which are directed by more
wheels, and suggestion^, and deducements, we cannot know certainly enough
(for so great a use, as to testify them in this fashion, as we speak of) that
they are, except we know first how, and in what manner they are. As if a man be
conuented before a Judge, ^especially when he is bound in conscience not to
answer, except he be his competent Judge, as you teach when Ecclesiastique
persons are called to Secular tribunals) he cannot be sure that man is his
competent Judge except he know first, whether he have that authority, as
Ordinary, or by special Commission. Though therefore in this point in
question, for a pious credulity, and general intention to advance the dignity
of the Church of Rome, a Catholic may have an indigested and raw opinion,
that this power is in the Pope, yet when he examines himself, and calls
himself to account, he must first know how it is, before he can resolve, that
it is. And though he may err in the manner, by which he beleeeues it to be in
him, yet certainly he must arest himself upon some one of those ways, by
which the Pope is said to have that Jurisdiction, or else he does not answer
his conscience, that asks him how he knows it? and if his conscience do not
ask him, he is in too drowsy and stupid a fit to be a Martyr.

Since therefore all his authority must be Direct or Indirect: Ordinary or
Extraordinary: as he is Pope or not as he is Pope, whosoever will seal with
his blood the auerment of this Jurisdiction, auerres one of these ways, how it
comes to him: Which being so, he cannot justly be called a Martyr; since he
only is a Martyr, whom all the Church estee^es to be so. And he which should
die, for maintenance of Direct power, should never be admitted into such a
Martyrologe, as the favorers of Indirect power should compile; nor these, into
the other. And if two should come to execution together, upon occasion of
denying this Oath, of which one refused it, because he thought the Pope Direct
Lord, the other Indirect, if they forbore hard words to one another at that
time, doubtless in their consciences they would impute to one another, the
same errors, and the same falsehoods, of which they inter-accuse one another in
their books, and neither would believe the other to be a true Martyr. And
might not a dispassioned and equal spectator apply to them both severally, that
Rule of the law, That to that, which is forbidden to be had by one way, one may
not be admitted by another? Especially since a Lawyer which has written on
that side, Vgoti^i de Validit. censura. Ca. 3.
takes the advantage of this Rule, against Princes, when he says, That they
have no Jurisdiction upon Clergy men's goods, because this were indirectly, to
have jurisdiction upon their persons, which being, says he, forbidden to be
had one way, may not be permitted another. It was said to Pompey, when he
wore such a scarf about his leg, as Princes wore about their head, That it
was all one in which place he wore the Diadem, and that his Ambition appeared
equally in either. And so ought this indirect power, though it pretend more
tamenesse, and modesty, aue^t men, as much as the other: for Bellarmine can
find as good an Argument for Peter's Supremacy, De pont. l. 1. C. 2.. Decima
et cap. 22.. Decimasepti.
out of Christ's washing his feet, as his appointing him to kill and eat,
which is, says he, the office of the Head. So that from head to foot, all
arguments serve his turn.

But to turn a little back to this point of knowledge, since the conscience is
by Aquinas his definition, Ordo scientiae ad aliquid, 1. q. 79. Ar. 13. Concl^s.
and an Act by which we apply our knowledge to some particular thing, the
Conscience ever presumes Knowledge: and we may no^, (especially in so great
dangers as these) do any thing upon Conscience, if we do it not upon
^nowledge. For it is not the Conscience it self that binds us, Carbo. summa
sum^ r. ^o 1. (...) ^2. S^c^^t^um.
but that law which the Conscience takes knowledge of, and presents to our
understanding. And as no ^gnorance excuses us i^ it be of a thing which we
ought to know, and may attain to: ^o no misconceiued knowledge binds our
conscience in these dangers, if it be of a matter not pertinent to us, or to
which we have no such certain way of attaining, that we can justly presume
our Knowledge to be certain.

For though in the questions raised by Schoolmen of the Essence and Counsels
of God, and of the Creation, and fall, and Ministry of Angels, and such other
removed matters, to the knowledge whereof, God has affoorded us no way of
attaining, a man may have some such knowledge, or opinion, as may sway him in
an indifferent action, by reasons of conueniencie, and with an apparent
Analogy, with other points of more evident certainty: yet no man may suffer
any thing for these points, as for his Conscience, because, though he have
lighted upon the truth, yet it was not by any certain way, which God appointed
for a constant and Ordinary means to find out that truth.

And if this refusal of the Oath, and implication of a power to depose the
King, be a matter pertinent to us, that we are bound to know it, Carbo. summa
summar. To. 2. par. 1. c. 2.. T^rt^^m.
( As all men in general are bound to know the principles and elements of the
Christian faith, and the general precepts of the law, And every particular man
is bound to know, those things which pertain to his state and office) Then
every Subject which does not know this, is in an inexcu^able and damnable
ignorance; which was the case of as many, as did at first, or do yet, allow the
taking of the oath^ Or if it be not so immediate to us, as those principles of
faith, or as the duties of every particular man (for though we know naturally
that Princes must be obeyed, yet, you will say, some cases may occur, in which we
may not obey) then there must be some certain way for us to a^taine to the
knowledge thereof by discourse and industry, if we may adventure these dangers
for it, and we may not adventure them, till we have by that industry sought it
out. For, if we shall say, that some things are to be held by a man, Ibid. C.
3:. Tertium.
De fide, of which he shall still be under an invincible ignorance, though he
bestow and employ all possible diligence, (as it is said of Cyprian, that be
did err in matter of faith, after he had used all possible industry) then
contrary opinions in matter of faith may be just ca^ses of Martyrdom, and yet
one of these opinions must of necessity be Heretical. For if Cyprian were
under an invincible ignorance, he was bound to do according to his erroneous
conscience^ since he had no way to rectify it. So that he must have died for
his Conscience in that case, that is, for such an opinion, as all his
Adversaries were bound to die for the con^rarie.

But since this seems incongruous and absurd, the other opinion will stand
safe and uncontrolled, that our Conscience, whose office is to apply our
knowledge to something, and to present to us some law that binds us in that
case, cannot bind us to these heavy incommodities, for any matter, but that,
which we therefore believe that we know, because there are certainly some
means naturally and ordinarily provided for the knowledge thereof; and that
we have used those means.

Now, in a man, in whom there are all these just preiudices and prescriptions,
That Nature teaches him to bey him that can preserve him, That the Scriptures
provoke him to this obedience, That the Fathers inte^prete these Scriptures of
Regal power, That subsequent acts, and Experience teaches, Regal power to be
sufficient for that end; what can arise, strong enough to defeat all these, or
plant a knowledge contrary to this, by any evidence so near the first
Principles, as this is grounded upon?

If it were possible that any thing could be produced at last, by which all
these rea^ons should be destroyed, yet, till that were done (which is not yet
done) both the priority and birthright of the ^easons and rules of nature,
which are on that side (for Rules are elder then the excep^ion) and the dangers
which would overtake, and entrap^ and depresse such as refused the Oath, must
prevail against any thing yet appearing on this part: for thus far the
Casuists agree, as in the better opinion, That although that which they call
Metum iustum, which is, such a fear as may fall upon a constant man, and yet
not remove his habit of Constancy, does not excuse a man from doing any Evil,
yet that is meant of such an Evil, as is Evil naturally, and accompanied with
all his circumstances: for, though no such fear can excuse me in an absolute
denial to restore any thing, which was committed to my trust, yet I maybe
excused from delivering a sword committed to me, if I have such a just fear,
that the owner will therewith offend me or another. And they account not only
the fear of death, to be this just fear, which may excuse in transgressions,
in any thing which is not naturally evil, but the fear of Torture,
Imprisonment, Exile, Bondage, Loss of temporal goods, or the greater part
thereof, or infamy, and dishonor. And not only when these are imminent upon
our selves, but upon our wives and children: And not only when a law has
directly pronounced them, but when the State threatens them, that is, is
exasperated and likely to p^oceed to t^ese inflictions. And though Canonists
are more severe and rigid in the observation of their law, yet the common
opinion of Divines is, That this just fear excuses a man from the breaking of
any humane law, whether Civil or Ecclesiastique: an^ that none of those laws
bind us to the observation thereof, in danger of death, or these distresses,
except in this case, that these punishments are threatened to us, because we
will not break the law in contempt and despite of that authority, which made
the law: for then no fear can excuse us, because the obedience to Superior
authority in general; is moral and natural; and therefore the power it self
may not be contemned; though in case of this just fear, I may lawfully think,
that that power which made the law, meant not to bind me in particular, in
these heavy inconveniences.

To apply this to our present purpose, since this Oath is not Naturally Evil,
so as no circumstance can make it good (for then, it would have appeared so at
first, and the Pope himself could by no Iudult or Dispensation tolerate it,
which, I think, they will not say) nor offered in contempt of the Church of
Rome, or in such sort as it should be a sign of returning to our Religion, or
abandoning the Roman profe^sion, but only for the Princes security,
certainly though the refusal thereof were commanded by any law of humane
constitution, and so it became Evil because it was Forbidden, yet in these
afflictions certainly to be endured by the letter of an express law, by every
Refuser, and in this bitterness and exasperation of the whole State, against
that whole Party, and the cause of Catholics, the taking of the Oath were so
excusable, as the refusing thereof could not be excused. For in such a just
Fear, even Divine Positive Law looses her hold and obligation, of which sort
^n^egrity of Confession is by all held to be; Tractat. 7. Theol. de Interd.
Pauli 5. prop^s. 5a.
and yet such sins may be omitted in confession, as would either Scandalize
the Confessor, Endanger the penitent, or Defame a third person. In which the
Casuists are so generally concurrent, that we need no particular authorities.

And in the matter of the greatest importance, which can be in that Church,
which is the Election of the Pope, and an assurance, that he whom they
acknowledge for Pope, is true Pope, which Comitolius (a Jesuit as much more
peremptory then the rest of the Jesuits, as they are above all other Friars)
says, Comitol. respo^s. Mo^^l. l. 1. q. 99.
To be an Article of Faith, and that we are bound to believe the present Pope
to be Christ's Vicar, with a Divine and with a Catholic Faith, and that all
Decrees of Popes, which annull all Elections, if they appear after, to have
been made by Simonie, intend no more, but to declare that GOD will never
suffer that to be done, or discover it presently (in which opinion, that
matter of fact, should so bind our Faith, he is (for any thing which I
remember to have read) singular, and I had occasion before to name Simancha
Ench^rd. Iudic. Tit. 5. nu. 3.
one great Doctor of his own Religion, directly contrary to him in the very
point.) In these Elections, I say, which induce (by his Doctrine) a Divine
^aith, and necessarily, such a probable, and moral certitude, that it were
sin in them, who are under the obedience of that Church, not to obey the just
Decrees of the present Pope, or quarrel at his Election^ The Council of
Constance, (as Azor. ^ns^it. Moral. ^ar. 2. l. 4. c. 2.. Sexto.
another Jesuit vrges it) has decreed that this just fear of which we
speak, Does make void any such Election of the Pope. And that, If after the
Cardinals are delivered of that fear, which possessed them at the Election,
they then ratify and confirm that Pope, yet he is no Pope, but the Election
void: So far does this just fear (which cannot be denied to be in your
case) extend, and upon so solemn, and solid Acts, and Decrees is it able to
work, and provide us a just excuse for transgressing thereof.

And in a matter little different from our case, Azorius gives the resolution;
That if an heretical Prince commands his Catholic Subjects to go to
Church, upon pain of death or loss of goods, if he do this only because he
will have his Laws obeyed, and not to make it Symbolum Hereticae prauitatis,
nor have a purpose to discern thereby Catholics from Heretics, they may obey
it. And the case in question falls directly and fully within the rule: For this
Oath is not offered as a Symbol or ^oken of our Religion, nor to distinguish
Papists from Protestants, but only for a Declaration and Preservation of such
as are well affected in Civil Obedience, from others which either have a
rebellious and treacherous disposition already, or may decline and sink into
i^, if they be not vphelde and arrested with such a help, as an Oath to the
contrary. And therefore by all the former Rules of just fear and this last of
Azorius, though there were an evident prohibitory act, against the taking of
the Oath, yet it might, yea it ought to be taken^ For, agreeable to this, Tolet
cyte^ Caietans opinion, with allowance and commendations, De^ence of English
Cathol. ca. 4.
That the Declaration of the Church, that subjects may not adhere to their
King, if he be excommunicated, extends not to them, if thereby they be brought
into fear of their lives, ^ar. de Pute^^ so 327. and so. 773.
or loss of their goods. For in Capital matters, says your great Syndicator,
it is lawful to redeem the life, per fas and nefas. which must not have a
wicked interpretation; and therefore must be meant, whether with, or against
any humane laws; which he speaks out of the strength and resultance of many
laws and Canons there alleged. And therefore it can never come to be matter
of Faith, that subjects may depart from their Prince, if this just fear may
excuse us from obeying, as these Authors teach; for that never delivers us in
matters of so strong obligation as matter of Faith, from which no fear can
excuse our departing.

To conclude therefore this Chapter, since later propositions, either
Adulterine, or Suspicious, cannot have equal authority, and credit, with the
first, and radical truth, much less blot out those certain and evident
Anticipations imprinted by nature, and illustrated by Scriptures, for civil
obedience, since the Rules of the Casuists ^or electing opinions in cases of
Doubt, and perplexity are uncertain and flexible, to both sides, since that
Conscience, which we must defend with our lives, must be grounded upon such
things, as we may, and do not only know, but know how we know them, since
these just fears of drawing scandal upon the whole cause, and afflictions
upon every particular Refuser, might excuse the transgression of a direct law,
which had all her formalities, much more any opinions of Doctors or Canonists,
I hope we may now pronounce, That it is the safest, in both acceptations, both
of spiritual safety, and Temporal, and in both Tribunals, as well of
conscience, as of civil Justice, to take the Oath.

CHAP. IX. That the authority which is imagined to be in the Pope, as he is
spiritual Prince, of the Monarchy of the Church, cannot lay this Obligation
upon their Consciences: first because the Doctrine it self is not certain,
nor presented as matter of faith: Secondly because the way by which it is
conveyed to them, is suspicious and dangerous, being but by Cardinal
Bellarmine, who is various in himself, and reproved by other Catholics of
equal dignity, and estimation.
We may be bold to say, that there is much iniquity, and many degrees of
Tyranny, in establishing so absolute and transcendent a spiritual Monarchy, by
them, who abhor Monarchy so much, that though one of their greatest Doctors,
to the danger of all Kings, say, Fran. a Victor. Relect. de potest. Civilly. Nu.
14.
That the Pope might, if he thought it expedient, constrain all Christians to
create one temporal Monarch over all the world: yet they allow no other
Christian Monarchy upon Earth, so pure and absolute, but that it must confess
some subjection and dependencie. The contrary to which Respons. ad Doct.
Venet. propos. 1.. Prima haec.
Bellarmine says, is Heretical; And yet there is no Definition of the Church,
which should make it so. And hereby they make Baptism in respect of
Soueraintie, to be no better then the body in respect of the soul. For, as
the body by inhaerent corruption vitiates the pure and innocent soul, so they
accuse Baptism to cast an Original servitude and frailty upon Soueraintie:
which, having been strong and able to do all Kingly offices before, contracts
by this Baptism a debilitie and imperfection, and makes Kings, which before
had their Lieutenancie and Vicariate from God, but Magistrates and Vicars to
his Vicar, and so makes their Patents the worse by renewing and confirming.

2 Nor do they only deny Monarchy to Kings of the Earth, but they change the
state and form of government in heaven it self; and join in Commission with
God, some such persons, as they are so far from being sure that they are
there, that they are not sure, that ever they were here. For their excuse,
that none of those inuocations which are used in that Church, are so directly
intended upon the Saints, but that they may have a lawful interpretation, is
not sufficient. For words appointed for such uses, must not only be so
conditioned, that they may have a good sense, but so, that they may have no
ill. So that to say, That God has reserved to himself the Court of Justice,
but given to his Mother, the Court of Mercy, And that a Swertius in Epitaph.
Pataui. Nulla erat in Medico spes, neque multa Deo.
desperate sick person was cured by our Lady, when he had no hope in
Physicians, nor much in God, howsoever subtle men may distill out of them a
wholesome sense, yet vulgarly and ordinarily they beget a belief, or at least
a blind practice derogatorie to the Majesty, and Monarchy of God.

3 But for this spiritual Monarchy which they have fansied, I think, that as
some men have imagined, and produced into writing, diverse Idaeas, and so sought
what a King, a General, an Orator, a Courtier should be, So these men have
only Idaeated what a Pope would be. For if he could come to a true and real
exercise of all that power which they attribute to him, I doubt not, but that
Angel, Victorellus de custod^a Ang^lorum.
which has so long served in the place of being the particular Assistant in
the Conclaue, (for, since they afford a particular Tutelar Angel to every
College and Corporation, And Fol. 16.
to the race of Flies and of Fleas, and of Ants, since they allow such an
Angel Fol. 133.
to every Infidel Kingdom, Fol. 121.
yea to Antichrist, Fol. 17.
yea to Hell it self, it were very unequal to deny one to this place,) This
Angel, I say, would be glad of the room, and become a Suitor to the holy
Ghost, to name him in the next Conclaue. For he should not only enlarge his
Diocese, and have all the lower world under him, but he shall have those two
principal Seraphins which ever attend the Pope, Fo. 104.
Michael, and Gabriel; (for, that Gabriel is the second, Victorellus produces
two very equal witnesses, Fo. 105.
The Roman Litanie, and Tassoes Jerusalem.) And all the particular Angels of
all spiritual Societies; Fo. 106.
And (because also (as he says) he is Temporal Lord) all the Archangels, and
Principalities, which govern particular estates, shall concur to his Guard and
assistance.

4 As Nero had an officer A voluptatibus, So, it seems, have the Popes, A
titulis. And flatterers have always a Complacencie and Delight in themselves,
if they can bestow a style and Title upon a great Prince, because therein they
think they contribute something to his greatness; since Ceremony is a maine
part of Greatness, and Title, a great part of that. And now they had observed,
that all the chief Titles of the Pope had been attributed to others, and were
in their Nature and use communicable; Aquin. contr. Gent. cap. 20.
For all the Apostles, and all the Disciples of Christ, are called Vicarij
Christi; And this name will not serve his turn, if it were peculiar to
himself. For, as his Victoria teaches us, Fraenc. a Victor. de potest. Papae
et Council. ^ Ad Quintum.
This Vicariate does not enable him to do all things which are not expressly
forbidden him (as some do think) but only such things as are expressly
granted unto him, and therefore his claim by that Title will be too strict.
And the name of Universal Bishop, was given to Cyprian, Hiero. de locis Hebr^.
when he was styled, Totius orbis Praeses. And in that sense it may justly be
given; For as a Physician or Chyrurgion, which has taken into his Cure any one
part of a man's body, either corrupted, or in danger of being so, may justly be
said to look to, and preserve the body of such a man; So that Bishop which
gouernes well one Church, is therein a Bishop of the whole Church, and benefits
the whole mystical body thereof, by reason of the strong relation, and
indissoluble co^nexion of all the parts, with one another, and to the head.

5 And for that style of Pontifex Maximus, which either is not due to the Pope,
or else is so sublime and transcendant a name, De Pont. l. 2. c. 31. Argumentum.
as Bellarmine could bring it within no Rule nor Predicament, when he makes up
the Canon of the Popes fifteen Titles, by all and every one of which, he
says, his Primacie is evidently collected; L. 2. c. 26.
They saw it given to At^ana^ius, in Ruffinus. And the name of Pope was so
communicated, that not only every Bishop was called a Pope, Hiero. Epist. ad
Chromat. Par. 2. l. 4.
but Cyprian, The Pope. Quem Christiani suum Papam vocant. In the estimation of
which name, they have often fluctuated and wa^uered. For, Azor. Mor. Ins^it. c.
4. Porro.
almost for nine hundred years, they affoorded it to all: Then they restrained
it to the Bishops of Rome, to which purpose Lect. 23. Did. 96 In Scripturis,
etc. 6. q. 1. Sacerdotes, etc.
Biel upon the Canon of the Mass, cites diverse Canons, though far from the
matter.

6 And ever since the Reformation of the Church was courageously begun, and
prosperously and blessedly prosecuted, they having been called Papists for
their implicit relying upon the Pope, lest their own Argument against us,
Bellar. de Eccles. milit. l. 4. c. 4.
That to be denominate from any person, is a mark of Heresy, should be
retorted upon themselves, they have in all Dedications and public Acts, as
much as they can, forborne, and declined that name Pope, and still usurped,
Summus Pontifex, and Pontifex Maximus. And yet being still urged and followed,
and having no escape, but that the name of ^apists, sticks to them, and by
their Rules imprints some marks of Heresy; Ibidem At inquiunt.
though Bellarmine, a little ashamed of the name Papist, say; That only the
Lutherans, and a few neighbor Countries call them so: Yet that late Carmelite
that has defended Lypsius, says confidently. Anastas. Cochelet. Pale^^rit.
hono. f. 9.
We are Papists; we confess it; and Fo. 6.
we glory in that Name.

7 And this name of Pope, they are the rather content to take to him againe^
because they think that we grudge him that name. Florimond. de Remond. l. 6.
For so that Counselor of the Parliament of Bordeaux, which in his History
of the progress and decay of Heresy, has taken occasion to speak of the
affairs of England, in which, because no man should doubt of the truth
thereof, he pro^esses to follow Sanders, and Ribadene^ra, (by whom a Moral man
may as well be instructed for matter of Fact, as a Christian might be by Arrius
or Mahomet, for his Faith) says, That Henry the ^ight, made it Felony to
call the holy Father Pope, or to read that name in any Book, and not to blot
it out.

8 Having therefore found such easiness, and flexibility in all old Names,
they have provided him now of this name spiritual Prince; in a larger sense,
then that great Prince, whom they call Praeste-gian assumes it (for that name
signifies Apostolic, Brancheda Orarati. ad Imp. de mutat. Imper. fo. 18.
and Christ's Vicegerent, in his own kingdoms) or then Christ himself ever
assumed, or the Holy Ghost, by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 9.6.
reckoning up his most glorious titles, ever attributed to him; and yet in that
place of Esaias, both his eternal Kingdom by his filiation, and his everlasting
Kingdom of glory, inchoated in his resurrection, and his Kingdom of grace in
our consciences, are evidently to be discerned: For, though there be mention
o^ Principality, yet it is said, Principatus super humerum eius, Lyra.
which your Doctor expounds of carrying the Cross; and that he shall be
Princeps pacis, which is Intrinsicall, ^aies the same Expositor and belonges to
the Conscience. But this Doctrine which must so settle and affirm a Catholic
conscience, that it must bind him to die, and entitle him to Martyrdom, has
no touch, nor tincture of either of these Principalities, of Patience, or of
Peace; bu^ all therein is Anger and War, not only with that sword of two
edges, of the Word and Censures, which is his, but with two swords; which now
we shall see how he claims.

9 The Pope represents Christ to us (says Bellarmine) as he was, De pont. l.
5. c. 4.. Superest.
whilst he lived amongst men: nor can we attribute to the Pope any other
office, then Christ had^ as he was a mortal man. And in t^is Capacity, says
he, Ibid. Sediam.
Christ neither had the execution, nor the power of any temporal Kingdom..
Caeterum.
And that therefore, if the Pope, as a King, can take from any King the
execution of his place, Ca. 3. parag. Gregorius.
he is greater then Christ; and if he cannot, then he has no Regal power.
Thus he disputes against those which entitle the Pope to a Direct, and
Ordinary Jurisdiction over Prin^es.

10 And the same reasons and grounds, by which he destroies that opinion, will
destroy his; which is, Ca. 3. ^arag. vt igitur.
That as Christ was, so the Pope is, spiritual prince, over all men, and that
by virtue of that power, he may dispose of all temporal things, as he shall
judge it expedient to his spiritual ends.

11 For first, against that opinion of Ordinary Jurisdiction he argues thus;
Ca. 3 parag. Eade^
If it were so, it would appear out of the Scriptures, or from the Tradition
of the Apostles: but in the Scriptures, there is mention of the keys of
Heaven, but none of the Kingdoms of the earth; nor do our Adversaries offer
any Apostolic Tradition. Will not you then, before you receive too deep
impression of Bellarmines doctrine, as to pay your lives for maintenance
thereof, tell him, That if his opinion were true, it would appear in
Scripture, or Apostolic tr^dition? And shall poor and lame, and ^lacke
arguments coniecturally and unnecessarily deduced from similitudes and
comparisons, and decency, and conueniency bind your judgments, and your
lives, for reverence of him, who by his example counsels you, to call for better
proof? will you so, in obeying him, disobey him, and swallow his conclusions,
and yet accuse his fashion of proving them? which you do, if when he calls for
scriptures against others, you a^cept his positions for his sake, without
scriptures.

12 Another of Bellarmines reasons against Ordinary Jurisdiction, is, That
Regal authority was no^ necessary nor of use in Christ to work his end, Ca.
4. Confirmatur.
but s^perfluous and unprofitable. And what greater use, or necessity can the
Pope have of this Extraordinary authority (which is a power to work the same
effects, though not by the same way) then Christ had, if his ends be the same
which Christ's were? and it appears that Christ neither had, nor forsaw use of
either, because he neither exercised nor instistuted either. For, that is not
to the purpo^e, which Bellarmine says, that Christ might have exercised that
power if he would, Ca. 4. Vt igitur
since the Popes authority is grounded upon Christ's example; and limited to
that: For Christ might have done many things which the Pope cannot do; as
converting all the world at once, instituting more sacraments, and many such:
Ca. 3. Gregorius.
and therefore Bellarmine argued well before, that it is enough for him to
prove, that Christ did not exercise Regal power, nor declare himself to have
it which Declarion only, and practice, must be drawn into Consequence, and be
the precedent for the Pope to follow.

16 The light of which Argument, that the Pope has no power, but such as
Christ exercised, has brought so many of them to think it necessary to prove
That both Christ did exercise Regal aut^ority in accepting Regal reverence
upon Palme-Sunday, and in his corrections in the temple, And his judgment in
the woman's case which was taken in Adultery. Maynardus de priuil. Eccles. Ar.
7. N. 5.6.9. Idem. Ar. 8. n. 3.5
And that S. Peter used also the like power, in condemning Ananias and Saphira,
and Simon Magus.

14 In another place Bellarmine says, That S. Paul appealed to Caesar, De
pont. l. 2. c. 29.. Respond. primo
as to his Superior Judge, not only de facto, but de Iure; and that the
Apostles were subjects to the Ethnique Emperors, in all temporal causes, and
that the law of Christ, depriues no man of his right, which he had before. And
lately in his Recognitions he departs from this opinion, and denies that he was
his Judge, de Iure. If his first opinion be true, can these consist together,
that he which is subject in temporal causes, can at the same time and in the
same causes be superior? Or that he over whom the Emperor had supreme
temporal authority, should have authority over the Emperor in temporal
causes? and what is there in the second opinion, that should induce so strong
an Obligation upon a conscience, as to die for it; Since the first was better
grounded (for, for that he produ^ed Scriptures) and the second is de^titute of
that help, and without further sear^h into it, tells us, that neither the
Doctrine, nor the Doctor are constant enough to build a Mar^yredome upon.

15 Thus also Bellarmine argues, to our advantage (though he do it to prove a
necessity of this power in the Church) that every Commonwealth is sufficiently
provided in it self, C^. 7. Secunda ra^^.
to attain the end, for which it is instituted. And, as we said before, the
end of a Christian Commonwealth, is not only Tranquillity (for that sometimes
may be main^ained by unchristianly means) but it is the practice of all moral
virtue, now explicated to us, and observed by us, in the exercise of Christian
Religion; and therefore such a Commonwealth has of it self, all means
necessary to those ends, without new additions: as a man consisting of body
and soul, if he come from Infidelity to the Christian Religion, has no new
third essen^iall p^rt added to him, to govern that body, and soul, but only
has the same soul enlightened with a more explici^e knowledge of her duty.

Ca. 6. Ita pr^r^u^.
16 B^llar^ine also tells us, That in the Apostles time, these two powers were
separated, and ^o all the Temporal was in the Emperor, as all the
Ecclesiasticke in the Apostles and that Hierarchy. By what way then, and at
what time came this Authority into them, if it were once out? For, to say,
that it sprung out of Spiritual Authority, when there was any use of it, were
to say, that that Authority at Christ's institution had not all her perfections
and maturity, and to say, that it is no other but the highest act, and a kind
of prerogative of the spiritual power, will not reach home^ For you must
believe and die in this, that the Pope as spiritual Prince, may not only
dispose of temporal matters, but that herein he uses the temporal sword, and
temporal jurisdiction.

17 But when Bellarmine says, l. 5^ C. 6.
That this supreme authority resides in the Pope, yet not as he is Pope, And
that the Pope, and none but he, can ^epose Kings, and transfer Kingdoms, and
yet, not as Pope, I pro^esse that I know not, how to speak thereof with so
much earnestness, as becomes a matter of so great weight. For other Princes,
when they exercise their extraordinary and Absolute power, and prerogative,
and for the public good put in practice sometimes some of those parts of
their power, 1. Sam. 8.11.
which are spoken of in Samuel, (which to many men seem to exceed Regal
p^we^) yet they profess to do these things as they are Kings, and not by any
other authority then that.

18 And if there be some things which the Pope cannot do as Pope, but as
chief spiritual Prince, this implies that there are other inferior
spiritual Princes, which are Bishops: (for so Bellarmine says, That Bishops
in their Diocesses are Ecclesiastique Princes. De Pont. l. 4. C. 15.. At in.
) And have Bishops any such measure of this spiritual principality, that they
may do somthings by that, which they cannot do, as they are Bishops^

19 All Principalities maintain their being by these two, reward, and
punishment. How lame then and imperfect is this spiritual principality, which
can afford but one half? For it is only then of use, when the Pope will
punish, and correct a King, by Deposing him: for all Rewards and Indulgences in
this life, and in the next, he conferres and bestows, as he is Pope, and
needs not this Title, to do any good which is in his power. And for
corrections and punishments, all which we are sure he can lawfully do, which
is, to inflict Church censures, upon those who are under his spiritual
obedience, he does as he is Pope, and needs not this principality for that
use neither.

20 But for irregular actions, and such as occasion tumult and sedition, De
Council. l. 1. C. 18.. Dico.
he must be a spiritual Prince. For, says Bellarmine, Though the Pope as he
is president of a general Council, (and he is that, as he is Pope) ought to
follow the greatest number of voices in making Decrees^ yet as he is chief
Prince, he is not bound to do so, but may follow the lesser number. And yet
scarce constant to himself, he says, That this liberty belongs to the Pope,
because he has the assistance of the holy Ghost: Now the Pope, as Pope, has
the assistance of the holy Ghost, (for else his Determination in Ca^hedra, in
matters of faith, were not by his Ordinary, and Direct power,) and therefore
as Pope he may follow the fewer voices in a Council, and as Pope (or no way)
he may depose Princes.

21 For as, though they seem to place more power, Reg. Iuris in 6. C. ^in.
glos. verb. P^ntif^catus.
or dignity, in Pontificatu, then in Apostolatu, because the Popes date their
Rescripts, from the time of their Election to their Coronation, thus, Anno
Apostolatus primo, etc. and seal but with half the seal, but after their
Coronation, they begin to call their government Pontificatum: yet all the
authority which they have, is certainly in them from their^ Election, because
says the gloss, that conferres praesulatum: so they have fancied and imagined
a Principatum above all these, yet certainly all the authority they have, is
as they are Popes. Which served them to do mischief enough, before this title
was invented. And to say, that they have authority, as they are Popes, to do
some acts, as they are not Popes, is such a dark, and mistie, and drowsy
Doctrine, as it is the fittest and most proportional Martyrdom in this
business, for a man to dream that he died for it.

22 For it is strange that the^e men can discern and distinguish in the same
office, between the Pope, and a spiritual Prince, when as Philip the last
King of Spain, could not distinguish between the Person and the Office of the
Pope^ for being in so much forwardness, that he had given the D. of Alua Order
to besiege Rome, because Paul the fourth had brought into Italy an Army of
French, to infest the Kingdom of Naples, and being solicited by the Venetians,
to desist from offending the Pope, though he answered, That his preparations
were not against the Pope, but against Peter Caraffa his subject, and a Rebel,
yet when the Venetians replied, Lelio medici contr. Venetia. Sopra il sunda 2.
fo. 194.
that if he could separate Caraffa from the Pope, they would intercede no
farther, else they would give the Pope their assistance, the King, says a
Catholic writer, gave over, because he saw it impossible to distinguish them.

23 And as the Doctrine it self is too inexplicable, for any man to adventure
thereupon his li^e, or such dangers as the law esteems equivalent to this
purpose, which are, all such damages as induce a just fear: So is the Channel
and way by which it is derived to us, so various, and muddy, as that also
should retard any man, from such a Prejudice, and such an Anticipation of the
resolution of the Church herein as it is, to seal with life, that which no man
yet knows, how the Church will determine. For, in Bellarmine, who has got the
reputa^ion to be the principal of t^is faction (though I confess he found the
foundation of it, and his best Arguments for it, in our Countriman Sanders, out
of whom and Stapleton and a few more, that Church has received more strength,
then from the late writers of all other Nations,) his authority and credit is
not only infirmed and impaired, in that, Baronius, a man of as much merit of
the Church, and rewarded by her, with the same Dignity, is of a contrary
opinion, but also, because auerring, that his opinion is the opinion of the
Divines, and the other only of Canonists, Divines themselves, (for such
Baronius and Bozius are) have more then others oppugned it.

24 And so that new Order of the Congregation, of which both they are, being
(as I said before) laid for a stumbling block, that the world, which in such a
rage of Devotion ran toward the Jesuits, might be arrested a little upon
the contemplation of an Order which professed Church-knowledge, as the other
did state-knowledge, has exceeded the Jesuits in their own Art, of
flattering and magnifying the Pope. For they have maintained his Direct and
Ordinary power, whereas the other have but provided him a new and specio^s
Title. Titulo libri.
And so not only such as Carerius lays the imputation of Impious Politician
upon Bellarmine and all his followers in this point, And bitterly Anathmatises
Bellarmine by name, and maintains this power to be in the Pope, De Pont. l^ 2.
C. 8.
either as Pope, or not as Christ's Vicar, l. 2. C. 11.
But Bozius also calls these men nouos Theologos, and says, l. 5. C. Vlti.
They teach doctrine evidently false, and such as fights against all Truth. And
another Catholic writer, Barclaius de pot. Pap. C. 1.. mihi.
though he impugn both these opinions, of Bellarmine, and Baronius, yet he
protests, that the opinion which Bellarmine calls the Canonists opinion, is the
more probable, and defensible: because, says he, that opinion is not against
the order of Nature, that the Pope should exercise such a power, which they
maintain to be directly granted to him: but that opinion, which they call the
Divines opinion, is against Nature, since it admits the exercise of such an
Authority, as is neither by name granted, nor necessary to the ends of the
Church: And therefore, says this Catholic, though the Divines overthrow the
Canonists, yet they prove not their own opinion. Cap. 3. in Princ. et ca. 40.
And in another place he says, That though Bellarmine have given as much to
the Pope, as honestly he could, and more then he should have done, yet he was
so far from satisfying the Pope herein, that for this opinion the Pope was
very near condemning all his works, as, says he, the Jesuits themselves,
have told me.

25 Which disposition of enclining to the Canonists opinion, appears still in
the Popes, who accept so well the books of that purpose, that the greatest
part of those Authors, which I have cited in this book, of that matter, are
dedicated to the late Popes. So that, that Doctrine, which is so much denied in
the substance and Essence thereof, that all ways of the existence thereof are
peremptorily denied, has not yet received concoxions enough from the Church, to
nourish a conscience to such a strength, as Martyrdom requires. For that,
which their great Doctor Franciscus a Victoria pronounces against his direct
Authority, De potest. Eccles. Sect. 6. Nu. 4.
we may as safely say against that and the indirect, This is the strongest
proo^e that can be against him, This Authority is not proved to be in the Pope,
Ibid. Nu. 2. et 3.
by any means, and therefore he has it not. To which purpose he had directly
said before, of the direct Authority, It is manifestly false, although they
say that it is manifestly true; And I believe it to be a mere devise, only to
flatter the Popes. And it is altogether fained, without probability, Reason,
Witness, Scripture, Father, or Divine. Only some Glossers of the law, poor
in fortune and learning, have bestowed this authority upon them. And therefore,
as that Ermit which was fed in the Desert by an Angel, Aluarez specul. vtri.
Dignit. ca. 33. Nu. 4.
received from the Angel withered grapes, when he said his prayers, after the
due time, and ripe grapes when he observed the just time, but wild sower
grapes when he prevented the time, so must that hasty and unseasonable
obedience to the Church, to die for her Doctrine, before she her self knows
what it is, have but a sower and unpleasant reward.

CHAP. X. That the Canons can give them no warrant, to adventure these dangers,
for this refusal: And that the reverend name of Canons, is falsely, and
cautelously insinuated, and stolen upon the whole body of the Canon law, with a
brief Consideration upon all the books thereof; and a particular suruay, of
all those Canons, which are ordinarily cyted by those Authors, which maintain
this temporal Jurisdiction in the Pope.
TO this spiritual Prince, of whom we spoke in the former Chapter, the huge
and vast books of the Canon law, serve for his Guarde. For they are great
bodies loaded with diverse weapons of Excommunications, Anathems, and
Interdicts, but are seldom drawn to any press or close fight. And as with
temporal Princes, the danger is come very near his person, if the remedy lie
in his guard, so is also this spiritual Prince brought to a near exigent, if
his title to depose Princes must be defended by the Canons. For, in this
spiritual war which the Reformed Churches under the conduct of the Holy
Ghost, have undertaken against Rome, not to destroy her, but to reduce her to
that obedience, from which at first she unadvisedly strayed, but now stubbornly
rebels against it, the Canon law serves rather to stop a breach, into which
men use to cast as well straw and Feathers, as Timber and Stone, then to
maintain a fight and battle.

2 This I speak not to diminish the Reverence or slacken the obligation which
belongs to the ancient Canons and Decrees of the Church; but that the name may
not deceive us; Carranza. sum. Council. fo. 92.
For, as the heretics Vrsalius, and Valens, got together a company at Nice,
because they would establish their Heresies, under the name of a Nicene
Council, (which had ever so much reputation, that all was readily received,
which was truly offered under that name) so is most pestilent and infectious
doctrine, conuayed to us, under the reverend name of Ecclesiastique Canons.

3 The body of the Canon law, which was called Codex Canonum, which contained
the Decrees of certain ancient Councels, was usually produced in after-
Councels for their direction, and by the entreaty of popes, admitted and
incorporated into the body of the Roman and Imperial law; and ever in all
causes, wherein they had given any Decision, it was judged according to them,
after the Emperors had by such admittance given them that strength.

4 And if the body of that law, were but grown and swelled, if this were a
Grauidnes, and Pregnancy which she had conceived of General Councels lawfully
called, and lawfully proceeded in, and so she had brought forth children loving
and profitable to the public, and not only to the Mother, (for how many
Canons are made only in favor of the Canons?) all Christian Princes would be
as inclinable to g^ue her strength, and dignity, by incorporating her into
their laws, and authorizing her thereby, as some of the Emperors were. And
had the Bishops of Rome maintained that purity, and integrity of Doctrine, Cod.
de Sum. Trinit. le. 1. Cunctos
and that compatiblenesse with Princes, which gave them authority at first,
when the Emperors conceived so well of that Church, as they bound their faith
to the faith thereof (which they might boldly do at that time) perchance
Princes would not have refused, that the adiections of those later Popes should
have been admitted as parts of the Canon law: nor should the Church have been
pestred, and poisoned with these tumors, and excrescenges, with which it
abounds at this time, and swelles daily with new additions.

5 In which, if there be any thing which binds our faith, and deriues upon
us a Title to Martyrdom, if we die in defense thereof (as there are many
things derived from Scriptures and Obligatory Councels) the strength of that
band rises so much from the nature of the thing, or from the goodness of the
soil, from which it was transplanted to that place, that though we might be
Martyrs, if we defended it in that respect, yet we should loose that benefit,
though it be an evident and Christian truth, if we defend it upon that reason,
That it is by approbation of the ^ope inserted into the body of the Canon law;
which is a Satyr, and Miscellany of diverse and ill digested Ingredients.

6 The first part whereof, which is the Decretum compiled by Gratian, which
has been in use above four hundred years, is so diseased and corrupt a
member thereof, that all the Medicines, which the learned Archbishop
Augustinus, applied to it, and all that the several Commissioners, first by
Pius the fifth, then by Gregory the thirteenth, have practiced upon it, have not
brought it to any state of perfect health, nor any degree of conualescence.

7 But though that Bishop say, De Emendat. Great. l. 1. Dial. 1.
That Gratian is not worthy of many words, though in his dispraise, yet because
he tells us, Ibid.
That the ignorant admire him, though the Learned laugh at him; And because he
is accounted so great a part of the Canon Law, as even the Decretall Epistles
of the Popes are called, Extra, in respect of him, as being out of the Canon
Law, it shall not be amiss to make some deeper impressions of him.

8 Thus far therefore the Catholic Archbishop charges him, L. 2. Dial. 8.
To have been so indiscreete and precipitate, that he never stood upon
Authority of Books, but took all, as if they had been written with the
finger of God, as certainly as Moses Tables; And he is so well confirmed in
the opinion of his negligence, that he says, L. 1. Dial. 4.
He did not only never Judge and weigh, but never see the Councels nor the
Registers of Popes, nor the works of the Fathers: And therefore says he,
There is only one remedy left, which is, Vna litura. L. 1. Dial. 19.
And in another place, L. 1. Dial. 16.
That there can be no use at all made of this Collection, but that a better
must be attended, out of the Originals.

9 But if his error were only in Chronologies, as to give Pope Nicholas a
place in the Council of Carthage, L. 1. Dial. 3.
who was dead before; Or in Arithmeticke, Ibid.
as when purposely he enumerates all the Councels, to make the number less by
four. If this weakness had only been, that he was not able to spell, and so
in a place of much importance, to Read Ephesus for Erphesfurd, Ibid.
Hierome, for Jeremy, L. Dial. 4.
and Heretic for Henry, and a hundred such; If he had stopped, either at
mistaking of true Authors, Ibid.
as to cite out of Saint Peter, that which Saint Paul says (which liberty his
Glosser extends farther, Did. 43. si quis. verb. postulat.
and therefore cites a whole sentence, for Scripture, which is no where) Or if
he had stayed at imagining words out of false Authors, as to cite the Council
of Geneua, L. 1. Dial. 4.
and Macharius the Pope, which never were, (as he and the Palea do) there were
an open way for him, as it is said in that Dialogue, to say with the Apostle,
L. 2. Dial 8. 1. Tim. 1.13.
Quia ignorans ^eci.

10 But we also find malignitie and danger to our cause, in his
Falsifications. For, to dignifie the Sea of Rome, De paenit. Doct. 1 potest
fi^ri.
he cites Ambroses words thus, Non habent Petri haereditatem, qui non habent
Petri sedem; which in Ambrose is observed to be, Petri fidem. And to establish
the exemption of Clergy men from secular Justice, 11. q. 1. Cl^ricum Ex Conc.
Agath. Can. 32.
he cites this out of a Council now a thousand years past, Clericum nullus
presumat pulsare apud Iudicem Saecularem; Whereas the words of the Council are
Clericus nullus presumat. And so the Council lays a Commandment upon the
Clergy, but Gratian lays it upon the Layetie.

11 Which falsitie, Tom. 2. ^o. 306.
Binius, citing the Council aright, and Gratians words also right in the
Margin, forbeares to observe or reprehend, and dissembles the injury done to
the world therein. But Bellarmine has dealt herein with more obnoxiousnesse,
and less excuse, De Clericis l. 1. c. 28 Tertia.
then Binius, because having no reference at all to Gratian, he cites the
words out of the Council it-selfe; and having said, That Counsel pronounces
in this point more clearly, in these words; He cites the words, falsely, and
corruptly as Gratian did before.

12 And as for such iniquities as these, we have reason to decline Gratian, as
injurious to us: So al^o in Charity toward them, which are carried with an
implicit Faith in Canons, in which name Gratian is enwrapped, we are bound to
tell you how unworthy he is, to be relied upon by you. For in the point of the
Emperors Electing the Pope, he has spoken so dangerously, Baron To. 9. Ann.
774. n. 13. D^st. 65 Hadrianus. St Did. 63 In Synodo.
that Baronius is forced to give this censure upon him, Gratian, out of too
much credulity, improuidently writ out a most manifest imposture, and inserted
that, as a most strong Decree, all which, with the Author thereof, should
rather have been hissed away, and pursued with execrations, which also he
says of another place in Gratian, to the same purpose; To 9. Anno 801. ^o.
622.11. q. 1. Volumus.
and accuses him of mutilating the famous laws of Charles the Great, called
Capitularia.

13 With like danger to the Roman Sea, he cites a Canon of a Greek Council,
Did. 31. quoniam.
whose sense he apprehended not, in the matter of marriage of Priests; for he
says, that that Canon was grounded upon the Apostles Canons; and yet it is
contrary to the Canons of the Roman Church. So that of this place, that
Archbishop of whom I spoke before, exclaimes, li. 1. Dial. 8.
who can endure this? and that by no means it may be received.

14 And not only in matters of fact (though that be the right leg upon which
the Roman Religion, (especially in Crown Divinity) does stand) does Gratian
deceive you, but even in such things as are matters of faith: both naturally,
and so, common to all men, As when he allows that there may be perplexities in
evil, Did. 13. Duo Mala. And Nerui.
and so in some cases a necessity of sinning, and then, says he, the remedy
is to choose the less evil; as also of that which is matter of faith,
especially to the professors of your Religion, which is the necessity of Orall
Confession: De p^niten^. Did. 1. Quamuis in fine.
for, having produced authorities on both sides, whether it be necessary or
no, he leaves it as indifferent to the Reader, to allow and choose which
opinion he likes best.

15 And because the Gloss is now by some thought, to be of equal authority
with the Text, it is not an inconvenient way to eneruate both, by presenting
some of the vanities and illusions of that. And though I will not in so serious
a business, insist upon such things, as might make sport and move laughter,
yet these few I may be excusable to let fall in this place. When Gratian
speaks of that Parable of the lost sheep, L^c. 15.4.
and says, out of the Gospel, that the 99 were left in Deserto, id est, Did.
5. Quia sanctitas. verb. In Deserto.
says the Gloss, In Coelo, quod Diabolus per peccatum deseruit. Which,
besides the detortion, destroys utterly the purpose of our Savior, in that
Parable. And so when Gratian, out of a Council cites an Act to be done, 24. q.
2. Sane pro^e^tur. Verb. Item.
in Ecclesia Romanorum, id est, says the Gloss, Constantinopolitanorum.

16 In many places Gratian says, that Did. 22. in tantum. in fine. 24. q. 2.
Sane profertur.
Dioscorus had not erred, in fide; which being evidently false, for Did. 15.
Canones. et glos. ver. Defe^sorem.
he followed and defended Eutyches his Heresy, the gloss remedies it thus,
Non in fide, id est, non in fide tantum. And out of his favor to Priests, Did
31. Sacerdotibus. ver. semper.
where Gratian says out of Bid, That Priests must always abstain from their
wifes, the gloss says, Semper, id est, Horis debitis. And when out of the
Nicene Council it was produced, Did. 33. Interd^xit. v^rb. Idoneas.
That a Prelate might have in his house no women, except his mother, or sister,
or such fit persons, as might avoid suspicion, that is, says the gloss, His
men's wives. And when Lanfred a young lusty Bishop, Did. 34. Quorundam. v^^sama.
and a great huntsman, was defamed also for immoderate familiarity with his
own daughter, the gloss says, It was not for any evil, for they were too
near in blood, but because he kissed her so much openly, and put his hand in
her bosom.

17 And lastly, to stay you no longer, in this ill air, Ibid. Vidua. ver.
multorum.
where the text says, Meretrix est, quae multorum libidini patet, the gloss
brings this indefinite number to a certain, and says, that that name belongs
to her, when she has lain with 23000. men.

18 And as these Authors in whom there are these aspersions, and such weeds as
these, are therefore unworthy, that either the Popes approbation should ^all
upon them, or that any obligation should be thrown upon our consciences, from
their authority: so is it impossible, that any such approbation should include
them both; for the gloss does somet^mes (when no reconciliation can serve him)
depart from Gratian with some disdain; Did. 68. sicut. ver. sicut.
as when he says, Superficialis est Argumentatio Magistri: and sometimes in
c^oler^ as one notes him to say, Alb. Gent. de lib. Iur. C. 2.
Fateor plane te mentitum, Gratiane: And sometimes he does positiuely teach
the just contrary to Gratian, in matter of faith; as in the Doctrine of
perplexities, Did. 13. Duo mal^.
which we noted before.

19 How dangerous therefore it is to confide in Gratian, we see already, and may
have further light, by observing, De Council. autor^ l. 2. c. 13. Sea obijciunt.
That Ballarmine says, that in a main point of Canonical Scriptures, Gratian
was deceived, by trusting a false copy of Saint Augustines works: Did. 19.
In Canonicis.
And as Bellarmine says here^ that Gratian was deceived, so Gratian deceived
him; for in that Canon which we cyted before, of the exemption of Clergy men,
either Bellarmine was a direct falsifier of the Council, or an indiscreet and
credulous swallower of Gratians errors; which in his Recognition he refuses
not to confess in another matter, when he retracts some things which he spoke
upon the credit of Gratian, and there repents and reca^ts the^.

20 But you and Bellarmine may easily be misled by him, since even a Pope
himself was brought into a false persuasion by his error. For, till of late,
all the copies of the Decretum, in that famous Canon, Did. 15.
Sancta Romana, which distinguishes Canonical from Apocryphal writings, in
stead of the words, Sedulij opus, Heroicis versibus descriptum, had these
words, Pierius de Barb. sace^do.. At videte.
Hereticis versibus. Which says a Catholic author, induced not only many
wise men, but even pope Adrian 6. to a persuasion, that al Poetry was
Heretical; since Gelasius a Pope, and Author of that Canon, though he praised
Sedulius his work, in that place, yet because it was writ in verse, he c^ls
them Hereticos versus.

21 Of them therefore which will bind their faith to the Canons, and aduentu^e
these dangers for that faith (as the Canonists say, Did. 75. quod a patrib.
gloss. ver. sabbati.
that Saturday and Sunday is all one, fictione Canonica so we may say, tha^
they are but Martyrs fictione Canonica; and that not only a Martyr, and a
Selfe-murderer, but a Martyr and a Traitor, may be all one, Fictione Canonica.
And by such fiction, that English Priest Bridgewater, which calls himself
Aquipontanus, ouerturning and re^enuersing his name with h^^ conscience, Respo.
ad Georg. Sohn. de Antichrist. These. 15.
may be believed, when he says, That those Priests which were executed under
Queen Elizabeth, died pro inficiatione pontificatus faeminei: But their malice
was not because she would have bin a Priest, but because she would not be a
Sacrifice to their Idolatry, nor Ambition; nor open her heart to their
enchantments, nor her throat and sides to their poisons and swords.

22 The next limme in this great body of the Canon law, after the Decretum, is
the Decretall; set out by Grego^y the ninth, who was Pope about the year one
thousand two hundred thirty. And as the Decretum pretends to bring to all
purposes, sentences of Fathers, an^ Canons of Counsels, So this pretends
principally the Rescripts and De^retall letters of Popes. So also, do all the
other books, which were set out after, in supplement of this: as that, which
is called Sextus, set forth by Boniface the eight, who was Pope, An. one
thousand three hundred: and the Clementines, which Clement the fifth set out,
who was Pope within six years after^ and those Extrauagants, which bea^e the
name of John the two and twenty, within ten years of Clement: and those which
are called common Extrauagants because they come from diverse Popes: and to
these is added not long since the book called Septimus Decretalium.

23 And thus this fat law (for so Ciuilians say of that, that it is Crassa
aequitas; which is a praise beyond desert, though rhey speak it in diminution
and scorn) grows daily so fast, that as any corruption can get entertainment in
a gross body, so I doubt not but this, or the next age, shall see in their
Octaues and future Volumes, not only many of their letters, yet for shame
co^cealed, but at Henry the thirds death, canonized in the body of this law.
For though they have denied it with some-earnestnesse, yet they have also
confessed, that if it were such as it is said to be, it admits a good
interpretation.

24 But for these books, though they have more credit with them then the
Decretum has, I will ease my self of that labor, which I took in that
book, in presenting particular defects and infirmities, both because we have
Bellarmines confession, That there are many things in the Decretall Epistles,
which do not make a matter to be De fide, De Pont. l. 4. c. 14. Respond. nec.
but only do declare, what the opinions of the Popes were in those causes,
and because a Catholic author of whom we spoke before, has observed, that
the compiler of the Dec^etals, Picrius de Barba sacerd. Hoc in genere.
by leaving out a word, in a Canon of a Council of Car^hage, has occasioned
the Church ever since, to do directly aganst the purpose of that Council, in
shauing the heads of Priests. De vit. and hon. Cleri. Clericus.
For whereas the Council is cited by him, Clerici nec Comam Nutriant nec
barbam, by occasion whereof, many subsequent orders were brought in, for
Shauing, and transgressors severely punished, it appears that he left out in
the end, the word Radant, which utterly changed the precept into the contrary.
These Canons therefore, of so sickely and weak a constitution, that any thing
deiects them, cannot prevail so much upon our consciences, as to imprint and
work such a confidence in them, and irremoueablenesse from them, as to
maintain them with the same manner of testimony, as we would do the words of
God himself.

25 For, howsoever they depart from them, and seem somewhat negligent of the
Canons, when we make use of them to our advantage against them, yet they
affright and enthrall the tender consciences of their own Disciples, with
nothing more, then the name of Canons, to which promiscuously they ascribe all
reverence and assent, without distinguishing to them, which are Gratians, and
which are opinionate, and which Decretall, for all together are approved and
confirmed. And therefore the Canons themselves not only inflict an Anatheme
vp^on any ^ay-ma^, D^st. 1^. s^ncta Romana.
which shall so much as dispute upon, the text, or any one Iod o^ the Epistle
of Pope Leo, 25. q. 1. Viola^ores.
which is in the Canons, but also pr^nounce it blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, to viola^e a Canon willingly, because ^hey are made by the hyol Ghost
And Bellarmine also, writing against a Doctor which had defended the Venetian
ca^se, against the Popes Censures, says, Respons. ad Docto T^^^lo. propo^it.
t^r^a Te^tia haec.
That it is a g^ieuous rashness, not to be lef^ unpunished, that he should
say, ^he Canons, as being but Humane laws, cannot have equal authority with
Divine. For this (says Bellarmine) is a contempt of the Canons, as though they
were not made by the direction of the holy Ghost. Marsilij desens. Docto. Ca.
5, E^rat. XI.
And yet these Canons which that Doctor intimated, were but two, and cy^ed but
by Gratian, and concerned only Exemp^ion of Clergy men from secul^r ^udges.

26 And so ^arsons when he is to ma^e h^s advantage of any Sentence in Gratian,
uses to dignifie it thus, That it is translated by the Popes into the Corpse of
the Canon law, Treat. of mitig. Ca. 7. n. 42.
and so not only allowed and admitted, and approved, but commended, and
commanded; and as he adds after, Nu. 43.
Canonized and determined for Canonical law, and authorized and set forth for
Sacred and Authentical, Nu 43
by all Popes whatsoeuer^ For they continue st^ll that practice which Frederic
the Emperor observed in his time, Petr. de vineis. Epist. 4. l. 1.
when they interdict^d his K^ngdome of Sicily, Offundunt bibulis auribus
Canon^s.

27 And when they list to urge a Canon, any little rag torn or fallen off from
^hence, Ca^si^nus lugd^ni. Ann. 1606 f^ 740.
must bind the Church de fide, as a cathedral, and Decretall resol^^ion: for
so says he, that made the Notes upon Cassianus, excusing Origin, Chrysostom,
and some other Fathers, for inclining to Platoes opinion of allowing some use
of lies, in wise men, That it was lawful till the Church had defined the
contrary: But now, says he, the Pope has decreed it. And how has he decreed
it? In a letter upon a question of Usury, the Pope says, De V^^ris super eo.
Since the Scriptures forbid lies, even for defense of any man's life, much
less may usury be permitted. But, if in this question of lying, the band did
not a^ise out of the evidence and truth of the matter it self, but relied
upon the authority of the Popes declaration, and decision, can such a ragge
casually and incidentally fall into a letter of another purpose, by way of
comparison, bind the whole Church, De fide? when as, though Sixtus 4. had so
much declared himself to favor the opinion of our Ladies conception without
original sin, that he had by Extra^. Com. De reliqui cum perexcelsa.
one Canon instituted a particular Festival thereof, and appointed a
particular Office for that day, with many Indulgences to the obseruers thereof;
yet the favorers of the contrary opinion, forbore not for reverence of that
Canon, to preach publicly against that Doctrine, till some years after, he
forbad it under pain of Excommunication, by another Canon, Ibid Grave.
that any should affirm that she was conceived in original sin; and yet,
Victorell de Custod. Ang^lo. fo. 99.
this is not esteemed as yet for all this, to be decreed as a matter of faith
in that Church: yea, it is so far from it, that after all these solemnities
and preiudices of that Pope, yet the Commissioners of Sixtus the fifth, and
Gregory the thirteenth (appointed to expunge all dangerous passages in the
Canons) in the Gloss upon that De Consecra. D^st. 3. Pronunciand^m^ Glos. ver.
Natiuitas.
Canon, which reckons all the festival days which are to be observed, have
left these words untouched, The Conception of our Lady is not named, because it
ought not to be kept, though in England, and some other places it be; And the
reason is, because she was conceived in original sin, as all but Christ,
were. And after, the Jesuit, of whom I spoke before, had refreshed that
Doctrine, That a Confession of a person absent, made by letters, was
Sacramental, and Clement the eight, was so vehement against it, that by a
solemn decree he condemned it, for false, rash, and scandalous at least, and
commanded, that no man should speak of it but by way of condemning it, and
excluded even dumb men from this benefi^, yet another Jesuit since, a great
Doctor perplexorum, finds escapes to defend that Doctrine from being
Heretical. Comitolus R^sp. Mor. lib. 1. q. 16.


28 So that, though in truth there go very many Essential formalities to
such a Decree as binds the conscience, De fide, yet these men when they need
the Majesty of a Canon, will ever have fe^ters in all corne^s, to hold all
consciences which off^r to slip or break from them, and still oppress them
with waights, and with Mountain of Canons. Which way, the Canonists do no^
only approve as the most convenient to hold men in that Religion, because the
Canons are more easily v^ried, and flex^ble, and appliable to occasion^, then
the Scriptures are, but also (because ordin^rily the Canonists have no other
learning) they think the way by Canons, to be the fittest means, to reduce them
whom they call Heretics. Maynardus de Priuil. Eccl. Ar. 11. ^. 8.9.
For so says one of them, in his book to the present Pope, (with much
a^u^enesse, certainty, and subtilty,) The Canons may well be alleged against
Heretics; because they allege Scriptures, and they cannot know Scriptures,
by any other way then Canons.

29 But besides, that I have given you sufficient light, to look into the
deformity and co^ruption of the Canons, (which, GOD forbid any should
vnde^stand me to me^ne of Canons, in that sense and acceptance, that the
Ancients received it, which is, of the Constitutions of Orthodox Councels, for
I take it here, as your Doctors do, and as your Confessors do, for the whole
body of the Canon law, extant) before I ente^ into the suruay of those
pa^ticular Canons, which usually are obtruded in this point of the Popes
temporal Supremacy, I will remember you briefly, of some of those re^sons and
occasions, (such as may be fittest to vn-entangle your consciences, and deliver
them from perplexi^ies) in which the Canons do not bind us to the^r
observation.

30 O^ which, one of the most principal and important is, That Canons do
never bind, though they be published and knowledge taken of them, except they
be rec^aued, and practiced in that Country. So says Gratian, Did. 4. In
istis.
Laws are instituted, when they are published, but confi^med, when they are
put in practice. And therefore, says he, none are guilty of transgressing
Telesphorus Decree, that the Clergy should fast fifty days, because it was
never approved by practice. No more does the Decree of A^exander the third, De
tregua et pace C. 1. Tregu^s. glos. ver. s^ongere.
though under excommunication, That in Armies there should be abstinence, for
reverence of certain days, bind any man^ because it was not practiced: which
op^nion Navarre also follows; Manual. C. 23. Nu. 41.
and a late Canonist writing to this Pope, calls it, Singularem, et
Magistralem, Vgolini. resp. ad 7. Theolo.. 1. Nu 9.
et a toto mundo allegatum. And upon this reason the Council of Trent binds
not yet in some Countries, in neither Tribunal of conscience, or the outward
censures of the Church, because it is not received.

31 And can you find that any such Canons, as enable the Pope to depose a
Prince, have been admitted by our Princes, and practis^d as ordinary and
current law? Or can you find any Canon to this purpose, with the face and
countenance o^ a law, made by the Popes in reposed and peaceable times,
delivered quietly as a matter of Doctrine and conscience, and so accepted by
the Church and state? For if in temporal Scismes, and differences, for
temporal matters, between the Popes and other Princes, the Popes to raise or
maintain a party against their enemies, have suffered seditio^s Bulls, and
Rescripts to pass from them, to facilitate and effect their enterprises then
in hand, this is far from the nature of a law, and from being accepted and
practiced, and so justified, as it may be drawn into consequence, and have
power and strength to bind the conscience.

Azor. To. 2. l. 7. C. 3.. Quaer^s. Vgotini. vbi supra.
32 And as acceptance gives life to law, so does disuse, or custom to the
contrary abrogate it. And howsoever a superstition toward the Canons, may
still be preserved in some of you, yet the general state, that is, the same
authority, by which those Canons were received before, which ever had any
strength here, has disused them, and pronounced against so many of them, as
can fall within this question, that is, Such as be derogatorie to the Crown.
For, if these laws be not borne alive, but have their quickening by others
acceptance, the same power that gives them life, may by desertion withdraw
their strength, and leave them inualid.

33 And thus much seemed needful to be said in the first part of this chapter,
that you might see how putrid and corrupt a thing it is, which is offered to
you under the reverend name of Canons; And that though this Cannon law be
declined, and extenuated when we urge it, yet every Sentence thereof is
equaled to Divine Scripture; and produced as a definition of the Church, when
it may work their ends upon your consciences, which, for diverse reasons
issuing out of their own rules, should now be delivered from that yoke.

THE SECOND PART.
FOr the second place in this Chapter, I reserved the consideration and suruay
of those Canons which are Ordinarily usurped for defense of this temporal
Jurisdiction: In which my purpose is not, to amasse all those Canons which
incline toward that point, of which condition those which exexempt the Clergy
from secular Jurisdiction, and very many other, are, but only such as belong
more directly to this point, to which the Oath stretches, That is, whether the
Pope may depose a Sovereign Prince, and so we shall discern whether your
consciences may so safely rely upon any resolution to be had out of the
Canons, that you may incur the dangers of the law, for refusal thereof.

2 Of which Canons, though I will pre^ermit none, which I have found to have
been urged, in any of their Authors, I will first present those Four, which
are always produced with much confidence and triumph: Albericus in Dictionar.
ver. Elect^o.
Though one Catholic Author, which might be alive at the making of the
Clementines (for he lived and flourished about 1350, and Clement the fifth died
not much before 1320.) have drawn these four Canons into just suspicion: for
thus he says of them, The Pastors of the Church putting their Hook into
another man's Harvest, have made four Decretals, which, God knows, whether
they be just or no: But I do not believe (yet I recall it if it be erroneous)
that any of them is agreeable to Law, but I rather believe that they were put
forth against the liberty of the empire.

3 The first is a letter of Innocent the third, who was Pope about 1199. to the
Duke of Caringia the occasion of which Letter, De Electio and Elect. potest.
Venera^^lem.
was this; Henry the son of Frederic the first, of the house of Sueuia,
succeeding his Father in the Empire, had obtained of the Princes of Germany, to
whom the Election belonged, to choose as Successo^ to him, his son Henry: but
he being too young to gouerne^ when his father died, they took thereby
occasion, though against their Oath, to leave him; being also d^sirous ^o
change the stock, and choose an Emperor of some other race; By this means was
Duke Ber^holdus, by some of the Pr^nces elected; but resigned again to Philip
brother to the dead Emperor, in whom the greatest number consented. But some
of the other Princes had called home out of England, Otho of the house of
Saxony, and elected him. Here upon arose such a schism, as rent that country
into very many parts: And then Innocent the third, an active and busy Pope
(for it was he which so much infested our King John) sent his Legate into those
parts, upon pretense of composing those differences. And being in displeasure
with the house of Sueuia for the Kingdom of Sicily, which was in their
possession, but pretended to by the Church, his Legate disallowed the election
of Philip, and confirmed Otho. But some of the Princes ill satisfied with the
Legates proceeding herein, complained thereof to the Pope; in answer whereof
the Pope writes to one of them, this Letter. In which, handling his Right of
confirming the elected Emperor, though he speak diverse things derogatorie to
the dignity of Princes, discoursiuely, and occasionally, yet is not this letter
such a Decree, as being pronounced Cathedrally in a matter of faith, after due
consultation, should bind posterity, but only a direction to that person,
how he ought to behave himself in that business.

4 The Letter may be thus abridged; We acknowledge the right of the Election
to be in the Princes, especially because they have it from the Apostolic Sea,
which transferred the Empire unto them: But, because we must consecrate the
Person elected, we must also examine his fitness. Our Legate therefore did no
Act concerning the Election, but the person elected. We therefore repute OTHO
Emperor; For, if the Electors would never agree, should the Apostolic Sea
always be without a defender? We have therefore thought it fit, to war^e the
Princes, to adhere to him. For there are notorious impediments against the
other: as public Excommunication, persecuting the Church, and manifest
perjury. Therefore we command you to depart from him, notwithstanding any
Oath made to him, as Emperor.

5 And is there any matter of Faith in this Decretall? Or any part thereof? Is
it not all grounded upon matter of fact, which is, the Translation o^ the
Empire which is yet under disputation^ Do not many Catholic writers deny
the very act of Transferring by the Pope; And say, That the people being now
abandoned and forsaken by the Eastern Emperors, had by the law of Nature and
Nations, a power in themselves to choose a King? And do not those which are
more liberal in confessing the Translation, deny that the Popes Consecration,
or Coronation, or Unction in^uses any power into the Emperor, or works any
fart^er, then when a Bishop does the same ceremonies to a King? Is it not
justly said, that i^ the Emperor must stay for his Authority, till the Pope
do these acts, he is in worse condi^ion, by this increase of his Dominions
then he was before. For, before he was Emperor, and had a little of Italy
added to him, there was no doub^ but that he had full jurisdiction, in his own
Dominions before these Ceremonies, and now he must stay for them.

6 And may not the Popes question in this le^ter, be well retorted thus, If the
Pope will not crown the Emperor at all, shall the Empire ever lack a head?
For the Pope may well be presumed to be slack in that office, because he
pretends to be Emperor during the vacancie. But besides that an over earnest
maintaining of this that the Emperor had no jurisdiction in Italy, before
these Ceremonies, would diminish and mutilate the patrimony of the Church, of
which a great part was confe^red and given by Pipin, before any of these
ceremonies were given b^ the pope, De Iure iurendo.
the glosser upon the Clementines, is liquid and round in this point, when he
says, That these ceremonies, and the taking of an Oath, are nothing; and that
now, Resipiscente mundo, the world being grown wiser, there must be no longer
striving for both swords.

7 For those notorious impediments, which the Pope objects in this letter,
against Philip, if they were such as made him incapable of Election, then there
was a Nullity in the choice, and the Pope did nothing but declare that; which
may often fall out in states, which elect their Princes, because there are many
limitations, but in Successorie princes, it cannot hold: but if these were not
such impediments, by the laws which governed the Electors, they became not
such, by this Declaration. For one of them, which is manifest perjury, the
pope himself was some cause of his continuing therein. For the oath was made
to his brother, in the behalf of his young Nephew, who should have been
Emperor. And now the Pope had not only disabled him, but all the other
Princes, from keeping that oath, by electing or confirming another Emperor.

8 But if all which the Pope says in that letter, shall not only be strong
enough to bind the Election, but to bind the consciences of posterity, as
matter of faith, his last reason against Philips election, must have equal
strength with the rest, which would be of dangerous consequence; for it is,
That if after his Father had been Emperor, and his Brother, he also should
succeed, the Empire would pass from Election to succession, and none should
be assumed but of one house; Either then it is matter of faith, that three of
one family may not succeed in an Elective state, or, as this is, so all the
rest are but arguments of inconueniencie and unfitness.

9 And this absoluing this Duke, to whom he writes, of his Oath, is but of an
Oath made Ratione Regni, to him who never had the Kingdom: and therefore that
power of absoluing, cannot by this Decretall be extended to such Oaths, which
are acknowledged to have been just, when they were made, as being made to
lawful and indubitable Princes. And certainly (for though you dare not hear,
yet we dare speak truth,) the whole purpose in that act, of the Pope, was
corrupt, and far from intention of making peace. Of whose profit by reason of
that dissension one of your own Abbats, Vspergens. so^ 1198.
says, That there was scarce any Bishopric, or Parish Church, which was not
litigious, and the Suite brought to Rome, Sed non vacua Manu, And so he
proceeds, Gaude, Matter nostra Roma, because all flows to thee, aperiuntur
Cataractae the saurorum. Rejoice for the iniquity of the Sons of men;
Iocundare de Adiutrice tua Discordia. Thou have now that which thou did
always thirst. Sing thy song, because thou have overcome the world, not by thy
Religion, but the wickedness of men, for men are not drawn to thee by their
own Devotion, or by a pure Conscience, but by the doing of manifold
wickednesses, and by buying the Decision of their Suites and Causes.

10 The second Canon usually produced, De Sent. et re iudic. in 6. Ad
Apostolicae.
and noted by Albericus (as I said) to be against Justice, issued upon this
occasion. When Otho whom the former Pope had established against Philip, became
unthankful to the Pope, he also was excommunicate: and Frederick, the Son
of the first Frederick, to whom the Princes had sworn in his Cradle, was
elected and crowned; with whom also, b^c^use he would not go into the holy
land, and expose the Kingdom of Sicily to their Ambition, the Popes fell out,
and excommunicated him thrice. And when a general Council was gathered by
Innocent the fourth, for the relief of the holy land, the Pope himself
proposed Articles against the Emperor. Whose Advocate Thaddaeus promised all,
which might conduce to peace and Reformation on his Masters behalf. This
satisfied not the Pope, but he asked for Sureties: and when the Kings of
England and France, were offered, the pope refused them, upon pretense, that if
the Emperor should remain incorrigible, the Church should by this means raise
more heavy enemies to it self. Then Thaddaeus proceeded to excuse his Master,
in all the particular objections, and desired that he might be personally
heard, but to that the pope replied, If he come I will depart, for I do not
yet find my self fit and ready for martyrdom. Binius To. 3. par. 2. fo. 1482.
Yet the English which were there, extorted a fortnights leisure for the
Emperors coming: but he not daring or disdaining to come, the pope proceeded
to this sentence of Deprivation; which, says the Relater the^eof, He thundered
out terribly, not without the amazement and horror of all the hearers and
bystanders. And Thaddaeus protested upon it, This day is a day of wrath, and
of calamity and misery.

11 So this Bull proceeded from a distempered Pope, and at a time when he was
not assisted with the Holy Ghost, for he was not in a readiness to suffer
Martyrdom for him. And where the Inscription says, it was Presenti Concilio;
the Margin notes, that it is not said approbante Concilio, though it assign
this for the reason, least the Pope should seem to need the Council.

12 So that, though it reach full as far as Pius the fifth his Bull against
our late Queen (for it depriues, it absolues Subjects, and it excommunicates
all adherents) yet it has nothing by which it should be called a Canon, or
law to direct and govern posterity; for there might be as much infirmity in
this act of Depriving, as in the former of Excommunicating; yea it was subject
to much more error then that act of spiritual jurisdiction, which has been
less questioned: yet in the preamble of this sentence, the pope says of those
former sentences, If the Church have injured him in any thing, she is ready to
correct her self, to revoke, and to make satisfaction. So that it may be, the
pope erred in both these acts.

13 Nor do those words which are in the Inscription, Ad perpetuam rei
Memoriam, give it the strength of a precedent, and obligatorie Canon, but
rather declare out of what shop it came, since that is the ordinary style of
the Roman Court, and not of the Canons of Councels. Nor can it ever be deduced
by any consequence, out of this Sentence, That the Pope has the same power
over other Sovereign Princes, as he exercised there against the Emperor;
because he proceeded against him (though vitiously and injuriously, and
tyrannically) by color of a Superiority claimed by him, and then not denied by
the Emperor, but testified by diverse Oaths of Fidelity to him, which cannot
be extended against those princes, which admit no dependency upon him, by any
reason contained in this Sentence.

14 By the third of these four principal Rescripts, Clement the fifth annuls a
Judgment made by the Emperor Henry the seventh, Clement. de Sentent. and re
iudic. pastoralis. Anno 1306.
against Robert king of Sicily, whom as a subject of the Empire, the Emperor
had declared a Rebel, and deprived him of his Kingdom and absolved his
subjects of their obedience. And the reasons why the Pope interposes himself
herein, are not grounded upon his power, as he is Pope, or as he is spiritual
Prince, but merely as he is a temporal Prince. For first he says, The King
of Sicily held that Kingdom of the Church; and the Pope, who was thereby his
ordinary judge, ought to have been called to the judgment; And that the
Emperor could not take knowledge of faults committed at Rome, as those, with
which that King was charged, were laid to be: Nor his Jurisdiction and power of
citation extend into the territory of the Church where that King was then
residing: nor he be bound upon any Citation, to come to a place of so certain
danger.

15 It is not therefore for this part of the Decretall, that either they
allege it so frequently, or that Albericus laid that mark upon it, that it
betrayed the authority of the Emperors; for in this particular case, I should
not be difficult to confess, some degrees of Justice, in providing that the
Sentence of the Empe^or should not prevail, where na^urally and justly it
could not work; especially the pope proceeding so manne^ly, as to revoke it
after the Emperors death; and as the Gloss says, Ad tollendum murmur Populi,
who grudged that the Emperor should dispose of them, who were the subjects of
the Church.

16 But the danger is in the last clause, which is, We out of the Superiority,
which without doubt we have over the Empire, and out of that power, by which we
succeed therein, in a vacancy, and by that power which Christ gave us in Peter,
declare that judgment to be void, and reu^ke all which has been done
thereupon. For the first part of which Clause, touching his Superiority over
the Emperor, if he had any (which, as many good authors deny, as affirm it^)
he had it by contract between the Emperor and the Church; and he neither can,
nor does claim that, at least not all that which he pretended in the Empire,
in other princes dominions; for where does he p^etend to succeed ^n a Vacancy,
but in the Empire? And if he had that right, Iure Diuino, it would st^etch to
all other places: And ^f it be by Con^ract, that cannot be but conditional and
variable in it self, and not to be drawn into e^ample to the prejudice of any
other prince. And ^or his last title, which is the power derived by S. Peter to
him, because in this place he extends it no further but to a defense of S.
Peter's patrimony, and only by declaring a Sentence to be void, which otherwise
might scandalize some of his subjects, we have no reason to exagitate it in
this pl^ce, nor have you any reason to assure your consciences, by the
instruction or light of this Canon, that that power extends to any ^uch case,
as should make you, in these substantial circumstances, of great de^riment
refuse this Oa^h.

Clement. de Iure iurando vnica.
17 The four^h Canon, which is, the Clementine of the diverse Oaths sworn by
the Emperors to the Popes, though it be ever cited, and be by Albericus i^stly
accused of injustice: yet it can by no extension work upon your conscience.
For the purpose thereof is but this; That diffe^ences continuing between the
Emperor and the King of Sicily, and ^he Pope writing to reconcile them, he
uses this as one induction, That they had both sworn Fidelity and Allegiance
to him. The Emperor answered, That he understood not that Oath, which he had
taken, to be an Oath of Allegiance: And therefore the Pope, afte^ the Emperou^s
death, in this Decretall pronounces, That they are Oaths of fidelities and
Allegiance, and that whosoever shall be created Emperor, shall take those
Oaths, as such. But, to leave it to the Lawyers, (whose tongues, and pens
are not silenc^d by this Decretall,) to argue whether they be oaths of
Allegiance, or no, and imposed by the pope essentially, so as the Emperor had
no jurisdiction without them (the first being a Constitution of the Emperor
Otho, and not of the pope, Did. 63. Tibi Domino.
(if it be rightly cited by Gratian) The second but an oath of Protection of
the Church, and the pope, And the third, only o^ a pure and entire observing of
the Catholic faith) who can press an argument out o^ this Canon, though it
we^e wholly confessed and accepted as it lies, that the pope may depose a king
of England? De Pontif. l. 5. C. 8.. septimum.
For Bellarmine informs your consciences ^ee^er then any of those Con^ellors,
who auert you from the oath, by this, and such Canons^ That the Empire not
depending absolutely upon the Pope, but since Charlemains time, this Oath of
Allegiance is taken of the Emperor, because the Pope translated the Empire
upon him. And whether ^his be true or false, in the la^ter part of translation,
yet his reason and argument discharges all other supreme princes, over whom the
pope has no such pretense.

18 Having passed through these four, we will consider those Canons, which
are in Gratian, to this purpose. The first whereof may justly be the Donation
of Constantine. Did. 96. Constantinus.
Which though it be not Gratians, but inserted, by the name of Palea (of whom,
whether he were a man of that name, a Scho^ler of Gratian, or whether he
called his Ad^dition to Gratian, Paleas in humility, the Canonists are like to
wrangle, as long as any body will read them) yet it is in the body and credit
of Canon law.

19 Toward the credit of this Donation, there lackes but thus much, to make it
possible, That the Emperor had not power, to give away ha^^e his Empire, and
that that Bishop had not capacity to receive it, And but thus much of making
it likely, That the Church had no possession thereof, but that it remained
still with the Successors of the Emperors: for if it had these degrees of
possibility or credibility, and did not speak in barbarous language discording
from that time, nor in false Latin unworthy of an Emperors Secre^arie, nor
gave the pope leave to confer orders upon whom he would, nor spoke of the
Patriarchate of Constantinople, before it had either that Dignity, or that
Name, I should be content, as I would in other fables, to study what the
Allegory thereof should be. But since the Pope can live without it, And Az^rius
tells us, To. 2. l. 4. C. 19. e^ 20.
that though the Donation be fal^e, yet the Pope has other just titles to his
estates, (though, by his leave, he has no such title, as will authorize him to
depose Princes, as Sovereign Lord over all the Western Kings, as they pretend
by this, if it were justifiable) I will leave it as they do, as a thing too
suspicious and doubtful, to possess any room, but that which it does in
Gratian. Only, this I will add, that if the power of the Emperor were in the
Pope, by virtue of this Donation, yet we might safely take this Oath, because
this Kingdom has no dependence upon the Empire.

20 The next that I find alleged, (to keep this Order, Did. 9. Quae
contrae.
as they lie in Gratian) is a sentence taken out of S. Augustine, by which you
may see how infinite a power, they place in the Pope: His words are: If the
King must be obeyed, though he command contra Societatem, yea, it is contra
Societatem, if he be not obeyed, because there is a general contract in humane
Societies, that Kings must be obeyed; how much more must we obey God, the
Governor of all Creatures?

And do they which allege for the Popes Supremacy over Princes, intend the
Pope to be Governor of all Creatures? Does he govern Sea, and Elements? or
do they think that the will and commandments of God are derived to us only
by the way of the Pope? or why should not we thank them, for producing this
Canon, since it is direct, and very strong for Kings, and for the Popes, it is
but common with all other Magistrates, who must be obeyed, when God speaks in
them, or when they sp^ake not against God?

Did. 10. lege.
21 In the tenth Distinction, one Pope by the testimony of two other popes,
says, That the Ecclesiastique Constitutions must be preferred before the
Emperors laws: And the cases mentioned there, are the constituting of a
Met^apolitane, and the dissoluing of a Marriage, upon entering into Religion; to
which, I say, that these cases, by consent of the Emperors, were under their
jurisdiction. And if you gather a general rule by this, of the force of Canons
above Civil laws, you proceed indirectly accepting the same persons, for
Parties, Judges, and Witnesses: and besides it is not safe arguing from the
Emperor to another absolute Prince, nor from the authority, which Canons have
in his Dominions, to what they should have in all.

22 In the 21. Distinction, A Pope writing to a Bishop of Milan, Did. 21.
Omnes.
tells him, That the dignities and preheminences of Churches, must be as the
Bishop of Rome shall ordain, because Christ committed to Peter, which has
the keys of eternal life, Iura terreni simul and Caelestis imperij But if he
mean by his Terrenum Imperium, the disposing of the dignities and
preheminencies of Churches one above another in this world: Or if he mean by
it, That he has this Terrenum Imperium, as he has the keys of heaven, that
is to bind and loose sins by spiritual censures and Indulgences of
absol^tion, in which capaci^y he may have authority over the highest secular
Princes; for any thing contained in this Oath, this Canon will do us no harm.
But if he mean that Christ gave him both these authorities together, and that
thereby he has them as Ordinary Judge, then Bellarmine and all which follow
the Divines opinion of indirect power, will forsake him; and so may you by
their example.

73 After, Did. 96. Du^ sunt.
another Pope, Gelasius writes to Anastasius the Emperor, comparing Secular
and Ecclesiastique d^gnity. And he sa^es, You know that you depend upon their
judgment: but this is, says the Gloss, in spiritual matters. And because
this Canon comes no nearer our question, then to justify in the Pope a power
of excommunicating Princes, (for it assumes no more ^hen Ambrose exercised upon
Theodosius) I will stand no longer upon it.

24 And these be the Canons, which out of the Distinctions, I have observed to
be scattered amongst their Authors, when they teach this doctrine: for any
that preferres Priesthood before Principality, seems to them ^o conduce to
that point. Now I will follow Gratian in his other parts where the first is, 2.
^. 7. Nos si.
the Canon Nos si incompetenter, which is very often vr^ed, but it is so far
from in^luding this power of Deposing, that it excludes it; ^or, allowing the
Priest power to Reprehend, and remembering former examples of Excommunication,
he adds, Nathan in reproouing the King, executed that office, in which he was
Superior to him, but he usurped not the Kings office, in which he was
inferior; nor gave judgment of death upon him as Adulterer, or murderer.

9. q. 7. Episcopo.
25 In the seventh Question of the ninth Cause, from the Canon Episcopo, to the
end of that Question, there are many sayings, which advance the digni^y of the
Roman Seat, and forbid al men to hinder Appeals thither, or to judge of the
popes Decrees: But all these were in spiritual causes, and directed to
spiritual persons, and under spiritual punishments. Only, in the Canon
Fratres the king of Spain seems to be threatened, but it is with
Excommunication only. And all these Canons together, are delivered by one Pope
of another, In whom, sa^es the Gloss, It is a familiar kind of proof, for
one one Pope to produce another for witness, as God did prove the sins of
Sodom, Ca. patet. ver. Innocentius.
by Angels.

And as there is much injustice in this manner of the Popes proceeding, so is
there some tincture of blaspemy, in the manner of justifying it, by this
Comparison.

26 The Canon Alius, which drops out of every pen, 15. q. 6. Alius.
which has written of this Subject, is the first wherein I marked any Pope to
speak of Deposing; In this, Gelasius writes to Anastasius; a Pope to an
Emperor, that Pope Zachary his predecessor, had deposed the King of France,
because he was unfit for so great a power. But the Glosser does the Pope good
service, and keeps him within such a convenient sense, as may make him say
true; For, says ^e, He deposed, that is, He gave consent to them which did
depose, which were the States of that Kingdom; which he says, out of the
Evidence of the history; for he is so far from coarcting the Popes power,
that we may easily deprehend in the Gloss, more ^raud and iniquity, then
arrogance and tyranny in the Pope. For, says he, the unfitness of the French
King, was licentiousness, not infufficiency to govern, for then the Pope
ought to have given him an assistant. 7. q. 1. quamuis. petijsti.
To prove which, he cites two other Canons; In which places it appears, That
to Bishops unable by reason o^ age, to discharge their functions, the Pope
assigns Coadiutores, and by this the Glosser might euict, that he has the same
Ordinary authority to dispose of Kingdoms, as of Bishoprics. This Canon
therefore does only unfaithfully relate the act of another Pope, and not
determine nor decree any thing, nor bind the conscience.

27 In the same Question, there is a Canon or two, in which our case is thus
far concerned; 15. q 6. Authoritat^m etc.
that they handle the Popes authority in Absoluing and Dispensing from Oaths:
And the first is c^ted often and with great courage; because besides the word
Ab omnibus Iuramentis, and cuiuscunquemodi obligationibus absoluimus, there
follows, parsue the^ with the spiritual and material sword. But when we
consider the case and the History, this power will not extend to our cause. For
the Pope thereby does give liberty to some Bishops, to recover by just
violence, such parts of the Church Patrimony, as were taken away from them,
and does dispense with such oaths as they had been forced to take, by those
which injuriously infested the Church. Yet I deny not but that the glosser
upon this Canon is liberal enough to the Pope, for he says, he has power to
dispense against the law of Nature, and against the Apostle.

Ibid.
28 After this, follows that solemn and famous Canon of Gregory the seventh,
Nos sanctorum. Of whom, since he had made a new rent in the body of the Church,
(as Authors of his own Religion (if he had any) profess,) it is no marvel
that he patched it, with a new ragge in the body of the Canon law. Thus
therefore he says, Insisting upon the statutes of our predecessors, by our
Apostolic authority, we absolve from their Oath of Allegiance, all which
are bound to persons excommunicate; And we utterly forbid them, to bear any
Allegiance to such, till they come to satisfaction. But to whom shall these
men be subject in the mean time? To such a one as will be content to resign,
when so ever the other will ask forgiveness? Ambition is not an ague; it has
no fits, nor accesses, and remittings; nor can any power extin^guish it upon a
sudden warning. And if the purpose of Popes in these deposings, were but to
punish with temporary punishment, why are the Kingdoms, which have been
transferred by that colou^, from Heretical Princes, still withheld from their
Catholic Heirs?

29 But who these predecessors, of whom the Pope speaks in this letter, were, I
could never find. And it appears by this, that this was an Innovation, and
that he used Excommunication to serve his own ends, because in another Canon he
says, 11. q. 3. Quoniam.
That many perished by reason of Excommunications; and that therefore he being
now overcome with compassion, did temper that sentence for a time, and withdraw
from that band, all such as communicated with the excommunicate person, except
those by whose Counsel, the fault was perpetrated, which induced the
Excommunication. And this, says the gloss, he did, Ver. Quoniam.
because he saw them contemn excommunication, and never seek Absolution; for
all those whom he exempts by this Canon, were exempt before his time by the law
it self. So that where he says Temperamus, Ver. Temperamus.
it is but Temperatum esse ostendimus; and he did but make them afraid, who
were in no danger, and make them beholden to him, whom the law it self
delivered. And of this Canon in special words D'Auila Par. 2. Ca. 6. Disp. 11.
Dub. 90
one of their great men says, That it binds not, where it may not be done,
without great damage of the subject.

15. q. 6. Iuratis.
30 Of his Successor, almost immediate, (for Victor the third lasted but a
little) I find another Canon, almost to the same purpose; for he wr^tes to a
Bishop, to forbid the Soldiers of an Earl, who was excommunicate, to serve
him, though they were sworn to him. For, saye^ he^ They are not tied by any
authority to keep that allegiance, which they have sworn to a Christian
Prince, which resists God and his Saints, and treads their precepts under his
feet. But in this man, as Gregory's spirit wrought in him, Binius. To. 3. ^ar
2. fo. 1293.
wh^lst he lived, for he was his Messenger to publish the Excommunication
against the Emperor in Germany, so Gregory's ghost speaks now; for all this
was done to revenge Gregory's quarrel; though in his own particular he had
some interest, and reason of bitterness, for he had been taken and ill used
by Henry in Germany.

q. 1. G^n^rali.
31 In the 25 Cause there is a Canon which tastes of much boldness; What King so
ever, or Bishop, or great person, shall suffer the Decrees of Popes to be
violated, Execrandum Anathema sit. But these (for in this Cause there are
diverse Canons, for the observing of the Canons) are for the most part such
imprecations, as I noted before, Gregory the first ^o have made for
preservation of the privileges of Medardus Monastery, and some other of the
same name (of which kind also Villagut, De re^us Eccle^. (...) 2. l. 3. C. 5.
N. 17.
has gathered some other examples;) And at farthest, they extend but ^o
excommunication; and are pronounced by the Popes themselves, and are intended
of such Canons, as are of matters of faith, that is, such as even the Popes
themselves are bound to observe; as appears here, by Leo ^he fourths Canon,
Ideo permittente. And here I will receive you from Gratian, and lead you into
the Decretals, whom they justly esteem a little better company.

32 To prove the Popes general right, Qui filij sunt legit. Causam quae. C. 4.
etc. 7. and De offic. Deleg. ca. 17.
to interpose in all causes (which seems to conduce to the Question in hand)
they cite often this case falling out in England; which is, upon several
occasions three or four times intimated in the Decretals. It was thus:
Alexander the third, writes to certain Bishops in England, to judge, as his
Delegates, in a Matrimonial cause. And because the person whose legitimation
was thereby in question, was an ^eire, and the Mother dead, and the Pope
thought it not fit, that after her death, her marriage should be so narrowly
looked into, since it was not in her life, therefore he appoints, That
possession of the land should be given first, and then the principal point of
the marriage proceeded in. And by this they euict for him a title in temporal
matters Accessorily, and Consequently. But if they consider the times, they may
justly suspect unjust proceeding; For it was when Alexander the third did so
much infest our King Henry the second. And it seems he did but try by this,
how much the King would endure at his hands; for when he understood that the
king took it ill, then came another Letter, related also in the Canons,
wherein he confesses, that that matter appertains to the King, and not to
the Church, And therefore commaundes them to proceed in the matter of the
marriage, without dealing with the possession of the land.

Tit. ^od. per v^nerabilem.
33 Another Canon, not much urged by the defenders of direct Authority, but by
the other faction, is a Letter of Innocent the third. In which Letter, I
believe the Pope meant to lay down, purposely and determinately, how far his
power in Temporal matters extended. For it is not likely, that upon a Petition
of a private Gentleman, for Legitimation of his Children, who doubted not of
his power to do it, the Pope would descend to a long discourse and proof out
of both testaments, and reasons of conueniencie, that he might do it, and then
in the end, tell him, he would not, except he meant, that this Letter should
remain as evidence to posterity, what the Popes power in Temporal causes
was. Let us see therefore what that is which he claims.

34 A Subject of the King of France, who had put away his Wife, desires the
Pope to legitimate certain Children which he had by a second wife. And, it
seems, he was encouraged thereunto, because the Pope had done that favor to
the King of France before: The Pope answers thus, By this, it seems, that I
may grant your request, because I may certainly Legitimate to all spiritual
capacities, and therefore it is Verisimilius, and probabilius, that I may do
it in Temporal. And, says he, It seems that this may be proved by a
similitude, because he which is assumed to be a Bishop, is exempted thereby
from his fathers jurisdiction; and a slave delivered from bondage, by being
made a Priest: And, he adds, In the patrimony I may freely do it, where I
am supreme Prince: But your case, is not the same as the Kings was, not only
for spiritual considerations, which are, That he was lawfully separated, and
pretended neerenesse of blood, and was not forbid to marry again, and your
proceeding has been without color, and in contempt of the Church. But the
King, who had no Superior in Temporal matters, might without doing wrong to
any other, submit himself to our jurisdiction; But you are known to be
subject to another. Thus far he proceeded, waueringly, and comparatively,
and with conditions and limitations.

35 And least this should not stretch far enough, he adds; Out of the
Patrimony in certain causes, we do exercise Temporal jurisdiction
casually, Ver. Certis.
which the Gloss interprets thus, That is when we are requested^ And the Pope
has said before, That he which makes this request, must be one that has no
Superior: And in this place he says, That this may not be done, to prejudice
another right. But after this, upon a false foundation, that is, an error in
their Translation (where in Deuteronomie, 1^.12.
Death being threatened to the transgressour of the sentence, Of the Priest and
Judge, they have left out the Judge) he makes that state of the Jews, so
falsely understood, to be a Type o^ Rome, and so Rome at this time to be Judge
of all difficulties, because it is the seat of the high Priest. But he must be
thought more constant, then to depart from his first ground and therefore must
mean, When superior Princes, which have no other Judges, are in such doubts,
as none else can determine, Recurrendum est, ad sed^m Apostolicam; that is,
they ought to do it, rather then to go to the only ordinary Arbitrator
between Sovereign Princes, the sword.

36 And when such Princes do submit their causes to him, in such cases he
de^lares himself by this Canon, to be a competent Judge, though the matter be
a civil business, and he an Ecclesiastical person: and though he seem to
go ^omewhat farther, and stre^ch that typical place in Deuteron. to ^gree
with Rome so far, that as there, so here, he which disobeyes, must die, yet
he explanes this death thus, Let him as a dead man, be separated from the
Communion, by Excommunication. So that this Canon p^rposely enacted to declare
temporal authority, by a Pope, whom none exceeded in a st^ffe and earnest
promo^ing the dignity of that Sea, procedes only by probabilities, and
verisimilitudes, and equiualencies, and ends at last with Excommunication; and
therefore can imprint in you no reason to refuse this Oath. For out of this
Canon, does Victoria frame a strong argument, That this most learned Pope does
openly confess, by this Canon, that he has no power over the King of France
in Temporal matters.

37 Another Canon of the same Pope is often cited, De iudicijs nouit
by which, when the King of England complained, that the King of France had
broken the Peace, which was confirmed by Oath, the Pope writes to the Bishops
of France, That though he intend not to judge of that Title, in question,
which appertains not to him, yet the perjury belongs to his cognizance: and
so, he may reprove, and in cases of Contumacie, constrain, Per districtionem
Ecclesiasticam, without exception of the persons of Kings: And therefore, says
he, If the King refuse to perform the Articles, and to suffer my Delegates to
hear the cause, I have appointed my Legate, to proceed as I have directed
him. What his Instructions were, I know not by this; but beyond
Excommunication, you see by the Text, he pretends not: Whatsoever they were,
this is certain, That the Princes of those times, to advantage themselves
against their enemies, with the Popes help, did often admit him, to do some
acts against other Princes, which after, when the Pope became their enemy,
themselves felt with much bitterness. But in this Canon, he disclaimes any
Jurisdiction to judge of Titles; which those Popes took to themselves, who
Excommun^cated our late Queen (if Parsons say true, That they had respect to
the injustice of her Title, by reason of a Statute) and all those Popes must
do, which shall do any act, which might make this Oath unlawful to you.

No^erit. Gra^em
38 In the title De Sent. Excom. there are two Canons, which concerns only
Excommunication of Heretics, and in^ringers o^ Ecclesiasticke Immunitie, and
are directed but to one par^icular place. Which, though they can impose
nothing upon your conscience against this Oath, may yet teach you not to
grudge, that a State which prouides for her security by Laws and Oaths,
express it in such words, as may certainly reach to the principal purpose
thereof, and admit no euasions. For so these Canons do, when they
Excommunicate, All of all Sex,, of any Name, Favorers, Receivers, Defenders,
Lawmakers, Writers, Governors, Consuls, Rulers, Councillors, Judges, and
Registers of any statutes, made in that place against Church liberties.

De prescriptionibus.
39 That the Canons have power to abrogate Civil laws of Princes, they use to
cite the Canon Quoniam omne, made by Innocent the third, who has made more
Canons then half of the Popes before him. And if this do not batter down,
yet it undermines all secular power. For they may easily pretend, that any
Law, may in some case occasion sin. This Canon has also more then Ordinary
authority, because it is made in a general Council: thus it ^aies, Absque
bona fide, nulla valeat praescriptio, De Pont. l. 5. c. 6. Itaque. Ex Cod. De
prescriptionibus.
tam Canonica, quam ciuilis: And this, says Bellarmine, does abrogate an
Imperial law, by which prescription would serve, so that it begann Bona fide,
though at some time after, he which was in possession, came to know, that his
title was ill; but the Canon l^w requires that he esteem in h^s conscience,
his title to be good, all the time, by which he p^escribes. But by this Canon,
that particular Imperial law is no more abrogated, then such other laws as
cannot be observed without danger of sin, which includes not only some
Civil Constitutions, but also some other Canons; For your Glosser says, Ver.
Nota quod
That the Canon derogates from all Constitutions, Civil and Ecclesiastique,
which cannot be observed without deadly sin: that is, it makes them guilty in
foro interiori. ver. Tam Canonica.
He adds, That he does not believe, that the Pope did purpose by this Canon,
to prejudice the civil laws, nor that the words are intended of civil and
secular law, but that by those words, Tam ciuilis, quam Canonica, the Pope
means, that a prescriber Malae fidei, is guilty in conscience, whether it be
of a matter Secular or Ecclesiastique. For (says be) though some say, the
Pope meant to correct the law herein, yet this correction is not observed in
Iudicio Seculari. And therefore (says he) I do not believe, that the Pope
himself is bound to judge according to this Canon, where he has temporal
jurisdiction, because he has that Jurisdiction from the Emperor: therefore
the Imperial law stands still, and is not abrogated by this Canon, though of
a general Council.

Cap licet^
40 This Pope also by a Canon in the title de Voto, has gone the farthest of
any, which have fallen within my observation: for a King of Hungary, which had
made a vow to undertake a war for Jerusalem, prevented by death, imposed
the execution thereof upon his younger son, who binding himself to perform
it, with the army which he levied for that purpose, in pretense, troubled his
brother in his Kingdom: To him therefore Innocentius writes, That except he
do forthwith perform the vow, he shall be excommunicate and deprived of all
right to that Kingdom; and that the kingdom, if his elder brother die without
issue, shall deuolue to his younger brother. But all these threatenings, except
that one of Excommunication, were not thundered by the Pope, as though he
could inflict them, out of his authority, but he remembers this ill-aduised
Prince, that except he perform the will of his father, he looses his
inheritance by the law: Verb. priuand^^.
Which the Gloss in this place, endeavors to prove, and to that purpose cytes,
and disputes some of the laws in that point.

De Ma^^r. and Obedient.
41 The Canon Solitae, though it be every where alleged, and therefore it
importunes me to mention it, reaches not to our question, for it is only a
Reprehension made by a Pope, to a Greek Emperor, because he did not afford
his Patriarch of Constantinople dignity enough in his place. And he tells him,
that he mistakes S. Peter's meaning, in his Epistle, where he teaches obedience
to Emperors; For, says he, he writ but to those which were under him, and not
to al; 1. Tet. 2.13.
and he did provoke them to a meritorious humility, not inform them of a
necessary Duty; For, says he, if that place shall be understood of Priests,
and literally, then Priests must be subject to Slaves, because it is Omni
Creaturae, neither (says he) is it said, To the King, absolutely Precellenti,
but tanquam precellenti, which was not added without cause. For (says the
Gloss) this word, Tanquam, is Similitudinarium, Ver. Tanquam
non expressiuum veritatis; So that S. Peter does not call the king Superior
in truth, but as it were Superior; as I noted the Cardinals to subscribe
Letters to persons of lower rank, Vester vti frater. And that which follows,
of the punishment of evil doers, and praise of God, is not (says he) that the
King has power of the sword over good and evil, but only over them, which
because they use the sword, are under his jurisdiction. Then proceeds he to
magnify Priesthood, because Jeremy, to whom Commission was given over
Nations, was descended of Priests: and because the Sun which designs
Priesthod, is so much bigger then the Moon: with so many more impertinencies,
and barbarismes, and inconsequences, that I wonder why he, who summed it,
should so specially say of this Canon, that it is Multum Al^egabile.

42 In the Canon Grauem, Honorius the third writes to certain Prelates, whose
Church had received much detriment by a Nobleman, That since he has continued
contemptuously under Excommunication two years, if upon this last monition he
refuse to conform himself, they should discharge those Churches from their
obedience to him, and denounce those which ought him allegiance, to be
discharged thereof, as long as be remained Excommunicate. But it appears not
here, whether he were a Subject of the Roman Church or no; And yet appears
plainly that he was no Sovereign, and therefore no precedent in our case, in
which there could not easily be restitution given to any, after another were in
possession.

43 In the next volume of the law, which they call Sex^us, De Supplend. neglig.
praelat. Grandi^n sexto.
I have noted in their Authors but one Canon, which comes within any
convenient distance of this point, which is a Letter of Innocent the fourth to
the Nobility of Portugal, by which, under pain of Excommunication he
commands them, to receive the kings brother, as coadiutor to that king,
Notwithstanding any Oath of Allegiance, or resistance of the King; So that
they preserved the right in the King, and in his children, if he shall ^aue
any: Which, being but matter of fact, does not constitute a rule, nor bind
consciences, especially when for the fact it self, the note says in that
place, Litera, b. in Margin.
That the Pope ought not to have interposed himself in that business.

44 In the Extrauagants ^f Pope John the two and twenteth, Si fratrum.
there is one Canon which would take great hold of consciences obliged to that
Sea, but that it proceeds from a Pope infam'd for heresy, and claims that
Jurisdiction, which it there inculcates, in the right of being Emperor, at
that time, when the throne, by the death of Henry the seventh, was vacant.
Thus it sa^es, Since it is clear in law, and constantly observed of old, that
in a vacancy of the Empire, because then there can be no recourse to any
Secular Judge, the Jurisdiction, Gouer^ment, and Disposition of the Empire
deuolues to the Pope, who is known to have exercised all these therein by
himself, or others: whereas diverse continue the offices of the Empire, without
our Confirmation, we admonish all under Excommunication, even Kings, to leave
off those titles; and if they do not so, within two months (how could he
prophecy so long a vacancie?) We will Excommunicate the persons, and
interdict the Dominions of them all, Etiam superiores et inferiores Reges, and
proceed with them, spi^itually and temporally, as we shall farther see to be
expedient. And we absolve all men, of all Oaths, by which they were bound to
them. But, as I said before, this right of inflicting temporal punishment he
claim^s as Emperor; and the spiritual punishments are threatened to no other,
nor in any other Capacity, then as they are officers of the Empire, of which
then he imagines himself supreme Prince, and so he is enabled to do all
those acts, upon any Prince which depends upon the Empire, which he might do
Ordinarily in the Patrimony; and all, which the Pope and the Emperor together
might do upon any Prince, which usurped the titles and dignities of the
Empire, without the Emperors approbation.

45 In the Common Extrauagants, that which they call vnam Sanctam, made by
Boniface the eight, Anno 1302. has the greatest force of all: both because it
intends to prove and to Decree a certain proposition, That it is of the
necessity of Salvation to be subject to the Pope, and also because it
determines it with Essential and formal words, belonging to a Decree,
Declaramus, Definimus, Pronunciamus. And though in the body and passage of the
Decree, there are sometimes arrogations of Secular Jurisdiction, by way of
argument, and conueniencie, and Probable consequence; yet is there nothing
drawn into the definition, and Decree, and thereby obligatorily cast upon our
Consciences, but only this, That a Subjection to the Pope is, of the
necessity of Salvation. Ver ponatur.
For, says the gloss, it was the intention of the Pope in this Decretall, to
bring reasons, examples, and authorities, to prove that Conclusion. So that, as
if it pleased him to have said so definitiuely, without arguing the case, the
Decretall had been as perfect and binding, as it is after all his reasons, and
argumentation: so do not his Reasons bind our reason, or our faith, being no
part of the Definition, but leave to us our liberty, for all but the Definition
it self.

46 And a Catholic which believes by force of this Decretall, That he cannot
be saved except he obey the Pope, is not bound to believe there^fore, that
these words of S. John, 10.16.
There shall be one sheepe-folde, and one shepherd, are meant of a Subjection
of all Christian Princes to the Pope, as this Decretall, by way of Argument,
says; but he may be bold, for all this, to believe an elder Pope, that this is
spoken of joining Jews and Gentiles in one faith; Grego Homil. 14.
or Theophilact, That this proves one God to be the shepherd of the old and
new Testament, against the Maniches. Citat. Ema^ Sa.
Nor is he bound, because this Decretall says it by the way, to believe that
the words in Saint Luke, 22 38.
Behold here are two swords, to which Christ did not answer, It is too much,
but it is enough, do prove the spiritual and temporal swords to be in the
disposition of the Church; but he is at liberty for all this, Sa.
to b^leeue Chrysostom, That Christ by mentioning two swords in that place,
did not mean, that they should possess swords, (for what good (says he)
could two swords do?) but he forwarned them of such persecutions, as in humane
judgment would need the defense of swords. Or he may believe Ambrose, That
these two swords, l. 10. Com. in lacam.
are the sword of the Word, and the sword of Martyrdom: of which there is
mention in S. Luke, Luc 2.35.
A sword shall pass through my soul. So that these swords arm them to seek
the truth, and to defend it with their lives: or he may believe S. Basil, who
says, That Christ spoke Prophetically, that they would incline to use swords,
though indeed they should not do so. Both which expositions of Chrysostom
and Basil, Ema. S. ^.
a Jesuit remembers, and adds for his own opinion; That Christ did not
confirm two Swords to the Church, by Saying, It is enough, but only, because
they could not understand him, he broke off further talk with them, as we use
when we are troubled with one, who understands us not, to say, It Is well, It Is
enough.

47 For Bellarmine is our warrant in this case, who says, De Pont l. 5. c. 5.
Secundo.
That those words intimate no more, but that the Apostles, when persecution
came, would be in as much fear, as they who would sell all to buy swords: and
that Pope Boniface did but mystically interpret this place.

48 And as the exposition of other places there cited by Boniface, and his
diverse reasons scattered in the Decretall, ^al not within the Definition
thereof, no^ bind our faith; so does it not, that those words spoken by God to
Jeremy, I have set thee over the nations, ^
and over the Kingdoms, and to pluck up, and root out, to destroy and to
throw down, to build and to plant, are ve^ifi^d of the Ecclesiastique power,
though he say it. But any Catholic may boldly believe that they were spoken
only to Jeremy, who had no further Commission by them, but to denounce, and not
to inflict those punishments. For it were hard, if this Popes Mystical
expositions should bind any man (contrary to his oath appointed by the Trent
Council) to leave the vnanime consent of the Fathers in expounding these
Scriptures: and so an obedience to one Pope should make him perjured to
another. The last D^finition therefore of this Decretall, which was first and
principally in the purpose and intention of this Pope, which is, Subjection to
him, is ma^ter of faith to all them, in whom the Popes Decre^s beget faith, but
temporal Jurisdiction is not hereby imposed upon the conscience, as matter of
faith.

49 But because this Canon was suspiciously penned, and perchance
misinterpretable, and bent against the kingdom of France, between which state
and the Pope there was then much contention, so that therefore it kept a
jealous watch upon the proceeding of that Church, Clement the fif^, who came
to be pope within four years after the making of this Canon, Extra^. Com. de
priuileg. M^ruit.
made another Decree, That by this Definition or Declaration of Boniface, that
Kingdom was not prejudiced, nor any more subject to Rome, then it was before
the making of that Decree. And though it was not Clements pleasure to deal
clearly, but to leave the Canon of Boniface, as a stumbling block still to
others, yet out of the whole History this will result, to us, that if this
temporal Jurisdiction, which some gather out of this Canon, were in the Pope,
Iure Diuino, he could not exempt the kingdom of France; and if it were not
so, no Canons can create it But even this exemption of Clement proves Bonifaces
act to be Introductory, and new, for what benefit has any man by being
exempted from a Declaratorie law, when for all that exemption, ^ee remains
still under the former law, which that declares: So that nothing concerning
temporal Jurisdiction is defined in that Canon; but it is newly thereby made
an Article of faith, that all men must upon pain of damnation be subject to
the Church in spiritual causes; from which Article it was necessary to exempt
France, because that kingdom was never brought to be of that opinion.

Licet ^aelici. Rescriptorum.
50 And in the last Volume of the Canon law, lately set out in the Title, De
Rescrip. and Mand. Apost. there is one Canon of Leo the tenth, and another of
Clement the seventh, which annull all Statutes and civil constitutions, which
stop Appeals to Rome, or hinder the execution of the Popes bulls; and
inflicts Excommunication, and Interdicts the Dominions of any, which shall make
or favor such Statutes. But because these Canons do not define this^, as
matter of faith, I doubt not but the Catholics of England would be loath to
adventure the dangers which our Laws inflict, upon such as seek Justice at
Rome, which may be had here: And they do, though contrary to these Canons, in
continual practice, bring all their causes into the Courts of Justice here,
which, if the Canons might prevail, belonged to Rome.

51 And these be all the Canons, which I have marked either in mine own
reading of them, or from other Authors which write of these questions; to be
cited to this purpose. Those which concern Ecclesiasticke immunitie, or the
Popes spiritual power I omitted purposely^ And of this kind which I have dealt
withal, I doubt not but some have escaped me. But I may rather be ashamed of
having read so much of this learning, then not to have read all.

52 Here therefore I will conclude, that though to the whole body of the Canon
Law, there belonged as much faith and reverence, as to the Canons of the old
Councels, yet out of them, you can find nothing to assure your consciences,
that you may incur these dangers for refusal of the Oath. Nor may the Pope
be presumed to imag^ne, that he shall re-establish himself in any place, which
has escaped, and delivered it self from his usurpations, by any Canon Law,
except he be able to use that Droict du Canon, which Montmorencie the French
Constable, persuaded his King to use against a Town which held out against him.

CHAP. XI. That the two Breues of Paulus the fifth, cannot give this assurance
to this Conscience; First, for the general infirmities, to which all Rescripts
of Popes are obnoxious: And th^n for certain insufficiencies in these.
THough that which has been said in the former Chapter of the Decretall
Letters of Popes, extend also to these Breues, since they are all of the same
elements and complexion, and subject to the same diseases and infirmities: Yet
because these two Breues, may be said to have been addressed directly and
purposely to give satisfaction in this particular business, they may
challendge more obedience, and lay a more Obligation then those other
Decretals, which issuing upon other occasions, do not otherwise concern the
question in hand, then by a certain relation, and consequence, and comparison
of the circumstances which produced them, with the circumstances which begot
these Breues.

2 It seems that the Pope when he would restrain the subjects of Princes,
and keep them short, when he would cut off there natural and profitable
liberty of obeying Civil Laws, when he would fetter and manacle them in
perplexities, and make them do less then they should, to the loss of life,
and liberties, he is content to send his Breues; But when he will swell and
blow up Subjects with Rebellion, when he will fill them with opinions, that
they may resist the entrances, or interrupt the possessions of Princes, when
he will have them do mo^e then they should do, then come forth his Bulls.
Anto. August. de Emend. Great. l. 2 Dial. 2.
For they say their Bulls are so called out of the tumor, and swelling of the
Seal; Tholoza. Syntag. l. 15. c. 4. n. 10.
And the other, because they are dispatched under a less Seal, Sub Annulo
piscatoris, are therefore called Breues; For, in temporal businesses of
foreign Princes, his Letters are ever defective, or abundant; they command
too much, or too little.

3 And as the Popes have ever been abstinent in declaring and expressing in
certain and evident terms, how they have this temporal Jurisdiction, least
having once ioynde issue upon some one way, all men should bend their proofs
against that, and being once defea^ed, they could be admitted to no other plea,
then themselves had chosen to adhere to, and rely upon: So have they abstained
as much from giving any binding resolution, in the question, how far the
civil laws of Princes do bind the subjects conscience. (...) c. 23. N^. 48.
For Nauar^us testifies of himself, and of Caietane, and others, that it was
much desired of the Council of Trent; that it would have defined something
certainly in that point: for the want of this definition brought him to
contradict himself, and to hang in a perplexed suspense, and various change of
opinions, fifty years; and at last to resolve, That Civil laws do^ not
bind the consciences, ad Mortale, in some such cases, De vi et Pot. leg. human.
as Carninus, his Catholic Adversary, says, It is Haeresi proximum, and
Temerarium, and sometimes Haereticum to say so.

4 If therefore we shall follow in this point Carninus his opinion, Ca. 8.
who delivers as the most common and most probable, yea, necessary Doctrine,
That because Civil laws are no more to be called Humane laws, P^r. 1. C. 1.
then Ecclesiastique are, (for so also Nauarrus confounds the names) and that
in power of binding, C. 3.
Humane laws, that is, Civil, and Ecclesiastique, are equal to Divine law,
because in every just law the power of God is in^used, And therefore, Diuinitas
ista (as he calls it) inheres in all laws, and to transgress them is sin, And
not only because the Majesty of God, who quickens and inanimates this law, by
a power derived upon his Lieutenant, is violated thereby, but even in respect
of the matter and Subject, which is in every law, that is, The common good, and
tranquillity, and to offend against that, is to offend against rectified Reason,
and therefore since, This opinion, I say, being received as true, and so this
law which commands this oath, made by a lawful power, and for the public
Good, and general tranquillity, being in possession of the Subjects
Consciences, and binding them under danger of Mortal sin, whatsoever can
warrant any man to transgress this law, must have both Authority, and Evidence
enough, to assure the Conscience, which till then is bound thereby, that either
for some Substantial, or for some formal Defect, this was never any law, or
that it is Abrogated, or that the persons of Catholics are exempted from it.

5 And have these Breues of the Popes gone about to give your Consciences, as
good reasons against the oath, as you were possessed withal before, for it?
Are you as sure that these Breues, or that any Breues can bind your Conscience
in this Case, as you were before, that the law could? And are you as sure that
there are Breues, as that there is a law?

6 If the statute which enacts a Subsidy, which by the Kings accep^ation
becomes a law, and so binds the Conscience, should so esteem the refusal of
the payment of his taxation in any person, to be an argument of disloyalty, as
to make it capital to refuse it, would you think that it such a Breue as
these are, should tell you, that you might not pay it, with out detriment of
Christian faith, you might die as Martyrs for refusal thereof?

7 If such a Breue should forbid you to suffer your children to be wards, to
deliver land escheated, or confiscate, to disobey the Kings emprest when he
leuies an Army, or any such act due by conscience to his laws, should this
work so upon you, as to make you incur the penalties of laws, or suspicion
of ill affected subjects? Nor can you say, that these are mere temporal
matters, and therefore removed from his Jurisdiction; for all sin is
spiritual, and he is Judge what is sin.

8 How weak a ground for Martyredome, and how insufficient to deuest a
conscience of an obedience, imposed in general by nature, and fastened with a
new knot by an express law, are such sickly and frail Breues, as the smallest
and most indiscernable error, even in matter of form does annihilate? for
first, in the Ti^le of Constitutions and Rescripts of Popes (which is always
the next Title to that of the Trinity and Cathol^que Faith, in all the books
of the Canon law, except those books which have no Title of the Trinity and
Catholic faith) there appears very many Reasons by which a Breue may be of
no force.

Extra. de Rescript. ex par^^.
9 Alexander the third, w^iting to an Archbishop of Canturbury, gives a rule of
large extent; That in these kind of letters (that is, such as proceed upon
information, as our case is) this condition; If the request be upon true
grounds, is ever understood, though it be not expressed. And writing to the
Archbishop of Rauenna, Ibid. Si quando.
he says, If at any time we write such things to you, as exasperate your
mind, you must not be troubled; but diligently considering the quality of the
business, whereof we write, either reverently fulfill our command, or pretend
by your Letters a reasonable cause why you cannot: for we will endure
patiently, if you forbear to perform that, which was suggested to us by evil
information. And so does that title abound with Interpretations, Limitations,
and Reuocations of such Breues.

10 And not only Delegate Judges, and such persons as have an inward
knowledge, of error in the cause which moved the Pope to write, have power to
judge these Breues, to be inualid, and of no force, Ibid. ad Audientiam.
but every Schoolmasters. For Lucius the third, by a Rescript of his forbids
any credit to be given to any Rescript, in which there is false Latin^ to which
also the Glosser adds, That it vitiates a Breue, if the Pope speak to any one
man in the plural number; Ver. Manifestu^.
or call a Patriarch or a Bishop son.

11 And, as many Omissions, and many Adiections in the body of the Breue,
either in matter, or in form does annull it, So would it make any considerate
conscience to doubt, whether such a Breue can warrant the expense of blood, or
incurring other Capital dangers, that observes, how often the Breues which
have issued upon best consideration and assistance of Counsel, have been
revoked; not upon new emergent matter, but upon better knowledge of the former.
Of which it seems to me to be of good use, to present one illustrous and
remarqueable example.

12 Eugenius the fourth, having first by one Bull dissolved the Council held
at Basil, and transfered it to another place, the Council for all that
proceeding, the Pope by a second Bull, annuls all which that Council had yet,
or should after Decree; and this, by the Council, and Assent of the Cardinals.
After this the Council cytes him, and all his Cardinals, upon whom it inflicts
confiscation, and other penalties, if they forbear to come. And then the Pope
by a third Bull annuls that decree of Citation, and excommunicates al persons,
even Kings and the Emperor, if they execute upon any, that Decree of the
Council. And then he publishes a fourth Bull, by which he answers all
objections made against him by the Council, and having so established his own
innocence, he annuls all acts made in prejudice thereof, and this also with
assent and subscription of the Cardinals. And at last he sends out a fifth Bull,
in which he takes knowledge, that his first Bull of dissoluing the Council,
had occasioned many grieuos dissentions, and was like to occasion more, and
therefore now, he Decrees and Declares (by the Council and Assent of his
Cardinals still) not only that the Council of Basil should from thenceforth be
good and lawful, but that it was so, when that Bull came, and that it had
been so from the time of the beginning thereof. And so in express words, he
annuls his annulling of it: and he reuokes two former Bulls, and pronounces them
Irritas, Annullatas, Cassatas; by the first whereof he had disabled the
Council, and by the second had excommunicated Princes, which should execute
that, which he pronounces now to be just: and of the other Bull he says, It
proceeded not from him, nor by his knowledge, though it were testified by the
Cardinals, and endorsed formally by his Secretary. And even this last Bull of
so many Reuocations, Annihilations, and Tergiuersations was not thought strong,
nor out of the danger of being revoked again, till the Council accepted it,
and ratified it by applying the BVLL and Seal of the Council to it.

13 So is it familiar in the Popes, not for the variety of just occasion, but
for pe^sonall hate to their predecessors, to annull the acts of one another. So
Stephen the sixth or seventh, Caranza. fo. 414.
abrogated Omnes ordinationes, of Pope Formosus, and dug him up, and cut of
some of his fingers, Binius. To. 3. par. 2. fo. 1047.
and cast him into Tyber, and made all to whom he had given Orders, take new
Orders again. Carran. Ibid.
And next year Pope Romanus abrogated all Stephens Acts; and within seven
year after, came Sergius, who refreshed the hate against Formosus, Id. fo. 415.
and beheaded his body; which I wonder how he found, since Pope Stephen had so
long before cast it into Tyber.

14 And in a matter so mainly concerning faith, as amongst them, an Autentique
translation of the Bible, is, between the Edition of Sixtus the fifth, and the
Edition of Clement the eight, there is so much difference, even in absolute and
direct Contradictions, as he which reads the several Breues, by which those
two Editions are authorized; both having equal iustifications of the present
Editions, equal absolutions from oaths for admitting any other, equal
imprecations and curses, for omitting these, may well think that that is a
weak and litigious title to Ma^tyrdome, which is grounded upon the Popes
Breues, which he himself, when he sends them, knows not whether they be just
or no.

15 For, as they have forbidden many lawful things, and offered to destroy the
laws themselves, so have they allowed and authorized many things, which our
own Reason, and discourse, and Experience, can convince of falsehood.

16 It is the common opinion that Eugenius the third, confirmed Gratian^ Of
whom, we may be bold, out of that learned Bishop which has made
animaduersions upon him, ^o say, That he knew neither things nor words,
mistook matters and names, erred in places, and times, and had neither seen
Fathers, Councels, nor Rolls. And though this Bishop seem not to believe that
Eugenius did confirm him, Dialo. 3.
yet he confesses, That he which does believe such a confirmation, is bound
thereby to believe as many errors, as are in Gratian. For, it seems we have
no longer liberty to doubt, after such a confirmation: as it will follow
evidently out of Bellarmines fashion of arguing, De purg. l. 1. C. 9. Altera.
when he says, We are bound to obey the Pope, when he institutes a festival
of a Saint; yet we are never bound to do against our conscience; and
therefore we may no longer doubt it; but we must make his Decree our
conscience. So that if either Eugenius confirmed it before, or Gregory the
thirteenth since, our liberty is precluded, and we must credulously, and
faithfully swallow, not only all the unwholesome, and insipid negligences,
ignorances, and barbarismes of Gratian, but all the bitter and venomous
mixtures to Christ's merit, and all the blasphemies and diminutions of his
Maiest^e, which Boniface the ninth, and Martin the fifth, have obtruded to us,
by approving and confirming by their Bulls, Histor. de Sacr. Sindone. Par. 1.
Epist. ^ector.
the Revelations of Saint Brigid; for so says Paleotus they have done.

17 These heavy inconueniencies, and dangerous precipitations into errors,
being foreseen by some of the ancient Schoolmen, out of their Christian
liberty, and prudent estimation of the Popes Authority, they have pronounced
this infallibility of judgment, to be only then in the Pope, When he does
apply all Moral means to come to the knowledge of the truth; As, hearing
both parties, and waighing the pressures and afflictions, which he shall induce
upon them whom he inflames against their Prince, and proceeding mildly and
dispassionately, and not like an interessed person, and to the edification, not
destruction of them, whom only he esteems to be his Catholic Church.

18 And this seems so reasonable, that though the Jesuit Tannerus at first
cast it away, De libert. Eccles. l. 2. c. 9.
as the opinion only, Quorundam ex Antiquioribus Scholasticis, yet afterward
he affoords an interpretation to it; but such a one, as I think any Catholic
would be loath to venture his Martyrdom thereupon, if he were to die for
obedience to a Breue. For thus he says, In every matter, when a Hypotheticall
proposition is made, of the condition whereof we are certain, then the whole
proposition must not be said to be Hypothetically and Conditionally true, but
absolutely. And this he exemplifies by this Proposition: If Christ do come to
judgment, there shall be a resurrection, which proposition is absolutely and
not conditionally true, because we are certain that Christ will come to
Judgment: And so he says, That it is the meaning of all them who affirm that
the Pope may er^e, except he use ordinary means, only to infer, that he
does ever use those means, without all doubt and question. But with what
conscience can this Jesuit say, That this was the meaning of these Schoolmen,
when in the same place it appears, that the purpose of those Schoolmen, was
^o bring the Pope to a custom of calling Councels, in determining weighty
causes; for when they say, He may err except he use Ordinary means, and
they intended general Councels for this o^dinary means, can they be intended
in s^yin^ so^ to mean that the Pope did ever in such cases use Genera^l
Councels, when they reprehended his neglecting that ordinary means, and
labored to ^educe him ^o the practice thereof?

19 And though most of these infirmities incident to Breues in general, do so
reflect upon these two Breues in question, that any man may apply them, ye it
may do some good to come to a nearer exagitation and tri^l^ of the necessary
obliga^ion which they are ima^ined to imposed. It is good Doctrine which one of
your men teaches; That even in laws, Carninus de vi ^t pot. leg Huma. C. 10.
every particular man has power to interpret the same to his advantage, and
to dispense with himself therein, if there occur a sudden case of necessity,
and there be no open way and recourse to the Superior. The first part of which
Rule would have justified them, who took the oath before the Breues (though
they had had some scruples in their conscience) by reason of the great scandal
to the cause, and personal detriment, which the refusal was li^ely to draw on.

20 Nor can the Catholics be said, to have had as yet recourse to their
Superior, when neither their reasons have been answered or heard, which
think the oath naturally and morally law^ull, nor theirs who think, that in
these times of imminent pressures and afflictions, all inhibitions ought to
have been forborne, and that any thing which is not ill in it self, ought to
have been permit^ed for the sweetning and mollifying of the state toward them.

21 Their immediate Superiors here in England have been in different
opinions, and therefore a recourse to them cannot determine of the matter: And
for recourse to the Pope, the party of Secular Priests have long since
complained, that all ways have been precluded against them. And if they had
just, or excusable reasons to doubt, that the first Breue issued by Subreption,
they had more reasons to suspect as many infirmities in ^he second, because one
of the reasons of suspecting the first, being, That their Reasons were not
heard, but that the Pope was misinformed, and so misledde by hearking to one
party only, the second Breue came, before any remedy or redress was given,
or any knowledge taken of the complaint against ^he first.

22 Certainly I think that if he had had true in^ormation, and a sensible
apprehension, that the s^ffe^ing of his party in this Kingdom, was like to b^
so heavy, as the laws threatened, and a pertinacy in this re^usall, was likely
to extort, he had been a lavish and prodigal steward of their lives, and
husbanded their bloods unthriftily, if he had not reserved them to better
services hereafter, by forbearing all inhibitions for the present, and
confiding and relying upon his power of absoluing them again; when any
occasion should present it self to his advantage, rather then thus to declare
his ambitions, and expose his servants and instruments to such dangers, when by
this violence of his, the state shall be awakened to a jealous watchfulnes over
them.

23 It is not therefore such a disobedience as contracts, crinduces sin
(which it must be, i^ it be matter enough for Martyrdom) not to obey these
Breues, though thus iterated; for it is not the adding of mo^e Cyphars after,
when there is no figure before, that gives any value, or increase to a number.
Man. C. 23. N. 38.
Nauarrus upon good grounds, gives this as the Resultance of many Canons there
by him allege, That it is not sin in a man not to obey his Superior, when
he has probable reasons to think, that his Superior was deceived in so
commanding, or that he would not have given such a command, if he had known
the truth. And can any Catholic believe so profanely of the Pope, as to
think, that if he had seen the effects of the powder treason, every Church
filled with devout and thankful commemorations of the escape, every Pulpit
justly drawing into suspicion, the Masters which procured it, and the Doctrine
wherewith they were imbued, every vulgar mouth extended with execrations of the
fact, and imprecations upon such as had like intentions, every member of the
Parliament studying, what clau^es might be inserted for the Kings security,
into new laws, and the King himself to have so much moderated this common
just distemper, by taking out all the bitterness and sting of the law, and
contenting himself, with an oath or such obedience as they were borne under,
which i^ they should refuse, there could be no hope of farther easiness, or of
such as his Majesty had ever showed to them before, Might any Catholic, I
say^ believe, that the Pope if he had seen this, would have accelerated these
afflictions upon them, by forbidding an Act, which was no more but an
attestation of a moral truth, that is, civil obedience, and a profession,
that no man had power to absolve them, Citat. Theod. Niem. Nem. vitio. Tract.
4. Ca. 9.
against that which they justly auerred to be such a Moral and indelible
truth? Might he not reasonably and justly have applied to the Pope, that which
Anselmus is said to have pronounced of God himself, Minimum inconueniens est
Deo impossible, and concluded thereupon, that it was impossible for the Pope to
be Author of so great inconveniences?

24 And if the Popes Breues were not naturally conditioned so, that in cases of
enormou^ de^ri^ment and inconvenience, to the cause and persons, the rigor
thereof might be remitted, since in such occurrences, the reason of those
Breues does euiden^ly cease, which is ever, understood to be the advancement of
the Roman Church; And if in all cases, all Breues must have their full
execution under the pains and penalties inflicted therein, the Catholics of
England are in worse condition by some former Breues of the Popes, then the
offending and violating these two later, can draw them into. For (to omit many
of like, and worse danger) That general Rescript of Clement the seventh, which
I mentioned before, pronounces, That not only by the Bulla Caenae, all such
are excommunicated though they be Princes, as hinder the execution of the
Apostolic letters, or such as give such hinderers any Counsel, help, or
favors directly, or indirectly, publicly, or secretly, or by any color or
pretense, (which words will reach to all those, who have refused, or doubted
and disputed these Breues) but also that the Kingdoms and places, where those
offende^s are remaining, are interdicted; And then in the rigor of this Breue,
how can the Priests exercise their functions here in England, if the Bulla
Caenae, and a local interdict oppress it.

25 And by such servile obedience to Breues, as this is all suc^ Catholics as
have relieved and succor'd themselves, with that weak distinction of the ^ourt
of Rome, and the Church of Rome, shall loose and forfeit all the advantage
which that affoorded them; For, when they shall be pressed with numbers of
Venial Indulgences, and of ambitious Bulls, and usurpations upon the right of
other Princes, they shall not be able to find this ea^e, to dischardge all
upon the Court of Rome, if the Church of Rome make it matter of Faith to obey
the Rescripts of the Court of Rome, which produce these enormities. For since
the Pope is the Church, how can you divide the Church from the Court? Since,
either as the Court is Aula or Curia, the Pope is the Prince, and as it is
Forum, he is the Judge, and the Ordinary. And since all those Bulls, which are
loaded with censures, or with Indulgences proceed from him as he is the
Church, (for those powers are only in the Church) how can you impute to his
act any error of the Court?

26 It was whilst Nero continued within the limits of a good and a just Prince,
that Tacitus said of him, Annal. 13.
Discreta fuit domus a Repub. but when he strayed into Tyranny, it was not
so. Nor is the Court of Rome, any longer distinguished from the Church of Rome,
if the Church justify the errors of the Court, and pronounce, that he which
obeyes not that Court, is not in that Church, as it does in Excommunicating
all them, which obey not the Rescripts and Breues of Popes.

Ap^end. ad lib. de Pont.
27 So that when Bellarmine undertook to answer all, which had been objected
out of Dante, and Bocace, and Petrarche, against Rome, it was but a lasie
escape, and around and Summarie dispatch upon weariness, to say, that all that
was meant of the Court of Rome, not of the Church; and therefore it was a wise
abstinence in him, not to repeat Petrarchs words, but to recompense them by
citing other places of Petrarch in favor of the Roman Church. For though
Petrarch might mean the Court, by the name of Babylon, and by imputing to it
Covetousness and Licentiousness, yet when he charges Rome with Idolatry, and
calls it the Temple of Heresy, can this be intended of the Court of Rome?

28 The disobedience to Popes (in whom no moderate men ever denied some
degrees of the leaven and corruption, of such passions and respects as vitiate
all men's actions) was not always esteemed thus heinous, though in matters
nearer to the foundations of Faith, then these which are now in question. The
famous dissension between Pope Stephen and Cyprian, is good evidence thereof.
For though now they say, Bell. de Pont. l. 4. c. 7. tertia ratio
That the Pope did not pronounce, De fide, against rebaptization, but only
say, that it might not be used: And that he did not Excommunicate Cyprian, but
only say, that he ought to be excommunicate; yet this is as far as the Pope
has proceeded with you: and after he had done thus much, Bellarmine says, it
was lawful for Cyprian to differ from him: I^^d and (...).
because he thought that the Pope was in a pernicious error. And though
Cyprian is never found to have retracted either his Doctrine of rebaptization,
or his behavior to the Pope, yet the seuerest Idolaters of that Sea, have
never denied him a room amongst the blessed Saints of the purest times.

29 And though they are for their advantage content to say now, To. 10 Anno
878. N. 41.
that Cyprian was never excommunicated, yet it is not denied by Baronius, but
that Ignatius the Patriarch of Constantinople was, and that he died
excommunicate; and resisted to the end of his life, the Popes Rescripts, by
which he was commanded to leave all the Country of Bulgaria to the
jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. But this (says Baronius) he did not out of
any displeasure to the Pope, but to defend the jurisdiction of his Church, as
he was bound by oath, under the danger of damnation: for his purpose was not to
take away another right but to keep his own.

30 And was not this your case, before the Breues came? Is not civil obedience
either really or by intention and implication sworn by every subject to the
King in his birth, and after? and do you not by this last oath defend, not
only the Kings right, as you are bound, under danger of damnation, but your
own liberty who otherwise must be under the obedience of two Maste^s? and
have these two Breues made your case to differ so much from his, that that
which was lawful to him, may not be so to you? when as to you the Breues have
only brought a naked and bare commandment, without taking knowledge of your
allegations: but the Pope gave Ignatius three several warnings; and disputed
the case with him: and told him that by the records at Rome, it was evident,
and that no man was ignorant, that that region belonged to the Roman Church,
and that Ignatius his pretenses to it, because the enemy had interrupted the
Roman possession were of no force; which he proves by a Decree of Pope Leo,
and diverse other ways: Yet for all this, Ignatius held out, endured the
excommunication, and died under that burden, and yet God has testified by many
miracles, the holiness and sanctity of this reverent man.

31 Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria, Did. 22. In tantum. and 24. q. 2.
^^ane profertur.
exceeded al these passive disobediences and contempts of the Popes, and
proceeded to an Active excommunication of the Pope himself: and yet for all
this, it is said of him, Higgons. fo. 32.
Non errauit in fide. And what opinion was held of our Bishop Grosthead, that
his disobedience to the Pope despoiled him not of the name of Catholic, a
late Neophite of your Church has observed.

32 For the Pope is subject to humane errors, and impotencies; and when a great
sword is put into a weak hand, it cannot always be well governed; And
therefore when Bartholinus an advocate in the Court of Rome, Theodor.a Niem de
Scrip. l. 1. c. 42
a bold and witty man, had adventured to co^uay secre^ly cer^aine questions,
in which he decl^red his own opinion affirmatively; amongst which, one was,
That if the Pope were negligent, or insufficient, or headstrong to the danger
of the Church, the Cardinals might appoint him a Curator and Guardian, by whom
he should dispatch the affairs of the Church, his reasons are said to have
prevailed with excellent Masters in Theology, and Doctors in both laws, and
that many Cardinals adbered thereunto, till the Pope coming to the knowledge
thereof, imprisoned six of the Cardinals, and confiscated their estates.

33 But if, as it is forbidden under Excommunication, to make any Comment upon
one Canon which concerns the privileges of the Franciscans, Na^ar. Manual. c.
27. n. 147. Clem. Exiui. Tit. de verb. si^ni^.
(which were the best laborers in the Popes Vineyard, til the Jesuits came) so
it were forbidden upon like penalty, to interpret the Popes Breues, yet no
such law can take away our natural liberty, nor silence in us these dictats
which nature inculcates, That against the end for which it was instituted, no
power can be admitted to work. Ver. Obedientia.
For from your Syluester we learn, That the Popes precepts bind not, where
there is vehement likelihood of trouble or scandal. And so he puts the
justifying and making valid the Popes Breues, to the judgment of considerate
men, though parties.

34 So also is it said there, That it is not the purpose nor intention of the
Church to be obeyed in such dangers; For auoydance of scandal, is Divine law,
and to be preferred before any command of a Pope, which is but Humane law: for
Divine positive law yeeldes to this precept of avoiding scandal, as I noted
before, in the integrity of confession, where some sins may be omitted,
rather then any scandal admitted. And therefore their great Victoria complains
justly of great inconveniences, De p^t. pa^. and Conc. Sed quia
If all matters should be left to the will of one man, who is not confirmed in
grace, but subject to error: or which, says he, I would it were lawful for us
to doubt, meaning that daily experience made it evident; for so he adds in
the point of Dispensations, We see daily so large and dissolute dispensations,
as the world cannot bear it. And not long after, in the same Lecture he ^aies,
Ibid. preterea.
We may philosophy, and we may imagine, that the Popes might be most wise men,
and most holymen, and that they would never dispense without lawful cause, but
experience cries out to the contrary, and we see that no man which seeks a
Dispensation misses it. And therefore we must despair if it be left, Arbitrio
humano: For (says he) the Pope must trust others, and they may deceive him, if
he were Saint Gregory himself. And he adds further, Ibid. and preterea.
We talk as though we needed great Engines to extort a Dispensation, as
though there were not me expecting at Rome, when any man will come and ask a
dispensation of all those things, which are provided against by the laws: and
though he confess, that former Popes were not so limited, as he desiers the
Popes in these times, might be, it was, says he, because they did not
presume, so easily to dispense against Councels. Da mihi Clementes, provide me,
says he, such Popes as Clement, Linus and Syluester were, Ibid. 87. si quis
and I will allow all things to be done, as they list.

35 And then since de facto, it may be, and often is so, whether a Precept of
the Popes, do work to that end for which the Church government was committed
to him, or no, Natural Reason, says a Azor. To. 2. l. 4. C. 5.. Tertio.
learned Jesuit, will instruct us. Who thereupon makes a free and ingenuous
conclusion, in a question of the Popes power in making a Law, of Electing a
Successor, That the Pope might make such a Law, if he would, but the Church
would never receive it. Which how could Azorius pronounce, or know, but by the
insinuation of natural reason, and conueniencie; which Counsailer and
Instructor, every other temperate and intelligent, and dispassioned man, has
as well as he?

Ibid.. Decimaseptima.
36 And so also says Fran. a Victor. and as many as speak ingenuously, That
where the Mandates of the Pope, are in Destru^tione Ecclesiae, they may be
hindered and resisted. For in the greatest effect which can be attributed to the
Popes Bulls, in these temporal affairs, which is, discharging of Subjects
from their obedience, that peremptory Canon, Nos Sanctorum, binds not, except
it may be done without grievous damage to the Subject, D'Auila de censuris.
par. 2. C. 6. disp. 11. Dub. 9.
and though by the virtue of that Canon, they may forbear their obedience if
they will, yet they are not bound thereby to do it. Yea, it were unlawful, to
deny that obedience, in cases of scandal or tumult. Alf. Castr. de potest.
leg. l. 1. C. 5. Docum.
For so also, says another of your great men, It is often expedient to obey
even an unjust law, to avoid scandal. Comitolus. Resp. Moral. li. 1. Q. 47.
And the late vn-entangler of perplexities, Comitolus the Jesuit, who
undertakes to clear so many cases, which Nauarrus and many others left in
suspense, when he comes to handle the question, whether a Professor of the
Roman faith, being sent into those parts where the Greek Church observes
other rites, may go to their service; in such cases as he allows it, he
builds upon this Reason, That by the law of God, and of Nature, it is lawful,
and the Precepts of the Church, (which forbid this) do not bind Christians,
in cases of great detriment to the life, or soul, or honor, or fame, or
outward things.

37 Since therefore a civil constitution, which in power of binding, and all
validities, except immura^lenesse, is by your own Authors equal to Divine,
had possessed your conscience, and so refreshed by a new solicitation your
natural and native Alleageances, so that no Breue could create in you a new
conscience, in this case, no more then if it had forbidden Obedience to the
common law, or any other statute, because it belongs not to you to judge what
is sin, and what conduces to spiritual ends, since by the testimony of the
Popes own Breues, his Breues are subject to many infirmities, and open to the
interpretation of mean men, since they are often revoked, and pronounced to
have been void from the beginning, upon such reasons as it is impossible for
you to suspect or spy in them, when you admit them, since these Breues have
contributed their strength, and given authority, to vain, and to suspicious,
and to false, and to blasphemous legends, since the Pope is allowed, to neglect
all ways of informing himself of the truth, in the most general and most
important matters, since recourse to your Superiors is not affoorded, which
you know both by the practices of one party and faction at Rome, and also by
effects thereof, because by the second Breue, the complaints against the first
were not remedied, And since in such cases, the interpretation and dispensation
of Breues, when necessity oppresses you, belongs to your self, who cannot be
esteemed disobedient, for abstaining from doing such a command, as you do
justly think to be erroneous, and that your Superior would not importune it,
if he knew perfitly your condition, and estate: since their rigorous
observation of Breues, might cast you under a local interdict, and sterue you
for spiritual food, And makes you justify all the errou^s of the Court of
Rome, by making the Court, and the Church, all one: since Cyprian, Ignatius and
others, have been justly reputed holy men, and Saints, though they disobeyed
the precepts of Popes, made upon more reasons, and stronger comminations, and
broken with less excuse, then these Breues may be by you: since lastly the
Pope cannot by pretense of aduauncing the Church serve his own ambitions to
your destruction, you may as well flatter your self, with specious Titles, for
not swimming if you were cast into a River, or for not running out of a house,
if it were ready to fall upon you, as you may think your selves Confessors
(in your sense) for suffering the penalties of this law, or they may think
themselves Martyrs, whose execution ^or other treasons, this Refusal may
hasten.

CHAP. XII. That nothing required in this Oath, violates the Popes spiritual
Jurisdiction; And that the clauses of swearing that Doctrine to be Heretical,
is no usurping upon his spiritual right, either by preiudicating his future
definition, or offending any former Decree.
THe same office which our s^erties perform for us, at our Baptism and
Regeneration, the Law vnder^akes at our Civil birth; For the Law is Communis
sponsio Reip. Dig. Tit. 5. L^. 1.
And as they which were our stipulators at the Font, take care when we come to
ability of Discretion, that we do by some open declaration, as frequenting
Divine Service, and so communicating with the Church in the word and
Sacraments, testifye that we acknowledge our selves incorporated and
matriculated into that Christian warfare, wherein they entered our Names, So has
Law provided, that when we grow to be capable of Good and Evil, we should
make some public protestations of that Obedience to the Prince, which by our
birth in his Dominions, and of his Subjects, we had at first contracted.
Thereupon has it proceeded that by our Laws at sixteen years of age, an
Oath has been required of every Subject. And besides this general Oath, it
has in all well governed Estates, been thought necessary, that they which
were assumed to any public function in the State, should also by another
Oath, appropriated to that calling, be bound to a just execution of that place;
And therefore it seems reasonable which a Lawyer says, That he which
undertakes to exercise any Office, Par. de Put. de Syndic. fo. 481.
before he have taken the Oath, belonging thereunto, Tenetur Maiestatis,
because he seems to do it by his own Authority. Nor might a Soldier, Mar
Donatus in Sueto. c. 16.
though he were in the Tents at the time of Battle, be admitted to fight
against the enemy, if he had not taken the Oath. And the Notaries in the
Courts of Rome, if they delay to dispatch them, who would by Appeal, In
septimo Tit. 2. c. 1.
or otherwise bring causes into those Courts, are by a l^te Decretall guilty of
perjury, because being sworn to advance the profit of that place, and the
Apostolic Authority, this is accounted an interpretatiue perjury.

2 So also has it been a wise and religious custom, in matters newly
emergent, and fresh occurrences, if either foreign pretenses, or inward
discontentments, threatened any commotions in the State, to minister new Oaths,
to all whom it might concern; not as new o^lig^tions, but as volun^ary and
public confessions, that all the former oaths sworn in Nature and in Law,
do re^ch and ex^end to that case then in question, and that they were bound by
them, to the maintenance of the peace and tranquillity of the present State.

3 And at no time, and to no persons, can such Oaths be more necessary, then
to us now, who have been awakened with such drums as these, Apolog. of
Jesuit, c. 5.
There is no war in the world so just and honorable, be it civil or
foreign, as that which is waged for the Roman Religion. And especially in
this consideration are Oaths a fit and proper wall and Rampart, to oppose
against these men, because they say, Ibid.
That to the obedience of this Roman Religion, all Princes and people have
yielded themselves, either by Oath, vow, or Sacraments, or every one of them.
For against this their imaginary oath, it is best, that a true, real, and
lawful oath be administered by us.

4 The Jesuits which in their Vow to the Popes will, have sworn out all
their obedience at once, in a Hyperbolicall detestation of oaths, do almost
say true, Spongia pro I^suit. fo. 79.
when they profess, That they avoid an Oath worse then perjury: But though
they have borrowed this protestation of the Esseni, Serarius Trihaeres. l. 3.
c. 4. Ar. 34
who were in so much estimation amongst the Jews, yet this declining of Oaths
wrought not upon them, as it does upon the Jesuits; for the Esseni did
willingly take Oaths, Ar. 37.
that they would attempt nothing against the Magistrate; out of this reason,
that they believed it happened to no man, to be a governor without the pleasure
of God^ Since therefore the Jesuits abhor such oaths, Par. de Put. de syn.
^c. fo. 990. Hier. Gigas de laes. Ma. l. 3. rubr. 1. q. 5. Nu. 2.
and it is a good presumption, that Scholars are guilty if their Masters were,
and sons are punished, because they are justly suspected to inherit their
fathers malignity, and ill disposition; It was necessary to present such an
oath, as might discover how much of their Masters poison, and of their Fathers
ill affections to this State, the Jesuits disciples, and spiritual sons had
swallowed and digested.

5 And when an Oath is to be conceived and framed, which has some certain
scope and purpose; it were a great impo^encie or slackenes in the State, if it
should not be able, or not dare to express it in such terms, as might reach
home to that purpose, and accomplish fully all that which was intended therein;
especially in these times of subtle euasions and licentious equivocations.

6 When Paulus 4. had a purpose to take in, and bind more sorts of men, by
that oath which was framed according to the Trent Council, for them only who
were admitted to spiritual dignities, and some few others, and so to swear all
those men fast to the Doctrine of that Council, and to the obedience of the
Church of Rome, it is expressed in so exquisite and so safe words, as can
admit no escape. For, how ignorant soever he be in controuerted Divinity, every
one which takes that oath, must swear, That there are seven Sacraments
instituted by Christ; which any of their Doctors might have doubted and
impugn'd an hour before; as it appears by Azorius, Azorius Insti^. Mor. To.
1. l. 2. ca 9 praecep. prima quoti^scu^que.
that Alensis and Bonauenture did of Confirmation, Hugo Victor and Lombard of
extreme unction, Hostiensis and D^randus of Matrimony, and others of others:
and he must swear, That he believes Purgatory, Indulgences, and veneration of
Relics: and he must swear, That all things contrary to that Co^ncell are
heretical. And this oath is not only Canonized (as their phrase is) by being
inserted into the body of the Canon law, In septimo Tit. 1. ca 4.
but it is allowed a room in the Title, De Summa Trinitate, and fide
Catholica, and so made of equal credit with that. And that Baro^res^. ad
Card. Colum. Nu. 31.
oath by which the Cardinals are bound to the maintenance of the Church
privileges is conceived in so strong and forcible words, that Baronius calls
it Terribile Iuramentum, and says, that the only remembering of it inflicts a
horror upon his mind, and a trembling upon his body.

7 And with equal diligence are those oaths framed which are given to the
Emperors, Cerem sacr. Ca. de Coron Imp.
when they come to be Crowned by the Pope. For before he enters the land of the
Church, he takes one oath, Domino Papae iuro, that I will exalt him with all my
power. And before he enters Rome, he swears, that he will alter nothing in
that Government, And before he receives the Crown, he swears, that he will
protect the Popes person and the Church. And in the creation of a Duke, Ibid.
ca. de creat. Duc.
because he might have some dependence upon another Prince, the Pope exhibites
to him this oath; I vow my reverence and obedience to you, though I be bound to
any other.

8 So did Gregory the seventh exact a curious oath of the Prince of Capua,
Binius To. 3. Par 2. ^o. 1161.
that he would swear Allegiance to the Emperor, when the Pope or his
Successors should admonish him thereto, and that when he did it, he would do
it, with reservation of his Allegiance to the Pope. And so when the Emperor
Henry the seventh, though he confessed that he had swo^ne to the Pope, yet
denied that he understood that Oath to be an Oath of Allegiance or Fidelity,
the Popes have tooken order, not only to insert the oath into the body of the
Canon Law, Clem. de Iure iurand.
but to enact thereby, That whosoever took that Oath after, should account and
esteem it to be an Oath of Allegiance.

9 With how much curiosity and vnescapablenesse their forms of Abiuration
under oath are exhibited? They thought they had not given words enough to
Berengarius, De Consecrat. Did. 2. Ego.
till they made him swear, That the body in the Sacrament, was sensibly
handled, broken, and ground with the teeth; which he was bound to swear, Per
Homousion trinitatem. And they dressed and prepared Hierome of Prage, Sess. 19.
an oath, in the Council of Constance, by which he must swear, freely,
voluntarily, (or else be burned) and simply, and without condition, To assent
to that Church, in all things, but especially in the Doctrines of the Keys,
and Ecclesiastic immunities and relics, and all the ceremonies, which were
the most obnoxious matters.

10 But yet this seemed not enough; De i^sta Haereti. Punitio. l. 1. c. 111
And therefore, though Castrensis say, That there is no Law, by which he which
abiures, should be bound to abjure any other Heresy, then that of which he
was infamed, yet he says that it stands with reason, that he should abjure
all. And accordingly the Inquisition give an oath, in which, says he, Nulla
manet rimula elabendi; For he must swear, That he abiures all Heresies, and
will always keep the faith of Rome; And that he has told all, of others, and
of himself, and ever will do so; And that if he do not, he renounces the
benefit of this Absolution, and will trouble the Court with no more days of
hearing; but says he, Ego me iudico.

11 And if we do but consider the exact forms, and the aduantagious words
and clauses, which are in their Exorcismes, to cast out, and to keep out
Devils, they may be good inducements, and precedents to us, how diligent we
should be, in the phrase of our Lawe^, to expel and keep out Jesuits, and
their Legion, which are as crafty, and as dangerous.

12 When therefore it was observed, that not only most of the Jesuits Books
which took occasion to speak either of matter of State, or Moral Divinity,
abounded with traiterous and seditious Aphorisms, and derogatorie from the
dignity of Princes in general; but that their Rules were also exemplified,
and their speculations drawn into practice in this Kingdom, by more then one
Treason; and by one, which included and exceeded all degrees of irreligion and
inhumanity, then was it thought fit to conceive an oath, whose end, and
purpose, and scope was, to try and find out, who maintained the integrity of
their natural and civil obedience so perfectly, as to swear, that nothing
should alter it, but that he would ever do his best endeavor to the
preservation of the Prince, what enemy so ever should rise against him.

13 And if any of the material words, or any clause of the Oath, had been
pretermitted, then had not the purpose and intent of the Oath been fulfilled;
That is, no man had auerr'd by that oath, that he thought himself bound to
preserve the King against All enemies, which to do, is mere Civil obedience.
For though the general word of Enemy, or Usurper, would have encluded and
enwrapped as well the Pope, as the Turk, when either of them should attempt any
thing upon this Kingdome^ yet, as it has ever been the wisdom of all States,
in all Associations and leagues, to ordain Oaths proper to the business then
in hand, and to the imminent dangers: So now it was most necess^rie to do so,
because the malignitie of men of that persuasion in Religion, had so violently
broke forth, and declared it-selfe; Which happy diligence, the effect praises
and iustifies enough, since it appears, that if these particular clauses had
not been inserted, they would have swallowed any Oath, which had been
presented in general terms and have kept their Consciences at large to have
done any thing, which this Oath purposed to prevent.

14 He therefore that should desire to be admitted to Swear, that he would
preserve the King against all his enemies, Except the Pope, or those whom he
should encourage or employ; Or that he would ever bear true Allegiance, Until
the Pope had discharged him, or that he^ would discover any conspiracy which
did happen before the Pope did authorize it; Or that he would keep this Oath,
Until the Pope gave him leave to break it: this man should be far from
performing the intent and scope of an Oath, which should be made for a new
attestation, that he would according to his natural duty, and inborne
obedience, absolutely desend the King from All his enemies.

15 I make no doubt but the Jesuits would have given way to the Oath, if it
had been conceived in general words, of All obedience, against all Persons;
for it were stupiditie to deny that ^o be the duty of all Subjects. Nor would
they have exclaimed, that spiritual Jurisdiction had been infringed, if in
such times as their Religion governed here, this clause had been added to
defend the King, D' Auila de Cens^. Par. 2. c. 4. disp. 1. Dub. 4.
Though the Metropolitan of England should Excommunicate him. And yet by there
Doctors it is auerr'd, that Iure Diuino, and Iure Com^muni Antiquo, A Bishop
may Excommunicate a King, as Ambrose did Theodosius, and that excepting only
infallibility of judgment, Ibidem.
in matter of Faith, a Bishop might, Iure Diuino, do all those things in his
Diocese, which the Pope might do in the whole Church. For, so Bellarmine
himself concludes, arguing from the Popes Authority in all the world, to a
Bishop in his Diocese. D^ Pont. l. 5. c. 3 Hem.
If therefor an Oath had been lawful, for defending the King against All
enemies, though a Bishop Excommunicate him, And the Pope have only by positive
laws, withdrawn from the Bishops some of the exercise of their jurisdiction,
and reserved to himself the power of excommunicating Princes, it is as lawful
to defend him after a Popes excommunication now, as it was after a Bishops,
when a Bishop might excommunicate: and no man ever said, that a Bishop might
have deposed a King.

16 All which they quarrel at in the oath, is, that any thing should be
pronounced, or any limits set, to which the Popes power might not extend: but
they might as well say that his spiritual power were limited or shortened, and
so the Catholic faith impugned, if one should deny him to have power over
the wind and sea; since to tame and command these, in ordine ad spiritualia,
would advance the conversion of the Indies, and impair the Turks greatness,
and have furthered his fatherly and spiritual care of this Kingdom in 88.

17 All the substance of the oath is virtually comprehended in the first
proposition, That king James is lawful King of all these Dominions; The rest
are but declarations, and branches naturally and necessarily proceeding from
that roo^e. And as that Catholic which has sworn, or assented, that Paul
the fifth, is Pope canonically elected, has implicitly confessed, that no man
can deuest or despoile him of that spiritual iu^isdiction, which God has
deposed in him, nor of those temporal estates, which by just title his
predecessors possessed or pretended too: so that Subject which swears king
James to be his true and lawful King, obliges himself therein to all
obedience, by which he may still preserve him in that state; which is to
resist all which shall upon any occasion be his enemies.

18 For if a king be a king upon this condition, that the Pope may upon such
cause as seems just to him, depose him, the king is no more a Sovereign, then
if his people might depose him, or if a Neighbor king might depose him: For
though it may seem more reasonable and convenient, that the Pope, who may be
presumed more equal, and dispassioned then the people, and more disinteressed
then the neighbor Princes, should be the Judge and Magistrate to depose a
Prince enormously transgressing the ways, in which his du^y bound to him to
walk, though, I say, the king might hope for better Justice at his hand, then
another, yet he is no Sovereign, if any person whatsoever may make him none.
For it is as much against the nature of Sovereignty, that it may at any time be
justly taken away, as that it shall cer^ainly be taken away. And therefore a
King whom the Pope may depose, is but a Depositarie^ and Guardian of the
Souerainty; ^o whose trust it is committed upon condition: as the Dictators
were Depositaries of it, for a certain time. And Princes in this case shall
be so much worse then Dictators, as Tenants at will are worse then they which
have certain leases.

19 And therefor that suspicion and doubt, which a learned Lawyer conceived,
that the Kings of France and Spain lacked somewhat of Souerainty, Alb. G^nt.
de l^gatio. l. 4.
because they had a dependence, and relation to the Pope, would have had much
reason and probability in it, (though he meant this only of spiritual matters
concerning religion) if that authority which those Kings seem to be subject
to, were any other, then such, as by assenting to the Ecclesiastique Canons, or
confirming the immunities of the Ecclesiastique state, they had voluntarily
brought upon themselves, and the better to discharge their duetyes to their
Church; and to their civil state, had chosen this way as fittest to govern
their Church, as other ways, by Judges and other Magistrates to administer
civil Iu^stice.

20 So therefor his Majesty's predecessors in this Kingdom were not the less
Sovereign and absolute^ by those acts of Jurisdiction which the Popes
exercised here. For though some kings in a mis-deuout zeal, and contemplation
of the next life, neglected the office of government to which God had called
them, by attending which function duly, they might more have advanced their
salvation, then by Monastique retirings (of which public care, and preserving
those which were committed to their charge, and preferring them before their
own happinesse^ Moses, and St. Paul were courageous examples) Though, Exodus
32.32.
I say, To. 9.3.
they spent all their time upon their own future happiness, and so making
themselves almost Clergy men, and doing their duties, gave the Clergy men way
and opportunity, to enter upon their office, and deal with matter of State;
And though some other of our kings oppressed with temporal and personal
necessities, have seemed to diminish themselves, by accepting conditions at the
Popes hands, or of his Legates, And some others, out of their wisdom avoiding
dangers of raw and immature innou^tions, have digested some indignities and
usurpations, and by the examples of some kingdoms about them, have continued
that form of Church Government, which they could not resist without tumult at
home, and scandal abroad^ yet all this extinguished no part of their
Souerainty; which Souerainty without all question they had, before the other
entered into the kingdom, entirely: and Souerainty can neither be deuested nor
divided.

21 As therefore Saint Paul suffered Circumcision as long as toleration
thereof, advanced the propagation and growth of the Church, when a severe and
rigid inhibition thereof would have auerted many tender and scrupulous
consciences, which could not so instantly pass from a commandment of a
necessity in taking Circumcision, to a necessity in leaving it; But when as
certain men came down and taught, Act. 15.
that circumcision was necessary to salvation, and so ouerthrewe the whole
Gospel, because the necessity of both could not consist together, then
Circumcision was utterly abolished: So, as long as the Roman Religion, though
it were corrupted with many sicknesses, was not in this point become so
infectious and contagious, as that it would utterly destroy and abolish the
Souerain^y of Princes, the kings of England succourd, relieved, and cherished
it, and attended an opportunity, when God would enable them to medecin and
recover her; but to be so indulgent to her now, is impossible to them, because
as every thing is jealous of his own being, so are kings most o^ any: and
kings can have no assurance of being so, if they admit professors of that
Religion, which teach, that the Pope may at any time Depose them.

22 We do not therefore by this oath exempt the King from any spiritual
Jurisdiction; Neither from often incitations to continue in all his duties, by
Preac^ing the word; nor from confirming him in grace, by the blessed Sacrament;
Nor from discreet reprehension if he should transgress. We do neither, by
this oath, privilege him from the Censures of the Church, nor deny, by this
oath, that the Pope has justly engrossed and reserved to himself the power to
inflict those censures upon Princes. We pronounce therein against no power
which pretendes to make Kings better Kings, but only against that, which
threatens to make them no kings.

23 For if such a power as this, of deposing and annihilating Kings, be
necessary, and certain in the Church, and the Hierarchy thereof be not well
established, nor our salvation well provided for, without this power, as they
teach, why was the Primitive Church destitute thereof? For if you allow the
answer of Bellarmine, That the Church did not depose Kings then because it
lacked strength, De Pont. l. 5. c. 7. Quod si.
you return to the beginning again, and go round in a circle. For the
wisdom of our Savior is as much impeached, and the frame of the Church is as
lame, and impotent, and our salvation as ill provided for, if Christ do not
always give strength and ability to extirpate wicked kings, if that be
necessary to salvation, as he were if he did not give them Title and
Authority to do it. Yea, all tese defect; would still remain in the Church,
though Christ had given Authority enough, and Strength enough, if he did not
always infuse in the Pope, a Will to do it.

24 And where this power of deposing Princes may be lawfully exercised, as in
States where Princes are Conditional, and not absolute and Sovereign, as if
at Venice the State should depose the Duke, for attempting to alter that
Religion, and induce Greek errors, or Turcisme, or if other States, which
might lawfully do so, should depart from the obedience, and resist the force
of their Princes, which should offer to bring into that State, the Inquisition,
or any other violence to their Conscience, if the people in these States should
depose the Prince, did they do this by any Spiritual Authority, or
Jurisdiction? Or were this done by such a Temporal Authority, as were
indirect, or casual, or incident, or springing out of the spiritual
authority, as the Popes ridler makes his authority to be? Or must they stay,
to ask and obtain leave of their Clergy, to depose such a transgressor? If
therefore such a particular state, in whom the Sovereignty resides, have a
direct temporal power, which enables it sufficiently to maintain, and
conserve it self, such a supreme spiritual power, as they talk of in the
Pope, is not necessary for our salvation, nor for the perfection of the Church
government.

25 Nor is there any thing more monstrous, and unnatural and disproportioned,
that that spiritual power should conceive or beget temporal: or to rise
downwards, as the more degrees of height, and Supremacy, and per^^ct^o^ it
has, the more it should decline and stoop to the consideration of secular and
temporal matters. It may well have some congruity with your Rules, that the
Popes of Rome, in whom the fullness of spiritual power is said to be, should
have more iuri^dictio^ in spiritual matters, then other Prelates. They may be
better trusted with the spiritual food and physic of the Church, and so
prepare and present, the word, and the Sacraments, to us, in such outward sort
and manner, as we may best digest, and convert them to nouriture. They may be
better trusted with the spiritual Justice of the Church, and make the censures
thereof profitable to the delinquent, and others by his example. They may be
better trusted with the spiritual treasure of the Church, and apply and
dispense the graces, of which they have the stewardship, at their discretion.
They may be better credited with canonizing of Saints, and such acts of
spiritual power, then others: and these are many, and great offices, to be put
into one bodies hands. But tha^ out of this power, and then only when this
power is at her fullness and perfection in the Pope, there should arise and
grow a temporal power, which in their estimation, is so poor and wretched a
thing, that a boy which does but shave his head, and light a candle in the
Church, is above it, (for so they say, even of the lesser Orders) is either
impossible, or to prodigious, as if (to insist upon their own comparisons of
spiritual and temporal power) the Sun at his highest glory, should be said
to produce a Moone-light, or gold, after all trials and purifyings, should
bring ^orth Lead.

26 Nor do they for this Timpany, or false conception, by which spiritual
power is blown up, and swelled with temporal, pretend any place of Scripture,
or make it so much as the putatiue father thereof. For they do not say, that
any place of Scripture does by the literal sense thereof, immediately beget in
us, this knowledge, That the Pope may depose a Prince; but all their arguments
are drawn, from natural reason, and discourse, and conuenience. So that, if
either the spring which moves the first wheel, or any wheel by the way be
disordered, the whole Engine is defeated, and made of no use.

27 And in this we will join and concur with Azorius the Jesuit, To. 2. l.
4. C. 5.. Tertio.
That though there be some^things which neither the Scriptures do in express
words forbid the Pope to do, nor the Canons can disable him^ because he is
above them, yet the very law of Nature inhibites them, and prouides that by no
means they may be done; and that if the Pope should do such a thing, there
were a Nullity in the action, and the Church would never permit it, but do
some act in opposition against it, And all this out of this respect, That
natural Reason would teach them, that the general peace and tranquillity of
the Christian Commonwealth would be disturbed thereby.

28 If therefore in the point in question, we must be directed by natural
reason, and dispute which is most profitable and convenient for the peace of
Christian states, though it may be long uncertain on both sides, where the
victory will fall, yet, during the suite, Melior est conditio possidentis. And
since it is confessed, that Princes before they accepted Christianity, had no
Superior, and nothing appears why Princes should not be as well able to
govern Subjects in Christian Religion, as in Moral virtue, or wherein they
need an equal Assistant, or Superior, now, more then before, or by what
au^horitie the Pope is that Officer, it is a precipitate and hasty prejudice
for any man, before judgment, to set to the seal of his blood, and a
licentious and desperate extending of the Catholic faith, to intrude into the
body thereof, and charge upon our consciences, under pain of damnation, such
an article, as none but the thirteenth Apostle Judas would have made, and in
which their own greatest Doctors, are yet but Ca^echumeni, and have no
explicit belief thereof: for they neither bring to that purpose, Scripture,
Tradition, consent of Fathers, general Counsel, no nor Decree of any Pope.

29 And, I think, I may safely auerre, that it will not constitute a
Martyrdom, to seal with your blood any such point here, as the affirming of
the contrary, would not draw you into the fire at Rome. Except you should be
burned for an Opinion there, you cannot be reputed Martyrs, for holding the
contrary here. As therefore it were no Heresy at Rome, to deny the Popes
direct power, nor his indirect, (for if it were, Bellarmine and Baronius had
made up an Heresy between them, as Sergius and Mahomet did) so is the
affirmation thereof no article of faith in England.

30 This then being so far from being an Article of faith, by what power the
Pope may depose a Prince, as that it is even amongst them which affect an
Ignorance, but Dubium speculatiuu^, a man may safely, and ought to take the
Oath: For so a man of much authority amongst themselves does say, Carbo. summa
summarum. To. 1. Par. 1. C. 14.. prima.
That in a doubt which consists in speculation, we do not sin, if we do
against it^ and himself chooses this example, If a Soldier doubt whether the
war which his Prince undertakes be just or no, yet in the practique part,
he may resolve to fight at his Princes command, though he be not able to
explicate the speculatiue doubt. And he ads this in confirmation; That where
one part is certain, and the other doubtful, we may not leave the sure side,
and adhere to the other. In his example that which he presumes for certain,
is this, That every man ought to defend his Prince, and the speculatiue doubt
is, Whether the war be just or no. If this be applied ^o our case, every man
will find this certain impression in himsel^e, that he ought to swear
civil obedience to his Prince, and this will be so evident to him, that no
doubt can arise, so strong, or so well commended to him, by any pretense of
Reason, and deducements, as may make him abstain from a pract que duty, for a
speculatiue doubt. For so, Fran. a Victoria, maintaining the same opinion,
gives the^e reasons or it, Franc. a Victor. Rele^t 6. De Iure bell^.. Tertium
Dubium.
That not only in defensive war, but in offensive (which i^ further then our
case, in any probability, is like to extend to) the Prince is not bound to give
an account to the subject of the justice of the cause: And therefore (says
he) in doubtful cases, the safer part is to be followed: And if he should not
fight for his Prince, he should expose the State to the enemy, which is a much
more grievous offense, then to fight against the enemy, though he doubt of the
cause. ^or if their opinion were an evident Truth, both their Doctors would be
able to explica^e it, and their Disciples would need no explication.

31 This Oath therefore containing nothing, but a profession of a moral Truth,
and a protestation that nothing can make that false, impugnes no part of that
spiritual power, which the Pope justly has, no^ of that which he is charged
to vsu^pe. That which has seemed to many of them, to come nearest to his
spiritual power is, that the Deponent dot^ swear, That the Pope has no power
to absolve him of this Oath. But besides, that it has been strongly and
vncontroulably proved already by diverse, that no absolution of the Popes can
wor^e upon the matter of this Oath, because it is a moral Truth, I do not
perceive, that to absolve a man from an Oath, belongs to spiritual
Jurisdiction.

32 For Dispensations against a law, and absolutions from Oaths and Vows
work only as Declaration^, not as Introductions. And that power which gives
me a priu^ledge, with a Non obstante upon a law, or an absolu^ion from an oath,
does not enable me to break that law, or that Oath, but only declares, That
that law and Oath, shall not extend to me in that case, and that if this
particular case could have been foreseen, at the making of the law, or the
Oath, neither the Oath, nor the law ought to have been so general.

33 So therefore these Absolutions, are but interpre^ations, and it belongs to
him who made the law, to interpret it. For without any use of spiritu^all
Jurisdiction, the Emperor Henry ^he seventh, absolved all the Subjects of
Robert king of Sicily of their oaths of Allegiance, when he rebelled against
^he Emp^^e, of which he was a feudatarie Prince. Clem. de Sen. ^t re. ^ud.
I^a^^oralis.
And though the Pope annulled this sentence, it was not because the Emperor
might not do this, but because the king of Sicily held also of the Church, and
this absoluing of Subjects made by the Emperor, extended to the Subjects of
the Church.

34 So also the Emperors Antoninus and Verus, when one had made an oath, Dig.
li. 50. Tit. 1. Ad munic. le. fin.
that he would never come into the Senate, creating him such an Officer, as his
personal attendance was necessary in the Senate house, by an express
Rescript, absolved him of his oath. Of which kind there are diverse other
examples.

35 And your Canons do not require this spiritual Jurisdiction, always in
this Act of absoluing an oath. 15. q. 6. Authoritatem. gloss.
For if I have bound my self to another by an unjust oath, in many cases I may
pronounce my self absolved; and in others I may complain to the Judge, that
he may force him, to whom I swore, to absolve me of this oath. And in such
cases as we are directed to go to the Church, and the governor thereof, it is
not for absolution of the oath, but it is for judgment, whether there were any
sin in making that oath, or no. For when that appears, out of the Nature of
the matter, arises and results a Declaration sufficient, whether we are bound
or absolved. If therefore the matter of this oath be so evident, as being
Moral, and therefore constant and ever the same, that it can never need his
judgment, because it can in no case be sin, the scruple which some have had,
that by denying this power of absoluing, his spiritual power is endamaged, is
vain and frivolous.

THE SECOND PART.
FRom this imputation, of impairing his spiritual I abjure as impious, and
Heretical, that position, etc. I have not observed that any of them, have
thought it worthy of their defense; But because I have found in some
Catholiqus, when I have importuned them to instance, in what part of the oath
sp^rituall Jurisdiction was oppugned, or what deterred them from taking the
same, that they insisted upon this, That it belonged only to the Pope to
pronounce a Doctrine to be Heretical, and that, since there was a Canon of a
general Council pretended for the contrary opinion, and that it was followed
by many learned men, it were too much boldness for a private man, to a^erre it
to be Heretical, I am willing to deliver them of that scruple.

37 It is no strange nor insolent thing with their Authors, to lay the Note of
Heresy upon Articles, which can neither be condemned out of the word of God,
nor are repugnant to any Article of faith; for Castrensis, that he might
thereby make room for traditions, Aduer. Haere. l. 1. C 5. in princ.
liberally confesses, That there are many Doctrines of the Heretics, which
cannot be refelled by the testimony of the Scriptures. De libe^ Eccles. l. 2.
C 9.. Secundus.
And the Jesuit Tannerus is not squeamish in this, when he allows thus much,
That in the communion under one kind, and in fasts, and in feasts, and in
other Decrees of Popes, there is nothing established properly concerning faith.
So that with you, a man may be subject to the penalties, and so to the infamy,
and so to the damnation belonging to an Heretic, though he hold nothing
against the Christian faith.

38 But we lay not the Name of Heresy (in that bitter sense which the Canons
accept it) upon any opinion which is not against the Catholic faith. Ad Leo.
A^g. Epist. 97. in princi.
Which faith we believe Leo to have described well, when he says, That it is
singular, and true, to which nothing can be added, nor detracted: and we accept
S. Augustines signific^tion of the word Catholic; Epist. 48. Cont. Rogat. et
Donat.
we interpret the name Catholic, by the Communion with the whole world;
which is so Essential and so truly deduced out of the Scriptures, that a man
which will speak of another Church, then the Communion of all Nations, which
is the name Catholic, is as much Anathematized, as if he deny, the Death and
Resurrection of Christ. And what is this Essential truth so evident out of
Scripture, which designs the Catholic Church? Because, says Augustine, the
same Evangelical truth which tells us the Death and Resurrection, tells us
also, That Repentance, and R^mission of sins shall be preached in his Name,
through all Nations. That therefore is Catholic Repentance, and Remission of
sins by the Death and Resurrection o^ Christ, and such truths as the Gospel
teaches, are that Doctrine, which coagulates and gathers the Church into a
body, and makes it Catholic; of which opinion Bellarmine himself is
sometime, as when he argues thus, De Eu^har. l. 3. C. 8.. Ac primum.
whatsoever is Heresy, the contrary thereof is veritas fidei; for then it
must be ma^ter of faith, And an error with pertinacie in those points only,
should be called Heresy, in that heavy sense, which it has in a Papists
mouth.

40 Castrensis foresaw this Danger of Recrimination, and retorting upon
themselves, t^is opprobrious name of Heretic, if they were so forward to
impute it, in matters which belonged not to faith, Aduer. Here Is. l. 1. C 7
for accordingly he says, They amongst us, which do so easily pronounce a
thing to be Heresie^ are often stricken with their own arrow, and fall into the
pit which they dug for others. And certainly as the Greek Church by using
the same st^^nesse and r^gour toward the Roman, as the Roman uses toward
the other Western Churches, which is, not only to justify their opinions,
but to pronounce the contrary to be Heresy, has tamed the Roman writers so
far, Bo^osius.
as to con^esse that they condemn nothing else in t^eir opinion and practice
of consecrating in a different bread, but that they impose it, as a necessity
upon all other Churches, and has extorted a Decretall from Pope Eugenius, In
70. tit. 1. C. 2.
That Priests in Consecrating (not only may) but ought to follow the custom
of that Church where they are, whether in leauened, Azor. To. 2. l. 4. C. 15..
Item eo.
or unleavened bread, and ^nnocent the thi^d, required no more of them, in this
point, but that they would not show so much detestation of the Roman use
therein, as to wash and expiate their Altars, after a Roman Priest had
consecrated, So if it should stand with the wisdom and charity of the
Reformed Church, Iurid^cally to call, all the Addi^ions which the Romans have
made to the Catholic faith, and for which, we are departed from them,
absolute and formal Heresy, though perchance it would not make them ab^ndon
their opinions, yet I think it would reduce them to a mo^e humane and civil
indifferency, and to let us, without imposing t^eir traditions, enjoy our own
Religion, which is, of ^t self, in their confession, so free from Heresy, that
they are forced to ma^e this all our Heresy, that we will not ad^it theirs.

41 Ye^ somethings have so necessary a consequence, and so immediate a
dependence upon the Articles of faith, that a man may be bold to call the
contrary Heretical, though no Defi^ition of any Council have pronounced it
so^ yea some Notions do so precede the Articles of our faith, that the
Articles may be said to depend upon them so far^e, as they were frustrate, if
those prenotions were not certain. Of that sort is the immortal^ty of the
soul, without which the work of redemption we^e vain. And therefore it had
been a viti^ous tenderness, and irreligious modesty, if a man du^st not have
called it Heretical, to say, that the soul was mortal, till Leo the tenth,
in the Laterane Council Decreed it to be Heresy. In septimo l. 5. Tit. 3. c.
8.
For though Bellarmine in one place req^ire it as Essential in an Heresy, I
hat^ have been condemned in a Council of Bishops, De Euchar. l. 3. c. 8. Ac
primu^
yet he says in another place, That the Popes alone without Councels, have
condemned man^ Heresies.

42 And this liberty has been used as well by Epiphanius, De Pont. l. 4. c.
3. Alterum.
and S. Augustine in the purer times, as by Castrensis and Prateolus, in the
later Roman Church, and of late years (of those which adhere to Caluins
Doctrine, by Danaeus, and of Luthers followers, by Schlusselbergius; all which
in composing Catalogues of Heretics, have mentioned diverse, which as yet no
general Council has condemned. So did the Emperors in their const^tutions
pronoun^e against some Heresies of which no Council had determined. So did the
Parliament of Paris in their sentence against Chastell for the assassinate
upon the person of this King of France, pronounce certain words, which he had
sucked from the Jesuits, and uttered in derogation of Kings, to be Seditious,
Scandalous, and Heretical.

42 And if the Oath framed by order of the Council of Trent, and ra^ified and
enjoined by the Popes Bull, be to be given to all persons, then must many men
swear somethings to be of the Catholic faith, and some other things to be
Heretical, in which he is so far removed from the knowledge of the things,
that he does not only not understand the signification of the words, but is
not able to sound, nor utter, nor spell them.

43 And he must swear many things determinately, and precisely, which even
after that Council some learned men still doubt, D'A^^in. de pot. (...) 23. n.
5. ^x (...).
As, that a license to hear confessions, in every Priest not beneficed, is so
necessary, necessitate Sacramenti, that except he have such a license, the
penitent, though never so contrite and particular in enumeration of his sins,
and exact in satisfactions, and performing all penances, is utterly frustrate
of any benefit by virtue of this Sacrament. So therefore a certain and
natural evidence of a moral truth, such as arises to every man, That to a
King is due perpetual obedience, is better authority to induce an assurance,
and to produce an oath, that the contrary is Heretical, then an implicit
credit rashly given to a litigious Council, not believed by all Catholics,
and not understood by all that swear to believe it.

44 For the other obstacle and hinderance which re^ards them, from pronouncing
that this position is heretical, Ann. 1215. ca. 3.
which is, the Canon of the Laterane Council, enough has been said of the
infirmity and inualidity of that Council by others. Thus much I may be bold
to add, that the Emperor under whom that Council was held, never accepted
it for a Canon, neither in those words, Extra. de Heresi. c. 13.
not in that sense, as it is presented in the Canon law; from whence it is
transplanted into the body of the Councels. And the Church was so far from
imp^gning the Emperors sense and acceptance thereof, Direct Inqui. let.
Apostol. page 13, 27, 51.
that Innocent the fourth, and diverse other Popes being to make use thereof,
cite the Constitution of the Emperor, not any Canon of a Council in their
Directions to the Inquisitors, how to proceed against Heretics. They
therefore either knew no such Canon, or suspected and discredited it.

45 Thus therefore that pretended Canon says, If a temporal Lord warned by
the Church, do not purge his land of Heretics, let him be excommunicate by
the Metropolitan and Conprouinciall bishopps; if he satisfy not within a
year, let it be signified to the Pope, that he may denounce his subjects to be
absolved from their Allegiance, and expose his Land to Catholics, which may
without contradiction possess it, the right of the principal Lord (which we
call Lord Paramount) being reserved, if he give no furtherance thereunto. And
thus far without doubt the Canon did not include Principal and Sovereign
Lords, because it speaks of such, as had Lords above them. And where it
concludes with this clause, The same Law being to be observed toward them, Cod.
l. 1. Tit. 5. l. 4 Si vero.
Qui non ^abent Dominos principales, The Imperial Constitution has it thus,
Qui non habent Domos principales.

46 And certainly the most natural and proper accep^ation of Domos
Principales in this place, in the Emperors Law, is the same as the word,
Domicilium Principale, has in the Canons, which is a Man's chief abiding and
Residence, though upon occasion he may be in another place, or have some
relation and dependence upon a Prince out of that Territory. And it may give
as much clearenesse to the understanding of this Law, if we compare with it,
De Sent. and r^iud
the great and solemn Clementine Pastoralis.

47 For then Robert being King of Sicily, that is, such a Principal Lord, as
this pretended Canon speaks of, but yet no Sovereign (for he depended both
upon the Empire and upon the Church) was condemned as a Rebel by the Emperor
Henry the ^euen^h. And Clement the fi^t, ann^l^'d and abrogated that Sentence,
of the Emperors, upon this reason; That though the King of Sicily held some
Lands of the Empire, yet Domicilium suum fouebat in Sicilia, which belonged to
the Church, and therefore the Emperors Jurisdiction could not extend to him,
because h^ had not Domicilium in Imperio^ Hereup^on the Gloss enters i^to
Disputation, how far a man which has goods in one Dominion, shall be subject
to the Laws of that place, though his Principale Domicilium (as he still c^ls
it) be in another. So that it seems the Emperor had this purpose in this
Constitution, that t^ose Domini Principales, which were under the Jurisdiction
and Dependence of the Empire^ should endure the penalty of this Law, if the^
transgressed it, though they ^ad not there Domos Prin^ipales within the limi^s
of (...) ^mpire. For at the time, when this Constitution was made, the
Emperors thought i^ law^full for them to do so, though a hundred ye^re a^^er,
Clement the fifth, denied by this Canon, tha^ they had so large a power. But
this Constitution in^er^es nothing against Sovereign Lords, whom the Empe^our
could not bind by any Constitution of his, because they had no depend^nce upon
him.

48 And as the Constitution d^ffers from the Canon in such ma^er^all words as
overthrows that ^ense which they would exto^t out of it, which is, That
Sovereigns are included therein, so does it in the sense, and in the
appointing of the Officer, who shall expel these favorers of heretics. For
where the Canon says, Let it be told to the Pope, who may absolve the
Subjects, and expose the land the Emperor speaks of himself, we do expose
the land. So that he takes the authority out of the Popes hand; which he would
not have done, nor the Pope have cyted as to his advantage, that law by which
it was done, if either Iure Diuino such a power had resided in him, or a Canon
of a general Council had so freshly invested him therewith.

49 And as it is neither likely that the Emperor would include himself in
this Law, nor possible that he should include others as Sovereign as himself,
at least: so does it appear, by the Ordinary Gloss upon that const^^ution
(which has more authority, then all other Expositors) that that law is made
against such Lords and Subjects, as have relation to one another by feudall
law; for so it in^erpre^es Dominum temporalem, and Dominum prin^cipalem, to be,
when some Earl holds something of a King; which King also must have a
dependency upon the Empire, because otherwise the Imperial law could not
extend to him. And yet even against those principal Lords, the law seem so
severe, that the Gloss says, Non legitur in Scholis. So that so many proofs
having been formerly produced, That this Council made no Canons^ but that
those which are usually offered now, are but rags torn out of one book, and
put into another, out of the Extra^agants into the Councels, and this Imperial
constitution, which to the Pope himself seemed of more force, then his
Predecessors Decretall, neither concerning Sovereign Lords, nor acknowledging
this power of absoluing Subjects, to be in the Pope, but in himself, no
sufficient reason arises out of this imaginary Canon, which should make a man
afraid to call that Heretical, which is against his natural reason, and
against that maine part of Religion, which is, civil obedience.

50 For the Romans dealing more seuer^ly, Azor par. 2. l. 4 c. 15. Item eo.
and more injuriously with us, then the Greek Church did with them, when they
presented to the Emperor, upon a commission to make an Inquisition to that
purpose, 99^ errors and deuiations in matter of faith, in the Roman Church:
of which some were Orthodoxall truths, some, no matter of faith, but
circumstantiall indifferencies^ though they called them all errors in faith;
the Roman Church, I say, traducing our doctrine, with as much intemperance and
sower language gives us example to call all their errors Heretical. And so,
when Drusius in his own defense against a Jesuit who had called him
Heretic, Serar. Tri^^. l. 3. c. 20.
says, That Heresy must be in fundamentis fidei; the Jesuit replies, that
even that assertion of Drusius is Heresy.

51 And this doctrine and position, which this Oath condemns, will lack
nothing of formal and absolute Heresy, if those notes be true, by which
Bellarmine designs Heresy, De Euchar. l. 3. C. 8.. Ac primum.
and says, that if that be not Heresy to which those Notes agree, there is no
heresy in the world. For, (as he requires to constitute an heresy) we can
note the Author, to have been Gregory the seventh; the place to have been
Rome, the time between five and 600 years past, And that it began with a few
followers, for Vercelleus. De vnitat Eccles. c^^seru.
sometimes but fifteene^ sometimes but thirteen Bishops adherd to Gregory,)
when even the Bishops of Italy favored the other part: And that it appeared
with the admiration of the faithful; for so it is noted to have been, Nouum
scisma: And that contradiction and opposition was made by all the Imperial
Clergy, and much of Italy it selfe^ And, for that which is the last note
proposed by Bellarmine, that it be condemned by a Council of Bishops, and all
faithful people, though that have not yet been done, because God for our
sins, has punished us with a Dearth of Councels, and suffered us in a
hunger, and rage of glory, and false constancy, to eat and gnaw upon one
another, with malignant disputations, and reproachful virulencies, yet when his
gracious pleasure shall afford the Church, that relief, we do justly hope
it will have that condemnation, and so be a ^onsummate heresy, because no
Pseudo-Councels as yet have been able to establish the con^ra^ie.

52 And though these marks and certain notes of Heresy be tyrannically, and
cau^elously put by Bellarmine (because it is easy to name many Heresies, in
which many of these marks are wanting, of which we know neither Parents,
Country, nor age, and which in^inuated themselves, and got deep root in the
Church, before they made any noise or trouble in the state thereof, an^ at the
first breaking out, were countenanced with many and mighty favorers, and which
no general Council has yet condemned) yet, as I said, we refuse not these
marks, but submit this opinion, to that trial, whether it be properly
Heretical, or no. For it will as well abide this trial, as an other, proposed
long before by S. Augustine, That he is an Heretic, which for any Temporal
advantage, 24. q. 3. Hoeretic. ex. lib. de vtil. credendi.
and advancement of his Supremacy, does either beget, or fo^low false and new
opinions, Which seems directly spoken of this Temporal Supremacy: to which
also, S. Paul may justly be thought to have had some relation, Gal. 5.20.
when he reckons Heresy, amongst the works of the flesh and worldly matters.

53 But leaving this exact and subtle appellation of Heresy, let him whom
that scruple deterrs from the oath, That he must swear the doctrine to be
Heretical, consider in what sense our law understands the word in that place.

54 The Imperial Law lays an imputation upon that man, Cod. l. 1. tit. 1. ^e.
5
Qui Saeua verborum praerogatiua fraudulenter contra ^uris sententiam abutitur;
that he is as guilty as he, which breaks the law. For he which picks a
quarrel with a law, by pretense of an ambiguous word, declares that he would
saine escape the obligation thereof. But, says the same law, Ibid.
A Law^maker has done enough, when he has forbidden that which he would not
have to be done; the rest must be gathered out of the purpose of the law, as
if it had been expressed. And no man can doubt, but that the lawmakers in this
law, has forbidden Defection from the Prince; and the purpose of the law, was
to provide only against that. Out of which purpose no man can justly collect,
that the Deponent should pronounce the contrary Doctrine, so Heretical, as
that he which held it, or relapsed into it, might be burnt; but that it was
apparently erroneus, and impious, and fit to be abiured; And how little
erroneous lackes of Heretical, En^hird. I^d. Tit. 24. n. 20.
and wherein they differ, Divines are not agreed, says your Simancha, and it
is yet undetermined.

55 Nor is there required in this Deponent, such an assurance in Faith, as
belongs to the making of an Article, Formal Heresy, but such an assurance in
Moral reason, and Humane discourse, as Bartholus requires in him which takes
and Oath, In Dig. l. 39. de Dam^nfe. le. 13. Nu^ 18.
when he says, He which swears the truth of any thing, understands not his
Oath to be of such a trueth^ as is subject to sense, Sed jurat de vehementi
opinione.

56 And the word Heretical in this Oath, has so much force, as the word to
Anathematize, has in many Councels. As, for example, in that place of the
Council of Constantinople, Ca. 11.
where it is said, Let him be Anathematized, which does not Anathematize
Origin. Which is meant of a detestation and abhorring some of his opinions, not
of pronouncing him, a formal and consummate Heretic. For you may well allow
a Civil and convenient sense to this word, in this Oath, that it means only
Impious, Conc. Trid. Sess. 4 de Peccat. Orig.
and inducing of Heresy, since you have bound all the world upon pain of
Damnation to believe, That S. Paul called Concupiscence sin, not because it
was sin, but because it proceeded from sin, and induced to sin.

57 A great Casuist, and our Countreyman, delivers safe Rules which may
vndeceiue them in these suspicions, if they will not be extremely negligent;
and Negligentia dissoluta Dolus est. For thus he says, Sayr. These. Cas.
con^c. l. 3. c. 8. n. 6. and 7.
Though a law should provide expressly, that the words of the law should be
understood as they lie, yet they must receive their interpretation from the
common use of speech; which is, that which the most part in that Country do
use. And if both significations may be found in common use, that must be
followed, which out of likelihood and reason, seems to have been the meaning
of the lawmaker, though it be improper^ And his meaning appears, when the word
taken in the other sense, would create some absurd, or unjust matter. And as
amongst us, those with whom this word Heretical is in most use, which are
Divines, use the word promiscuously, and indifferently, against all impious
opinions: so especially did the Lawmaker at this time use it, because
otherwise, it had been both absurd, to decree a point to be properly
heretical, which was not brought into debatement, as matter of faith, and it
had been unjust, under color of requiring civil obedience, to have drawn the
deponent, to such a confession, as if he had relapsed and fallen from it after,
he might have been burned.

58 And the words of the oath agree precisely to Sayrs rule; for the deponent
must swear, according to the exp^esse words, and the plain and common sense,
and understanding of the same. And Sayr says, That if we must swear to a Law,
according to the proper signification of the words, then there is no place for
such discretion, and for admitting a diverse sense: but the words of our Oath,
which are, According to the plain, and common sense, fall directly within his
first Rule.

59 And the law has good warrant and precedent to assume the word, heretical,
in such a moderate signification; for so the Scriptures use the word, 1. Cor.
11.19.
when S. Paul says, oportet hereses esse, which Gretzer confesses, when to
excuse the vulgate Edition, which has in that place, Desensio. B^ll. l. 2. c.
14.
left out the words, In Vobis^ he says, It would do no harm to their cause
to admit those words, because it is not spoken, De haeresi proprie dicta.

60 And so the general Council of Constantinople within the first ^oure
hundred years, ca^. 6.
calls some Heretics, though they be not Anathematized by the Church,
because they make Conuenticles against bishopps, and accuse them unorderly, and
against the form of Canons. So also does another Council say of Simony,
Turon. 2. ca. ^^t.
that it is not only Sacrilegious, but heretical.

And accordingly to these, a late Pope, Leo 10. in a formal Decree and Bull,
uses the word in a like sense. Binius To. 4. fo. 654.
For he condemns the Articles imputed to Luther, Tanquam respective
haereticos, because out of some of them it would follow, that the Church had
erred. But that proposition, out of which the next deducted Conclusion, might
be Heresy, is not it self necessarily Heresy, properly understood.

61 And as these do, so also do the Canons in the law, Did. 11.
consuet^d^^em. ver. fid^m.
speak in a moderate phrase: For in one place, where the text says, that a
thing is done, Contra fidem Catholicam, the Gloss expl^cat^s it, Contra bonos
Mores: and in another pl^ce, it interpretes the same words so, De Consecrat.
Did. 4. Si non. ^^r. catholicum.
because it does Sapere heresim; and yet it is not heresy: and so we find a
late Decretall, to call Simony, True and undoubted heresy; where Gregory is
produced, I^septimo Ti^. 3. c. 1.
to give this reason why Simony is called heresy, because whosoever is ordained
by Simony, is therefore ordained that he may be an heretic. So that we see,
such acts as beget or accompany heresy, are called heresy in this mild
acceptance, which our law gives it.

l. 2^ ^^uer. (...) c. 2.
62 From which sense the Fathers did not abstain in using that word; for
Tertullian says, That no man will doubt to call Adams transgression heresy,
since by his own election, he adhered rather to his own will, then to Gods.
And in another book he says, De veland. v^^g. c. 1.
Not so much newnes, as truth does convict things to be heresies, for
whatsoever tastes against truth, is an heresy, though it be an ancient
custom. And so says S. August. (if their own men cite him truly) That
Schism is called Heresy, not that it is heresy, but that it disposes to
heresy. Alf. castr. adu. Ha^. l. 1. c. 9.


63 And the Jesuits themselves, who are the precisest and seuerest accepters of
this word, come thus near, That some things tolerated by the Church, though
they be not proprie haeretica, ^et they are haeresi proxima. De pont. l. 4. c.
5. Ex his.
For so says Bellarmine; and he might justly make this position which we
speak of, his example. And his defender Gretzer says, that some opinions are
so framed, that though no Decree of the Church have yet condemned them, Append.
ad lib. 1. Bell. Interin.
yet they are enormous, Scandalous, and haeresi proximae.

64 And thus also do the Schoolmen sometimes take it; For so, says Aquinas out
of S. Jerome, that he which expounds the Scriptures against the sense of the
holy Ghost may be called an heretic, 22 ae. q. 11. Ar. 2. ad 2.
though he depart not from the Church. And so have diverse compilers of the
Ecclesiastique history done; D^ Haer^sib.
for Epiphanius r^ckons diverse sects of the Jews and Gentile Philosophers,
amongst Heretiqu^s. And Bernardus de Lucemburgo inserts into his Catalogue of
heretics, Alf. castr adu. Here Is. l. 1. c. 9.
Auerros and Auicen, though they were not Christians. And lastly that the word
was vulgarly so used, as by many other observations, so is it evident by a
Story in Math. Paris, where one upon his deathbed calls the Friars heretics
for not reprehending the Prelates, catalog. test. ex Mat. Paris. Anno 1253.
and the Prelates heretics, for conferring Benefices upon unworthy persons:
yea in this very case, which we have in hand Vercell. de vnitat. Eccles.
an author, of your own Religion, pronounces thus of those fifteen Bishops,
which adhered to Gregory the seuenths party, against the Emperor, It is great
heresy to resist the Ordinance of God, who only has power to give Empire,
which heresy it appears that those fifteen false Bishops have committed.

65 As therefore all sorts of men, into whose mouths upon any occasion this
word was like to come have used the word for Erroneous: and Impious, and
Corrupting good manners, and disposing and preparing absolute and proper
Heresy, so does the law accept it in this oath, where it makes it equivalent,
and Synonimous, to the words which are joined with it, which are Impious and
Damnable: and therefore it is but a Calumny cast upon the law, and a
tergiuersation picked out for their escape, if any pretend for that word, to
decline the Oath.

66 But if this word in this place, were to be understood in the strictest and
seuerest sense, that a Jesuit could use it against us, yet he that shall take
the Oath, does not thereby pronounce, that any Position, which attributes any
power to the Pope, is heretical. Not, that he may excommunicate a King; no,
nor that he may deprive him: but it is thus conceived, That this position is
heretical, That Princes which be excommunicate, or deprived by the Pope, may
be deposed or murdered by their subjects or any other. So that it casts no
Manicles upon the Popes hands; if he will excommunicate, let him; if he will
deprive, let him. Only them, who by his act, (of the goodness or badnes whereof
this Proposition pronounces nothing) may be misled to an unchristian and
undutiful desperatenes, it forewarnes, and aduises, to a due and just
consideration of such proceedings. For, as when men were content to hear
heresies, Epist. 39. Turibio. in fine.
Leo said wisely, in reprehension of that easiness, They which can hearken to
such things, can believe them, So since it is too late to forbid hearing of
this heresy, of deposing Princes, since out of Jesuits books, which speak of
state-learning, scarce any thing is to be sucked, but it, or such preparatiues,
as work and conduce to it, it was necessary to begin a step higher then Leo
did, and pronounce it heretical, that so none might believe it, since he that
can believe it, can be content to afford his help to the doing thereof.

67 And having thus gone as far as I purposed in both parts of this Chapter, in
the first whereof I showed, that in special cases new oaths were necessary,
and that the form of them ought to be such, as might reach home to the intent
thereof, and not be eluded, which had been, if any part of this oath had been
omitted, and that their writers, which never teach, that upon a Bishops
excommunication a Prince may be deposed, deny implicitly this power in the
Pope, because only that power which was in the Bishops, in this matter, is
transferd by Reservation into the Pope, and that where such Depositions are
needful, the state is provided naturally with a temporal power to effect it,
and therefore it is not necessary to place it in the spiritual, which were
monstrous and imperfect, if it should produce, as the most excelent issue
thereof, a power so base in their estimation, And that this possibility of being
Deposed, is as contrary to Souerainety, as a certain limitation, when he shall
be removed, And that those writers, which limit the Popes power by Natural
Reason, and which teach, that in doubts of speculation, we may for all that
proceed to practice, as far, as we do in this Oath, And having in the
second part declared, That though the Papists make proper, and absolute
Heresy, to be without matter of faith, yet we do not so, and yet in points
necessarily and immediately issuing out of these principles, a general
Council needs not be attended to inform a man's understanding what is
Heretical, because the Emperors and other Princes, and diverse Authors, and
registers of heresies, have pronounced therein before any Decision of Counsels,
and that the Canon which is obtruded, in the name of the Laterane Council, for
diverse reasons, cannot impeach this proposition, That this Doctrine is
heretical, which proposition, though if it were tried by Bellarmine, and by
Saint Augustines description of heresy, it would appear absolutely
heretical, yet this law gives it that name in a vulgar and common sense, as
Scriptures, Councels, Bulls of Popes, Fathers, Schoolmen, Historians, Jesuits,
and the Common sort has used and accepted it, and that if it be taken in the
sharpest sense, the Oath may nevertheless be taken without prejudice, or
limitation of any power which the Pope himself claims, I make account that I
have discharged my promise and undertaking in this Chapter, and delivered as
much, as without inculcating that which has been formerly said by others,
(which I purposely avoided) in this point of the oath need to be said to any,
of indifferency or equal inclination.

FINIS.

