A SERMON UPON THE XX. VERSE OF THE V. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.

Wherein occasion was justly taken for the Publication of some Reasons, which
his Sacred MAJESTY had been pleased to give, of those Directions for
Preachers, which he had formerly sent forth.

Preached at the CROSS the 15th. of September.

1622.

By JOHN DONE, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Saint PAVLS, London.

And now by commandment of his Majesty published, as it was then preached.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Strand, at the black Raven, near unto Saint Clements Church, 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE, Marquess of Buckingham, High ADMIRAL of
ENGLAND, etc.
WHen I would speak to the KING, by your LORDSHIPS Means, I do: Now, when I
would speak to the Kingdom, I would do that by your Lordships Means too:
and therefore I am bold to transfer this Sermon to the World, through your
Lordships hands, and under your Name. For the first part of the Sermon, the
Explication of the Text, my Profession, and my Conscience is Warrant enough,
that I have spoken as the Holy Ghost intended. For the second part, the
Application of the Text, it will be warrant enough, that I have spoken as his
Majesty intended, that your Lordship admits it to issue in your Name. It is
because Kings favor the Church, that the Prophet says they are her
Foster-Fathers; and then, those persons, who have also interest in the favor
of Kings, are her Foster-Brothers: and such use to love well. By that Title,
(as by many other also) your Lordshippe loves the Church; as you are her
Foster-Brother; loved of him who loves her. And by that Title you love all them
in the Church, who endeavor to advance both the unity of our Church in it
self, and the unity of the Church, with the godly designs of our religious
King. To which Service, I shall ever sacrifice all the labors of

Your Lordships humblest and thankefullest Servant in Christ Jesus: JOHN DONE.

IVDGES. 5.20. De coelo dimicatum est contra eos: stellae manentes in Ordine,
and cursu suo aduersus Siseram pugnauerunt.

They fought from Heaven; The stars in their courses fought against Sisera.


ALl the words of God are always sweet in themselves, says David; but
sweeter in the mouth, and in the pen of some of the Prophets, and some of the
Apostles, then of others, as they differed in their natural gifts, or in their
education: but sweetest of all, where the Holy Ghost has been pleased to set
the word of God to Music, and to convey it into a Song; and this Text is of
that kind: part of the Song which Deborah and Barak sung after their great
victory upon Sisera; Sisera who was Iabin the King of Canaans General against
Israel. God himself made Moses a Song, and expressed his reason Deuteronomy. 31.19.
why; The children of Israel, says God, will forget my Law; but this song they
will not forget; and whenever they sing this song, this song shall testify
against them, what I have done for them, how they have forsaken me. And to such
a purpose has God left this Song of Deborah and Barak in the Scriptures, that
all Murmurers, and all that stray into a diffidence of Gods power, or of his
purpose to sustain his own cause, and destroy his own Enemies, might run and
read, might read and sing, the wonderful deliverances that God has given to
his people, by weak and unexpected means. This world begun with a Song, if
the Chalde Paraphrasts, upon Salomons Song of Songs have taken a true
tradition; That as soon as Adams sin was forgiven him, he expressed (as he
calls it in that Song) Sabbatum suum, his Sabbath, his peace of conscience, in a
Song; of which, we have the entrance in that Paraphrase. This world begun so;
and so did the next world too, if we count the beginning of that (as it is a
good computation to do so) from the coming of Christ Jesus: for that was
expressed on Earth, in diverse Songs; in the blessed Virgins Magnificat; My
soul does magnify the Lord: In Zacharies Benedictus; Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel; and in Simeons, Nunc dimittis, Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace. This world began so, and the other; and when both shall join,
and make up one world without end, it shall continue so in heaven, in that Song
of the Lamb, Great and marvelous Apoc. 3.
are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of
Saints. And, to Tune us, to Compose and give us a Harmony and Concord of
affections, in all perturbations and passions, and discords in the passages of
this life, if we had no more of the same Music in the Scriptures (as we have
the Song of Moses at the Red Sea, and many Psalms of David to the same
purpose) this Song of Deborah were enough, abundantly enough, to slumber any
storm, to becalme any tempest, to rectify any scruple of Gods slacknesse in
the defense of his cause, when in the History and occasion of this Song,
expressed in the Chapter before this, we see, That Israel had done evil in the
sight of the Lord again, and yet again, God came to them: That God himself
had sold Israel into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan, and yet he repented the
bargain, and came to them; That in twenty years oppression he came not, and
yet he came. That when Sisera came against them, with nine hundred Chariots of
Iron, and all preparations, proportionable to that, and God called up a woman, a
Prophetess, a Deborah against him, because Deborah had a zeal to the cause,
and consequently an enmity to the enemy, God would effect his purpose by so
weak an instrument, by a woman, but by a woman, which had no such interest,
nor zeal to the cause; by Jael: And in Iaels hand, by such an instrument, as
with that, scarce any man could do it, if it were to be done again, with a
hammer she drives a nail through his temples, and nails him to the ground, as
he lay sleeping in her tent: And then the end of all, was the end of all, not
one man of his army left alive. O my Soul, why art thou so sad, why art thou
so disquieted within me? Sing unto the Lord an old song, the song of Deborah
and Barak, That God by weak means does mighty works, That all Gods creatures
fight in his behalf, They fought from heaven, the stars in their Order,
fought against Sisera.

You shall have but two parts out of these Division.
words; And to make these two parts, I consider the Text, as the two
Hemispheres of the world, laid open in a flat, in a plain Map. All those parts
of the world, which the Ancients have used to consider, are in one of those
Hemispheres; All Europe is in that, and in that is all Asia, and Afrike too: So
that when we have seen that Hemisphere, done with that, we might seem to have
seen all, done with all the world; but yet the other Hemisphere, that of
America is as big as it; though, but by occasion of new, and late discoueries,
we had had nothing to say of America. So the first part of our Text, will be
as that first Hemisphere; all which the ancient Expositors found occasion to
note out of these words, will be in that: but by the new discoueries of some
humors of men, and rumors of men, we shall have occasion to say somewhat of a
second part to. The parts are, first, the Literal, the Historical sense of
the words; And then an emergent, a collateral, an occasional sense of them.
The explication of the words, and the Application, Quid tunc, Quid nunc, How
the words were spoken then, How they may be applied now, will be our two parts.
And, in passing through our first, we shall make these steps. First, God can,
and sometimes does effect his purposes by himself; entirely, immediately,
extraordinarily, miraculously by himself: But yet, in a second place, we shall
see, by this story, That he looks for assistance, for concurrence of second
causes, and subordinate means: And that therefore, God in this Song of
Deborah, has provided an honorable commemoration of them, who did assist his
cause; for, the Princes have their place, The Princes of Issachar were Verse 15.
with her: And then, the Governors, The great Persons, the great Officers of
the State, have their place in this honor, That they offered themselves
willingly to that Verse 9.
service; And after them, the Merchants, Verse 10.
for those who are said there, to ride upon white Asses, to be well mounted,
according to the manner of those Nations, are, by Peter Martyr, amongst our
Expositors, and by Serarius the Jesuit, amongst the others, fitly understood,
to be intended of Merchants; And in the same verse, the Judges are honorably
remembered, Those that sit in Judgment; And a far vnlikelier sort of people,
then any of these, in the same verse too, Those that walked by the way; Idle,
and discoursing men, that were not much affected, how business went, so they
might talk of them: And lastly, the whole people in general, Verse 2.
how poor soever, they have evidence from this record, That they offered
themselves (and what will they deny, that offer themselves) and willingly, to
this imploiment. And then, God having here afforded this honorable mention of
them, who did assist him, he lays also a heavy note upon such, who for
collateral respects preuaricated, or withdraw themselves from his service:
perticularly upon Ruben, who Verse 16.
was divided by greatness of heart, And upon Dan, who remained in his ships.
And therefore Verse 17.
to the encouragement of those who did assist him, in any proportion, though
their assistance were no ways competent against so potent an enemy, God fought
for himself too, They fought from Heaven, The stars in their order fought
against Sisera. And these will be the branches, or circumstances of our first
part: for the particulars of the second, we shall open them more commodiously
for your memory and use, then, when we come to handle them, then now. Now we
proceed to those of the first part.

And into those I pass with this protestation, Part 1.
That in all which I shall say this day, being to speak often of God, in that
Notion, as he is Lord of Hosts, and fights his own battles, I am far from
giving fire to them that desire war. Peace in this world, is a precious
Earnest, and a fair and lovely Type of the everlasting peace of the world to
come: And war in this world, is a shrewd and fearful Emblem of the
everlasting discord and tumult, and torment of the world to come; And
therefore, our Blessed God, bless us with this external, and this internal,
and make that lead us to an eternal peace. But I speak of this subject,
especially to establish and settle them, that suspect Gods power, or Gods
purpose, to succor those, who in foreign parts, groan under heavy pressures
in matter of Religion, or to restore those, who in foreign parts, are deuested
of their lawful possessions, and inheritance; and because God has not done
these great works yet, nor yet raised up means, in appearance, and in their
apprehension, likely to effect it, That therefore God likes not the cause; and
therefore they begin to be shaked in their own Religion at home, since they
think that God neglects it abroad. But, beloved, since God made all this world
of nothing, cannot he recover any one piece thereof, or restore any one piece,
with a little? In the Creation, his production of specifique forms, and
several Creatures in the several days, was much, very much; but not very
much, compared with that, which he had done immediately before, when he made
Heaven and Earth of nothing. For, for the particular Creatures, God had then
Praeiacentem Materiam, he had stuff before him; enough to cut out Creatures of
the largest sise, his Elephants of the Earth, his Whales and Leuiathans in the
Sea. In that matter there was Semen Creaturarum, The Seed of all Creatures in
that stuff. But for the stuff it self, the Heaven and Earth, God had not
Semen Coeli, any such seed of Heaven as that he could say to it, do thou hatch
a Heaven; he had not any such Semen terrae, as that he could bid that grow up
into an Earth: There was nothing at all, and all, that is, was produced from
that; and then who shall doubt of his proceeding, if by a little he will do
much? He suffered his greater works to be paraleld, or to be counterfeit by
Pharaohs Magicians, but in his least, in the making of Lice, he brought them
to confess Digitum Dei, the finger of God; and that was enough; The arm of
God, the hand of God needs not; where he will work, his finger is enough, It
was not that imagination, that dream of the Rabbis, that hindered the
Magicians, who say, that the Devil cannot make any Creature, less then a
Barley corn; As it is with men, they misconceiue it to be with the Devil too;
harder to make a little clock, a little picture, any thing in a little, then
in a larger form. That was no part of the reason in that case: but since man
ordinarily esteems it so, and ordinarily admires great works in little form,
why will he not be content to glorify God that way, in a faithful confidence,
that he can and will do great works by weak means. Should God have stayed
to levy, and arm, and train, and muster, and present men enough to discomfit
Sennacherib? He took a nearer way; he flew almost two hundredth thousand of
them, in one night by an Angel. Should God have Esa. 37.36.
troubled an Angel to satisfy Elisha his servant? 2. Reg. 5.16.
Only by apparition in the clouds, he brought him to acknowledge, that there
were more with them, then with the Enemy, when there was none. He troubled not
so much as a cloud, he employed no Creature at all, against the Philistines,
when they came up with thirty thousand Chariots; but he 1. Sam. 23 5
breathed a dampe, an astonishment into them, he imprinted a divine terror in
their hearts, and they fought against one another. Iud. 6.
God fore saw a diminution of his honor, in the augmentation of Isreal's
forces, and therefore he reduced Gideons thirty two thousand to three hundred
persons. It was so in persons, God does much with few, and it was so in time,
God does much, though late; though God seem a long time to have forgot his
people, yet in due time, that is, in his time, he returns to them again. S.
Augustine makes a use ull Historical note, That that land to which God brought
the Children of Israel, was their own land before; they were the right heirs
to it, lineally descended from him, who was the first possessor of it, after
the flood: but they were so long out of possession of it, as that they were
never able to set their title on foot; nay, they did scarce know their own
title, and yet God repossessed them of it, reinuested them in it. It is so for
persons, and times in his ways in this world, Much with few, much though late,
and it is so in his ways to the next world too: for persons, Elias knew of no
more but himself, that served the right God aright: God makes him know that
there were seven thousand more, seven thousand was much to one, but it was
little to all the world: and yet these seven thousand have peopled heaven, and
sent up all those Colonies thither; all those Armies of Martyrs, those flocks
of Lambs, innocent children, those Fathers, the Fathers of the Church, and
Mothers, holy Matrons, and daughters, blessed Virgins, and learned and
laborious Doctors; these seven thousand have filled up the places of the fallen
Angels, and repeopled that Kingdom: And wheresoever we think them most worn
out, God at this time has his remnant (as the Apostle Romans 11.5.
says) and God is able to make up the whole garment of that remnant. So he
does much with few, in the ways to heaven; and that he does much though late,
in that way too, thou may discern in his working upon thy self. How often
have thou suffered thy Soul, to grow clean out of all reparations into ruin,
by thine inconsiderate and habitual course of sin, and never repaired it by
any good use of hearing the word, or receiving the Sacrament in a long time,
and when thou have at any time, come to a survey of thy conscience, how have
thou been affected with an inordinate apprehension of Gods anger, and his
inaccessiblenesse, his inexorablenesse toward thee, and sunk even into the
jaws of desperation; And yet, Quia manet semen dei, because the seed of God
has remained in thee, Incubat Spiritus, 1. 10. 3.4.
the Holy Ghost has sat upon that seed, and hatched a new Creature in thee, a
modest, but yet infallible assurance of the Mercy of thy God. Recollect all; in
raising of sieges, and discomfiting of Armies, in restoring possessions, and
reinuesting right heirs, in repairing the ruins of the Kingdom of heaven,
depopulated in the fall of Angels, in reestablishing peace of conscience; in a
presumptuous confidence, or ouer-timorous diffidence in God, God glorifies
himself that way, to do much with little.

He does so; but yet he will have something. God is a good Husband, a good
Steward of Man's contributions, but contributions he will have: he will have a
concurrence, a cooperation of persons. Even in that great work, which we
spoke of at first, the first creation, which was so absolutely of Nothing, yet
there was a Faciamus, let us, us, make Man; though but one God, yet more
Persons in that work. Christ had been Matt. 4.3.
able to have done as the Devil would have had him do, to have made bread of
stones, when he had so great a number to feed in the Wilderness; but he does
not so: He asks his Disciples, Quot panes habetis; How many loafes have you?
and though they were but five, yet since they were some, he multiplies them,
and feeds above five thousand with those five. He would have a remnant of
Gedeons Army to fight his battles: A remnant of Isreal's believers to make up
his Kingdom; A remnant of thy Soul, his seed wrapd up somewhere, to save thy
Soul; And a remnant of thy self, of thy Mind, of thy Purse, of thy Person,
for thy temporal deliverance. God goes low, and accepts small Sacrifices; a
Pigeon, a handful of Flower, a few ears of Corn; but a Sacrifice he will
have. The Christian Church implies a shrewd distress, when she prouides that
reason, that clause in her prayer, Quia non est alius, Give Peace in our time,
O Lord, because there is no other that fights for us: If the bowels of
compassion be eaten out, if the band of the Communion of Saints be dissolved,
we fight for none, none fights for us, at last neither we nor they shall fight
for Christ, nor Christ for them nor us, but all become a prey to the general
enemy of the name of Christ; for God requires something, some assistance, some
concurrence, some cooperation, though he can fight from heaven, and the
Stars, in their order, can fight against Sisera.

And therefore, though God give his glory to none, his glory, that is to do
all with Nothing, yet he gives them their glory, that do any thing for him,
or for themselves. And as he has laid up a record, for their glory and
Memorial, who were remarkable for Faith (for the eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews, is a Catalogue of them.) So in this Song of Deborah and Barake, he
has laid up a Record for their glory, who expressed their faith in Works,
and assisted his service. That which is said in general, The Memory of the
just is blessed, but the name of the Prou. 13.7.
wicked shall rot, That is applied and promised in particular, by him, who can
perform it, by Christ, to that woman, who anointed him, That whersoeuer his
Gospel should be Preached in the whole world, there should also this that Mat.
26.13
this woman had done, be told for a memorial of her. She assisted at his
Funeral (as Christ himself interprets her action, That she did it to bury
him) and has her glory: how shall he glorify them, that advance his glory?
She has her reward in his death; what shall they have, that keep him, and
his Gospel alive? Not a verse in Deborah and Baraks song, and yet that is
honorable evidence: Not a commemoration at the Preaching of the Gospel; and
yet that is the honorable testimony in this place, and at these Exercises, of
such as have contributed to the conueniencies of these Exercises, but they
shall have a place in the Book of life; indelibly in the Book of life, if
they proceed in that devotion of assisting Gods cause, and do not think,
that they have done all, or done enough, if they have done something some one
time. The Moral man has said well, and well applied it; Plutar.
A Ship is a Ship for ever, if you repair it. So, says he, Honor is Honor,
and so say we, A good Conscience is a good Conscience for ever, if you repair
it: But, says he well, Aliquid famae addendum, ne putrescat. Honor will
putrify, and so will a good Conscience too, if it be not repaired. He that
has done Nothing must begin, and he that has done something for Gods cause,
must do more, if he will continue his name in the Book of Life; though God
leave no one particular action, done for his glory, without glory; as those
who assisted his glory here, have a glorious Commemoration in this Song.

In the fifteenth verse, Princes have their place; The Princes of Issachar,
were with Deborah when the King goes to the field, Many, who are in other cases
Privileged, are by their Tenures bound to go. It is a high Tenure to hold by
a Crown; And when God, of whom, and whom only they hold, that hold so, goes
into the field, it becomes them to go with him. But as God sits in Heaven, and
yet goes into the field, so they of whom God has said, Ye are Gods, the
Kings of the Earth, may stay at home, and yet go too. They go in their
assistance to the War; They go in their Mediation for Peace; They go in
their Example, when from their sweetness, and moderation in their Government
at home, their flows out an instruction, a persuasion to Princes abroad. Kings
go many times, and are not thanked, because their ways are not seen: and
Christ himself would not always be seen; In the eight of John, he would not
be seen. When they took up stones to stone him, he withdrew himself
inuisibly, he would not be seen: When Princes find that open actions
exasperate, they do best, if they be not seen. In the sixth of John, Christ
would not be seen. When they would have put upon him, that which was not fit
for him to take, when they would have made him King, he withdrew himself, and
was not seen. When Princes are tempted to take Territories, or possessions in
to their hands, to which other Princes have just pretenses, they do best, if
they withdraw themselves from engagements in unnecessary Wars, for that,
that only was Iofiahs 2. Reg. 23.29.
ruin. Kings cannot always go in the sight of Men, and so they lose their
thanks; but they cannot go out of the sight of God, and there they never lose
their reward: For the Lord that sees them in secret, shall reward them openly,
with peace in their own States, and Honor in their own Chronicles, as here,
for assisting his cause, he gave the Princes of Issachar a room, a strain in
Deborah and Barakes Song.

And in the ninth verse, the Governors, the great Officers, have their place,
in this praise, My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered
themselves willingly. It is not themselves in person; Great Officers cannot do
so; They are Intelligences that move great Spheres, but they must not be
moved out of them. But their glory here is their willingness. That before
they were inquired into, how they carried themselves in their Offices, before
they were intimidated, or soupled with fines and ransomes, voluntarily they
assisted the cause of God. Some in the Roman Church write, that the Cardinals
of that Church, are so incorporated into the Pope, so much of his body, and so
blood of his blood, that in a fever they may not let blood without his leave.
Truly, the great Persons and Governors in any state, are so noble and near
parts of the King, as that they may not bleed out in any subuentions and
assistances of such causes underhand, as are not auowd by the King; for, it is
not evident that that cause is Gods cause; at least not evident that that way
is an assistance of Gods cause. But a good, and tractable, and ductile
disposition, in all courses which shall lawfully be declared to be for Gods
glory, then, not Contra, but Praeter, not against, but besides, not in
opposing, but in preventing the Kings will, before he urge, before he press,
to be willing and forward in such assistances, this gives great Persons,
Governors, and Officers, a verse in Baraks and Deborahs Song, and Deborah and
Baraks Song is the Word of God.

The Merchants have their place in that verse too. For, (as we said before)
those who ride upon white Asses, (which was as honorable a transportation, as
Coaches are now) are by Peter Martyr amongst ours, and by Serarius the Jesuit
amongst others, well understood to be the Merchants. The greatness and the
dignity of the Merchan of the East is sufficiently expressed in those of
Babylon, Thy Merchants were the great Men of the Earth. And for the Merchants
of the Apoc. 18.23
West, we know that in diverse foreign parts, their Nobility is in their
Merchants, their Merchants are their Gentlemen. And certainly, no place of the
world, for Commodities and Situation, better disposed then this Kingdom, to
make Merchants great. You cannot show your greatness more, then in serving
God, with part of it; you did serve before you were free; but here you do both
at once, for his service is perfect freedom. I am not here to day, to beg a
Benevolence for any particular cause on foot now: there is none; but my Errand
in this first part is, first to remove iealousies and suspicions of Gods
neglecting his business, because he does it not at our appointment, and then
to promoue and advance a disposition, to assist his cause and his glory, in all
ways, which shall be declared to conduce thereunto, whether in his body, by
relieuing the poor, or in his house by repairing these walls, or in his honor
in employments more public: And to assure you that you cannot have a better
debtor, a better play master then Christ Jesus: for all your Entayles, and all
your perpetuities do notso nail, so hoope in, so riuet an estate in your
posterity, as to make the Son of God your Son too, and to give Christ
Jesus a Childs part, with the rest of your Children. It is noted (perchance
but out of leuity) that your Children doc not keep that which you get: It is
but a calumny, or but a fascination of ill wishers. We have many happy
instances to the contrary, many noble families derived from you; One, enough
to enoble a World; Queen ELIZABETH was the great granchild of a Lord Mayor of
London. Our blessed God bless all your Estates, and bless your posterity in
a blessed enjoying thereof; But truly it is a good way to that, amongst all your
purchases, to purchase a place in Barak and Deborahs Song, a testimony of the
Holy Ghost, that you were forward in all due times in the assistance of Gods
cause.

That testimony, in this Service in our Text, have the Judges of the Land, in
the verse too, ye that fit in Judgment. Certainly, Men exercised in Judgment,
are likeliest to think of the last Judgment. Men accustomed to give
Judgment, likeliest to think of the Judgment they are to receive. And at
that last Judgment the Malediction of the left hand falls upon them that have
not harbored Christ, not fed him, not clothed him, And when Christ comes to
want those things in that degree, that his Kingdom, his Gospel, himself
cannot subsist, where it did, without such a sustentation, an omission in such
an assistance, is much more heavy. All Judgments end in this, Suum cuique, to
give every one his own. Give God his own, and he has enough; give him his
own, in his own place, and his cause will be preferred before any Civil or
Natural obligation. But God requires not that: pay every other Man first, owe
nothing to any Man; pay your Children, apportion them convenient portions. Pay
your estimation, your reputation, live in that good fashion which your rank
and calling calls for: when all this is done, of your superfluities begin to
pay God, and even for that you shall have your room in Deborah, and Baraks
Song, for Assistants, and Coadiutors to him.

For a far vnlikelier sort of people, then any of these, have that in the
same verse also, Ambulantes super viam, They that walk up and down idle,
discourcing Men, Men of no Calling, of no Profession, of no sense of other Men's
miseries, and yet they assist this cause. Men that suck the sweet of the
Earth, and the sweat of other Men: Men that pay the State nothing in doing the
offices of mutual society, and embracing particular vocations; Men that make
themselves but pipes to receive and convey, and vent rumors, but spunges to
suck in, and power out foul water; Men that do not spend time, but wear
time, they trade not, they plough not, they preach not, they plead not, but
walk, and walk upon the way, till they have walked out their six months for
the renewing of bands, even these had some remorse in Gods cause, even these got
into Deborah and Baraks Song for assisting there.

And less; that is, Poorer then these: for in the Second verse, the people are
as forward as the Governors, in the Ninth, They offered themselves willingly.
They might offer themselves, their persons. It is likely they did; and likely
that many of them had nothing to offer but themselves. And when Men of that
poverty offer, part easily with that which was hardly got, how acceptable to
God, that Sacrifice is, we see in Christ's testimony of that Widow, who
amongst many great giuers gave her Mite, That she gave more then all they,
because she gave all: which testified not only her Liberality to God, but
her Confidence in God, that though she left nothing, she should not lack:
for that right use does Saint Augustine make of that example, Diuites
largiuntur securi de diuitijs, pauper securus de Domino: A rich man gives, and
feels it not, fears no want, because he is sure of a full Chest at home; A
poor man gives, and feels it as little, because he is sure of a bountiful
God in Heaven.

God then can work alone; there we set out: yet he does require assistance;
that way we went: And to those that do assist, he gives glory here; so far
we are gone: but yet this remaynes, that he lays notes of blame, and reproach
upon them, whom collateral respects withdrew from this assistance. For there
is a kind of reproach and increpation laid upon Reuben in that question, Why
abodest thou amongst the sheepfolds? The divisions of REVBEN were great Verse
16.
thoughts of heart. Ambition of precedencie in places of employment, greatness
of heart, and a lothnesse to be under the command of any other, and so an
incoherence, not concurring in Counsels and Executions, retard oftentimes
even the cause of God. So is there also a reproach and increpation Verse 17.
upon Dan, in that question, why did Dan remain in his ships; A confidence in
their own strength, a sacrificing to their own Nets, an attributing of their
security to their own wisdom or power, may also retard the cause of God;
that stayed Dan behind.

Thus then they have their thanks that do, thus their marks that do not
assist in Gods cause: though God to encourage them that do, accomplish his
work himself, They fought from heaven, The Stars in their order fought
against Sisera. They fought, says the Text, but does not tell us who; least
men should direct their thanks for that which is past, or their prayers for
future benefits, to any other, even in heaven, then to God himself. The stars
are named; It could not be feared that Men would pray to them, sacrifice to
them, Angels and Saints are not named; Men might come to ascribe to them, that
which appertained to God only. Now these Stars, says the text, fought in
their courses, Manentes in Ordine, they fought not disorderly. It was no
Enchantment, no Sorcery, no disordring of the frame, or the powers, or the
influence of these heavenly bodies, in favor of the Israelites; God would not
be beholden to the Devil, or to Witches, for his best friends. It was no
disorderly Enchantment, nor it was no Miracle, that disordered these Stars;
as in Iosuahs time, the Sun and Moon were disordred in their Motions; But as
Josephus, who relates this battle more particularly, says, with whom all
agree, The natural Influence of these heavenly bodies, at this time, had
created and gathered such storms and hayles, as blowing vehemently in the
Enemies face, was the cause of this defeat: for so we might have said, in
that deliverance, which God gave us at Sea, They fought from heaven, The
Stars in their order fought against the Enemy. Without coniuring, without
Miracle, from heaven, but yet by natural means, God preserved us. For that is
the force of that phrase, and of that manner of expressing it, Manentes in
Ordine, The Stars, containing themselves in their Order, fought. And that
phrase induces our second part, the accommodation, the occasional application
of these words: God will not fight, nor be fought for disorderly; And therefore
in illustration, and confirmation of those words of the Apostle, Let all things
be done decently, and in order, Aquinas, in his Commentaries upon that place,
cites, and applies this Text, as words to the same purpose, and of the same
signification. You, says Saint Paul, you who are Stars in the Church, must
proceed in your warfare, decently, and in order, for the stars of heaven, when
they fight for the Lord, they do their service, Manentes in Ordine, containing
themselves in their Order. And so in our order, we are come to our second part.
In which, we owe you by promise made at first, an Analysis, a distribution of
the steps and branches of this part, now when we are come to the handling
thereof: And thus we shall proceed; first, the War, which we are to speak
of here, is not as before, a Worldly war, it is a Spiritual War: And then
the Munition, the provision for this war, is not as before, temporal
assistance of Princes, Officers, Judges, Merchants, all sorts of People, but it
is the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the preaching thereof. Preaching is Gods
ordinance, with that Ordinance he fights from heaven, and batters down all
errors. And thirdly, to maintain this War, he has made Preachers Stars; and
vae simon, woe be unto them, if they do not fight, if they do not preach: But
yet in the last place, they must fight, as the Stars in heaven do, In their
order, in that Order, and according to those directions, which, they, to whom
it appertains, shall give them: for that is to fight in Order. And in these
four branches, we shall determine this second part.

First then we are in Contemplation of a Spiritual war; now, though there be
a Beatie Pacifici, a blessing reserved to Peacemakers, to the Peacemaker, our
Peaoe-maker, who has sometimes effected it in some places, and always
seriously and chargeably, and honorably endeavored it in all places, yet there
is a spiritual War, in which, Maledicti Pacifici; Cursed be they that go
about to make Peace, and to make all one, The wars between Christ and
Beliall. Let no man sever those whom God has joined, but let no Man join
those whom God has severed neither, and God has severed Christ and Belial:
and that was Gods action, Ponam inimicitias; The Seed of the woman, and the
Seed of the Serpent, we and the Devil, should never have fallen out; we
agree but too well; but God has put an enmity between us. God has put Truth
and Falsehood, Jdolatrie and Sincerity so far asunder, and infused such an
incompatibilitie, and imprinted such an implacabilitie between them, as that
they cannot flow into one another: And therefore, there, Maledicti Pacifici, It
is an opposition against God, by any colorable Modifications, to reconcile
opinions diametrally contrary to one another, in fundamental things. Day and
Night may join and meet. In Diluculis and in Crepusculis, The dawning of the
day, in the Morning, and the shutting in of the day in the Evening, make day
and night so much one, as sometimes you cannot tell which to call them: but Lux
and tenebrae, light and darkness, Midnight and Noone never met, never joined.
There are points, which passions of men, and vehemence of disputation, have
carried farther a sunder then needed: and these indeed have made the greatest
noise; because upon these, for the most part, depends the matter of profit: and
Beati pacifici, blessed were that labor, and that labourer, that could
reconcile those things; and of that there might be hope, because it is often
but the Persons that fight, it is not the thing, the matters are not so
different. But then there are matters so different, as that a Man may sit at
home, and weep, and wish, praise God that he is in the right, and pray to God
for them that are in the wrong, but to think that they are indifferent, and
all one, Maledicti Pacifici, he that has brought such a Peace, has brought a
curse upon his own Conscience, and laid, not a Satisfastion, but a
Stupefaction upon it. A Turk might perchance say, in scorn of us both, They
call you Heretics, you call them Idolaters, why might not Idolaters, and
Heretics agree well enough together? But a true Christian will never make
Contrarieties in fundamental things indifferent, never make foundations, and
superedifications, the Word of God, and the Traditions of men, all one. Every
man is a little world, says the Philosopher; Every man is a little Church too;
and in every man there are two sides, two armies: the flesh fights against the
Spirit. This is but a Civil war, nay it is but a Rebellion indeed; and yet
it can never be absolutely quenched. So every man is also a Soldier in that
great and general war, between Christ, and Beliall, the Word of God, and
the will of man. Every man is bound to hearken to a peace, in such things as
may admit peace, in differences, where men differ from men; but bound also to
shut himself up against all ouertures of peace, in such things, as are in
their Nature irreconcilable, in differences where men differ from God. That
war God has kindled, and that war must be maintained, and maintained by
his way; and his way, and his Ordinance in this war, is Preaching.

If God had not said to Noah, Fac tibi Arcam; and when he had said so, if he
had not given him a Deseigne, a Model, a Platform of that Arc, we may doubt
credibly, whether ever man would have thought of a Ship, or of any such way of
trade and Commerce. Shipping was Gods own Invention, and therein Laetentur
Insulae, as David says, Let the Islands rejoice. So also, if Christ had not
said to his Apostles, Ite praedicate, Go and preach: And when he had said so,
said thus much more, Qui non crediderit damnabitur, He that believes not your
Preaching, shall be damned: certainly man would never have thought of such a
way of establishing a kingdom, as by Preaching. No other Nation had any such
Institution, as Preaching. In the Roman State, there was a public Officer,
Conditor Precum, who upon great emergent occasions, deprecations of imminent
dangers, or Gratulations for evident benefits, did make particular Collects
answerable to those occasions: And some such occasional Panegyriques, and
gratulatory Orations for temporal benefits, they had in that State. But a
fixed and constant course of containing Subjects in their Religious and Civil
duties, by preaching, only God ordained, only his Children enjoyed. Christ
when he sent his Apostles, did not give them a particular command, Ite orate,
go and pray in the public Congregation; All Nations were accustomed to that;
Christ made no doubt of any man's opposing, or questioning Public Prayer; and
therefore for that, he only said, Sic orabitis, Not go, and pray, but, when
you pray, pray thus, he instructed them in the form; the duty was well
known to all before. But, for Preaching, He himself was anointed for that,
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, Esa. 61.1
because the Lord has anointed me to preach: His unction was his function. He
was anointed with that power, and he has anointed us with part of his own
unction: All power is given unto me, says he, in Heaven and in Earth; and
therefore (as he adds there) Go ye, and preach: Because I have all Math. 28
19.
power, for preaching, take ye part of my power, and preach too. For,
Preaching is the power of God unto Salvation, and the savor of life unto life.
When therefore the Apostle says, Quench not the Spirit, Nec in te, nec in
alio, 1 These. 5. 19.
says Aquinas; Quench it not in your self, by forbearing to hear the Word
preached; quench it not in others, by discouraging them that do preach. For so
Saint Chrysostom, (and not he alone) understood that place, That they quench
the spirit, who discountenance preaching, and dishearten Preachers. Saint
Chrysostom took his example from the lamp that burnt by him, when he was
preaching; (It seems therefore he did preach in the afternoon) and he says,
You may quench this Lamp, by putting in water, and you may quench it by taking
out the oil. So a man may quench the spirit in himself, if he smoother it,
suffocate it with worldly pleasures, or profits, and he may quench it in
others, if he withdraw that favor, or that help, which keeps that Man, who
has the spirit of Prophecy, the Unction of Preaching, in a cheerful
discharge of his duty. Preaching then being Gods Ordinance to beget Faith, to
take away preaching, were to disarme God, and to quench the spirit; for by that
Ordinance he fights from heaven.

And to maintain that fight, he has made his Ministers Stars; as they are
called in the first of the Revelation. And they fight against Sisera, that is,
they preach against Error. They preach out of Necessity; Necessity is laid
upon me to preach, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
and upon a heavy penalty, if they do not; Vae mihi si non, Woe be unto me
if I do not preach the Gospel. Neither is that spoke there with the case of a
future, as the Roman Translation has it, Sinon Eliuangelizauero, If I do not
hereafter preach; If I preach not at one time or other; If I preach not when I
fee how things will go, what kind of preaching will be most acceptable: But it
is, Sinon Euangelizem, If I preach not now; now, though I had preached
yesterday; for so Saint Ambrose preached his Sermon de sancto Latrone, of the
good Thief, Hesterno die, Yesterday I told you etc. So Saint Augustine preached
his Sermon upon All Saints day: And so did Saint Bernard his twelfth Sermon
upon the Psalm: Qui habitat. Now, though I preached but lately before; and now,
though I had but late warning to preach now; So St. Basil preached his 2.
Sermon upon the Hexameron, the six days work, when he had but that Morning
for Meditation: and more then so, in his 2. Sermon de Baptissimo; for, it
seems he preached that without any premeditation, Prout suggerit Spiritus
sanctus. Now, though I had not time to labor a Sermon; and now, though I
preach in another man's place; for so Saint Augustine preached his Sermon upon
the 95. Psalm: where he says, Frater noster Seuerus, Our brother Seuerus
should by promise have preached here, but since he comes not, I will. Now,
that is, whenever Gods good people may be edified by my preaching: Vae si
non, woe be unto me, if I do not preach. The Dragon drew a third part of the
Stars from heaven. Apoc. 12. 3.
Antichrist by his Persecutions, and Excommunications silenced many; all that
would not magnify him. And many amongst us, have silenced themselves:
Abundance silences some, and Laziness, and Ignorance some, and some their own
Indiscretion, and then they lay that upon the Magistrate. But God has placed
us in a Church, and under a Head of the Church, where none are silenced, nor
discountenanced, if being Stars, called to the Ministry of the Gospel, and
appointed to fight, to preach there, they fight within the discipline and
limits of this Text, Manentes in ordine, containing themselves in Order.

In this phrase, as we told you before, out of Aquinas, the same thing is
intended, as in that place of Saint Paul, Let all things be done decently, and
in Order. That the Vulgat Edition reads, Fiant honest; and then says Saint
Ambrose, Honest fit, quod cum pace fit, That is done honestly, and decently,
which is done quietly, and peaceably. Not with a peace, and indifferency to
contrary Opinions in fundamental Doctrines, not to shuffle Religions together,
and make it all one which you choose, but a peace with persons, an abstinence
from contumelies, and reuilings. It is true that we must hate Gods enemies
with a perfect hatred, and it is true that Saint Chrysostom says, Odium
perfectum est, odium consummatissimum, that is not a perfect hatred, that
leaves out any of their Errors vnhated. But yet a perfect hatred is that too,
which may consist with perfection, and Charity is perfection: a perfect hatred
is that which a perfect, that is, a charitable man may bear, which is still to
hate Errors, not Persons. When their insolences provoke us to speak of them,
we shall do no good therein, if therein we proceed not decently, and in order.
Christ says of his Church: Terribilis vt Castrorum acies, It is powerful
Cant. 6.3
as an Army; but it is vt acies ordinata, as an army disciplined, and in
order: for without order, an Army is but a great Riot; and without this
decency, this peaceablenesse, this discretion, this Order, zeal is but fury,
and such preaching is but to the obduration of ill, not to the edification of
good Christians. Saint Paul in his absence from the Colossians, reioyces as
much in beholding Col. 2.5.
their Order, as in their steadfastness in the faith of Christ Jesus: Nay, if
we consider the words well, as Saint Chrysostom has done, we shall see that
it is only their Order that he reioyces in: for Non dixit fidem, sed
firmamentum fidei, says that Father, It was not their faith, but that which
established their faith, that was their order, that occasioned his joy. For
when there is not an uniform, a comely, an orderly presenting of matters of
faith, faith it self grows loose, and loses her estimation; and preaching in
the Church comes to be as pleading at the Bar, and not so well: there the
Counsel speaks not himself, but him that sent him, here we shall preach not
him who sent us, Christ Jesus, but our selves. Study to be quiet, and to do
your own business, is the Apostles commandment 1 These 4.11.
to every particular man amongst the Thessalonians. It seems some amongst them
disobeyed that: and therefore he writes no more to particular persons, but to
the whole Church, in his other Epistle, and with more vehemence, then a small
matter would have required: We command you in the name of our 2 These. 3.6.
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your self from all that walk
Inordinate, as the vulgat reads that in one place, and Inquiete, as they
translate the same word, in another, disorderly, unquietly: from all such as
preach suspiciously, and iealously; and be the garden never so fair, will make
the world believe, there is a Snake under every leaf, be the intention never
so sincere, will presage, and prognosticate, and prediuine sinister and
mischievous effects from it. A troubled spirit is a sacrifice to God, but a
trouble some spirit Psa 51.7
is far from it. I am glad that our Ministry is called Orders; that when
we take this calling, we are said to take Orders. Yours are called Trades,
and Occupations, and Mysteries: Law and Physic are called Sciences, and
Professions: many others have many other names, ours is Orders. When by his
Majesty's leave we meet in our Conuocations, and being met, have his further
leave, to treat of remedies for any disorders in the Church, our Constitutions
are Canons, Canons are Rules, Rules are Orders: Parliaments determine in Laws,
Judges in Decrees, we in Orders. And by our Service in this Mother Church, we
are Canonici, Canons, Regular, Orderly men; not Canonistae, men that know
Orders, but Canonici, men that keep them: where we are also called
Prebendaries, rather a Praebendo, then a Praebenda, rather for giving example
of obedience to Orders, then for any other respect. In the Roman Church the
most disorderly men, are their men in Orders. I speak not of the viciousness
of their life, I am no Judge of that, I know not that: but they are so out of
all Order, that they are within rule of no temporal Law, within jurisdiction
of no Civil Magistrate, no secular Judge. They may kill Kings, and yet can be
no Traitors, they assign their reason, Because they are no Subjects. He that
kills one of them, shall be really hanged; and if one of them kill, he shall be
Metaphorically hanged, he shall be suspended. We enjoy gratefully, and we
use modestly the Privileges which godly Princes, out of their piety have
affoorded us, and which their godly Successors have given us again by their
gracious continuing of them to us; but our Profession of it self, naturally
(though the very nature of it dispose Princes to a gracious disposition to us)
exempts us not from the tie of their Laws. All men are in deed, we are in Deed
and in name too, Men of Orders; and therefore ought to be most ready of all
others to obey.

Now, beloved, Ordo semper dicitur ratione Aquin.
principij: Order always presumes a head, it always implies some by whom we
are to be ordered, and it implies our conformity to him. Who is that? God
certainly, without all question, God. But between God, and Man, we consider a
twofold Order. One, as all creatures depend upon God, as upon their beginning,
for their very Being; and so every creature is wrought upon immediately by God,
and whether he discern it or no, does obey Gods order, that is, that which
God has ordained, his purpose, his providence is executed upon him, and
accomplishd in him. But then the other Order is, not as man depends upon God,
as upon his beginning, but as he is to be reduced and brought back to God, as
to his end: and that is done by means in this world. What is that means? for
those things which we have now in consideration, the Church. But the body
speaks not, the head does. It is the Head of the Church that declares to us
those things whereby we are to be ordered.

This the Royal and religious Head of these Churches within his Dominions has
lately had occasion to do. And in doing this, does he innouate any thing, offer
to do any new thing? Do we repent that Canon, and Constitution, in which at
his Majesty's first coming we declared with so much alacrity, as that it was
the second Cano^ we made, That the King had the same authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings of Judah, and the Christian Emperors in
the primative Church had? Or are we ignorant what those Kings of Judah, and
those Emperors did? We are not, we know them well. Take it where the power of
the Empire may seem somewhat declind in Charles the great; we see by those
Capitularies of his, that remain yet, what orders he gave in such causes; there
he says in his entrance to them, Nemo presumptuosum dicat; Let no man call
this that I do an usurpation, to prescribe Orders in these cases, Nam legimus
quid Josias fecerit, We have red what Josiah did, and we know that we have the
same Authority that Josiah had. But, that Emperor consulted with his Clergy,
before he published those Orders. It is true, he says he did. But he, from
whom we have received these Orders, did more then so; His Majesty forbore, til
a representation of some inconuenie^ces by disorderly preaching, was made to
him, by those in the highest place in our Clergy, and other grave and reverend
Prelates of this Church; they presented it to him, and thereupon he entered
into the remedy. But that Emperor did but declare things constituted by other
Counsels before: but yet the giving the life of execution to those
Constitutions in his Dominions, was introductorie, and many of the things
themselves were so. Amongst them, his 70. Capitularie is appliable to our
present case; there he says, Episcopi videant, That the Bishops take care,
that all Preachers preach to the people the Exposition of the Lords Prayer:
and he enioynes them too, Ne quid nouum, ne quid non Canonicum, That no man
preach any new opinion of his own; nay, though it be the opinion of other
learned men in other places, yet if it be Non Canonicum, not declared in the
Universal Church, not declared in that Church, in which he has his station,
he may not preach it to the people: And so he proceeds there to Catechistical
Doctrine.

That is not new then, which the Kings of Judah did, and which the Christian
Emperors did. But it is new to us, if the Kings of this kingdom have not done
it. Have they not done it? How little the Kings of this kingdom did in
Ecclesiastical causes then, when by their conniuence that power was deuold
into a foreign Prelates hand, it is pity to consider, pity to remember,
pity to bring into Con emplation; And yet truly even then our Kings did
exercise more of that power, then our adversaries who oppose it, will confess.
But, since the true jurisdiction was vindicated, and reapplyed to the Crown,
in what just height Henry the eight, and those who governed his Sons
minority, Edward the sixth, exercised that jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
causes, none, that knows their Story, knows not. And, because ordinarily, we
settle our selves best in the Actions, and Precedents of the late Queen of
blessed and everlasting memory, I may have leave to remember them that know;
and to tell them that know not, one act of her power and her wisdom, to this
purpose. When some Articles concerning the falling away from justifying grace,
and other points that beat upon that haunt, had been ventilated, in
Conuenticle, and in Pulpits too, and Preaching on both sides past, and that
some persons of great place and estimation in our Church, together with him who
was the greatest of all, amongst our Clergy, had upon mature deliberation
established a resolution what should be thought, and taught, held and preached
in those points, and had thereupon sent down that resolution to be published in
the University, not vulgarly neither, to the people, but in a Sermon, Ad
Clerum only, yet her Majesty being informed thereof, declared her displeasure
so, as that, scarce any hours before the Sermon was to have been, there was a
Countermaund, an Inhibition to the Preacher for meddling with any of those
points. Not that her Majesty made her self Judge of the Doctrines, but that
nothing, not formerly declared to be so, ought to be declared to be the Tenet,
and Doctrine of this Church, her Majesty not being acquainted, nor suplicated
to give her gracious allowance for the publication thereof.

His sacred Majesty then, is herein upon the steps of the Kings of Judah, of
the Christian Emperors, of the Kings of England, of all the Kings of England,
that embraced the Reformation, of Queen Elizabeth her self; and he is upon
his own steps too. For, it is a seditious calumny to apply this which is done
now, to any occasion that rises but now: as though the King had done this, now,
for satisfaction of any persons at this time. For some years since, when he
was pleased to call the Heads of Houses from the University, and intimate to
them the inconveniences that arose from the Preaching of such men, as were not
at all conversant in the Fathers, in the School, nor in the Ecclesiastical
Story, but had shut up themselves in a few later Writers; and gave order to
those Governors for remedy herein, Then he began, then he laid the foundation
for that, in which he has proceeded thus much further now, to reduce
Preaching nearer to the manner of those Primitive times, when God gave so
evident, and so remarkable blessings to men's Preaching.

Consider more particularly that which he has done now; His Majesty has
accompanied his most gracious Letter to the most Reverend Father in God, my
Lords Grace of Canterbury, with certain Directions how Preachers ought to
behave themselves in the exercise of that part of their Ministry. These being
derived from his Grace, in due course to his reverend Brethren, the other
Bishops, our worthy Diocesan, ever vigilant for the Peace and unity of the
Church, gave a speedy, very speedy intimation thereof, to the Clergy of his
Jurisdiction; so did others, to whom it appertained so to do in theirs. Since
that, his Majesty who always taking good works in hand, loves to perfect his
own works, has vouchsafed to give some Reasons of this his proceeding; which
being signified by him to whom the State and Church owes much, The right
Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the great Seal,
and after by him also, who began at first, his Majesty's pleasure appearing
thereby, (as he is too Great, and too Good a King to seek corners, or
disguises, for his actions) that these proceedings should be made public, I
was not willing only, but glad to have my part therein, that as, in the sear
of God, I have always preached to you the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who is the
God of your Salvation; So in the testimony of a good Conscience, I might now
preach to you, the Gospel of the Holy ghost, who is the God of peace, of
unity, and concord.

These Directions then, and the Reasons of them, by his Majesty's particular
care, every man in the Ministry may see and write out, in the several
Registers Offices, with his own hand for nothing, and for very little, if he
use the hand of another. Perchance you have, at your conuenience, you may see
them. When you do, you shall see, That his Majesty's general intention therein
is, to put a difference, between grave, and solid, from light and humerous
preaching. Origin does so, when upon the Epistle to the Romans, he says,
There is a great difference, Inter praedicare, and docere: A man may teach an
Auditory, that is, make them know something that they knew not before, and yet
not Preach; for Preaching is to make them knowthings appertaining to their
salvation. But when men do neither, neither Teach, nor Preach, but (as his
Majesty observes the manner to be) To soar in points too deep, To muster up
their own Reading, To display their own Wit, or Ignorance in meddling with
Civil matters, or (as his Majesty adds) in rude and indecent reuiling of
persons: this is that which has drawn down his Majesty's piercing Eye to see
it, and his Royal care to correct it. He corrects it by Christ's own way,
Quid ab initio, by considering how it was at first: for, (as himself to right
purpose cites Tertullian) Id verum quod primum; That is best, which was first.
He would therefore have us conversant in Antiquity: For, Nazianzen asks that
question with some scorn, Quis est qui veritatis propugnatorem, vnius diei
spatio, velut e luto statuam fingit. Can any man hope to make a good Preacher,
as soon as a good Picture? In three or four days, or with three or four
Books? His Majesty therefore calls us to look, Quid primum, what was first in the
whole Church? And again, Quid primum, when we received the Reformation in this
Kingdom, by what means, (as his Majesty expresses it) Papistry was driven
out, and Puritanisme kept out, and we delivered from the Superstition of the
Papist, and the madness of the Anabaptists, as before he expresses it: and
his religious and judicious eye sees clearly, That all that Doctrine, which
wrought this great cure upon us, in the Reformation, is contained in the two
Catechisines, in the 39. Articles, and in the 2. Books of Homilies. And to
these, as to Heads, and Abundaries, from whence all knowledge necessary to
salvation, may abundantly be derived, he directs the meditations of Preachers.

Are these new ways? No way new: for they were our first way in receiving
Christianity, and our first way in receiving the Reformation. Take a short view
of them all: as it is in the Catechismes, as it is in the Articles, as it is in
the Homilies. First you are called back to the practice of Catechizing:
Remember what Catechizing is; it is Institutio viua voce. And in the Primitive
Church, when those persons, who coming from the Gentiles to the Christian
Religion, might have been scandalized with the outward Ceremonial, and
Rituall worship of God in the Church, (for Ceremonies are stumbling blocks to
them who look upon them without their Signification, and without the reason of
their Institution) to avoid that danger, though they were not admitted to see
the Sacraments administered, nor the other Service of God performed in the
Church, yet in the Church, they received Instruction, Institution, by word of
mouth, in the fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, and that was
Catechizing. The Christians had it from the beginning, and the Jews had it
too: for their word Chanach, is of that signification, Initiare, to enter.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he Pro. 22.6
is old, he will not depart from it. Train up, says our Translation in the
Text; Catechize, say our Translators in the Margin, according to the natural
force of the Hebrew word. And Sepher Chinnuch, which is Liber Institutionum,
that is, of Catechism, is a Book well known amongst the Jews, every where,
where they are now: Their Institution is their Catechism. And if we should
tell some men, That Caluins Institutions were a Catechism, would they not love
Catechizing the better for that name? And would they not love it the better, if
they gave me leave to tell them that of which I had the experience. An
Artificer of this City brought his Child to me, to admire (as truly there
was much reason) the capacity, the memory, especially of the child. It was but
a Girl, and not above nine years of age, her Parents said less, some years
less; we could scarce propose any Verse of any Book, or Chapter of the
Bible, but that that child would go forward without Book. I began to
Catechize this child; and truly, she understood nothing of the Trinity,
nothing of any of those fundamental points which must save us: and the wonder
was doubled, how she knew so much, how so little.

The Primitive Church discerned this necessity of Catechizing: And therefore
they instituted a particular Office, a Calling in the Church of Catechisers.
Which Office, as we see in Saint Cyprians 42. Epistle, that great man Optatus
exercised at Carthage, and Origin at Alexandria. When S. Augustine took the
Epistle, and the Gospel, and the Psalm of the day, for his Text to one
Sermon, did he, think you, much more then paraphrase, then Catechize? When
Athanasius makes one Sermon, and, God knows, a very short one too, Contra
omnes Haereses, To overthrow all Heresies in one Sermon; did he, think you, any
more then propose fundamental Doctrines, which is truly the way to overthrow
all Heresies? When Saint Chrysostom enters into his Sermon upon the 3. Chapter
to the Galatians, with that preparation, Attendite diligenter, non enim rem
vulgarem pollicemur, Now hearken diligently, says he, for it is no ordinary
matter that I propose, There he proposes Catechisticall Doctrine of faith and
works. Come to lower times, when Chrysologus makes six or seven Sermons upon
the Creed, and not a several Sermon upon every several Article, but takes the
whole Creed for his Text, in every Sermon, and scarce any of those Sermons a
quarter of an hour long, will you not allow this manner of Preaching to be
Catechizing? Go as low as can be gone, to the Jesuits; and that great
Catechizer amongst them, Canisius, says, Nos hoc munus suscipimus: We, we
Jesuits make Catechizing our Profession. I doubt not but they do recreate
themselves sometimes in other matters too, but that they glory in, that they
are Catechizers. And in that Profession, says he, we have Saint Basil, Saint
Augustine, Saint Ambrose, Saint Cyrill, in our Society; and truly as
Catechizers, they have; as State-Friers, as Jesuits, they have not. And in the
first Capacity they have him, who is more then all; for as he says rightly,
Ipse Christus Catechista, Christ's own Preaching was a Catechizing. I pray God
that Jesuits conclusion of that Epistle of his, be true still; There he says,
Si nihil aliud, If nothing else, yet this alone should provoke us to a greater
diligence in Catechizing; Improbus labor, and indefessa cura, That our
Adversaries, the Protestants do spend so much time, as he says, day and night
in catechizing. Now, if it were so then, when he writ, and be not so still
amongst us, we have intermitted one of our best advantages: and therefore God
has graciously raised a blessed and a Royal Instrument, to call us back to
that, which aduantaged us, and so much offended the Enemy. That man may sleep
with a good Conscience, of having discharged his duty in his Ministry, that
has preached in the forenoone, and Catechized after. Quaere, says Tertullian,
(and he says that with indignation) an Idolatriam committat, qui de Idolis
catechizat: Will any man doubt, says he, whether that man be an Idolatrer,
that catechises Children, and Servants in Idolatry? Will any man doubt, whether
he be painful in his Ministry, that catechises children, and servant in
the sincere Religion of Christ Jesus. The Roman Church has still made her use
of us; of our fortunes, when she gouernd here, and of our example, since she
did not: They did, as they saw us do; And thereupon they came to that order,
in the Council of Trent, That upon Sundays and Holidays, they should Preach
in the forenoone, and Catechize in the afternoon; till we did both, they did
neither. Except ye become as little Children, ye Mat. 18.3
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, says Christ. Except ye, ye the
people be content at first to feed on the milk of the Gospel, and not
presently to fall to gnawing of bones, of Controversies, and unrevealed
Mysteries, And except ye, the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, descend
and apply your selves to the Capacity of little Children, and become as they,
and build not your estimation only upon the satisfaction of the expectation of
great and curious Auditories, you stopp theirs, you loose your own way to the
kingdom of Heaven. Not that we are to shut up, and determine our selves, in
the knowledge of Catechisticall rudiments, but to be sure to know them first.
The Apostle puts us upon that progress, Let us learn the Principles Heb. 6.1.
of the Doctrine of Christ, and go on to perfection. Not leave at them; but
yet not leave them out: endeavor to increase in knowledge, but first make sure
of the foundation. And that increase of knowledge, is royally, and fatherly
presented to us, in that, which is another limne of his Majesty's directions,
the 39. Articles.

The Foundation of necessary knowledge, is in our Catechismes; the
Superedification, the extention in these Articles. For they carry the
understanding, and the zeal of the ablest Man; high enough, and deep enough.
In the third Article there is an Orthodoxe assertion of Christ's descent into
Hell; who can go deeper? In the 17. Article there is a Modest declaration of
the Doctrine of Predestination; who can go higher? neither do these Articles
only build up Positive Doctrine; If the Church had no adversaries, that were
enough; but they embrace Controversies too, in points that are necessary. As
in the two and twentieth Article of Purgatory, of Pardons, of Images, of
Inuocations: and these not in general only, but against the Romish Doctrine
of Pardons, of Images, of Invocation. And in the eight and twentieth Article
against Transubstantiation, and in such terms, as admit no meeting, no
reconciliation; but that it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, and
has given occasion to many Superstitions. And in one word, we may see the
purpose and scope of these Articles, as they were intended against the Roman
Church, in that Title which they had in one Edition (in which though there were
some other things, that justly gave offense, yet none was given nor taken in
this) That these Articles were conceived and published, to condemn the
Heresies of the Manichees, of the Arrians, of the Nestorians, of the Papists,
and others. And therefore in these reasons, which his Majesty has descended
to give of his Directions, himself is pleased to assign this, That the people
might be seasoned in all the Heads of the Protestant Religion. Not only of
the Christian against Jews, Turks, and Infidels, but of the Protestant
against the Roman Church.

The Foundation is in the Catechism; the growth and extention in the Articles,
and then the Application of all to particular Auditories in the Homilies:
which, if his Majesty had not named, yet had been employed in his
recommendation of the Articles. For the five and thirtieth Article appoynts the
reading of them: both those, which were published in the time of Edward the
sixth, and those which after. In the first Book, the very first Homilies are,
of the Sufficiency of Scriptures, and of the absolute necessity of Reading
them; sufficiently opposed against that which has been said in that Church,
both of the impertinencie, of Scriptures, as not absolutely necessary, and of
the insufficiency of these Scriptures, if Scriptures were necessary. And in
the second Book, the second Homily is against Idolatry; and so far against
all approaches toward it, by having any Images in Churches, as that perchance
Moderat Men, would rather think that Homily to severe in that kind, then
suspect the Homilies of declination toward Papistrie. Is it the name of
Homelies that Scandalizes them? would they have none? Saint Cyrills 30.
Paschall Sermons, which he preached in so many several Easter days, at his
Arch-bishoprike of Alexandria, and his Christmas days Sermons too, were
ordinarily exscrib'd, and rehearsed over again, by the most part of the
Clergy of those parts: and in their Mouths they were but Homilies. And
Caluins Homilies upon Job (as Beza in his Preface before them, calls them) were
ordinarily repeated over again in many places of France: and in their mouths
they were but Homilies. It is but the name, that scandalizes; and yet the name
of Homilia and Concio, a Homily and a Sermon, is all one. And if some of these
were spoken, and not read, and so exhibited in the name of a Sermon, they
would like them well enough. Certainly his Majesty mistook it not, that in
our Catechises, In our Articles, in our Homilies, there is enough for Positive,
enough for Controuerted Divinity; For that Jesuit, that intended to bring in
the whole body of Controuerted Divinity into his book, (whom we named before)
desired no other Subject, no other occasion to do that, but the Catechism of
that Church; neither need any sober Man, that intends to handle Controversies
ask more, or go further.

His Majesty therefore, who as he understands his duty to God, so does he his
Subjects duties to him, might justly think, That these so well grounded
Directions, might, (as himself says) be received upon implicit obedience.
Yet he vouchsafes to communicate to all, who desire satisfaction, the Reasons
that moved him. Some of which I have related, and all which, all may, when they
will see, and have. Of all which the Sum is, His Royal and his Pastoral
care, that by that Primitive way of Preaching, his Subjects might be armed
against all kind of Adversaries, in fundamental truths. And when he takes
knowledge, That some few Churchmen, but many of the people, have made sinister
constructions of his sincere intentions, As he is grieved at the heart, (to
give you his own words) to see every day so many defections from our religion
to Popery and Anabaptisme; So without doubt he is grieved with much bitterness,
that any should so pervert his meaning, as to think, that these Directions
either restraind the Exercise of Preaching, or abated the number of Sermons, or
made a breach to Ignorance and Superstition, of which three scandals he has
been pleased to take knowledge. What could any Calumniator, any Libeller on the
other side, have imagined more opposite, more contrary to him, then approaches
toward Ignorance, or Superstition? Let us say for him, Can so learned, so
abundantly learned a prince be suspected to plot for Ignorance? And let us
bless God, that we hear him say now, That he does constantly profess
himself an open aduer sary to the Superstition of the Papist (without any
milder Modification) and to the madness of the Anabaptist: And that the
preaching against either of their Doctrines is not only approved, but much
commended by his roy all Majesty, if it be done without rude and indecent
reuiling. If he had affected Ignorance in himself, he would never have read
so much; and if he had affected Ignorance in us, he would never have writ so
much, and made us so much the more learned by his Books. And if he had had any
declination toward Superstition, he would not have gone so much farther, then
his rank and quality pressed him to do, in declaring his opinion concerning
Antichrist, as out of Zeal, and zeal with knowledge he has done. We have
him now, (and long, long, O eternal God, continue him to us,) we have him now
for a father of the Church, a Foster-father; such a father as Constantine, as
Theodosius was; our posterity shall have him for a Father, a Classique father;
such a father as Ambrose, as Austin was. And when his works shall stand in the
Libraries of our Posterity, amongst the Fathers, even these Papers, these
Directions, and these Reasons shall be pregnant evidences for his constant zeal
to Gods truth, and in the mean time, as arrows shot in their eyes, that
imagine so vain a thing, as a defection in him, to their superstition. Thus
far he is from admitting Ignorance, and from Superstition thus far, which
seems to be one of their fears. And for the other two, (which concur in
one) That these Directions should restrain the Exercise of Preaching, or abate
the number of Sermons, his Majesty has declared himself to those Reverend
Fathers, To be so far from giving the least discouragement to solid Preaching,
or to discreet and religious Preachers, or from abating the number of Sermons,
that he expects at their hands, that this should increase their number, by
renewing upon every Sunday in the afternoon, in all Parish Churches throughout
the kingdom, that primitive, and most profitable exposition of the Catechism.
So that here is no abating of Sermons, but a direction of the Preacher to
preach usefully, and to edification.

And therefore, to end all, you, you whom God has made Stars in this
Firmament, Preachers in this Church, deliver your selves from that imputation,
The Stars were not Job 25.5
pure in his sight; The Preachers were not obedient to him in the voice of his
Lieutenant. And you, you who are Gods holy people, and zealous of his glory, as
you know from St. Paul, that Stars differ from Stars in glory, 1 Cor. 15 14.
but all conduce to the benefit of man: So, when you see these Stars, Preachers
to differ in gifts; yet, since all their ends are to advance your salvation,
encourage the Catechizer, as well as the curious Preahcer. Look so far
toward your way to Heaven, as to the Firmament, and consider there, that that
star by which we sail, and make great voyages, is none of the stars of
the greatest magnitude; but yet it is none of the least neither; but a middle
star. Those Preachers which must save your souls, are not ignorant,
unlearned, extemporall men; but they are not over curious men neither. Your
children are you, and your servants are you; and you do not provide for your
salvation, if you provide not for them, who are so much yours, as that they are
you. No man is saved as a good man, if he be not saved as a good Father, and as
a good Master too, if God have given him a family. That so, Priest and people,
the whole Congregation, may by their religious obedience, and fighting in this
spiritual warfare in their Order, minister occasion of joy to that heart,
which has been grieved; in that fullness of joy, Which David expresses. The
King shall rejoice in thy Psalm. 21.
strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice? Thou
have given him his hearts desire, and thou have not withholden the request of
his lips: for the King trusts in the Lord, and by the mercy of the most
High, he shall not be moved. And with that Psalm, a Psalm of Confidence in
a good King, and a Psalm of Thank sgiuing for that blessing, I desire that
this Congregation may be dissolved; for this is all that I intended for the
Explication, which was our first, and for the Application, which was the other
part proposed in these words.

FINIS.

