A TIPE OR FIgure of Friendship. Wherein is lively, and compendiouslie
expressed, the right nature and property of a perfect and true friend.

Also a conclusion at the end in the praise of Friendship.

Written by. W. D.

Non aurum, non adamas, fulget splendidius, quam bonorum mentes consentientes.

^mprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, and Henry Kirkham. 1589.

TO THE WORSHIPful and worthy favorers of learning, Master William Cravne,
and and Master William, Parker, Citizens and Merchants of London W. D. wishes
allearthly prosperity, and heavenly felicity.
THE ancient Grecians (as Aristotle writes) accustomed to erect the Temples of
the Graces called Charites in the midst of their Cities, to the end that the
Citizens might thereby be admonished of Amity, mutual Benevolence, and
Charity: In regard whereof worshipful friends,) considering with my self
the imbecillitie of our nature, the malignitie of mortal minds, and the
dangerous days of this our iron age, finding a lamentable defect of
Friendship, and fearing a final fall and decay of the same; I, not wallowing
in wealth, being far from the ability of building a Temple of the Grecian
Graces, have according to my slender faculty framed a Figure fully fraught
with the glorious gifts of a Goddess: more worthy to be purtraied with the
cunning pencill of Protogenes, than so dimly adumbrated with the running pen
of Agatharcus. Which if it deserve not to be situated in the midst of the
City as the Grace Aglaia, nor to be placed on some high pinnacle as the Image
of Minerua, yet it may be suffered in the corners and Suburbs of the same in
the honor of Amicitia. Through whose beneuolent aspect and goodness, some men
may be perhaps the sooner moved to Amity, Friend^hip, and gratefulnes. We
read that Apelles by a picture caused the Egyptians to abhor and hate
derraction, as a monstrous copesmate of vices, and I wish this present Figure
may be analectiue to our Anglians to entertain and embrace Friendship as a
mighty companion and aid to virtues. And forasmuch as Friendship does chiefly
consist inter duos, and can have no essence but inter bonos, I have been the
more emboldened (although unknown) to presume of your Worships favorable
acceptance hereof: who, as popular fame pronounces, as well for your accustomed
courtesy toward all men, as also for your continual Amity and brotherly love
one toward another in faithful society, do rightly resemble friendships
nature and property: to whom I humbly present and offer the same. Wherein,
if my presumption shall breed prejudice, or cause me to be checked with dislike,
I shall be choked with despair for ever practicing my pen again in any such
petite pamphlet, yea though it were to my familiar friends. Thus wishing your
Worships all manner of temporal benefits, and spiritual blessings, I end and
humbly take my leave.

Your Worships to use: Walter Dorke.
Inuitat ad magna qui gratanter suscipit modica.
The Figure of Friendship.
AS the life of man generally, lies open to many miseries, so is it
specially relieved by two remedies, according to that worthy saying: Tristia
cuncta exsuperans aut animo, aut amico. That is to say all things are to be
overcome, either with the fortesied power of a patient mind, or with the
fortunate presence of a faithful friend. What comfort can there be more
propitiate or present to a penciue mind, than to power out the plaints thereof
into the secret bosom of a sincere friend, by whose sweet communication is
received a sudden delight, and sovereign consolation, as a most cordial
medicine against any corrasiue.

Architas of Tarento teaches us that life is no life being led without the
loyal love and liking of some that are living: neither is his joy, any joy,
that does not enjoy some friend with whom he may be jointly joined in
society: for if a man should climb up to the skies, and take a full view of
the brightness of the heavens, and contemplate the beautifulness of the
stars: and behold all the wonderful works of GOD upon the face of the
earth: the admiration thereof would be but unpleasant without some friend to
whom he might make relation of the same.

Scipio Minor when he went forth of his house at any time would earnestly
endeavor himself to find out some company among whom he would make one his
familiar friend before he returned home again: saying there is no better
possession than the fruition of a friend.

Titus Vespasianus the Emperor on a certain time finding by feeling his own
conscience that he had not pleasured any person the day passed, complained with
this clause, Diem Amici perdidi. I have (says he) lost a day, by neglecting
the duty of a friend.

Dionisius the Tirant was so amazed at the friendship of Damon and Pithias that
it translated his mind from being tirannous toward them, to become almost
amorous with them, as it may appear by his own petition. Rogo vt me quoque in
vestram amicitiam recipiatis. I beseech you (says he) receive me also into
your sacred society.

King Darius doubted not to say, he had rather enjoy his faithful friend
Zopirus free from wounded face and deformity, then a hundred such cities as
Babylon with all their wealth and superfluity.

Achilles being demanded of Ajax, which were the greatest labors that ever
he sustained; answered, the labors that he endured for his friends. And
being again demanded of the same, what travails and pains seemed to him
most pleasant: said, the travails and pains he took for his friends.
Signifying thereby, that a man endued with an heroical heart should always
be inflamed with a desire of doing good to his friend. And to the like end and
purpose, a certain Philosopher compared a perfect friend to a good proportioned
horse in seven properties as follows, having A little head by humble
conversation. A sharp ear to be quick of hearing and ready at every call. A
soft mouth to the end his tongue be temperate. A hard hoof to endure travail.
An open hand to do good deeds. A sure foot to continue in amity. A bay
color for his good renown.
Some also affirm that true friends ought to be like mulberie trees which
bring forth their fruit at such times, that they neither fear the frosts of
May, as the vines do; nor the mistes of October, as the Peaches and Quinces
do. Thus among the ancient Romans and Grecians friendship has been had in
great reverence, but throw the iniquity of our time it is now become, tam rara
auis in terris, that a man may as soon see a black Swan, as find out a
faithful friend.

And here I imagine some man may ask me a double question. First, whether the
late famous Famelie of love, which began to creep in among us, have any
fellowship with Friendship. Secondly, whether the Holy league may be linked in
the golden chain of charity, or contained in the silver band of amity. To
them both I answer negatiuely: and first as for the family of love, I think
them fitter to be termed the familiars of lust, and of the family of Lucifer:
they are a sect given to sensuality, stirred up by some infernal Fury, to
make a confusion of al things generally, the which is so odious that as I
loath to think of it, so will I leave to speak of it.

And as for the holy league, which some call the helly lake or hellish legion,
how far they are from amity or honesty, France can best Judge, of whose
loyalty they have had experience but too lately. The first original and birth
of the^ was like to an untimely monster ripped out of the bowels of rebellion,
and fostered up with the poisoned teats of treason, and will be still
mainteyned by their mistres abomination, until the breath of Gods wrath work
their destruction. Wherefore the Friendship yt is spoken of in this place, is
not the tirannicall friendship of the holy league, nor the filthy friendship,
of the false named family of love, nor the froward friendship which a man may
find at Billingsgate for a box on the ear, nor the profitable friendship
which is among Merchants, nor the pleasant friendship which is among Courtiers,
nor the common friendship which is among Clownes: but it is the true, perfect,
and unfeigned friendship, which is neither for pleasure partly, nor for profit
chiefly, but for virtues sake only.

And because no man should be deceived, as the Painter who supposed light
colors to be linen cloth, I have set down certain Articles, precepts, or
statutes of the law of Amity appertaining to the foresaid Figure: the which,
whosoever does not observe and perform, cannot obtain the name of a sincere
friend.

First, That Friendship is to be esteemed more than all wordly things.

2 Friendship is only among good men, and cannot be where virtue is not.

3 A faithful Friend is as a man's own self.

4 Friendship must not be desired for profit or gain.

5 Friendship cannot be changed no more than Nature, but is of continuance.

6 Covetousness is a great plague to Friendship.

7 Flattery is an vtterenemie to Friendship.

8 A man must neither grant to his Friend, nor request any thing of him that
is unlawful or dishonest.

9 If our friends conspire against the commonwealth, we ought to forsake them,
and also reveal them.

10 Friends must not flatter, but boldly and freely advertise, admonish, and
counsel one another.

11 The chief trial of a Friend is in time of necessity.

12 True friendship is hard to be found amongst great men.

13 A faithful Friend in weal and woe is all one.

14 A Friend must neither be a tale carrier, nor a tale creditour.

15 Friends ought to remember good turns.

16 A reverent and modest bashfulnesse ought to be in Friendship.

17 Pleasant speeches and courteous manners be not the worst sawces in
Friendship: but lumpish sadness, and sullen sowrenesse ought to be in any
wise shunned.

18 A trusty Friend is a great treasure.

19 We cannot do too much in Friendship.

20 Among Friends all things should be common.

Finally, they are all included in this definition.

Friendship is a perfect consent and agreement with benevolence and charity in
all things, appertaining as well toward God as men.

These precepts duly considered, a true Friend may be easily discerned, and
yet you may sooner by definition declare what he is, tha^ by demonstration show
where he is: for friendship described in this form and fashion has been long
since as one banished from every Nation, not having any certain place to make
abode in: No not in Rome; for they are too covetous, superstitious, and
vainglorious: Not in Turkey; for their Mahomet is too monstrous: in India, they
are too rude and barbarous, in Italy proud and ambitious, in Spain
disdainful, vile and vicious: in France crafty, fierce and furious: in
Germany and Denmark they dedicate themselves to Bacchus. But I would I could
justly report our selves to be clear from all these vices, and more apt to
embrace Friendship here in England: for that it has the name and fame to be a
most flourishing Island, where religion has appeared, where peace and concord
has been placed, and the people accounted blessed many years; which God
continue for ever. And here in this point, I cannot pass without some reverent
and honorable mention of the Queens most excellent Majesty: neither can any
man sufficiently admire the most absolute and rare perfections of her Highness
heroical mind; by whose regal benevolence and bounty, full many are made
happy, whose great mercy, abundant natural clemency, and unspeakable
lenity (even toward her greatest enemies) do merit immortal memory. And if I
should particularly speak of her Majesty's mighty Friendship to foreign
Princes: if I should declare her gracious inclination and readiness in aiding
the oppressed: if I should show her godly zeal in planting the Gospel: and
to be short, if I could but in the least part express her princely care,
pity, and piety toward her own people and country, it would seem such,
and so great, that it might well make all other Princes and Potentates rather
amazed to hear it, than apt to imitate it. What subject would not show
himself as faithful as Zopirus? What Courtier would not contend to be as
constant as Curtius? What Noble man would not offer both life and service, as
far forth as King Codrus to the good of so gracious a Gouernesse?

Wherefore, if Friendship were thus embraced in the Court, there should be no
Gnatho so often with filed tongue flattering, nor Thraso so commonly with
brazen face bragging: nor Davus so continually with double heart dissembling.
Currifauourers and clawbackes, should be contemned as irksome and perilous:
Sicophants and Shifters, should be pronounced as execrable and odious:
Parasites and platter-friends, should be proclaimed as pestilent and pernicious.

In like manner in the City, if they would whip out the spaniels that will
fawn when they are empty, and beat out the dogs that will bite when they
are full, and fear away the crows that will eat up quick bodies, and flap
out the flies that will sting Alexander, and rid themselves of the Friars
fleas that are bred in every corner; then should they not have so many wilful
murders to molest them in the day, nor so many secret robberies to disquiet
them in the night: then should not our hearts be so much heated with hatred and
spitefulness, nor our tongues so tipped with taunts and bitterness, nor our
deeds so distained with mischief and noughtinesse: then should reason rule
only in the head, and treason should be trodd utterly underfoot: then should
Cities be governed peaceably, and people in all places live prosperously:
which God grant continually.

SO necessary, great and infinite are the commodities of Frie^dship, that they
seem to take the Sun out of the world, which would remove Friendship from
amongst us: without the which, nothing is so well staid, but it may be soon
destroyed, nothing so strong but it may easily be beaten down, nothing so
firmly settled but it may be utterly subverted: yea without Friendship no house
can be well guided, no City well governed, no Country safe preserved, no State
long continued, no nor any thing in the use of man rightly ordered. It is so
convenient for the Court, and so fit for the Country; it is such a treasure
abroad in the wars, and such an ornament to the City in time of peace; that
as Tully testifies, there is no gift given of God to man (Sapience only
excepted) more agreeable to nature, more comfortable to the heart, more
pleasant to the mind, or more profitable to a Public weal: although some
rather regard riches, other more esteem health, many chiefly prefer
honor, most of all vainly delight pleasure: but yet neither the use of
riches, nor the worship of wealth, nor the praise of honor, nor the delight of
pleasure, nor the happiness of health, may be compared with Friendship: for
which way soever thou take, it turns with thee: if thou go forward, it
follows thee: if thou call, it is at hand: if thou look for it, it is linked
unto thee: in no place is it excluded, at no time out of season, in no cause
troublesome: wherefore it may be well said, that we use neither water, nor
fire, nor earth, nor air, in more places than we do Friendship. It makes
prosperity to shine most glorious, and causes adversity to seem nothing
grievous. It suffers neither the heart to be daunted, nor the courage in any
case quailed: wherefore being absent, yet are they present: being needy, they
have enough: being poor, they have plenty: being weak, are strong: yea and I
had almost said that which is more strange, being dead are alive: insomuch,
that the death of the one seems blessed, and the life of the other nothing
blemished, so great is the honor, so gracious the remembrance, so godly the
zeal that is bred in Friends one toward another. He yt looks upon his
faithful Friend, does behold a perfect pattern of his own person, being as
it were an Alter ego, that is another himself. What was it that caused Phocion
to say, he never denied any thing to his faithful friend Nicocles, was it not
Friendship? What was it that urged Damon to yield himself a pledge for the
life of his companion Pithias, was it not Friendship? What was it that moved
Titus to come down from the Bench of authority, and accuse himself to
acquit Gisippus from misery, was it not Friendship? What was it that inflamed
Pilades to present his own person to save the life of Orestes, was it not
Friendship? To be short, what was the reason that the two honorable Romans,
Scipio and Laeli^^s so greatly loved: insomuch that one house served them both,
one face, one joint study, one delight, one consent in all things: not only
in private affairs, but also in public, in travails, in voyages, in
soiourning, at home and abroad all were alike common: was not this a laudable
kind of Friendship? Yea, to make our full period, (though Friendships praise be
infinite) such is the force thereof, that mighty Kings have desired it, it is
so glorious: famous Philosophers have honored it, it is so specious: cruel
tyrants have been amazed at it, it is so victorious: al men in general have
praised it, it is so precious: and yet few have effectually at any time
attained unto it, it is so miraculous.

FINIS.

