TO all People to whom this present VVriting shall come, I Thomas Dovvnes of
the City of Dublin Stati^*ner, send greeting in our Lord God everlasting:
Whereas the Kings most excellent Majesty by his Highness Letters Patents
under the great Seal of this Kingdom has granted to Felix Kyngston and me
the said Thomas Dovvnes (Assignees for and on the behalf of the Company of
Stationers of London) the Office of Printer general within this his Majesty's
Realm of Ireland, with full power to Imprint, Bind and sell all Books and
other things incident to the said Office: prohibiting all others to imprint,
bind, sell or put (...) sale any of the premises, upon pain of forfeyture of
ten shillings Irish for every such book or thing, And upon pain of
forfeyture and confiscation of the said Books and other things, to them the
said Patentees and their assigns, to their proper use and uses. And where also
the Lord Deputy and Council of this Kingdom, by their Proclamation bearing
date the fifteenth day of July 1620. did signify and declare the express
tenor of the said Letters Patt. that all his Majesty's subjects and others
might take notice thereof, Requiring all his Majesty's Officers and loving
subjects to be ayding and assisting to the said Patentees, their Agents,
servants and deputies therein, as by the said Letters Patents and Proclamation
at large appears. Now Know ye, That I the said Thomas Dovvnes (on the behalf
and to the use of the said Company) do by these presents authorize, substitute
and appoint (...) within this Kingdom, my true and lawful deputy ^^d
Attorney, to make search for, take and seize into his hands such books and
^^^er things of that nature so brought into this Realm, and forfeyted and
con^iscated by force of the said Letters Patt. or Proclamation or either of
them: And also to cause the said delinquents in that behalf to be committed to
prison there to remain until they and every of them shall have paid the said
Fine of ten shillings Irish, for every such Book and other thing so brought
in and forfeited as aforesaid, And all other things to do and execute (in the
behalf of the said Company) as I my self might being present. Which power
and ^uthoritie concerning the premises I the said Thomas Dovvnes do ratify
^hese presents to the foresaid (...) Sealed with my seal the (...) day of
(...) Anno Dom.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)


