ABRAHAM'S TRIAL: A Sermon preached at the Spittle, in Easter week Anno Domini
1602.

By George Downame Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed for Humfrey Lownes. 1602*

To the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Killigrew Knight, Grace in this life, and
glory in the life to come.
AMong all the worthy histories of the Saints which are registered in the book
of God, there is not any one example of faith and obedience comparable (as I
suppose) to Abraham: who as he was the father of all the faithful Romans 4.11.
so he is propounded to all the heirs of promise, as a most worthy pattern
for imitation. And to this end the Lord as he had endued him with an excellent
measure of his grace, so by a correspondencie of trials proportionable to his
faith, he has manifested the same to the world: that all those which profess
themselves to be the sons of Abraham, might either imitate his faith and
obedience, or else know themselves to be none of his children. For which cause
the holy Apostles Paul and James, the one entreating of the causes whereby a
man is justified, the other of the effects and signs whereby a man is known
to be just: the one proving that we are justified by faith alone without works,
the other concluding that we are justified by such a faith as is not alone, or
without works: both propound the example of Abraham as a rule, the one of that
justification whereby we are made just, to wit, by imputatio^ of Christ's
righteousness apprehended by faith, the other of that whereby we are declared to
be just, namely by the fruits of faith, which are good works. Paul therefore
proving that we are justified by faith without works, that is, by imputation of
Christ's righteousness alone, which is apprehended by faith, argues from the
example of Abraham to this effect: that as he was justified, so are we, Romans
4.23.24. he was justified by faith without works, that is, by imputation of
Christ's righteousness apprehended by faith, without respect of any righteousness
inherent in himself, therefore we are justified by faith, without works.
James disputing against vain me^ Chap. 2. ver. 20. who thought to be justified
by an idle or counterfeit faith, proves from the example of Abraham, that we
must be justified by such a faith as is not without works. For by such a faith
as Abraham was justified, must we be justified: Abraham was justified not by an
idle or dead faith, but by a lively faith working by love, as apeareth
especially by that example recorded, Genesis 22. Therefore howsoever we are
justified by faith alone, yet we are not justified by such a faith as is alone:
but as we are justified by faith alone, that is, made just by imputation of
Christ's righteousness, which is apprehended by faith alone: so we are justified,
that is, declared and known to be just by good works, which are the fruits of
faith. Abraham therefore as you see, is propounded to all the faithful as a
pattern in both respects. So that if we would be esteemed the sons of
Abraham (as all the faithful are) we must look to be justified as he was, and
by such a faith. The Papists therefore, who seek Justification by works, that
is, inherent righteousness, are not the sons of Abraham. For those who are of
faith, that is, who seek justification by faith and not by works, are the
children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. No more is the carnal Gospeller* (...) by such
a faith as (...) and void of righteousness (...) our Savior says John. 8.
(...) the sons of Abraham, (...) do the works of Abraham. (...) Abraham
though he were justified by faith alone, yet he was not justified by such a
faith as is alone. But howsoever the notable faith of Abraham whereby he was
justified before God, and his dutiful obedience whereby he was known and
declared to be just, appears in many particulars recorded by Moses, yet then
especially he approved both his faith and obedience, when he was enjoined by a
commandment of trial, to sacrifice his own and only son Isaac. For by
this greatest trial the Lords purpose was to manifest to the world his
greatest faith and rarest obedience: and in respect of both to commend him to
all succeeding generations, as a most lively pattern to be followed of all the
heirs of promise. For which cause as I thought this notable story of Abraham's
trial most worthy to be handled in this Easters solemnity: so others have
desired, and I have yielded, that the Sermon wherein it was handled, should be
made more public for the benefit of more then did hear me. Being therefore to
publish this Sermon as the first fruits of mine english labors, I thought good
to dedicate the same to your Worship, to whom with your loving brother, and
the virtuous Lady your wife, I am for great benefits exceedingly bound: that
there might remain some memorial both of your bountifulnes, and of my
thankfulness. Accept therefore (I pray you) according to your accustomed
favor this commendation of Abraham's faith and obedience. And as hitherto you
have (to Gods glory be it spoken, and to the good example of others) showed
your self to be one of the sons of Abraham: so my desire is, that this
example of Abraham commended unto you, may be some encouragement for you, to
continue to the end in that course wherein you have long walked. That imitating
still the faith of Abraham, and treading in the steps of his obedience unto the
end, you may be sure after the labors of this life to rest in Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16.22.
where you shall receive the end of your faith, 1. Pet. 1.9.
which is the salvation of your soul by the precious merits of Jesus Christ,
(...).

(...), the 28. of April 1602. Your Worships in the Lord George Downame.

ASYNOPSIS OR BRIEF VIEW of the particulars contained in this Sermon.
(...) Explication of the text, divided into a Proposition, where three
questions are discussed. 1. Whether God tempts any to evil. 2. In what sense
he is said to have tempted Abraham. 3. To what end he tempted him.
Narration, declaring the action of God proving Abraham, which is two fold, his
Vocation or call, preparing Abraham, to the trial. Commandment, containing
the trial, which appears to be great, both by the Deerenes of that which he
was to forgo, amplified by the Lord in four degrees, commanding him to
sacrifice 1. His son. 2. His only son. 3. Whom he loved. 4. Even Isaac.
Hardness of that which he was to undergo, showed by the Circumstances of Time
when this commandment Was given. Was to be performed.
Place in General, noted to be a hill in the country of Moriah. Patricular,
lest indefinit.

Substance of the work, that he was to offer Isaac for a burnt sacrifice,
which was very hard in respect of his Affection to his son whom it had bin Hard
only to forgo, but more hard by death, and that a violent death. Harder to
Consent to his death. Deliver him to be killed. Be present at his slaughter.
Hardest to kill him with his own hands, and that as a burnt sacrifice.
Allegiance to God, viz. his Obedience with which how could it stand to do an
act so Unlawful? Unnatural? Dishonorable to God? Scandalous to man?
Faith: for how could he believe in the promises concerning Isaacs seed, and
yet himself kill him, and consume him to ashes, before he had any seed?




Abraham approving his Obedience, which was 1. Absolute and simple. 2. Resolute
and serious 3. Speedy and ready. 4. Not headie or for a brunt, but discreet,
temperate, constant, and courageous.
Faith being assured that although Isaac were consumed to ashes, yet the
promise of God concerning Isaac should be fulfilled.


Application in respect of Gods proving Abraham, that he uses to try men* and
that diversely: but his trials may be distinguished by the Objects, that is, the
things wherein we are tried, and thus trials are of the Right hand, by
temporal benefits. Offered. Conferred.
Left hand, by crosses. Temporal. Spiritual.

Subjects, that is, the men who are tried, viz. Hypocrites. Sound Christians.

Abraham's approving himself, that if we would be esteemed his children (as all
the faithful are) we must imitate both his Obedience, and to that end we must
as he did Deny our selves. Think nothing too dear for God. Resolve beforeha^d
to do what soever God shall command.
Faith in Believing the promises of God. Working by love.





ABRAHAM'S TRIAL.
(...). Genesis 22.1. to the 13. 1 After these things it came to pass that God
himself tempted Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: who answered, Here am I.

2 And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou love, even
Isaac, and go thy ways unto the land of Moriah, and offer him up there for a
whole burnt offering upon one of the mountains, which I will tell thee.

3 Then Abraham rose up early in the same morning, and sadled his ass, and
took two of his servants with him, and Isaac his son, and cloue wood for the
burnt offering, and rose up and went to the place which God had told him.

4 The third day Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place a far off.

5 And Abraham said to his servants, Stay here with the ass: for I and this
youth will go yonder and worship, and come again unto you.

6 Then Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac
his son, and he took the sire in his hand and the knife, and they both went
together.

7 And Isaac spoke to his father and said, My father. And he answered, Here am
I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb
for the burnt offering?

8 Then Abraham answered, God will provide him a lamb for a burnt offering, my
son: and so they two went together.

9 And when they came to the place which God had told him, Abraham builded an
altar there, and couched the wood, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on
the altar upon the wood.

10 And Abraham stretching forth his hand, took the knife to kill his son.

11 But the Angel of the Lord called unto him from heaven, saying, Abraham,
Abraham. And he answered, Here am I.

12 Then he said, Lay not thine hand upon the young man, neither do any thing
to him: for now I know thou fear God, seeing for my sake thou have not
spared thine only son.


IN this chapter the Holy ghost has recorded the memorable history of
Abraham's temptation by God himself concerning the immolation of Isaac,
pretended by God, and intended by Abraham, unto the 11. verse: and the events
thereupon ensuing, in the rest of the chapter.

The story of the temptation consists on two parts: the proposition in the
first words, containing both the argument of the story, and the scope and
purpose of God in this business, viz. that God tempted Abraham: and the
narration in the rest of the words, unto the 11. verse. Wherein is declared
both the action of God tempting, and the behavior of Abraham when he was
tempted. In the proposition the Holy ghost gives us, and all that shall read
or hear this story, an item, or watchword, that howsoever Abraham was to
understand the commandment following, concerning the killing and sacrificing
of his own son, as a serious precept, the omission whereof had been sin
unto him, and an honoring of his son more then God: yet notwithstanding the
Lord bad him offer his son, not because he would have Isaac sacrificed, but
Abraham's faith and obedience tried. Which also appears by the event, verse.
11.12. where the Lord, who is not changed, by a contrary commandment
signifies that he did inquire (as Ambrose says) his affection, Affectum tuum
inquisiui, non factum exegi. Ambros. In voto probaui quod in facto renui.
August. de tempore Sermon 73.
and not require the fact: and as another, he did approve in the intent and
desire, which he disprooued in the performance. Now this warning that God did
but tempt Abraham was necessarily to be given, lest men understanding the
commandment following, as a serious precept which God would have fulfilled,
might imagine that God is pleased with sacrificing of men, or might justly
ground their devilish practice of sacrificing their children upon this
commandment of God.

This admonition therefore teaches us to understand the commandment
following, as the question which our Savior propounded to Philip concerning
the feeding of five thousand men, Ioh. 6.5, 6. Whence shall we buy bread that
all these may eat: this he said tempting him, for himself knew what he was
purposed to do. So in this place God says to Abraham, Go offer thy son to
me for a burnt sacrifice. This he said tempting him, for himself knew what he
was purposed to do, viz. to try, and by trial to manifest Abraham's faith and
obedience, and to propound the same to all ages following as a most worthy
pattern to be followed. But whereas it is said that God tempted Abraham, for
so the words are ( haelohim nissah) and the Apostle speaking of this matter,
Hebr. 11.17. By faith (says he) Abraham (...), when he was tempted, offered
Isaac, diverse questions may not unprofitably be moved: and first whether God
tempts any man or not. For James says, chap. 1.13. that God tempts no man,
and therefore that no man (...) when he is tempted, may say that he is tempted
of God. And yet Moses here says that he tempted, and as the seventy
Interpreters read (...), and accordingly the Apostle Hebr. 11.17. means that
Abraham (...), when he was tempted, was tempted of God.

I answer by distinction, that temptations are either prouocations to evil,
or probations and trials. Of temptations as they are prouocations to evil, God
is not the author; neither does he tempt any unto sin, as James says, but
the devil as the principal, who is therefore called the tempter, (...), the
world and the flesh as his seruitours. For from the flesh, 1. Pet. 2.11. Iam.
1.14.
that is our own corruption, arise evil and noisome concupiscences which
fight against our soul, whereby we are tempted and stirred up to evil.

The world is said to tempt in respect of men in the world, or worldly things.
Men tempt either by words counselling, alluring, incensing and provoking to
sin, or by deed and example. Worldly things whereby men are tempted are either
the desires of the world drawing to evil, or the terrors of the world
withdrawing from good.

The devil tempts either immediately by casting bad motions as it were fiery
darts into men's hearts, Ephesians. 6.16
which are called his suggestions: or mediately by means, using either as his
instruments sometimes the flesh, that is our own corruption, which is as it
were the devils bawd prostituting the soul to his temptations, or the
mediation of other men sometimes friends sometimes foes, who are as it were the
devils brokers: or else as objects and occasions either the desires of the
world which he uses in respect of the (...), that is getting as baits of
sin, and in regard of (...), that is the using, as the snares of sin, or
the terrors of the world, which are as it were the devils bugbeares to scarre
us from weldoing. As touching these temptations therefore which are
prouocations to evil, we conclude with James 1.13. Let no man when he is
tempted say I am tempted of God: for God as he is (...) one that cannot be
tempted to evil, so he tempts no man, namely to evil.

But you will say, God tempts Abraham to kill his own son which is a sin,
and elsewhere he is said to harden men's hearts, to lead them into temptation,
etc.

Ans. Whether this particular whereunto Abraham was tempted were a sin or not,
I will anon discuss in the person of Abraham. In the mean time this general
assertion is to be retained, that God tempts, that is, provoke no man unto
sin.

Ob. Why then do we pray that he would not lead us, or as the word (...)
signifies, that he would not carry or bring us into temptation?

Answ. It is one thing to tempt, and another to lead into temptation: as it is
one thing to execute punishment on a malefactor, and another to deliver him
over to the executioner; the one is the act of the hangman, the other is the
act of the Judge. So the devil tempts and God leads into temptation. For
the better understanding whereof we are to know that there be three degrees of
the Lords dealing in this case. For first the Lord sometimes brings his
servants to be tempted, as it were his champions into the lists of the combat
to be encountered and tried, that his graces in them may appear, but not to be
foiled, and much less overcome or utterly vanquished. Thus our Savior Christ
was carried of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil,
Matthew. 4.1. Thus Job was permitted, yea and committed into the hands of Satan
to be tempted.

Secondly, the Lord sometimes delivers men to be tempted, and leaves them
for the instant to take a foil, either for a chastisement or a trial, that
they might be humbled at the sight of their own weakness, and be made more
circumspect for the time to come. Thus the Lord left Ezechias when the
Ambassadors of Babylon came unto him that he might tempt, that is, prove him,
and know, that is, make known all that was in his heart, 2. Chro. 32.31. The
like may be said of David and Peter when they fell.

Thirdly, the Lord sometimes delivers men over to the devil as his
executioner, or to their own lusts, not only to be tempted, but to be overcome
and to be carried headlong into sin, as a just punishment of their former
sins. For howsoever men thus given over do as it were take a felicity in
sinning, yet of all punishments that can befall a man in this life, Romans
1.24.26.28.
this is the most dreadful judgment. In this sense therefore God is said to
lead men into temptation, as also to harden men's hearts, not that he tempts,
that is, provoke any to sin, or infuseth sin into them, nor that he
hardens, that is, of soft makes hard, but that they being hard and in the
slavery of sin and Satan already, he gives them over for a just punishment
of their former sins, further to be hardened and enthralled: which hardness and
thraldom they further gather to themselves willingly, hardening their own
hearts, Exodus 15.32.
and committing sin with greedines. Ephe. 4.19.
It cannot therefore be proved that God tempts any, and yet it cannot be
denied but that in all temptations he has a stroke. For this is a certain
truth, that nothing can happen inscio aut inuito Deo, without Gods knowledge or
against his will. For his knowledge is omniscient, and nothing can escape it,
his will is omnipotent, and nothing can resist it. The devil therefore cannot
tempt a man, unless God would have him tempted; nor foil him, unless God
would have him foiled; nor vanquish him, unless God would have him vanquished.
And although the devil in tempting, and the man which yields to the
temptation do both sin; yet by their sins the Lord brings to pass his
own good work. As for example, the chastisement, trial, or amendment of his
servant, or the just punishment of the wicked. And howsoever the devil and
wicked men in respect of their will and endeavor rebelliously oppose themselves
against the will of God; yet the event is no other then God has appointed, God
in his infinite wisdom and almighty providence, so ouer-ruling the actions
of all his creatures, that when they think nothing less then to do the will
of God, they become his instruments unwittingly for the effecting of his
designs, as August. says ad Laurent. cap. 100. Hoc quippe ipso quod contra
Dei voluntatem fecerunt, de ipsis facta est voluntas Dei: But we must
distinguish betwixt the evil work of the bad instrument and the good work of
God, which by the evil instrument he brings well to pass, which is never
the worse for the bad instrument, as it is never the better for the good. As
for example, when a malefactor (whom the Magistrate perhaps suffers to go
unpunished) falls into the hands of thieves and is murdered, the judgment
of God upon him is no less just, then if he had been put to death by the
Magistrate. Albeit the instruments by whom this judgment is executed, are
wicked murderers. Thus through the envious sending of Joseph by his brethren,
who therein set themselves against the will of God revealed in Joseph's dreams,
the Lord in mercy sends him to be a father unto Pharao, and a fosterer of
his Church, Genesis 45.7. and 50.20. By the filthy incest shamefully committed
by Absalom, the Lord justly punishes the adultery of David, 2. Sam. 12.11.12.
By the treacherous, unjust, envious giving over of our Savior to death, by
Judas, Pilate, and the Priests, the Lord in unspeakable mercy gave his son
to death for us, Act. 2.23. and 4.28. So by the wicked and malitions
temptations of Satan, who therein seeks the ruin and perdition of the
faithful, the Lord furthereth their salvation, sometimes chastising them for
their amendment, sometimes trying their faith and obedience, sometimes
exercising them to humility and mortification of sin, always so onerruling
the malice of the devil, that even in his temptations, wherein he intends
nothing but their harm and destruction, he becomes (maugre his spite) the
instrument of God to further their salvation.

Thus then it appears that God tempts no man unto evil, and that howsoever
the Lord has a hand in all temptations which be unto evil, yet he works no
evil, but uses, orders, and disposes them unto good, and so ouerruleth all
his creatures, that when they intend and do evil to their own damnation,
they are the instruments of God to advance his glory and further the salvation
of the elect. The which doctrine as it ministers singular comfort to the
faithful, unto whose good al things, even the temptations of Satan, do work
together, Romans 8.28: So it serves to discover the devilish malice of the
Papists, and namely of the shameless author of the twelve Articles, who is not
ashamed to publish in print, that we not only make God the author of sin,
which is blasphemous, but the only cause of sin, and (that which the devil
would have bin ashamed to utter in his own person) that we make God worse
the^ the devil, Articl. 10. But I conclude this point with Fulgentius, ad
Monimum. lib. 1. page 57. Deus itaque licet author non sit malarum
cogitationum, ordinator est tamen malarum voluntatum, and de malo opere
cuiuslibet mali, non desinit ipse bonum operari: That is, God therefore
although he be not the author of evil thoughts, yet he is an orderer or
disposer of bad wills, and by the bad work of every wicked one, he cease
not to effect that which is good.

Hitherto we have spoken of the former kind of temptations which are
prouocations to evil, in which sense God tempts no man. The other kind are
probations or trials, in which sense God in diverse places of the Scripture is
said to tempt, that is, to try or to prove men, and that diversely, as we shall
hear anon.

But it will be said, that tentare, to tempt or try a man, is to take an
experiment of him that is tried, presupposing in him that te^pteth either
ignorance or doubting at the least: the former whereof is a privation or
absence, the latter a defect and want of knowledge; but neither is incident to
the alknowing God, who with one eternal view or act of understanding, does at
once perfectly and distinctly know al things that have been, are, or shall be.
It may therefore be demanded in the next place in what sense God is said, who
knows all men better then themselves, to tempt or prove them.

I answer, that tempting or proving does not always presuppose ignorance or
doubting in him that tempts. For there are two sorts of tempting or proving:
the one when a man tempts to take an experiment of that which he knew not,
or doubted of; as when a master tries the fidelity of his servant, or one
friend the good will of another, whereof he is not sufficiently persuaded. The
other, when one tempts, to cause the party tempted to give an experiment of
that which he already knows: as when a Schoolmaster calls forth one of
his best scholars, and apposeth him in such questions as he can answer. The
end of both indeed is experimental knowledge: but of the former, the knowledge
of him that tempts, that he may by experience know somewhat whereof before
he was ignorant or doubtful: of the latter, the knowledge, not of him that
tempts, but of him that is tempted, and also of others. In the former sense,
tempting cannot properly be attributed to God, yet improperly and after the
manner of men, it may. For even as God is said to be angry or sorry, or to
repent, Non quantum ad affectum, sed quantum ad effectum: Not in regard of the
affection which is not incident unto God, but of the effect, when he does that
which a man would do when he is angry, or sorry, or repents: So God may be
said to tempt metaphorically, when as after the similitude of a man he says or
does any thing whereby the mind and disposition of him that is tempted may
appear either to himself or to others. And as this is spoken here (...), that
is by a metaphore taken from men, so afterward verse. 12. when he says, now I
know, that is, now I have experience or experimental knowledge: for thereunto
tempting directly tends. But in the latter sense tempting may properly be
ascribed to God, who is then said to tempt, when he brings men into trial,
and causes them to give an experiment of that which is in them, that their
mind and disposition may be manifested, not to God (before whose eyes all
things, be they never so secret, are (...), that is, Heb. 4.13. Va^in. apud
^ez^m.
naked, and as it were cut through the back bone) but to themselves and to
others. In this sense God is said to have tempted Abraham, when he caused him
to give an experiment to the world of his excellent faith and obedience: and
answerably he is said verse. 12. now to know that Abraham feared God, when
Abraham had given a good experiment of it, as Procopius fitly expounds those
words, Nunc noui, i. nunc specimen eius rei dedisti eximium. And thus tempting,
which in the former sense is attributed to God (...) after the manner of men,
is according to the latter sense understood (...) as it beseems God, De
Sancta Trin. lib. 1.
as Athanasius speaks.

Now if it be further objected, that if God would take trial of Abraham's faith
and obedience, he should have tried him rather whiles he was younger, and
before he had given so many testimonies of his faith and obedience: for it may
seem strange that he would try a tried servant: I answer, according to that
which has been said, that God takes trial of his servants to another end
then men do. Men take trial of their servants, because they would have
experience olf their fidelity, which is not sufficiently known unto them. But
God, to whom the secrets of all hearts are known, needs not make trial of
men to this end, that he might learn something which before he knew not. But
he is said to try men, when he causes them to give experiments of that
which he perfectly knows, and that either to themselves or to others. To
themselves, for as Augustine well says, De tempor^ Sermon. 72.
Nescit se homo nisi in tentatione discat se: A man knows not himself
thoroughly, unless, by tentation he has experience of himself. For men many
times ouerweene their own gifts, and therefore God brings them into trial
that they may see their own weakness, that seeing it they may be humbled, and
being humbled they may be more fervent in prayer, more circumspect of their
ways, and as it were more jealous over their own hearts. Thus the Lord
afflicted the Israelites in the wilderness, that he might tempt them and know
what was in their hearts, whether they would observe his precepts or not: that
is, that by their afflictions and trials he might discover unto them their own
weakness and inability to keep his law, and that they by this means might be
driven unto Christ, Deuteronomy. 8.2. The like may be said of Ezechias, 2. Chron.
32.31. whom the Lord left to himself for a time, that he might tempt him and
know whatsoever was in his heart. On the other side, men sometimes excelling in
humility, are defective in tha^kfulnes, too much preiudging their own gifts,
and therefore the Lord brings them also to trial, that they seeing his
graces in themselves, may be thankful unto him for them. What shall we say
then? De tempore Sermon. 72.
Sic ergo ignarus est Deus. reru^ etc. (says Augustine) Is God therefore so
ignorant of humane affairs, so unacquainted with men's hearts, that he should
by tempting seek to find men? No, but that man should find himself. For (as
he also says) there are many things in a man hidden and unknown unto
himself, Ibid.
which are not manifested or made known, but in temptations. And as the Lord
by temptations makes men known to themselves, so also to others. First, in
respect of their frailty, that we by their example may become more
circumspect, especially if they whose example we behold, were better and
stronger then our selves. For if David, if Ezechias, if Peter, when they were
tempted, bewrayed their weakness, how had we need to watch and to pray that we
enter not into temptation? Matt. 26.41
Secondly, in respect of their faith and constancy, that we seeing their good
examples may both glorify God, and stir up our selves to their imitation.

But as touching the tried servants of God, such as Abraham and Job were, this
may be said in brief: that the Lord tries them, that his graces in them, as
their faith, love, obedience, constancy, patience, may be manifested not only
to themselves, both to minister comfort unto them, and to stir them up to
thankfulness, but especially to others, unto whom the Lord propounds them as
notable patterns to be imitated. For even as schoolemasters sometimes call
forth some of their most toward scholars, and take exact trial of them,
partly to approve their own pains, and partly to stir up their other
scholars to greater diligence: so the Lord makes choice of some of his
principal servants of whom he takes exquisit trial, to manifest his graces
in them, both to themselves and also to others, who comparing their own wants
with their perfections, and perceiving how far short they are of that
perfection which they are to aspire unto, may be stirred up to a daily increase
in piety. And to conclude this point with Augustine, Sermon. 72. de temp. where
having showed that Abraham was tempted, that he might be the better known to
himself, he adds: And if Abraham were known to himself, yet he had not
been known to us. Verily he was to be manifested either to himself or to us.
To himself, that he might know wherefore to give thanks: to us, that we
might know either what to beg of God, or what to imitate in the man.

So much may suffice to have spoken of the proposition: wherein we have
discussed these three questions: first, whether the Lord who is here said to
have tempted Abraham to kill his own son, does tempt any man unto evil: and
secondly, if the Lord tempt none to evil, then in what sense he is said to
tempt Abraham, namely to try or prove him: and thirdly, to what end the Lord,
who by himself knows all things, tempted and proved Abraham, which Augustine
briefly notes, De tempore sermon. 73.
Vt manifestetur mundo, qui iam notus fuerat Deo: That he might be manifested
to the world, who was already known to God.

Now we are to proceed to the narration, wherein this great trial of Abraham
is declared. And in the narration we are to consider two things, the actio^ of
God tempting, and the behavior of Abraham when he was tempted. The action of
God is twofold, his vocation or call, whereby he prepares Abraham to undergo
this trial, verse. 1. Secondly, his commandment, whereby he tries him, verse.
2. As touching the former: Seeing the thing here enjoined to Abraham, namely
that he should with his own hands kill his son Isaac, and offer him for a
burnt sacrifice, was in show not only most cruel and unnatural, but also
repugnant to the commandments and promises of God: therefore this is to be
presupposed as a most certain truth and taken for granted, that Abraham was as
certainly and infallibly assured, as a man can be certain of any thing, that
it was the Lord himself which gave him this commandment. For if Abraham could
but have suspected that it was not the Lord which spoke unto him; how easily
might he, yea and how resolutely ought he to have repelled this temptation, as
being not so likely to be a serious commandment of God, as an instigation of
Satan, who might seem thereby to provoke him to murder his only son, and by
sacrificing him to cut off the promises concerning the blessed seed of Isaac.
But the Lord so fully enlightened his mind, so powerfully affected his will,
so certainly assured him of the truth of this revelation, as that he could not
possibly once doubt thereof. To this end the Lord speaks familiarly to him
and calls him by his name, Abraham, that he might duly attend, and advisedly
consider who it was that spoke unto him: And then having received his answer,
Here am I, wherein Abraham showed himself not only assured of the person that
spoke to him, but also resolved to put in execution whatsoever he should
command: then I say he propounds the commandment, whereof I am now to
speak. But first with this protestation, that it contains the greatest
trial that ever any mere man was exercised withal, and indeed far greater
then I in my weakness am able to set forth unto you, according to the worthiness
of the matter. Neither are you to marvel hereat, as though the Lord dealt
hardly with Abraham whom thus hardly he tempted, nor yet to please your selves
that you are not tried after the same measure. For seeing the Lord is
faithful, and suffers none of his children to be tempted above their
strength, therefore he proportioneth their temptations and trials, God in
trying his servants observes a Geometrical proportion.
according to the measure of grace bestowed upon them. Hence it is that the
best servants of God have endured the greatest trials: and accordingly Abraham's
strongest faith is proved by the greatest trial, whereas the weaker faith of
others, is exercised by easier temptations. For what Schoolmaster that seeks
by trial to encourage or approve his scholar, and to commend him to others
(as the Lord does his tried servants) will appose a petite that learneth his A,
B, C, in Greek or in Hebrew? But trials are proportioned to men's strength, the
strongest faith has the greatest trials, the weakest faith has the least
trials, and where are no trials, it is a sign of no faith.

Now that Abraham's trial was exceeding great, it may evidently appear by
those two things whereby the greatness of trials is to be esteemed, to wit, the
deerenes of that which he was to forgo, and the hardness of that he was to
undergo. The sum of both is, that he was to sacrifice Isaac. The deerenes
of that which he was to forgo, is of purpose amplified by the Lord himself to
increase the trial, in four degrees, plainly distinguished in the original
text. Take now (says he) eth bincha, thy son, eth iehidcha, thy only son,
asher ahabta, whom thou love, eth ijtscak, even Isaac, and offer him for a
burnt sacrifice. Take thy son, thine only son, whom thou love, even
Isaac. Alas, what needed all these words? had it not bin sufficient to break
his heart, to have said, take thy son and offer him, but he must be put in
mind that he was his only son whom he loved, even Isaac his joy? But the
Lord having given him strength to bear, lays load upon him, and by every
word which is added, he adds to the weight.

For a father to lose his son, especially by death, and that violent death, it
is a greater grief the^ any man can conceive that is not a father, such a (...)
or natural love God has implanted in parents, who therefore desire to die
before their children, and exceedingly grieve if they survive them; but
especially in godly parents, and heroical natures, wherein these (...) are
most effectual; but most especially in Abraham, in whom this (...) did excel,
who as he had long wanted, so did he most earnestly desire, and highly esteem
of a son, in so much that without him he little esteemed of all outward
blessings besides. For whereas God had by his promise (Genesis 15.1.2.) encouraged
him, Fear not, Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thine exceeding great reward. O
Lord God (says he) what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? And
therefore to lose him whom he so greatly desired, and highly esteemed, must
needs in all likelihood be an exceeding great grief unto him. How did David
lament the death of Absalom his rebellious son, when he wept and said, O my
son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee! O
Absalom, my son, my son! 2. Sam. 18.33. How did Jacob mourn for the
supposed death of Joseph, Genesis 37.34.35. he rent his clothes, and put
sackcloth about his loins, and sorrowed for a long season, and when all his
sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, he would not be comforted, but
said, Surely I will go down into the grave to my son, mourning? And how
again was he revived, when he understood that Joseph was not dead, Genesis
45.28. where it is noted, that the spirit of Jacob revived, And Israel said, I
have enough, Joseph my son is yet alive. And yet Jacob and David had many
other sons, whose presence might comfort them in the absence of any one that
they missed. But Abraham was to forgo his only son, which is the second
degree to increase his grief. For of many to have offered any one to God, as
it were the first fruits of his children, as Philo speaks, it had been a
less matter: but having but one, and no hope of more by Sara, his only wife,
to give him was to forgo all, and with him all hope of posterity, which might
have pierced his heart with unspeakable grief. Therefore the Scriptures when
they would signify the greatest sorrow that may be, they use to compare it to
the sorrowing of a father for his only son, Amos 8.10. Zach. 12.10. And as
this might have caused great grief, so it required great love, not only to
forgo, but willingly to forgo his only son. For this was a figure of Gods
love to us, which in the Scriptures is worthily noted to be exceeding great,
because he has given his only begotten son for us, Ioh. 3.16. Romans 8.32. 1.
Ioh. 4.9.10. But both his love of God and cause of grief for his son may
greatly be amplified, if you consider in what respects he is called his only
son. For in this word, as Calvin speaks, there was repetitus ictus, a doubled
and trebled stroke, which might have wounded his heart. For he is called the
only son, first in respect of Sarai, who in regard of him was called Sarah,
with promise that she should be a mother of Kings and of nations, as Abram also
by the addition of the same letter (he) was called Abraham, to signify that
he should be a father of many nations, Genesis 17.5.15. and to put him in mind
of this promise, which is crossed by the commandment, verse. 2. the Lord
calls him by his name, Abraham, verse. 1. Secondly, he is called his only
son simply, after the sending away of Ismael, whereunto the Lord in these
words seems to have relation, to gall his mind with the memory of his
putting away of Ismael, whom also he dearly loved. As though he would signify
unto him, that he was not contented to have caused him to put away Ismael the
son of the bondwoman, whom also he loved; leaving unto him Isaac alone; but
he will have him forgo Isaac too, the only child which he had, or could look
to have by Sarah, in respect of whose seed notwithstanding both he and she
were promised to be the parents of nations and Kings.

But although Abraham loved Ismael dearly, yet he loved him but a little in
comparison of Isaac, and therefore that is added in the third place, whom thou
love. Indeed if he had been a son whom either he had not loved, or loved
but with an ordinary love, the trial had been the easier: but now the Lord
tried him in that which was nearest and dearest unto him, for Abraham (as
Josephus speaks) (...) loved Isaac with more then an ordinary love: This was
says Philo, lib. de Abrah. (...), the most forcible motive of love because as
he says, (...), parents dote as it were, upon those which are late borne. De
tepore Sermon. 73.
first, because he was the child of his old age: for (as Philo says) parents
exceedingly love those which are late borne, and this is noted to have been the
cause of Jacob his extraordinary love toward Joseph, Genesis 37. verse. 3. The
reason is (says Philo) either because they have long desired them, or because
they look for no more: this therefore much increases the trial in that as
Augustine notes, Iubetur filium victimare, solatiu^ paternae senectutis, and
vnicu^ pignus posteritatis: qui quanto serior, tanto dulcior: He is commanded
to sacrifice his Son, the solace of his Fathers old age, and the only pledge
of posterity: who the later he was borne, the sweeter he was to his parents.
Secondly, because he was the son of the freewoman, Gal. 4.22.23
and therefore not only his legitimate son, but that son with whom and
whose seed the Lord had promised to establish his everlasting covenant, Genesis
17. verse. 19. Thirdly, because he was much desired, long expected, and after
many delays (which increase the desire Pro. 13.5.1^) and by many earnest
prayers at the length obtained. Fourthly, because he was given him of God by
miracle* above the course of nature, as a pledge of Gods love to him. Fifthly,
because he was a virtuous, gracious and obedient son; which appeared in the
voluntary submitting himself to God and his father even unto death, as being
therein a type of Christ. And lastly, which I touched before, because he was his
only child. For love divided among many is not so fervent. And yet these
three degrees, to forgo his son, his only son, whom he loved, are nothing
to the last. For it was Isaac that he was to lose, Isaac the joy of his heart,
Isaac the pledge of Gods love, the reward of his faith, the earnest of his
salvation, of whom it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, in whose
death the promise not only of posterity, but also of the Messiah who was to
come of him, might seem to be repealed and brought to nothing. And therefore
with him the Church who was to come of him, might seem to dye, and in his
loss concurred in all appearance the loss of salvation both to himself and to
all the heirs of promise. For no salvation but by Christ, who according to the
promise of God, was to come of Isaac. In the former degrees Abraham was to
contend with nature and with natural affection, (...), Philo.
which I confess is hard to do: but in this he was to contend with grace, and
to oppose himself to the word and promise of God. Why, to bid him offer Isaac,
was as much in appearance as to bid him rend in pieces Gods covenant, to
renounce all assurance of Gods love, to destroy the Church as it were in the
shell, and to cut off all hope of salvation by Christ.

And thus have we considered the deerenes of the person, whom Abraham was
willingly to forgo: now we are to consider the hardness of the action which
he was to perform, which indeed appears to have been very hard in respect
both of his affection to his son, and of his allegiance unto God. And in both
respects the hardness may be showed, both by the substance of the work it
self, and the circumstances thereunto belonging. The work as you have heard
was, that he should offer up his son unto God for a burnt sacrifice. The
circumstance is twofold, of time and place. The time, both when this
commandment was given, and when it was to be performed. It was given (says
the holy Ghost) in the first words of the chapter, After these things, which
have relation to the matters contained in the last chapter, although not to the
last words of the chapter. That is, after the Lord had commanded Abraham to put
away Ismael, and had given him many notable promises in Isaac, concerning the
multiplying of his seed which should inherit the land of promise, and the
blessing of all nations in the promised seed, and for a pledge of his love had
given him many temporal blessings, insomuch that Kings were desirous to enter
into league with him. So that now Abraham after Ismael was gone rested wholly
upon Isaac, and as himself lived in great prosperity and favor of God; so he
took this to be his greatest felicity, that he was to leave Isaac behind him
the heir of his happiness, and the inheritour of the favor and promises of
God: insomuch that now Isaac being grown to man's estate (for now he was as
Josephus says 25. years old, as others 33. as the Seder Olam, 37) he began to
bethink him of providing a wife for him, that the promise concerning his seed
might be performed (as may be gathered by the last event mentioned in this
chapter, whereby the Lord to gratify his desire, gave him hope of a wife out of
his own kindred) after these things I say, when Abraham was in the height of
his prosperity, and in the top of his felicity, resting wholly upon Isaac,
and living in certain expectation of the accomplishment of the promises made in
him, even then the Lord propounds unto him this commandment, which might
cross all these promises, cut off his happiness, and overthrow all his
expectation. This circumstance does greatly increase the trial, which had been
far easier, if this commandment had been given before the eiecting of
Ismael, with whom alone Abraham could have been contented, as may be gathered
out of Genesis 17.18: before he had received such promises, or conceived such
hope of the performance thereof in Isaac, or had tasted so plentifully of Gods
blessings, which now he hoped to leave to Isaac, as the inheritour of his
happiness, and of Gods favor: for the more a man has to leave to his child,
the more he is grieved if he lose his only child.

As touching the time when this commandment was to be performed: he must take
him presently without further respite: for so he says, Take now, verse. 2. but
he must offer him three days after, verse. 4. that is, although this work was
most hard, in man's judgment most unreasonable, and in show most cruel and
barbarous: yet he must deny himself and his own reason, and without further
consultation not only resolve to do it, but also address himself to this
work. But having once resolved, and being entered into the action, he should
not offer him until the third day. He might have bidden him presently to
dispatch, to rid him of this care and grief, or if he would needs have him
go into the country of Moriah, (because there was the place which after he
would choose for his worship and service, 2. Chron. 3.1. where also our Savior
offered himself upon the cross, of which sacrifice this immolation of Isaac
was a type) yet he might have concealed it from him, as Abraham in his fatherly
care concealed it from Isaac, until he came to the place, because he would
not macerate his son with a tedious expectation of death. The which
circumstance also does add great weight to the trial, especially if you
consider the manifold exceptions, which his own knowledge set on work by his
affection could object, and the cunning obiectio^s which Satan would suggest,
and those diverse occurrents which might happen in the mean space, especially
the continual company of Isaac, whom he could not behold without great
remorse, his sweet conversation and amiable speeches, which might make him
relent. So that by this delay Abraham's faith and constancy was strongly
assaulted, and his heart being resolute was macerated with the expectation of
this dreadful sacrifice. It is truly said, Acerbissima est mora quae trahit
paenam: And many times the long expectation of death, is worse then death it
self.

The place also, howsoever in general terms it was declared that it should be
one of the hills in the country of Moriah, which was distant from Beersheba,
where Abraham received this charge, and whither he returned unto his family,
verse. 19. as Lyra says 20. leagues, as Luther and others 10. Germane miles:
yet in particular the place was not defined: but for the greater trial of his
faith and obedience (as in his calling out of Vr, Heb. 11.8.) left indefinit.
For if on an hill, then he might think not in an obscure and secret, but an
open and conspicuous place; and perhaps in the presence or view he knew not of
whom, and therefore he could not tell what either danger or offense he might
incur, by sacrificing his son there. And whereas he came not to the place
before the third day, you may think, either that the place was so far
distant, as that an old man of 125. years or upward, traveling on foot, with
an ass laden with all necessaries both for the sacrifice and their own
provision, could with conuenie^cie come thither no sooner, especially being to
travel leisurely, that he might the better meditate and advise of that which
he went about; or if he came into the country sooner, that the Lord for his
greater trial held him in suspense, not showing him the hill before the third
day. So that by the circumstance of time and place, it appears that Abraham
had time enough to bethink him, that if he had not been very resolute, he
might have desisted from this enterprise.

Now as I said, the work it self was very hard to be performed of him,
whether you consider his affection to his son, or his allegiance to God. For
as touching the former, it had been a sore matter, as I showed before, only to
have forgone his son, as appears by his forgoing Ismael, chap. 21.11. and
Jacob his unwilling forbearing of Beniamins presence for a time, Ge^. 42.38.
especially being his only son, the son who^ he loved even Isaac the joy of
his heart; more especially to have forgone him by death, and that a violent
death (for the true parent 1. King. 3.27. desired rather to lose her child
altogether, then have half of him dead) but most especially seeing his death
seemed to annihilate the promises of God, not only concerning the
multiplication of the Church, but also concerning the salvation of the faithful
by Christ, who was to come of Isaac: to consent unto his death had been more
grievous, having consented to deliver him to death had been doleful, to be
present thereat had been more woeful. The eloquent Poet Euripides, and the
cunning Painter Timanthes, Iphigen. Plin. 35.10.
were no otherwise able to express the doleful countenance of Agamemnon,
being present at the sacrificing of his daughter Iphigenia, then by covering
his face: because howsoever they could decipher the mourning countenance and
doleful behavior of her other friends, See Tully in Oratore.
and that in diverse degrees, yet they perceived, neither pen nor pencill could
express the grief of a father being present at the death of his child. What
then shall we say to this work enjoined Abraham, that he should not only
consent to his sons death, nor to deliver him to others by them to be
sacrificed, nor to be present only thereat, which few men could endure (for my
part says Luther on this place, Ego non potuissem esse spectator, nedum actor
and mactator: I could not have been a beholder, much less an actor or
slaughterer) but also that with his own hands he should kill his own son,
who was more dear unto him then his own life. And how should he kill him? as
a burnt sacrifice: that is, first he was to bind him and to lay him upon the
altar, then to cut his throat, after he was to sprinkle his blood round about
upon the altar, Leuit. 1.5.11
then was he to cut him in pieces, and having pulled out his entrails, and
washed them in water, he was to burn all on the altar, himself making and
tending the fire, and putting every part as it should fall out from the rest
into the fire again, until all were consumed to ashes: which is signified by
the phrase of speech which God uses, vehagnalehu sham legnolah, and make him
ascend there (namely in smoke) as a whole burnt offering, whereof nothing
remains but ashes. And all this was to be performed of a most tender hearted
father in his own person, to his dear and only child. Whose bowels earne not
to think of this fact, who would not swoune to see it, who would not dye
rather then do it? And not only his affection toward his son might have
hindered him from this act, but much more his allegiance to God, even his
obedience and his faith which here the Lord tried. And whereas in other
temptations the word of God is our helmet of salvation to defend our selves,
Ephesians. 6.17.
and the sword of the spirit to offend our enemies; in this temptation Abraham
found the greatest opposition against him in the commandments and promises of
God. And surely (beloved) if God assault us with his word, wherewith in other
temptations he does arm us, how shall any man hope to stand? And yet this was
Abraham's case. For if Abraham would show himself obedient to the law of God,
then should he not do that which was in it self unlawful, and unnatural,
dishonorable to God and scandalous to men. But this fact was condemned by the
law of God, who as he forbids the shedding of innocent blood, Genesis 9.6. so
he allows it not in sacrifices. Sacrificing of men. Psalm. 106.37
But (...) which was acceptable to the Gods of the Heathen, who were devils,
was most abominable to the Lord. As for him, Augustine says De temp. Sermon. 73.
Deus pro nobis iussit filiu^ suu^ occidi, non nostros immolari: God commanded
his son to be slain for us, and not ours to be sacrificed. And if homicide
be condemned, can parricide be allowed?

It was unnatural, and against the law of nature for a father to kill his
guiltless child: for even the brute beasts themselves do love and cherish
their own brood. Dishonorable to God, as though he delighted in such cruel
and unnatural sacrifices, or as though he would have men show their religion
by committing parricide. Scandalous in respect of the Canaanites, amongst whom
there was yet no such practice, as Philo says, who might have condemned his
religion, and abhorred his God for this one practice. Scandalous in respect of
posterity, who would be ready to imitate his example. For even hypocrites, if
outward service would serve their turn, Mich. 6.7.
would not stick to offer the fruit of their body, for the sin of their
soul. Scandalous to his servants, who would either have bound him for a mad
man, or finding him in his wits have detested him and his profession as bloody
and barbarous. But scandalous especially to Sarah his wife, who how she would
have taken the slaughter of her most dearly beloved and only son, in regard
of whom she was called Sarah, a Princess, and promised to be the Queenemother
of the Princes and people of God, and the great grandmother of the Messiah,
who^ God had given her by miracle, especially being committed by Abraham
himself, and without her priuitie and consent, I leave it to your wisdoms to
judge. For if Zipporah when she was appointed by Moses only to circumcise her
son, did cast the foreskinne at his feet, and said, Thou art indeed a
bloody husband unto me: and thereupon (as Tremellius and Iunius note upon
Exodus 4.25. and 18.2.) in a rage refused to go any further with him: in what a
case do you think would Sara have been, when she should have understood, that
Abraham with his own hands had killed her only son, and in that manner
which before I have described. And shall Abraham now show his obedience in
doing that which in it self was unjust, unnatural, dishonorable to God, and
scandalous to men? And as touching his faith, if Abraham would approve
himself to be faithful and to believe the promises of God, then will he not
commit that, whereby in all appearance the promises are overthrown. The
promises were principally two: the first concerning the multiplication of the
Church in Isaacs posterity, which was to inherit the land of Canaan: the
second, concerning the salvation of the faithful in all nations, by the
promised seed* which is Christ, who according to the promise was to come of
Isaac. And shall Abraham now approve his faith, by killing Isaac, and consuming
him to ashes? Nay rather this might seem a voluntary extinguishing of ye
Church, and a wilful renouncing of salvation by Christ. Did thou believe
Abraham in the promised seed, and was this thy faith imputed unto thee for
righteousness, and can it now stand with thy faith to kill Isaac, in whom alone
thou have these promises? In Isaac shall thy seed be called, chap. 21.12. With
Isaac and his seed (says the Lord) chap. 17. will I establish mine everlasting
covenant, etc. Do thou believe to be saved by Christ, who was to come of
Isaacs seed, and will thou with thine own hands kill him, of whom he is to
come?

And this was the trial whereby God proved Abraham's faith and obedience. Now
let us consider how Abraham approved himself in this trial. For howsoever
this trial was exceeding great, yet was not he tried above the strength which
God had given him. And first consider how he approves his obedience. For
Abraham behaueth not himself, as any one of us would perhaps have done in the
like case, alleging for himself and his son: Alas he is my son, mine
only son, whom I dearly love, even Isaac the joy of my heart, without whom
I can neither look for the multiplication of a blessed seed, nor salvation by
the Messiah who is to come of him: if therefore I should but forgo him, it
were death to me, if I should consent and be present at his slaughter, it were
worse than death: if I my self should shed his innocent blood and bereave him
of his precious life, if I should butcherlike slaughter him and cruelly burn
his beloved body to ashes, it were a hell unto me in respect of that affection
which I do, and as I am a father ought to bear him. Besides, this stands
not with mine obedience to God, to commit such an act which is so unjust,
unnatural, dishonorable to God, and scandalous to man; nor yet with my faith
in his promises, to kill him in whom they are made; and therefore I will rather
die then I will thus deprive my self of my son, the world of the Church
which is to be his seed, or the faithful of their Savior which is to come of
him. But Abraham although in his fatherly affection he were as tender hearted
as the best of us, and in his wisdom did see and consider all these
impediments; yet notwithstanding he was content to deny his affection, yea and
his reason, and to perform simple and absolute obedience to God. For he might
think; God has revealed his will unto me in this commandment, so as I
cannot possibly doubt but that it is the oracle of God; to this will of God
therefore must I submit my self. What though Isaac be dear to me, yet I must
not love him more then God; yea, for Gods sake I must be willing to forgo him.
God has promised his son to me, and shall I deny my son to him? And what
though it shall seem an unjust thing to kill my guiltless son, yet I am
sure it is more unjust not to obey God. And although I am to be unwilling to
sacrifice my son, if it pleased God otherwise, yet must I be more unwilling
to disobey God. And what though it seem unlawful and contrary to the law of
God, yet I know it is not. Indeed to kill a man upon a private motion, without
sufficient warrant and authority, is fearful murder: but I have sufficient
authority, yea an express commandment from God, and therefore so far shall
I be from sinning if I sacrifice Isaac, as that I shall fearfully sin, if I
do it not. But you will say, has not God forbidden the shedding of innocent
blood? Yea, but the Lord who is the supreme lawgiuer, has this prerogative
royal to dispense with his own laws, and may if it please him command things
above the common course of justice; his will, which is the rule of justice,
having this privilege, that whatsoever he wills is therefore just, it being
a mere impossibility that he who is goodness and justice it self, should
either will or do any thing which is not just; and consequently all his
commandments are to be understood with this exception or restraint, Nisi Deus
aliter voluerit, Unless God appoint otherwise. As for example, the law
forbidding manslaughter is thus to be understood, unless God appoint or
authorize a man to kill, as the lawful Magistrate, and the warrior in lawful
battle. This particular commandment therefore given unto me of God, is my
sufficient warrant to sacrifice my son, the general commandment to the
contrary notwithstanding. August. de temp. ser. 72.
And therefore to conclude, Attendis quis feriat, and quem feriat? attend quis
iubeat: Do you mark who strikes, and whom he strikes? mark also who
commands, and acknowledge with me that the bare show and appearance of sin,
should not drive me into a manifest and apparent sin. Besides, God almighty
is a sovereign Lord over all his creatures, having absolute authority of life
and death, who may kill or preserve, or any ways dispose of his own as
pleases him, Matthew. 20.15. and therefore if he will he may justly take away
the life of any man by what means he pleases, although there were no cause of
death in him. But there is also cause of death in my son, and in all men
since the fall, seem they never so innocent. For as in Adam all have sinned,
1. Cor. 15.22
and have made our selves subject to death: so the Lord may justly, when it
pleases him, take us out of this life, and by what means it pleases him.
Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto all men once to dye, and this debt we owe to God in
respect of our sin, which debt also he may claim when it pleases him.
Neither may he be thought to deal hardly with my son or any of his
children, whose days he shortneth, seeing he recompenceth their mortal life
with immortality.

And what though he be my son, yet seeing I have the commandment of God to
offer him, this ought to be an inducement to me, rather then otherwise. For if
he were a stranger or my servant, I might well suspect my self, lest by any
sinister affection I were moved to enterprise this work. But seeing it is my
son, whom I love above all things but God, Foelix orbis soret, si omnes fic
fierem parricidae. Zeno. Veronens.
nothing but the pure love of God could persuade me to offer him.

And lastly, what though many inconveniences are like to follow? what though I
shall seem to cut off the promises as it were at the root, yet my duty is
not to be a quariste to dispute of Gods commandment, but simply to obey his
will, and to commit the event to God.

And as his obedience was absolute and simple, so also resolute and serious, as
appears by these particulars: first, in that he acquainted not Sara or any
other with his purpose, by whose persuasions and entreaties he might perhaps
have been hindered. Secondly, that when he saw the place a far off, he would
not suffer his two servants to go with him, verse. 5. lest perhaps they would
have hindered him, condemning him of dotage: of which excuse an vnresolute man
would have been glad. Thirdly, in that he binds Isaac: for although Isaac
when he understood the will of God willingly submitted himself, when as for
his strength he might easily have resisted (for he was of years 25 at the
least, Neither must that trouble us that he is called Nagnar, verse. 5. which is
translated a child, for so are the two servants called, verse. 3.5. (whom Philo
supposes to have been (...), the ancientest in the family) and Joshua when he
was (as the Hebrews think) 56. years old, Exodus 33.11. and David's soldiers
2. Sam. 1.15.
when his father was 125, of strength sufficient to carry, and that up the
hill, wood enough to consume himself to ashes) yet lest any thing might have
happened at the very instant, through the natural fear of present death,
which is common to all, and natural commotion of the parts and members of the
body, struggling against the sense of pain, he thought good to prevent the
worst. And so resolute was Abraham's purpose to sacrifice his son, as that the
Lord esteemed it as done. For so he says, verse. 16. Because thou have done
this thing, and have not spared thine only son: And the Apostle Heb. 11.17.
plainly affirms, that Abraham when he was tempted, offered his son. To
which purpose some expound those words, verse. 19. that he received him from
the dead by a similitude: for so resolute was Abraham's purpose to offer him, as
that in his opinion, who not once suspected a trial, Isaac was but a dead man.
When as therefore he was spared by the commandment of God, he esteemed it as
if he had received him from the dead.

3. It was ready and speedy. For although there were many difficulties, as
you have heard, and many impediments to hinder him, yet was not he long in
resolving, and in ouercomming them. Who would not have bin daunted and amazed
at such a charge? who would not have been at his wits end? who would not at the
least have sought delays, or desired respite? But Abraham early in the same
morning arises, verse. 3. and presently addresseth himself to this work.

4. And although it were speedy, yet was it not headie and for a brunt, but
discreet, courageous, and constant. His discreet carriage of this action
appears in all the particular actions and speeches mentioned in this
narration, which Moses has to this purpose particularized, as yt he provided
wood and other necessaries, that he loaded an ass with wood and food, that he
took two of his servants to attend him, and so of the rest; all which he did
to so good end and purpose, as that it might appear that this his behavior
was not a fantastical fit, or melancholy mood, but a discreet and temperate
action, undertaken with due advice and mature deliberation, managed by rare
wisdom and singular discretion. And therefore the Lord delaied the execution
of this work unto the third day, that he might not only prove, but also
approve the obedience of Abraham in this behalf, as being not performed on a
sudden motion, or unadvisedly, but with advised deliberation.

His courage and constancy appears in this, that having once resolved, and
being entered into this action, nothing could hinder him from effecting the
same, but the voice of God from heaven: not the affection to his son, not his
sweet company; not his amiable speech, verse. 7. which might have moved a heart
of flint, Chrysostom. tom. 2. ser. 33
when as Isaac hostia, de hostia patrem interrogat: Isaac being the sacrifice,
questioneth with his father concerning the sacrifice, and receives this
answer, God will provide, my son; not the consideration of the contrary
commandments of God, or repugnancie of the promises: but steadfastly persisteth
in his course. And having already travailed two days, enduring al occurrents
in the mean time, which beating upon him as waves upon a firm rock were
dashed and repelled: and now seeing the place, the sight whereof might have
daunted him; and having commanded his servants to stay with the ass, A caption
in respect of their understanding, taking that properly which was spoken by a
Synecdoche ( we will return) and a prophecy in respect of the holy Ghost
directing his speech according to the event.
using a cunning speech unto them, that they for want of a beast to be
sacrificed, should suspect nothing; without show of passion and perturbation,
with cheerful countenance and constant mind he perfourmeth all those actions
which were the forerunners of the sacrifice, every one representing unto him
the death and slaughter of his son, which was to be committed by himself: He
lays the wood upon his son (as the cross was laid on Christ) with purpose
(tender heart) to burn him upon it, himself takes the fire and the knife in
his hand, a knife and fire, the sight whereof, if you respect his intent, might
have cut his heart, and burnt his entrails: and so they two went together,
which ye holy Ghost has twice noted, ver. 6.8. partly to move compassion in
the hearer, when he should consider this couple who they were, with what mind
and to what end they went together, the innocent and obedient son suspecting
nothing, carrying wood to burn himself, and a kind and loving father, carrying
a knife to kill his son, and fire to burn him that was deerer unto him then
his own life. Such a passage (says Luther) is not to be found again in all
the Scriptures: and partly to note the invincible constancy of Abraham, who
having left his two servants behind, and being not only occasioned by his sons
speech, which could not but go near him, but also importuned as it were by
the opportunity of the solitary place to utter his grief (which otherwise a
man would think should have burst his heart) notwithstanding he neither sends
Isaac before, nor bids him come after, either that he might have less cause
of grief if he were not present and in his sight, or more opportunity to
grieve if he were a little absent and out of his hearing, but without show of
passion accompanies him to the very place, where he builds an Altar,
coucheth the wood, uses no doubt some effectual speech to persuade his son,
when it cannot be sufficiently marueiled how he could persuade himself: having
persuaded him, he binds him after the manner of sacrifices, Ne impatientia
doloris victima calcitraret: Less through impatience of grief his sacrifice
should kick or sting, as Augustine says: having bound him hand and foot, he
lays him on the Altar upon the wood, Sermon. 73. De tempere
stretches out his hand, takes his knife with purpose presently, I tremble to
speak it, presently I say to cut his throat, to dismember his body, and after
to set fire to the wood, that as a whole burnt offering he might be consumed,
leaving nothing to himself in appearance of all his hopes and expectations but
a few ashes. But blessed be God, in the very nicke as he was giving the fatal
wound, as appears by the sudden cry of the Angel, Abraham, Abraham, he is
stayed from his purpose, and commended for his obedience; even as if he had
sacrificed his son, the Lord (to whom obedience is more acceptable then
sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22.) accepting of the sincere will and earnest endeavor
of his servant for the deed it self.

But although Abraham's obedience was singular, yet his faith, which was the
ground of his obedience and his victory in the temptation, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
was more wonderful: and therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 11.17. By faith he
offered Isaac. For Abraham had received a double oracle from God, the one a
promise concerning Isaacs seed, the other a commandment concerning the
burning of him to ashes before he had any seed. These 2. oracles in man's reason
are contrary one to another, and nothing but faith can reconcile them. How
then was Abraham to behave himself in this repugnancie of Gods oracles? He
knew certainly that the commandment was the word of the Lord, and therefore
resolved whatsoever should come of it, to obey it, and to commit the event to
God; and of the promise he could not doubt, but that it also was the very
oracle of God, and therefore resolved to believe it, assuring himself that
although Isaac before he had any seed were consumed to ashes, yet
notwithstanding God would perform his promises concerning Isaacs seed. But
how can this be? If Isaacs seed must inherit the land of Canaan, and Christ
himself must come of his seed, then must he live until he have seed, and not
be consumed to ashes before he have any: if he die and be burnt to ashes before
he have seed, according to the commandment, how shall his seed be
multiplied, or Christ come of it, according to the promise? Yet such was
Abraham's faith that he assuredly believed, that although Isaac were consumed to
ashes before he had any seed, yet the promise concerning his seed should be
performed: and in this assurance of faith in the promise, he readily,
resolutely and constantly obeyed the commandment. But how could he obey the
one, and yet believe the other, seeing the one is contrary to the other? I
answer, Abraham assuredly believed that God as he is true and faithful, and
therefore willing to keep his promise: so in respect of his omnipotent power
and alsufficiencie he is able to make good his word, being indeed able to do
any thing, but to deny himself or to go back from his word. And therefore
doubted not but that as he had received his soon from the dead and barren
womb of Sara, as similitude of death (for thus those words Heb. 11.19. may
also be expounded) so also the Lord would in respect of his truth and
faithfulness, and could in respect of his power, even out of those ashes
restore him unto life, that his seed might be multiplied, and all nations of
the earth might account themselves happy in his blessed seed. And this is
testified by the Apostle, Heb. 11.17.18.19. By faith (says he) Abraham offered
up Isaac when he was tempted, and he that had received the promises (which were
to be fulfilled in his son and his posterity) offered his only begotten
son. To who^ it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. (...)
For he considered, or rather concluded, that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead, from whence he received him also after a sort. For as Procopius
says, he pondered in his mind that saying of the Apostle, that God who had
made Sarah of barren fruitful, could also raise up Isaac from the dead: And
therefore as Augustine says, he believed when Isaac was to be borne, Sermon. de
temp. 72.
and mourns not for him when he was to die: his hand is lifted up to
sacrifice him that he might be dead, whose heart was lifted up to believe that
he might be borne. Abraham doubted not to believe when Isaac was promised: he
doubted not to offer him when he was required again: neither was his religion
in believing, contrary to his devotion in obeying. And again, Credidit
suscepturus filium, credidit occisuru^: He believed when he was to beget his
son, he believed when he was to kill him, vbique fidelis, nusquam crudelis,
every where faithful, no where cruel. And therefore, as another says, In spe
non denegabat Deo, quod contra spem acceperat ab eo. In hope he denied not to
God, which against hope, he had received from him.

And thus by undoubted faith in the truth and power of God Abraham reconciled
the repugnancie betwixt the commandment and the promise, and so approved his
singular obedience to the one, and his admirable faith in the other* and in
respect of both is propounded to us and to all posterity, as a most notable
pattern to be imitated. For beloved, we are to know that these things they
were written for our profit, and therefore we must not be idle hearers of this
story concerning Gods proving, and Abraham's approving his faith and obedience,
but we are to apply the same to our use and edification.

And first from Gods proving of Abraham, we are to learn that it is his manner
to try the sons of men, and by trial to make known what is in them, that
men might labor aforehand to be sound, and to lay a good foundation against
the day of trial. For if men be endued with grace, the Lord will not have it
smothered, but by trial to be manifested to his glory, their comfort, and
good example of others. If men be unsound, and lead their life as it were upon
a stage, he will by trial unmask them, that their hypocrisy may be detected
and detested. And although none may look in these days to be tempted as
Abraham was, by a particular commandment from God (because howsoever the Lord
in former times spoke (...), at sundry times and many ways to the Fathers,
yet in these latter times he has spoken last unto us by his son, Heb. 1.1.
(and we are not to look for extraordinary revelations and apparitions, but to
hearken to the Son of God speaking unto us in the Word) notwithstanding we
must look to be tried by some other means. Eccles. 2.1. My son, if thou will come into the service of God, prepare thy soul to temptation.


Gods trials are either of the right hand, as some distinguish them, or of the
left. Of the right hand are his temporal blessings, either offered unto us, or
conferd upon us. In respect of temporal blessings offered, he tries us
whether we will make conscience in the gathering and getting of them, as he
tried the Israelites in the gathering of Manna. Exodus 16.4. For if, when any
worldly commodity is offered to our desire, we make no conscience how we
compass it, whether by lying and falsehood, or any other sinful means, we
show our selves to he carnal and profane, seeing for every trifle of the
world we are ready to sell our souls to the devil: when as indeed the gain
of the whole world (if thou could get it) will not counteruaile the loss of
thy soul. And therefore if we were good Christians indeed, and citizens of
heaven we would be resolved not to sin, and by sin to hazard the loss of our
souls, though we may gain the whole world, Mar. 8.3.6. And as God tries, so
Satan tempeth us by worldly commodities offered, using them as his baits to
allure us to sin: and therefore we are to be assured, that when we got them
by unlawful means, we do with them swallow the hook of the devil.

As touching the blessings bestowed, the Lord tries us in respect of the use:
whether we will make conscience of employing the^ according to his appointment,
remembering that we are but his stewards even of these outward gifts, who must
give him an account, how we have disposed the goods committed to our trust: as
namely, whether we are ready to expose and communicate them to the public
uses of the Church and commonwealth, and to the private necessities of our
brethren, as our ability shall afford, and their necessity require* For (that
I may speak a little of this point, the place wherein I speak requiring it at
my hands, and the time wherein we live giving me but too just occasion, the
charity of many waxing cold) when we having wealth are made acquainted with
others wants, the Lord tries our love, and he tries our fidelity. Our love,
first to God, namely whether we love him or the world more. And we are to know
that God uses to try us in those things which we love, as in this example of
Abraham: for he loves not God aright, who thinks any thing too dear for
him. Whosoever therefore having this worlds good, sees his brother have need,
and shuts up his compassion from him (whom he ought to relieve for Gods
sake) how dwells the love of God in him, says John, 1. Epist. 3.17. Such a
one would be far from offering Isaac unto God, that denies him a small part of
his goods. Secondly, he tries thy love to thy brother, which appears to be
nothing worth, when thou can find in thy heart to deny him, being thy
brother in Christ, yea thy fellow member of Christ, some worldly pelf which
thou might spare, to whom Christ Jesus has not denied his own heart blood.
3. Yeah herein is tried thy love to Christ thy savior, who esteems that
given, or denied to him, which is given or denied to his poor members. Could
thou find in thine heart to deny relief to Jesus Christ if he were in need?
Take heed then how thou deniest it to thy needy brother who is a member of
christ. Remember the excuse which the wicked will make at the day of judgment,
and Christ's answer to the same, Matthew. 25.44, 45. for when Christ shall say unto
them, Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire: for I was an hungered and
you gave me no meat, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, etc they shall
take exception, and say: Lord when saw we thee an hungered or thirsty, etc. and
did not minister unto thee? But he shall answer, Verily I say unto you, in as
much as you did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.
Again, he tries thy fidelity: For if God have appointed thee to be his
Almoner (as every rich man is Gods Almoner) then art thou no better then as
thief (for so would thou think of thine Almoner) if thou keep back
from the poor that which God has commanded thee to give them.

The trials of the left hand are crosses both temporal and spiritual. The
temporal are afflictions: and afflictions are whatsoever cross our desires.
And because afflictions try men's faith, obedience, love, patience, therefore
they are called temptations or trials, Iam. 1. ver. 2.3. 1. Pet. 1.7. Wherefore
when we are exercised under the cross, let us think that the Lord as he does
fatherly chastise us for our sins, so he proves our faith and patience,
what we are able to bear for his sake, and willing to suffer at his hands
that has suffered so much for us; whether we are willing to forgo our
worldly desires for his sake, etc. that so we may be careful to approve our
selves to God, that proves us. For as James says, Blessed is the man that
endures temptation or trial: for when by trial he shall be found approved,
Iam. 1.12.
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. Among others which are afflicted, let parents which forgo their
children or other friends, learn by this trial of Abraham how to behave
themselves: For as Abraham by the commandment understood the will of God, so
may they by the event. And as he submitted himself to the will of God declared
in the commandment, so must they to his will revealed in the event. For if we
cannot be content to give the Lord leave to take them to his mercy when it
pleases him to call them, what would we do if the Lord should bid us with our
own hands to kill them, and to burn their bodies to ashes, especially if they
were to us, as Isaac was to Abraham? Yea but Abraham by reason of the promise
knew his son should (if he were killed) be restored to life: and have not
thou a better promise of thy sons resurrection? Isaac if he had bin killed,
he should have risen to have died again, as Lazarus did: thy son shall rise
to die no more. He should have risen with a mortal body, thy son shall rise
with an immortal. And what though he shall, not rise again so soon, yet in
the mean time his soul is with God, and therefore in better case then if he
were still with thee: and his body, no otherwise then as seede-graine is
committed unto the earth against the great harvest. And what husbandman weepeth
when he commits his seed to the ground, the common mother of us all? Yea but
his body shall be resolved into dust. Thou foul, that which thou sowest is
not quickened, except it die, and as it were rot in the earth, 1. Cor. 15.
verse. 36. And although thy sons body he sown in corruption, yet it shall be
raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory.
verse. 42.43.

Spiritual crosses are heresies in judgment, and common corruption in
manners. In respect of the former the Lord tries us, when he permits
heresies to spring up among us. For as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.19. There
must be heresies, even among us, which are the true Church of God, that those
which are approved among us, might be known. Therefore the Lord forewarneth the
Jews, that if a false prophet should arise among the^, they should not hearken
unto him, though he should confirm his doctrine by signs and wonders: For
(says he Deuteronomy. 13.3.) the Lord your God proves you whether you love the Lord
your God, with all your heart, and all your soul. Even so at this day, the
Lord suffers Popery, the sink of heresy and mystery of iniquity, to
spread, and popish heretics and Idolatours to go about, persuading men to an
apostasy from Christ to Antichrist, which they call reconciling men to the
Pope and Church of Rome: but is (as I have proved elsewhere) the setting upon
men the mark of the beast, whereby they are branded unto destruction, Revel.
14.9.10. But this is done for the trial of the faithful and sound Christians;
and for a just judgment on the unsound, upon whom the Lord sends efficacy of
error and strong illusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.12.
that they may believe the lying doctrines of Antichrist, because they have not
loved the truth of the Gospel, yt they might be saved by it. But blessed be
God: howsoever Antichrist prevails in those that do perish, as the Apostle
says, Verse. 10.
yet the Lord Jesus has prophesied, that it shall not be possible for the
false prophets and ministers of Antichrist, to seduce either totally or finally
the elect, Mat. 24.24.

And as touching corruptions in manners, the Lord suffers the wicked to live
among the faithful to try them, Iud. 2.2^. And even in these times (beloved)
the godly live among such a generation of men, as that if a man do but labor
to keep a good conscience in any measure, although he meddle not with matters
of state, of discipline or ceremonies: As for example, if a Minister diligently
preach, or in his preaching seek to profit rather then to please, remembering
the saying of the Apostle, If I seek to please men, I am not the servant of
Christ, Gal. 1.10. Or if a private Christian make conscience of swearing,
sanctifying the Sabbath, frequenting Sermons, or abstaining from the common
corruptions of the time, he shall straight way be condemned for a Puritan, and
consequently be less favored, then either a carnal Gospeller, or a close
Papist. But thus it pleases God to try us whether we have faith or not, and
whether we prefer the applause of vain men, before the approbation of the
great and glorious God. For what says our Savior to the Jews, Ioh. 5.44. How
can you believe seeing you seek glory and estimation one from another, and
seek not that glory which comes from God alone? It therefore thou desire
to be approved for a sound christian, thou must labor to keep a good
conscience, and approve thy self to God who tries the heart: and not only
contemn the censures of carnal men (whose wisdom is enmity against God)
but also think thy self happy when men speak evil of thee for righteousness
sake, Mat. 5.11. And these briefly are the trials of God, whereunto all sorts
of men are subject, both hypocrites and sound Christians.

Hypocrites, whom the Lord tries, that they shrinking in their trial and
falling away, their hypocrisy may be detected. For (beloved) there be many
which live in the Church which be not of it, and cannot easily be discerned
until trial come. But such men as they are unsound, and by reason thereof
subject to defection, so when they are tried they commonly fall away: and they
are suffered to fall, that it might appear they were not of us, as John
speaks, 1. Epist. 2.19. For as the fiery furnace discerns the dross from
the metal, the fan seuereth the chafe from the corn; so trials put a
difference betwixt hypocrites and sound Christians. It behooves us therefore
(beloved in the Lord) to lay a good foundation against the day of trial,
Matthew. 7.24
to build upon the rock, to take root inwardly, and to bring forth fruit
outwardly, to have oil in our lamps; otherwise, if we content our selves
with the green leaves of an outward profession, neither having the root of
faith, nor fruits of love, we shall wither when the sun of temptation
arises, Luke 8.13. If we build upon the sand, that is, as our Savior
expounds, be hearers and not doers of his word, when the winds of
temptations shall blow, and surges of trials shall beat against us, our
building will fall to the ground, Matthew. 7.26.27. If we content our selves
with the shining lamp of an outward profession, wanting the oil of inward
grace, when the Bridegroom comes, we shall be shut out.

But the Lord also tries the faithful and sound Christians, sometimes to let
them see their own weakness, that they may be humbled at the sight thereof, and
be made more circumspect for the time to come. Sometimes to manifest his graces
in them, both to themselves and others, but always for their good in the end,
Deuteronomy. 8.16. And therefore he never tries them above their strength, or at
least above their profit, but proportioneth his trials both to their strength,
1. Cor. 10.13. and also to their profit, Hebr. 12.10. and consequently the
issue of them is always happy and good: the Lord causing all things (and not
only his trials) to work together for their good which do love him, Romans
8.28. And although many times they are brought to that exigent, as that their
estate seems desperate and remediless, yet even in the nick when things are
at the worst, the Lord (who never fails those which forsake not him) as it
were (...) and beyond al expectation, gives deliverance. As in this trial of
Abraham, verse. 10.11. and that of Job. And it was well said of Philo, when he
pleaded the cause of his nation, being brought to a great exigent, before
Caligula: It cannot be but that Gods aid is near, seeing all man's help
fails us. Seeing then the trials of the faithful are profitable and tend to
their good, therefore so many of us as are sound, are to be so far from
praying against these temptations of trial, as that we are rather to desire
that we may be tried, Psalm. 139.23. and to be glad when we are, Iam. 1.2.3.
1. Pet. 1. verse. 6.7.

The use in respect of Abraham's approving himself is this, that as we profess
our selves to be the children of Abraham and heirs of promise, so we should
show our selves to be the children of Abraham, in imitating his obedience and
his faith, to which end the Lord has by Moses propounded this worthy example,
and by me expounded the same unto you. And first our obedience must be
conformable unto his. I say not that it must be equal. For although we must
strive toward this perfection, and never content our selves with our growth
until we come to our (...) that is, our full growth, which we shall never do
whiles we live here, because in this life we are always in our (...) and
growing age; yet few may hope to attain to Abraham's pitch. But though we
cannot be equal to match him, yet we must be like to imitate him in obedience,
if we would be esteemed his children, as the faithful are. For as our Savior
says, Ioh. 8.35. If you were the sons of Abraham, you would do the works
of Abraham.

But thou will say, If God did speak to me, and command me any thing, as he
did to Abraham, I would do as Abraham did. I answer, thou art to apply every
general commandment in the word, as spoken unto thee: and thou art to make
conscience of obeying the same, as if God from heaven did now speak unto thee.
For so the Lord has propounded his commandments, as that thou can not doubt
but that he has spoken to thee therein. For does he not speak to thee, when
he says, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, etc. Nay further I
profess unto thee, that as thou have greater assurance that God speaks unto
thee in his word, then if an Angel should speak unto thee from heaven (for
the written word the Apostle calls (...) a more sure word, 2. Pet. 1.19. and
if we should trust to extraordinary revelations and apparitions of Angels, we
should be subject to the illusions of Satan, who can transform himself into
an Angel of light:) so if thou will not hearken to the written word of God, to
Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles, neither will thou believe or obey though
an Angel should come from heaven, or a man should come from the dead, Luke 16.

Well then, when thou have a commandment from God, do as Abraham here does.
As for example, God commands thee to turn unto him, to repent thee of thy
sins, to believe in Christ, to walk uprightly before him, to sacrifice not
thy son, but thy self, and to offer up thy soul and thy body as a holy,
lively and acceptable sacrifice unto him, Romans 12.1.
which is thy reasonable, that is, spiritual service of him. Be careful to
approve thy obedience as Abraham did. What though inconveniences will follow,
what though the world shall condemn thee, and the wicked flout thee, and the
devil and thine own flesh set themselves against thee: deny thy self as
Abraham did, and thine own reason; dispute not of Gods commandment, but obey
it, and commit the event to God. And let thine obedience be not only absolute
and resolute, but also speedy without delay, and constant without fainting.
Worthy is that saying of Luther to be written in the tables of our hearts,
Qui habet certum verbum Dei, in quacunque vocatione, credat tantum and audeat,
and dabit Deus haud dubie secundos exitus, Whosoever has the certain word of
God in any calling, let him believe only and be bold, and God no doubt will
give prosperous success.

Now if we would approve our obedience when God proves us, as Abraham did, we
must be qualified in two respects as he was. For first, seeing the Lord uses
to prove us in such things as we love: therefore we are with Abraham to think
nothing we have too dear to be consecrated to God, but we must be ready to
offer as a spiritual sacrifice, if God shall require the same, our goods, our
honor, our sons and daughters, our parents, our wives, our lives, our
selves: for he that loves any of these more then Christ is not worthy of
him, Matthew. 10.37.38. This therefore in a word Abraham teaches us, De temp.
sermon. 72.
as Augustine says, Vt Deo non praeponamus quod dat Deus, That we prefer not
before God, that which God has given us.

Secondly, we must (as Abraham was) be resolved before hand to obey the
commandments of God, seem they never so unreasonable unto us. For this
resolution will make the commandments easy to us, which seem hard to others.
As indeed the difficulty of Gods co^mandeme^ts is to be attributed to the
corruptions and contrary dispositions of men, who have resolved, or at the
least inured themselves to do evil: so that it is as easy for them to
abstain from their accustomed sins, as it is for a Blackamoore to change his
hue, or a Leopard his spots, Ierem. 13.23. It is easy for a sober and temperat
man to abstain from drunkenness, a chaste man from whoredom, a religious man
from swearing, a mild man from chafing and revenge; but bid a drunkard leave
his drunkenness, a whoremaster to forsake his filthiness, etc. you may as well
bid him pull out his eye, or cut off his hand, so hard a thing it is for them
to mortify their earthly members, fornication, uncleanness, etc. Col. 3.5. But
let God say to an Abraham that is resolved to obey him in all things, offer
thine only son unto me for a burnt sacrifice, and he will readily do it.
And as we are to follow Abraham's obedience, so must we imitate his faith, and
that in two respects: first, in believing the promises of God: secondly, in
bringing forth fruits and working by love.

As touching the former, our duty is to be resolved before hand with Abraham,
as to obey the commandments of God, seem they never so unreasonable: so to
believe his promises, seem they never so incredible.

Thou will say, If God did promise me any thing as he did to Abraham, I would
believe as he did. The promises were made to Abraham and his seed, that is,
the faithful who are the sons of Abraham and the heirs of promise. And
although the promises be generally propounded in the word, yet art thou
particularly to apply them to thy self as spoken to thee. For being general
they include al, that exclude not themselves by infidelity: only bring the
condition of the promise which is faith, and thou art safe. For does not the
Lord promise, whosoever believes in Christ has remission of sin, shall rise
to glory, shall be saved? even as the Israelites had a promise, Number. 22.8.9.
that if when they were stung with the fiery Serpents, they did lift up their
eyes to the brazen Serpent, Ioh. 3.14.15 16.
they should be healed. Resolve then to lift up the eye of faith to him that
was figured by the brazen Serpent, to believe in Christ, labor to lay hold
upon him by faith, strive against thine own infidelity and doubting: assure
thy self, if thou beleeuest, that thou art justified, and shall be saved. Let
not the sense of thine own weakness, or the conscience of thine own
unworthiness, or any thing else, wring from thee thy steadfast faith in Christ:
but believe against sense and reason, and hope against hope as Abraham did.
This is the promise of God, believe in Christ, and thou shall be saved. Mat.
16.16.
Indeed it pleases God many times so to try his servants, for the exercise of
their faith, as that their trial seems to oppugn his promises. But yet
notwithstanding the promises are firmly to be believed, and we are to be
persuaded, Luther in Genesis 22.
that when any thing does happen unto us contrary to the promise, and the Lord
shows himself unto us otherwise then the promise sounds (as our Savior
showed himself to the woman which was a Cananite, Matthew. 15.23.28.) that it is
but a trial, whereby the Lord, howsoever he exercises us for a time, will yet
do us good in the end, Deuteronomy. 8.16. and therefore we are not to let go our
hold, or suffer the promise, which is our staff and stay, to be wrested out of
our hands. Rather let us imitate Abraham's faith in this place, who when he was
commanded to kill his son, in whose seed he had many promises, yielded
indeed to the commandment, and yet held him to the promise. Though Isaac be
consumed to ashes, yet shall the promise of God concerning his seed be
performed. So Job when he was so grievously afflicted, as that in his own
sense, and opinion of others, he seemed to be cast out of Gods favor, yet
(says he) though he kill me I will believe in him. Job. 13.15.
In like sort, when as God promises life to all that believe, and yet we die:
we must believe that although we die, yet we shall live, Ioh. 11.25. In a
word, we must learn by Abraham's example, to give credit to the truth and
power of God, rather then to our own sense and reason. For he is true, and
therefore will, he is omnipotent, and therefore can perform his promise.

Secondly, our faith must be fruitful, as Abraham's was, and we are to manifest
it by good works, that the Lord may say of us, Iam. 2.18.
as he did here of Abraham, Now I know that thou fear God, etc. for
although good works do not concur with faith to the act of justification as
any cause thereof, yet they concur in the subject, that is, the party
justified, as necessary fruits of his faith, and testimonies of his
justification. And therefore Abraham although he were justified before God, by
faith without works, as Paul says, that is, absolved from his sins and
accepted as righteous unto life; yet he was justified not only in that sense by
faith, but in another sense, that is, declared to be just by works, as James
says. But to this purpose most effectual is S. James his argument in the
second chap. By such a faith as Abraham was justified, must we be justified:
but Abraham was justified by such a faith as brought forth good works, as
appears by this example, and was not an idle or dead faith: and therefore that
faith whereby we must be justified must bring forth good fruits, or else it is
not a lively and a true, but a dead and counterfeit faith, by which no man can
be justified. For howsoever faith alone does justify, because it alone does
apprehend the righteousness of Christ, whereby we are justified; and not love
or any other grace, yet that faith which is alone does not justify, because it
is not a true faith. For even as, the body without spirit or breath, Iam. 2.26
is judged to be dead, so faith which is without works is dead. And to
conclude, howsoever the promise of salvation is made to faith, yet the sentence
of salvation shall be pronounced according to our works: and therefore let us
be careful as Abraham was to show our faith by our works: For good works are
as it were the evidence according to which the Lord will judge of our faith: in
so much that where he finds none, ^att. 25.34
he will say, Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire* And where he
finds works giving evidence to our faith, he will say, Come you blessed of
my father, inherit the kingdom which is prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. To which kingdom let us beseech him to bring us, who has so
dearly purchased it for us, even Christ Jesus the righteous, to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost be all praise and glory both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 16. lin. 10. read, as he knows he can answer. page 27. lin. 21.
read, when as. page 41. lin. 9. read, not deliver. lin. 10. not be present.


