THE CHRISTIANS SANCTVARIE: Whereinto being retired, he may safely be preserved
in the midst of all dangers. Fit for all men to read at all times, especially
for those that are exercised in the school of affliction, in the time of Gods
present Visitation. Described in two Books or Treatises: I. Of the Christian
exercise of Fasting. II. Of holy Invocation on Gods name.


By GEORGE DOWNHAM Doctor of Divinity.

SALVS VITAE.



LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at
the sign of the Talbot. 1604.

To the Right worshipful my singular good friend Mr. James Mountague Doctor of
Divinity, and Deane of his Majesty's Chapel.
WHen as it pleased God by his public visitation the last year, to call us
unto Fasting and mourning, and to move the Royal heart of our Sovereign Lord
the King, to proclaim a general Fast to be observed weekly: I did acknowledge
it to be my bounden duty, (having according to direction of public
authority, assembled the congregation over which I am placed, for the
observation of those Fasts) first, to instruct them in the doctrine of fasting
and prayer, and after to stir them up to the effectual practice of these
Christian duties. Wherefore, after I had bestowed some pains that way, I was
entreated by a loving friend that I would not only set down in writing a
couple of my Sermons which especially handle the duty of prayer; but also pen
a Treatise of the Christian exercise of Fasting. The which I was the more
easily persuaded unto, because it was then alleged, and I knew not the
contrary, That there was very little written of this argument in the English
tongue. Howbeit, I do now understand, that not only before that time, but also
since I wrote this Treatise, (which I wholly finished the last year) some
others have taken good pains in this kind. To whose godly labors this book of
mine, though published after them, ought not to be prejudicial, as though I
had gathered into this short sum, what they and and others have written more at
large of this argument: for as I had fully finished this Treatise before I saw
theirs, so have I not since taken any thing from them.

This Treatise of the Christian exercise of Fasting, together with the other of
Prayer, containing two Sermons on the 15 verse of the 50 Psalm (which were
written in the due season, though published thus late, having waited at London
ever since the last year upon the printing of my Lectures on the 15. Psalm:)
I now dedicat to your Worship, as a small token of my great love, and a
perpetual remembrance of mine unfeigned thankfulness: Of my love, in respect
of your manifold virtues, wherewith I was long acquainted whiles we lived
together in Christ's College, that famous seminary of good learning and true
godliness: Of my thankfulness, in regard not only of your former goodwill,
but also of your late favors vouchsafed unto me since you followed the Court.
The Lord bless you and enrich you with his graces, and increase your favor
with God and man, to his glory, and your own endless comfort. Amen.

Mondon in Hertfordshire, the 12. of November. Anno 1604. Your worships in the
Lord, George Downame.

THE ANALISIS OF THE FIRST Treatise, being the Christian Exercise of Fasting.
This Treatise contains the Doctrine of the true and Christian fast, showing
in General what fasting is.. 1. Particular the sorts of fasting.. 2. viz. that
it is either Natural. Civil. Spiritual: and that is either the Moral or
chaste fast.. 3.4.5.6. Religious fast.. 7.8.9.10, 11.12.13.14.15. whereof there
are two Parts, viz. the Outward and bodily exercise of abstinence.. 16. where
we consider From what we are to abstain, viz. from Helps of this life, as
from Food wholly. 17.18. Sleep in part.. 19. Better apparel.. 20. Worldly
delights and pleasures.. 21.
Bodily labors and wordly business.. 22.23.24.
For how long we are to abstain, and what the time of the fast is.. 25.26.
Inward and spiritual exercise (. 27.) of prayer joined with repentance, which
we consider Jointly. 28.29. severally, viz. Prayer, whereof the Parts are
Deprecation of evil. (...).. 35. Precation of good. (...).. 36.
Properties Feruencie.. 37. Faith.. 38.39.40.41.

Repentance, the parts whereof are Humiliation or penitencie ((...)) which is
partly Inward, and that is the Sense of our misery, and sorrow for sin.. 30.
Humble conceit, and base estimation of our selves.. 31.32.
Outward as Lamentation and bewayling of our misery.. 33. Confession of our
sin..34.

Amendment ((...)) which stands in Eschewing evil, and fasting from sin..
42.43.44. Ensuing that which is good, both for the time Present by practicing
duties of Piety toward God. Charity toward men: but especially the works of
mercy.. 45.46.
To come by purposing and promising amendment. 57.





Sorts, for it is either Private.. 48. Public, where we consider the
Appointment of it By whom.. 49. Upon what occasion, as the Obtaining of some
public blessing. 50. Removing of some public evil, either of Sin,
Punishment, either threatened. 51. inflicted, as Sword. Famine. Pestilence.
Captivity. 53.54.




Observation of it By whom.. 55. How, viz. that it is to be sanctified as a
Sabbath of humiliation (. 56) both Publicly, by the Minister.. 57. People.. 58.
Privately.. 59.60.







Survey of the Popish and Antichristian fast.. 61, 62.63.64.


THE FIRST TREATISE. OF THE CHRITIAN exercise of Fasting.
FAsting, What fasting in general is, viz.
being a voluntary abstinence from all food for a time, is distinguished from
that abstinence, which being only in respect of the quantity or quality, is a
forbearing not of all food, but of such and so much. Not a sober
That, which is in respect of the quantity, is the moderat, sober, and
temperat use of food, avoiding all excess. That, which is in respect of the
quality, Or abstemious use of food,
is the abstemious use of food, forbearing some kind of meat or drink, which
we suppose to be noisome unto us, in regard either of our bodies or souls
health. The former, which is the sober diet, ought, and the latter, which is
the abstemious diet, may, be perpetual among Christians. But fasting is an
abstinence not only, But an utter abstinence therefrom.
a tali and tanto, that is, from such and so much, but a toto, that is, from
all food. Neither is it a sober or abstemious using of food, but a not using,
or forbearing of food altogether, Of (...). Suidas. Varinus. Nor yet a forced
abstinence
during the time of the fast. For therefore is it called (...), which
signifies, not eating, or not taking of food. And he is said to be (...), that
is, fasting, who is (...), or (...), that is, who has taken no food. And
whereas I call it a voluntary abstinence, therein I distinguish fasting from
that forbearing or wanting of food, which is not voluntary or purposely
intended, but forced, either because men cannot eat, being either in sickness,
Act. 27.33. Or want. Psalm. 102.4. and 109.24. Amos 4.6.
or in fear of present danger, or in some other agony: or because they have
not what to eat, which is not fasting but famine, or as the Scriptures call it,
cleanenesse of teeth. For this forced forbearing or wanting of food is not
(...), that is, fasting properly, but (...), which signifies a privation of
food: Act. 27.21.33.
and is not a duty voluntarily undertaken, but an affliction imposed, or a
consequent of affliction. But a voluntary forbearing of food.
For (...), fasting, is derived of (...), which signifies to fast, or to
observe a fast. And although all they which take no food may be said to be (...)
or Ieiuni, that is, Mat. 15.33. Man. 8.3. Mat. 6.16.17, 18
fasting, yet they are not (...), ieiunantes, such as do fast: for they only
may be said (...), ieiunare, to fast, or to observe a fast, who voluntarily
abstain.

The sorts of fasting.
2. We see then, what fasting in general is. The sorts of fasting are to be
distinguished according to the variety of the end, for which it is undertaken.
And it is either natural, or civil, or spiritual, according to the threefold
life of a Christian in this world: unto the help and furtherance whereof, For
it is either natural,
all voluntary abstinence is referred. The natural fast is that which is
undertaken for the health of our life natural: and is sometimes enjoined by
the Physician. or civil,
The civil is that which is referred to the wealth of the life civil: and is
sometimes enjoined by the magistrate. 1. Sam. 14.24. or spiritual.
The spiritual fast is that, which is undertaken for the furtherance of the
life spiritual in the duties either of chastity toward our selves and our
neighbor, or of religion and repentance toward God, and is ordained of the
Lord to be used to these ends, as necessity shall require. For although
fasting in it self be but a thing indifferent, and is not simply either
commanded or forbidden: yet as it may be a means either for the preservation
of chastity, or for the furtherance of our repentance and religion toward
God, so far forth it is required and commanded. For as where the Lord
forbids any vice or sin, there he does also forbid ^he means,
allurements, and prouocations thereunto: so where he commands any duty or
virtue, there also he commands the helps and means which tend thereto.
And this is that which an ancient and learned writer says, Hieronymus. And
that is either the moral and chaste fast,
That fasting is not a virtue in it self, but a degree to virtue. The
spiritual fast therefore is to be considered of us, either as a means of
chastity, which we may for distinction sake call the moral or the chaste fast:
or as a help to further us in the duties of repentance and religion, or the
religious and devout fast.
which we may call the religious or the devout fast.

3. The moral or chaste fast is that whereby men or women finding the sober and
abstemious diet not sufficient to repress the concupiscence of the flesh,
What the chaste fast is.
do endeavor to subdue and chastise their bodies, that is to say, to make them
chaste. This fast therefore is not commanded them, who either have the gift of
continency in single life, or may lawfully use the remedy ordained against
lust in marriage: for to such, the sober diet, moderating the quantity of their
food, and the abstemious diet forbearing such things as provoke lust, is a
sufficient preservative of chastity; and therefore as a medicinal purgation
to those that are in health, so this fast to such persons is not only
superfluous, but sometimes also hurtful and pernicious. As for those who find
their bodies more prone to lust and uncleanness, and may not lawfully use the
remedy against it, which to single men is not permitted at all, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4,
5. 2. Cor. 6.19. And what other helps must concur therewith, viz.
whiles they be single, nor to married persons at certain times: they are to
be admonished to use all good means of chastity, that they may possess their
vessels, that is, their bodies in holiness and in honor, as it becomes the
temples of the holy ghost, and not in the passion of lust, like to the Gentiles
which knew not God. And to this purpose they are to be exhorted, first, to
observe perpetually the virtue of sobriety, Sobriety in moderating not only
the inward fancies and affections, b^^ also the outward se^ces.
not only in respect of governing their inward affections and fancies, out
also in restraining the pleasures of their outward senses, especially of the
sight and taste. Of sight, by restraining their eyes from beholding the objects
of lust; such as are lovely or lascivious persons, wanton pictures, louebookes,
obscene enterludes, and such like. For by the sense of sight, concupiscence is
ordinarily conveyed to the heart: for as the old saying is, (...), of looking
comes loving. And therefore as we must pray with David, Psalm. 119.37. Job.
3^.1. Eccles. 9.8.9.
that the Lord would turn away our eyes, that they behold not vanity; so must
we with Job make a covenant with our eyes: that as the son of Syrach
advises, we should turn them away from a beautiful woman, and not to eye the
beauty of others: for by the beauty of women many have been seduced, and
thereby love is kindled as it were a fire. Temperancie in diet.
Of taste, by temperancie in diet, that neither in respect of the quantity they
exceed by gluttony or drunkenness, nor in respect of the quality they affect
such meats or drinks as are fit to provoke lust. And if they find not this
sobriety and abstinence to be sufficient for this purpose, then are they so
often as their health will bear, and their necessity require, by fasting to
chastise and subdue their bodies. And because continency is not a thing in our
own power, but the free gift of God, Mat. 19 11. 1. Cor. 7.7. 3. Prayer. 4.
Vigilancie. 1. Pet. 4.7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 5. Diligence and painfulness.
Avoiding contrariwise intemperancie in diet. Hieronym.
we are therefore with our fasting to join earnest prayer for the same. And to
our fasting and prayer we must join vigilancie and watchfulness, that as the
Apostle exhorts, we may be sober, and watch unto prayer: and thereunto must
we add painfulness in our calling, or in some honest labor.

4. For the greatest enemy to chastity, and chiefest prouoker of lust, is
excess in meat and drink: Ciborum saturitas est seminarium libidinis,
fullness of meat is the seminary of lust: for the overplus of our nourishment
is the matter of generation, which abounds where nourishment exceeds, and
that abounding provoke to lust, etc. And therefore the chief preservative
against lust, is by temperancie in diet not to subminister matter unto it. And
if temperancie suffice not, to use also fasting, that by withdrawing the oil
as it were from the flame of concupiscence, it may be quenched. To which
purpose, let the order and coherence of the Apostles words, 2. Cor. 6. be
observed: 2. Cor. 6.6. Ad Rusticum Monach. de viuendi formae.
in fasting, (says he) in chastity. But here two things are to be observed:
The first, that as* Jerome says, our fasts be moderat, least being too much,
they weaken the stomach, and requiring greater refection, breed cruditie, Ad
Furiam de viduitate seru.
which is the mother of lust: for as he says in another place, nothing does
so inflame the body and provoke unto lust, as indigested meat, etc. The other
thing, that as we use fasting sometimes, so must we use temperance and
sobriety always, avoiding evermore excess, especially of such things as are
apt to provoke lust. For what are we better for fasting at any time, if we
recompense our fasting with fullness at other time? for then our minds by much
repletion will wax heavy, August. de temp. sermon. 56. Hieronym. ad Eustoch. de
custodia virginit. Ad Furiam de vid^itate seru.
and irrigata corporis nostri terraspinas libidinum germinabit: And the earth
as it were of our bodies being well watered, will bring forth the thorns of
lust. And therefore as Jerome well says, A spare diet, and a stomach always
hungry, is preferred before fasts continued three days together: and it is
much better every day to take but a little, then sometimes though seldom to
take too much. But as excess of all meats and drinks is to avoided, so
especially of wine and strong drinks. It was truly said of the Poet, Terent.
Eunuch. Ovid. 2. de Remed. Prou. 23.33.
Sine Cerere and Libero friget venus: and of another, vina parant animos
veneri. The same is testified by Solomon, Prou. 23. that if we delight in wine,
our eyes will look upon strange women, and our hearts will speak leaud
things. And this the daughters of Lot knew too well: Genesis 19.32, 33.
for that incestuous copulation which they could not expect from him whiles he
was sober, they obtained by giving him wine to drink. For as one says,
Proximus a Libero patre intemperantiae gradus ad inconcessam venerem esse
consucuit. Valor. Max. lib 2. c 1. Slouthfulnes, etc.


5. The next enemy to chastity, is slothfulness: which contains two
nurses of lust, idleness and drowsinesse. For the matter which gluttony and
drunkenness prepares for lust, that does idleness preserve. And therefore not
unworthily are fullness of bread, and slothfulness, reckoned among the sins
of Sodom, whereby they were incensed to unnatural lust. Ezekiel. 16.49.
For idleness is both the mother and nurse of lust.

Ovid. 2. de remed.
Haec (otia) ut ames faciunt, haec quae fecere tuentur:
Haec sunt iucundi causa cibusque mali.
Theophrast.
A Philosopher being asked, what lust or impure love is, (...), he said, The
passion of an idle mind. For as water which is not stirred putrifieth, and iron
that is not exercised, rusteth: so the mind by idleness is corrupted. For as
the Grecians rightly say, (...), Idleness, or doing nothing, is the beginning
of doing ill. Definit. breuior. 69.
And as Basil says, (...), Every occasion of idleness is occasion of sin.
Such is the disposition of our minds, that if they be not exercised about
lawful things, they will go a whoring about things unlawful. In desiderijs
est omnis anima otiosi, says Jerome, Every idle man's mind is overtaken with
lust. 2. Sam. 11.
And that, the example of David himself does show, who on a time giving
himself to idleness, was overtaken in this kind. And therefore such as have out
of their own experience prescribed remedies against lust, have warned men
especially to beware of Ergo vbi visus eris nostra medicabilis art, Fac
monitis fugias otia prima meis.

Otia si tolla^, periere Cupidinis arcu^, etc. Ovid.


idleness. Likewise much sleeping and long lying in bed are Romans 13.12, 13
the works of darkness, the companions of wantonness, the nurses of lust.
For that matter which by large diet is prepared for generation, and by
idleness and ease preserved, by long lying and much sleeping is concocted and
perfited.

6. Whosoever therefore has a true and serious purpose, by fasting to chastise
his body; Which means of chastity not sufficing in single life,
let him with his extraordinary fasting and praying join ordinary temperance
and sobriety, diligence in his calling, and vigilancie. And if having used
these means of chastity in single life, which is the gift of continency (to
a perpetuity whereof very few attain who are fit for procreation) then let
him know that God does call him to marriage, which he has provided as a lawful
remedy against lust: 1. Cor. 7.2 9. Men are bound to fly to marriage, as the
lawful remedy against lust.
That those who cannot live chastely in single life, may live chastely in
marriage: for as there is chastity in single life, so also in wedlock. And
whosoever having not the gift of continency, refuses this ordinance of God,
under pretense of chastity he lives in uncleanness: or if he strive overmuch
as it were against the stream, by fasting and abstinence to subdue his body,
in an erroneous desire of keeping the seventh commandment, (which of the most
may better be kept in marriage than in single life) he breaks the sixth, in
shortning his days, and making himself unapt for the duties of his calling,
and unfit for the service of the Church or commonwealth. Neither may any man
allege, that in respect of his outward estate it is inconvenient for him to
marry: for no outward inconvenience can be so great, as to live in sin.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken of the former sort of spiritual
fasts: may chief desire and purpose being to entreat of the religious fast.

7. The religious fast is a solemn exercise of religion, What the religious
fast is, viz.
wherein we being humble suitors unto the Lord upon some special or
extraordinary occasion, do abstain not only from food and some other
commodities and delights of this life, but also from bodily labors and worldly
business during the time of the fast, which is a Sabbath of humiliation: that
by this outward abstinence our humiliation may be furthered, and our repentance
testified, to the increase of our feruencie and confirmation of our faith in
prayer, for the obtaining of our request at the hands of God. For further
explication whereof we are to consider, 2. That it is an exercise of religion
ordained of the Lord.
that where I call it an exercise of religion, that is presupposed which before
I touched, that this religious fast is an ordinance of God: for nothing may be
offered unto the Lord by way of religion or worship, which is not appointed and
ordained of the Lord: for whatsoever is obtruded unto him for worship, being
not ordained by him, is will worship and superstition. Now, that the Lord has
appointed and ordained that we should humble our selves before him by fasting
and prayer, for the obtaining of some special blessing from him, it may
appear: first, by evident testimonies of Scripture in the old testament. Both
in the old Testament, and that not as ceremonial and peculiar to the Jews.
Whereunto if it shall be objected, that the places of the old Testament which
require fasting, may seem to enjoyne it among other ceremonies of the Jewish
religion, unto which Christians are not bound: I answer, that in the Jewish
fasts some things were ceremonial, and so peculier to them; other things were
moral, and so common to us. The things which were peculier to them, were
first, the circumstance of the time in their set and ordinary fasts; whether
that which was appointed by the Lord on the tenth day of the seventh month;
Leuit. 16.29 and 23.27.29. Zac. 7.5. and 8.19
or those which the Jews voluntarily undertook during the time of the seventy
years captivity, in the fourth month, in the fifth, in the seventh, and in the
tenth. And secondly, there were certain habits and iestures used among them
when they mourned and fasted, which were part of the pedagogie of the old
testament, which as they are abrogated by Mat. 6.17.
Christ in the new Testament: so were they not greatly required in the Joel.
2.13. Esaias 58.5.
old. Such were their putting on of sackcloth, renting their garments, 1. King.
21.27. Esaias 58.5. Mat. 6 16. 2. Sam. 12.20. Esth. 4.1.3. Ezr. 9.3. Dan. 9.3.
and 10.3
sitting in the ashes, putting earth or ashes on their head, not washing or
anointing, but deforming their faces, looking sorrowfully, hanging down their
heads, going softly, and such like outward signs and tokens of humiliation,
which were observed both of the godly and of the hypocrites among them: but
with this difference, that the hypocrites rested in these outward shows,
without any true humiliation of their souls: whereas in the godly these signs
proceeded from the sorrow of the heart, as unfeigned testimonies thereof.

8. But although that circumstance of the time was proper to that people, But
as a moral and common to all:
and those ceremonies peculier to those times: yet the substance of the fast,
which is the humbling of our souls by abstinence, is a moral duty belonging
commonly to all nations, in all ages: for as the moral or chaste fast is
enjoined in the seventh commandment, as a means of chastity, to those that
need that help; so the religious fast is enjoined in the second commandment,
and in the fourth. In the second, as it is a means to further us in the
worship of God, and in the duty of prayer upon extraordinary occasion. In the
fourth, as the time of the fast is a Sabbath of humiliation, wherein we are to
profess our humiliation, and testify our repentance before God: for when the
Lord commands us to sanctify the Sabbath, he means all Sabbaths, not only
the ordinary and weekly Sabbath, Leuit. 23.
but also the extraordinary, whether they be Sabbaths of joy and festiuitie,
wherein by feasting and thanksgiving we signify our joy and thankfulness for
some great blessing received, such as was that feast, Nehem. 8, Nehe. 8.9, 10.
and the feast of Purim. Esth. 9: Esth. 9.18, 19.
or whether they be Sabbaths of humiliation; wherein by fasting and prayer we
signify the sorrow and desire of our souls, in respect either of some
blessing wanting, or of some evil either feared or felt, present or imminent:
such as was the fast proclaimed by Iosaphat 2. Chron. 20, 2. Chro. 20.3. Ezr.
8.21. Joel. 1.14. and 2.15. Leuit. 23.32.
or by Ezra cha. 6. etc. For such a fast by the commandment of God is to be
sanctified and observed holy as a Sabbath, even in such manner as the ordinary
Sabbath of humiliation was to be sanctified. Neither is it to be omitted, that
Esaias 58, the day of the fast seems to be called an acceptable day to the
Lord, Esaias. 58.5.13.
yea his Sabbath, and his holyday, which even as the ordinary Sabbath is to be
consecrated as glorious to the Lord.

But also in the new Testament.
9. But if to these places of the old Testament, we shall add some testimonies
out of the new, we shall make it more than evident, that the duty of fasting
belongs unto us. Where first consider the doctrine of our Savior Christ,
Mat. 6.16.
concerning a fast, Math. 6, for when he prescribes the manner how we are to
fast, he presupposes the duty that we are to fast. Neither does he alone
require this duty at our hands, but also makes a gracious promise of happy
reward to those that shall fast aright. Verse. 18. Mat. 9.14. Luke 5.33. Mar.
2.18.
And in the same Gospel Chapter 9, as also Luke 5, and Mar. 2, when as the
Disciples of John and the Phariseys took exception against our Savior Christ,
because they fasted, but his disciples did eat and drink: he makes answer,
That although during his abode with them, which was a time of joy and not of
mourning, his disciples which were the children of the marriage chamber, were
not to fast and mourn, whiles himself, who was the bridegroom was among
them: yet the time should come when the bridegroom being taken from them, as
they should have occasion of mourning, so also they should fast in those days.
Mat. 17.21.
Again, Math. 17, our Savior Christ seems to ascribe great efficacy to the
prayer of the faithful helped by fasting; affirming that that kind of unclean
spirit, which by no other means can be cast out, goes forth by prayer and
fasting. In the second of Luke the holy Ghost gives this testimony of Anna
the Prophetess, Luke 2.37.
That she being in the Temple night and day worshipped God with fastings and
prayers. Not that fasting in it self is a worship of God, as prayer is, but
only is a means and help to further us in the worship of God, and to make
our prayers more fervent and effectual: to which purpose Anna joined fasting
with her prayers. And hereunto let us add the practice of the primitive Church
in the time of the Apostles: A^^. 13.3.
In the 13. Chapter of the Acts, the Prophets and teachers which were in the
Church of Antioch, before they sent forth Barnabas and Paul to the work of the
ministry, whereunto the holy Ghost had called them; they fasted and prayed,
and laid their hands on them. And in the fourteenth Chapter it is said, Act.
14.2^.
that Paul and Barnabas when they had ordained to the faithful, elders by
electioni^n every Church; having prayed with fasting, they commended them to
the Lord in whom they believed. And to conclude, the Apostle Paul testifies of
himself, 2. Cor. 11, 2. Car. 11.27.
That as he was often in hunger and thirst by a forced obedience, so he was often
also in fastings; whereby this voluntary abstinence is meant. Hereby therefore
it appears that the Christian exercise of fasting, is not a will worship, nor
an action which is merely arbitrary, or left to our free choice, whether we
will use it or not: but a duty enjoined and imposed upon us by the Lord.
Wherefore in the definition I doubted not to call the religious fast, An
exercise of religion.

10. But here it will be objected, And yet not ordinarily to be performed.
That if fasting be an exercise of religion; a moral duty, not only
commanded in the moral law of God, which binds all men, but also commended
unto us in the Gospel both by the doctrine of the holy Ghost, and also by the
practice of the faithful in the primitive Church; then it may seem, that so
often as we do not fast, we sin, etc. I answer, that affirmative commandments,
though they bind us always, yet do they not bind us to perform them always
and at all times, but as just occasion is offered, together with a concurrencie
of all needful circumstances: as for example, we are always bound to pray,
namely as we have just occasion to beg any thing at the hands of God, and may
do it in some measure as it ought to be done; but we are not bound to pray
always and to do nothing else. And although we are always in this life bound
to fast; yet are we not bound to fast either always, or so often as we are bound
to pray: for we are to pray ordinarily every day, and also extraordinarily as
occasion is offered: but we are not to fast ordinarily and every day, but upon
special and extraordinary occasion. And that we are not bound to join fasting
with the ordinary exercise of prayer, 1. Cor. 7.3.5.
it is manifest by the doctrine of the Apostle, 1. Cor, 7, where he would have
the husband and the wife (who are ordinarily to pray every day) to perform
mutual benevolence, and not defraud one another, unless it be by consent for
a time, that they might give themselves to fasting and prayer, and again come
together, that Satan tempt them not through their incontinencie. And therefore
we are not bound to join fasting with our ordinary and daily prayers, but
when we have just and special occasion to humble our selves in prayer, after
an extraordinary manner. And our Savior Christ notes, that those which do
fast, Mat. 9.15.
do mourn; and that the time of fasting is the time of mourning; and that in
the time of joy it is unseasonable. Phil 4.4. 1. These. 5.16.
Now ordinarily the faithful are to be joyful: and therefore they are not
bound ordinarily to fast, and in fasting to mourn, but when they have some
extraordinary cause of mourning: for as a piece of new cloth put to an old
garment makes the rent worse, Mat. 9.16.
so fasting unseasonably imposed upon men, makes them not better, but worse.
Again, the time of the fast has the nature of a Sabbath, wherein we are to
lay aside all worldly business, and the works of our callings, which
ordinarily we are to follow. Neither is it an ordinary Sabbath, but the
extraordinary Sabbath of humiliation; wherein we are after a special manner to
humble our souls, and to give our selves to prayer, abstaining not only from
bodily labor and worldly affairs, but also from our food and other delights
of this life. And to the sanctifying of this Sabbath we are bound, Esaias. 22.12.
when the Lord calls us to fasting and mourning by some special causes of
mourning and humbling our selves (which afterward I shall touch) whether they
be private or public. But especially we are then bound to observe this fast,
when not only the Lord by some public judgment or calamity, either
threatened or inflicted, does call us unto fasting and mourning; but also
public authority has blown the trumpet, Joel. 2.1^.
and proclaimed a fast: for to such a Sabbath of humiliation, the equity of
that law concerning the yearly Sabbath of humiliation is to be extended, Leuit.
23, Leuit. 23.29.
Every person that humbles not himself that day, shall even be cut off from
his people.

11. And this also I signified in the definition, But extraordinarily, as
special and urgent occasion is offered.
when I said that fasting is a solemn exercise of religion, to be undertaken
of us, when we are to be humble suitors unto the Lord, upon some special and
extraordinary occasion: for when I call it a solemn exercise, I do not mean
that it is a common, usual or ordinary exercise, nor yet to be performed after
a common or ordinary manner; but that as it is undertaken upon some special
urgent occasion, so we ought to stir up our selves in the observation thereof,
to an extraordinary measure of humiliation, to an extraordinary feruencie in
prayer, to a solemn and extraordinary testification and profession of our
repentance. And when as it is said in the definition, that this exercise is to
be undertaken of us when we are humble suitors to the Lord upon some special or
extraordinary occasion, it is plainly signified, that this exercise is not at
set and ordinary times to be performed, but when it pleases God to give just
and necessary occasion either by our wants, or by his judgments, of a more
special and extraordinary humbling of our selves in the exercise of prayer
and profession of our repentance.

12. The causes therefore and occasions whereupon this exercise is to be used,
The causes of fasting, are either the obtaining of some special good*
are these. First, when we are humble suitors unto the Lord for the obtaining of
some special benefits: especially, when some matter of great importance is to
be enterpris^ed: For at such a time an extraordinary feruency in prayer is
required, which may be helped forward by fasting. Nehemiah intending to move
Artasbaste for the repairing of Jerusalem: Nehe. 1.4.11.
first humbles himself before God by fasting and prayer, for good success in
that weighty business. Ezr. 8.21.
And so did Ezra in his voyage toward Jerusalem proclaim a fast: Queen
Esther before she durst presume contrary to the law of the Persians, Esth. 416.
to enter into the kings presence, being not called, to make suit unto him for
the preservation of the Jews against the wicked conspiracy of Haman; she with
her maids humbled themselves by fasting and prayer for three days, and
required the like fast to be observed of Mordecay and the rest of the Jews,
who were at Susban. In like sort, the ministry of the word being a matter of
great importance (for it is the power of God to our salvation, Romans 1.16. 1.
Cor. 1.21.
and though it be esteemed folly in the world, yet by the foolishness of
preaching God is pleased to save those that believe) therefore the Church of
God has thought it expedient before they have ordained ministers, or sent them
forth to the work of the ministry, to humble themselves before God by
fasting and prayer, Act. 13.3 and 14.23.
as we may read in the Acts of the Apostles. It is reported of John the
Evangelist, that being entreated by the Churches to write the Gospel of our
Savior, Hicronym. in p^ologo super Math.
whereby the heresies of Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied the divinity of
Christ, might be refuted; he made answer, That he would do it, if first the
whole Church would in his behalf humble themselves before God in fasting and
prayer.

Or removing of some evil, whether it be the evil of sin.
13. But as fasting is sometimes to be joined with precation or prayer, for some
special good: so more commonly it is joined with deprecation of evil, whether
it be the evil of sin, or the evil of affliction: For when as men do
apprehend thewrath of God for sin, whether it be in the act of their
conversion, or otherwise finding themselves or their country guilty of some
more grievous sin: it is necessary that they should humble themselves before
God, after a more special manner: And for the better humbling of themselves in
prayer, and testifying of their repentance, to entertain this Christian
exercise of fasting. Act. 9.9.11.
Paul in the first act of his conversion fasted and prayed three days
together: when as the people of Israel returned to the Lord their God from
idolatry, and lamented their former sins: they being assembled at the
commandment of Samuel, 1. Sam. 7.6.
do testify their humiliation and repentance by a solemn fast: wherein they
drew as it were buckets of water from the fountain of their hearts, and poured
the same before the Lord, saying, We have sinned against the Lord. Ezr. 9.3.6.
and 10.6.
Ezra when he understood how the people, of Israel had joined in marriage with
the heathen people contrary to the law of God, he prayed and fasted, greatly
mourning for the trasgression of the people. Neh. 9.1.2.
And afterward the people themselves were assembled with fasting, and with
sackcloth and earth upon them; and having separated themselves from the strange
wives with whom they had been mingled, they confessed their sins and the
iniquities of their fathers.

14. But when as our sin has not only deserved the anger of God; Or the
evil of affliction, and that either imminent,
but also has provoked him, either to threaten his judgments, and as it were
to lift up his hand to strike us; or else as he has threatened, to lay his
judgments upon us: Esaias 22.12.
then does the Lord especially call us to fasting and mourning: howbeit the
chief cause of mourning must be, not so much the consideration of the
judgment it self, whether present or imminent; as the detestation of our
sin, whereby we have offended God, and provoked him either to threaten or to
inflict that judgment upon us. Jonas. 3.5.6.
Examples hereof we have in respect of judgments imminent, in the Niniuits,
who when destruction was threatened against them for their sins, humbled
themselves before God in fasting and prayer. In Iosaphat, Chro. 20.3.
who hearing of an invasion attempted against him by the Moabits and Ammonits,
feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout
all Judah. Or present:
In respect of afflictions and calamities present, as famine, sword,
pestilence, captivity, and such like messengers of Gods wrath, we have both
commandments, as our rules; and examples, as precedents in this behalf. As
famine, Joel. 1.14. and 2.12.15.
In the time of famine, the Lord by his Prophet Joel, commands the Jews to
turn unto him, with all their heart, and with fasting, weeping and mourning:
And to that end he bids them to proclaim and sanctify a fast. Ios. 7 6.
Sword,
And as touching the sword: when the men of Ai had discomforted the Israelits,
Joshua and the elders of Israel fasted until the even. Captivity,
In the time of captivity Daniel greatly desired the deliverance of the Jews
out of the captivity of Babylon at the end of seventy years, according to
the promise of the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, Dan. 9.3. Sickness and
mortality.
he turned his face unto the Lord God, and sought by prayer and supplication,
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes. And as touching sickness and
mortality, we have a notable example in David, 1. Sam. 12.16.
who when his child which he had begotten in adultery was sick, he besought
God for it, and fasted, and went in and lay all night upon the earth: yea, when
some that proved his enemies were sick, he professes Psalm. 35, Psalm. 35.13.
that he clothed himself with sackcloth, and humbled his soul with fasting,
and that he prayed for them with such compassion, that hanging down his head
for grief, his prayer returned upon his bosom. And if fasting is to be used
for private persons when they are sick, much more in a public visitation, and
in the time of pestilence.

Upon such occasions, necessity is imposed.
15. These allegations therefore of holy Scripture may be sufficient directions
for us, when we are to undertake this exercise: namely, when we have some
urgent cause of a more than ordinary humbling of our selves before God in
prayer. And when such causes are offered, we may not think that it is a thing
merely arbitrarie, whether we will use this exercise or not: but by warrant of
the former Scriptures we are to be persuaded that the Lord does call us to this
exercise. It is well said of Basil, Esaias. 22.12. Definit. breuior. 129. and
130.
(...). The time of fasting is not every man's will, but the necessity of
those who come to Gods worship: and in a time of such necessity, to fast it is
necessary. When as therefore there is public necessity, On public persons
who have authority, to proclaim* Joel 2.25. And on private persons, to observe
the fast.
those which are in public authority must think, that a necessity is
imposed upon them, to blow the trumpet in Sion, and to proclaim a fast. And
those which are in private place, must think a necessity imposed on them, to
observe and sanctify the fast. And if it happen that they which are in
authority neglect this duty; then those, who according to the example of the
faithful, Ezekiel. 9, Ezekiel 9.4.
which were marked to salvation, do mourn either for the common calamities,
or for the common enormities of the time, which are forerunners of calamities:
Math. 6.18.
they are to use this exercise privately and secretly, which also they are to
do, when their own necessities require. As for those who neither by public
calamity, nor private necessity, can be drawn to this duty, Romans 13.14.
but continually take care for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: they
must know, that they are but carnal m^n; Gal. 6.^.
who, as they sow to the flesh, so of the flesh shall reap corruption.

16. Thus we have heard that the religious fast is a solemn exercise of
religion, The religious fast, consists on two parts* viz the outward and the
inward exercise.
to be undertaken of us, when we are humble suitors to the Lord, upon some
urgent occasion. Let us now consider wherein this exercise does consist, which
is expressed in the rest of the definition, whereout we may gather, that this
exercise consists on two points, viz. the outward or bodily, and the inward
or spiritual exercise. The former, being the means to the latter; and the
latter, being the end of the former: for the bodily exercise profits little
or nothing at all, 1. Tim. 4.8.
unless it be referred to the spiritual exercise, as a means to further it.
The bodily exercise is an outward abstinence from food and some other
commodities and delights of this life, In the outward exercise we are to
consider from what we are to abstain, and for how long.

It is abstine^ce, first from helps of this life, as first from food wholly.


and also from bodily labors and worldly business during the time of the
fast, which is a Sabbath of humiliation. Here therefore we are to consider in
respect of the outward exercise, from what we are to abstain, and for how long.

17. First, we are to abstain from food, from whence the whole exercise has
his name. And here we are to understand not an abstinence in part, nor a sober
and abstemious use of diet, as I have showed before; but a total abstinence
both from meat and drink, so far as our health will permit: for this is
required to the nature of a fast, as has been declared, and further may be
proved by the examples of such fasts as are recorded in the scriptures. David
when he fasted and mourned for the death of Abner, 2. Sam. 3.35.
swore that he would not taste bread or ought else till the Sun were down.
Ezra, Ezr. 10.6.
when he fasted for the sin of the people, he did neither eat bread, that is,
not so much as bread, nor drink water, that is, not so much as water. The fast
which Esther required and performed, Esth. 4 16.
was the total abstinence from meat and drink. The Niniuits when they
proclaimed a fast, Ion. 3.7.
gave a charge that none should taste any thing, whether it were meat or drink.
And of Paul it is said Acts. 9, Act 9.9.
that for the time of his fasting and prayer, he did neither eat nor drink.
That we should not think, either that fasting is an abstinence from meat and
not from drink, or that it stands only in choice of meats. And yet this
total abstinence from meat and drink is not so strictly required, but that
they whose health cannot bear it, may for their necessary sustenance take
some little refreshing: for the Lord, who desires mercy rather than
sacrifice, Math. 12.7.
does not so require this outward abstinence, that it should impair our
health, or make us unfit for his service in the spiritual exercise of the
fast; but that it might further us therein. But here we must take heed, that we
use not this liberty as an occasion to the flesh, pretending we cannot, when
indeed we will not abstain. Gal. 5.13.


18. But now let us consider, The reasons why abstine^ce from food is required.
why this abstinence from food is required, seeing the kingdom of God does not
stand in meat and drink, nor yet in abstinence therfrom: and that, Romans 14.17.
1. Cor. 8.8.
as to eat and drink, so also to abstain therefrom, is in it self a thing
indifferent. I answer, that although in and for it self it is not required;
yet as it is referred to the inward and spiritual exercise, it is enjoined.
For seeing the body is not only the habitation of the soul, but also it and
the members thereof the instruments of the soul, whereby it exercises his
several functions: who knows not, that the actions of the soul are either
furthered by the good constitution of the body, or hindered by the
indisposition thereof? and, that the disposition of our body does much depend
upon our diet? For if by intemperancie and excess we ouercharge our selves,
then are our hearts made heavy, as our Savior Christ says, Luke 21.34.
by surfeiting and drunkenness, and we become unfit for any good office. Or if
we be too careful to pamper our bodies, they will not be so pliable and
obsequious to the soul, but rather become like pampered horses, which kick
against their rulers. On the other side, if by too much abstinence we pine away
our bodies, and deny necessary sustenance thereto, we do make our selves
not only unfit for the service of God in the church or commonwealth, and for
the discharge of our callings, but also guilty of selfe-murther: For the
difference is not great, whether we murder ourselves at once, or by little and
little pine and consume our selves away. And surely, where the Lord forbids
to kill, he forbids us to kill our selves. Now if any in their superstitious
conceit shall in this their not sparing of their body, Col. 2.23.
whereby they make themselves guilty of murder, place religion or merit; then,
as they are injurious to themselves, so also impious against God. That
therefore the body may be serviceable to the soul, we are to diet it
ordinarily, according to the rules of sobriety and temperance: so shall it
neither be unruly to kick against the soul, nor unable to serve it. And this
disposition of the body is the best ordinary disposition that may be, for the
ordinary performance of our duty in the worship and service of God.
Notwithstanding, if we shall have necessary occasion to humble our selves in
prayer after an extraordinary manner, then is it necessary also, that to our
ordinary temperance and sobriety, we should add the extraordinary 2. Cor.
7.11.
when we use it by way of godly

From sleep in part.
19. Secondly, we are not only to abstain from all excess of sleep, but also
to cut off so much of our ordinary sleep, as the want thereof be not an
hinderance unto us in the worship of God, Col. 4.2. 1. Pet. 4.7.
that so we may watch unto prayer. To which purpose, the faithful under the
law, when they fasted, made choice to lie uneasily: that so they might take no
more sleep than was necessary, and thereby also might show themselves
unworthy of their ordinary case and rest, and might (as I said) the better
watch unto prayer. When David fasted and prayed in the behalf of his child, 2.
Sam. 12.16. Esth. 4.3.
he lay upon the ground all night. When the Jews had notice of Hamans
conspiracy against the^, many of them lay in sackcloth and ashes. Joel. 1.13.
The Prophet Joel exhorting the priests and elders to fast and mourn, because
of the famine, he wills them to lie all night in sackcloth. 1. King. 21.27.
And in imitation of the faithful, Achab when he fasted, did also lie in
sackcloth.

20. Thirdly, From ornaments and costly attire.
we are to forbear our better or more costly apparel: especially if it be
such as may hinder our humiliation, or minister some matter to our pride: for
such is the vanity of our corrupt nature, and our pronenesse to pride, that
although apparel was ordained to cover our nakedness, and to hide our shame,
the consequent of our sin and falling from God: yet if it be any thing gay
or costly, we take a pride therein. When as therefore the Israelits by
worshipping the golden calfe, had broken their covenant with the Lord, Exodus
32. Exodus 33.1.
and had provoked him to cast them off: the Lord commanded Moses and the
people to go toward the land Canaan, signifying, that he would be as good as
his promise made to their fathers, in giving to them the land of promise: Verse.
2.
And to that end would send his Angel before them, to drive out the Canaanits
and the other inhabitants, and to put them in possession: Verse. 3.
But as for himself, he would not be present among them (or if he should, he
could not but consume them) neither would he have ought to do with them,
namely, unless they turned unto him by repentance. For to that end he
propounded that threatening, and withal appointed them to lay aside their
ornaments and costly rayments, Verse. 5.
that he might know what to do with them, viz. if they repented, to receive
them to mercy: if not, to cast them off. When as the people therefore heard
this evil tidings, Verse. 4.
they sorrowed; preferring the favor of God before the fruition of the land of
promise: whereby without Gods favor, they should have been fatted as cattle
for the slaughter. And in testimony of their humiliation, they put not on
their better attire, Verse. 6.
but laid aside their ornaments. And this they did, removing themselves from
mount Horeb, as acknowledging themselves unworthy of Gods presence, which he
had manifested on that mount. Where we see the laying aside of ornaments and
costly attire, appointed by the Lord himself for a sign and testimony of
humiliation. And to the same purpose, they used in those times to put on
sackcloth; whereby is meant any course or homely garment. Which ceremony
though it were abused by hypocrites in their private fasts to ostentation, that
they might be seen of men: yet in public fasts it was profitably observed
for the example of others, whose humiliation might be the more increased, by
the beholding one of another.

From delights and pleasures.
21 Fourthly, we are to abstain from all carnal delights, whereby any one of
our senses might be pleased. For the sense of pleasure would abate our
mourning, diminish the sense of our want, and hinder our unfeigned humiliation
before God. Wherefore Jerome says, that fasting is to abstain not only from
meats, but also from all pleasures or allurements. Quest. Euangel. lib. 2. c.
18.
And Augustine, The Scripture, says he, teaches a general fast, not from the
concupiscence of meats only, but also from all pleasures of temporal
delights. Thus are we not only to abridge our taste of meats, but also to
contain our eyes from beholding vanities and pleasures, our ears from hearing
mirth or music, which in time of mourning is unseasonable, our nostrils, from
pleasant odours and effeminate smells: 1. Cor. 7.5.
Our sense of feeling, from the use of the marriage bed: which as all married
persons are to forbear upon consent, for such a time of humiliation, that they
may give themselves to fasting and prayer; Joel* 2.16.
so are the Bridegroom and Bride admonished to come forth of their marriage
chamber, in the time of the fast. And all these are to be done, partly as
means of our humiliation, in removing the impediments thereof; partly as
signs of our humiliation, whereby we acknowledge our selves unworthy of these
delights; and partly as tokens of our repentance, in that by way of godly
revenge, because all our senses have sinned, we deprive the^ all of their
several delights. And as we are to make all our senses thus to fast: so must
we also weyne our minds from sports and recreations, which would not only
hinder our humiliation and godly sorrow, but also distract our minds from
better meditations in sanctifying the fast. And thus have I showed, that in our
fast we are to abstain from food and some other helps and commodities of this
life, and also from all outward delights and pleasures.

22 Now it remains, From bodily labors and worldly business.
that I should speak of rest from bodily labors and worldly business: For
the time of the fast has the nature of a Sabbath. And by the Prophet Joel it
is called dies interdicti, Joel. 1.14. and 2.15 (...)
a solemnity, or day of prohibition, wherein men are forbidden to do any work:
as ths Lord expounds that word Leui. 23. Leuit. 23.36.
It is a day of prohibition, or a solemn day, You shall do no servile work
therein. And Deuteronomy. 16. Deuteronomy. 16.8.
Six days thou shall eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day, which shall
be a solemnity or day of prohibition to the Lord thy God, thou shall do no
work. So Number. 29.35. For there is the same reason of the extraordinary Sabbath
of humiliation, and of the ordinary. But the ordinary was a Sabbath or rest,
Leuit. 23.28.30.32.
in which no work was to be done: yea, the Lord threatens to destroy that
person from among his people, that shall do any work that day. And as I said
before, the law of the weekly Sabbath is to be extended to other extraordinary
Sabbaths: But on the weekly Sabbath, we may do no work, therefore not in this.

23 But let us consider also, Why rest from labors is required.
why, and in what respects rest is required in the day of our fast, and bodily
labors and worldly business forbidden. The Lord forbids labor and worldly
business, and commands rest on every Sabbath: not because simply he either
likes of rest, or misliketh labor; but because bodily labors and worldly
business are a means to distract us from the worship of God: and rest from
them, is a remedy against distraction. For every Sabbath is to be sanctified
and set apart from our business and affairs, and is to be consecrated to the
worship of God. And further, on the Sabbath of humiliation, we take upon us
after a more special manner to worship God: and therefore that we may
seriously and entirely intend the service of God, we are to abando^ all other
business and cares. For that is better done which is done alone, as the
Philosopher has truly said, (...). Polit. 4.15.
And it is the counsel of the Wiseman, that, what we do, we should do with
all our might. For by doing many things our minds are distracted. This
therefore does teach us, that with free and entire minds, sequestered from all
worldly cares, we are to be conversant in the worship of God; chiefly, when
after a more special manner we endeavor to humble our selves before him. For
if bodily labors and worldly business be therefore forbidden, because they
are means to distract us: then may we be sure that distraction it self in the
worship of God is much more forbidden. For distraction breeds hypocrisy in
Gods worship, and causes us when we draw nigh to the Lord with our lips, to
remove our hearts far from him.

24. Again, the Lord commands us in all his Sabbaths to rest from labors,
that this outward rest might be an admonition unto us to rest from sin. For
why (may every one of us think) does the Lord forbid me on the day of rest,
the lawful works of may calling? Or why do I cease from mine honest
affairs? Must I forbear that which in it self is lawful; and may I do that
which is unlawful? Must I therefore for this time sequester my self from my
honest business, that I may attend vanities or sins? Or does the Lord
enjoyne me rest, because he is delighted with idleness, and would have me to
do nothing? No verily. If he forbid me that which is lawful, much more does
he forbid that which is unlawful. And if he command me to rest from honest
affairs, it is not because he would have me idle (for idleness is the mother
of much iniquity) but because he would have me attend better matters. In a
word, he forbids me to do mine own works and business, that I may do
his work, and attend his religion and service. Lastly, there may an outward
cause be rendered, why on the day of the fast we are to cease from bodily
labors. For our frail nature cannot well bear abstinence and bodily labor
together: for labor setting the body in a heat, wastes the moisture and
spirits, which are to be supplied by nourishment: otherwise we spend upon the
stock of our natural moisture, which is as it were the oil in the lamp of
our life.

25. We see then, How long this abstine^ce is to be used, or the time of the
fast.
wherein the outward exercise does consist, and the particulars from which we
are to abstain. Now we are briefly to consider, for how long this abstinence
is to be observed. The usual time of a fast is the space of a natural day,
viz. from even to even, or from supper to supper. For as that was the time
appointed for the ordinary Sabbath of humiliation, so also of the
extraordinary, From even to even shall you celebrate your Sabbath. Leuit.
23.32.
And accordingly it is noted of the Israelits fast, Judge. 20.26.
Iud. 20. of David and his followers, 2. Sam. 1.12. Ios. 7.6. 2. Sam. 3.35.
2. Sam. 1. of Iosuah and the elders, Ios. 7. that it was until the evening.
And more particularly of David's fast for Abner, that he refused to eat any
meat while it was yet day, but swore, saying, So do God to me and more also,
if I taste bread or ought else till the Sun be down. In like sort, not only
the Jews, but also the ancient Christians used to fast until the Sun were
set. Hieronym. in vita Hilarionis.
Howbeit in process of time they began especially in the Church of Rome to
dissolve their fasts at the ninth hour, which is three a clock afternoon:
which now they have brought to the sixth hour, and for the most part on their
fasting days go to supper before noone. But the shortest time that is
mentioned in the Scripture of a fast, is until the evening: to which custom
their practice is most conformable, who fast all day until the ordinary time
of supper. This, as I said, is the usual time. But the children of God, when
they have been pressed with more urgent occasion, have sometimes continued
this exercise for more days together: As Esther and the Jews for three days,
Esth. 4.16.17.
Esth. 4: and likewise Paul, Act. 9. Act. 9.9.
The men of Iabesh Gilead, when they mourned for the death of Saul and his
sons, fasted seven days, 1. Sam. 31. Daniell one and twenty days. 1. Sam.
31.13. Dan. 10.2, 3.


Of the forty days fast of Moses, Elias, and Christ.
26. As for the forty days fast, which Moses, Elias, and our Savior Christ
did fast, it was miraculous, and therefore not to be imitated. Neither did they
fast forty days together, either to subdue their flesh, or to humble their
souls: But Moses being the publisher of the law, Elias the restorer of
religion, our Savior Christ the author of the Gospel; the Lord would by this
miraculous fast so countenance their doctrine, as that in respect thereof they
might seem not men arising from the earth, or authorized by men, but the two
former as Angels, the third as the son of God, sent from heaven: for their
abstinence for the time was angelical. And we might as well take upon us to
imitate the Angels not taking of food, which they do not need, as the fast of
Christ and of the other two; who were by the power of God above the strength of
nature so sustained, as that during their forty days, they no more needed
food than angels do. Neither did our Savior Christ or either of the other,
fast forty days every year, but once only in all his life. Wherefore
unless we have the like cause of fasting, and the like power to support us (as
indeed none have) it is but a vain thing to go about to imitat their fast.
Now when the fast is continued for more days together, it is not unmeet, that
as in the mean time we are to take but one meal every day in the evening; so
also that we should at those times content our selves with a spare diet in
respect of the quantity, and mean in respect of the quality, whether it be
fish, or flesh, or neither; according to the example of Daniel. But when our
fast is once dissolved, Dan. 10.3.
whether it be at the end of one day, or of more, we may freely use our
ordinary diet, observing always the rules of temperance and sobriety. And it
fitteth best the faith of Gods children, when they have humbled themselves
before God, and poured forth their suit into his bosom; to cheer up
themselves in this persuasion, That they having commended and committed their
cause to God, he will dispose of it and them, as shall be most for his glory,
and their good. To this purpose consider the examples, of Anna, 1. Sam. 1, who
after she had fasted and poured forth her soul before the Lord, 1. Sam. 1.18.
2. Sam. 12.20.
she went her way and did eat, and looked no more sad: Of David, even then when
the Lord did seem to have denied his particular request, 2. Sam. 2. He arose
from the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and changed his apparel,
and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped, and afterward came to his
own house, and bad that they should set bread before him, and he did eat. And
thus much may suffice to have spoken of the outward fast.

27 Now for as much as the kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink, Of
the spiritual exercise, or inward fast, without which the outward is of no
value.
nor in the abstinence therefrom, and seeing bodily exercise profits little,
but piety (which consists in duties of religion sincerely performed) has the
promises both of this life, and of that which is to come: Romans 14.17. 1. Tim.
4.8.
therefore all this outward abstinence is nothing worth, unless it be joined
with the inward fast and spiritual exercise of religion, and be referred
thereunto, as to the end thereof. For if men rest in the outward fast, as
though that in it self were acceptable unto God, they fast no better than the
beasts of Niniuie fasted. They fast not unto God: Ion. 3. John 4.23, 24.
for God is a spirit, and they that will worship him, must worship him in
spirit and truth. Wherefore as Zachary says to the Jews, who resting in the
outward fast, Zach. 7.5.
imagined, that they pleased God thereby: When you fasted and mourned in the
fifth and seventh month these seventy years, did you in fasting fast to me,
to me, says the Lord? Likewise Esaias 58, when as the Lord respected not the
fast of the Jews, whereby they looked to win his favor, as appears by their
question, verse. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou respectest it not, we
have afflicted our souls, and thou regardest it not? He renders this reason:
Because neglecting the inward exercise, they rested in the outward. Verse. 5.
Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a man should for a day afflict his
soul (namely by outward fasting) and hang down his head like a bull-rush, and
lie down in sackeloth and ashes: will thou call this a fasting or an
acceptable day to the Lord? But if men shall not only rest in the outward
fast, as if that in it self were an acceptable worship of God; but shall also
observe it with an opinion of satisfaction and merit, persuading themselves,
that by their fast they satisfy for their sins, and merit everlasting life:
then is it much more abominable in the sight of God, as being derogatorie to
the only both satisfactorie sufferings and meritorious obedience of Christ our
Savior. And such seems to have been the fast of the Pharisie: Luke 18.11,
12, 14.
who for all his fasting twice a week, and his other merits which he
alleges, went home vnjustified. And such is the fast of the Papists at this
day, who not only rest in their outward fast, which notwithstanding in many
respects is but a mockefast: but also ascribe satisfaction and merit thereunto.
The inward fast is a solemn exercise of prayer, joined with repentance.


28. What then is the spiritual exercise and the inward fast, whereunto the
outward abstinence must be referred? It is an humbling of our souls in a
solemn exercise of prayer, joined with repentance, for the obtaining of our
special suit, helped forward and testified by the outward fast: as Ezra
speaks, Ezr. 8.21.
chap. 8. I proclaimed a fast, that we might humble our selves before our God,
and seek of him a right way, etc. For as the occasion of our fast is some
special suit or request, which we are upon urgent occasion to make to God: so
the obtaining of our request is the end of our fast. Now that we may obtain
our suit to our comfort, it is necessary that we should beg it at the hands
of God by prayer. For as James says, Iam. 4.2.
You have not, because you ask not. And because the Lord does not hear every
prayer of every man, therefore that our prayer may be heard, it is necessary,
that both it be qualified in some measure according to Gods will, 1 John 5.14.
and our selves also endued with repentance for our sins. For if our prayer
be not rightly qualified, we may ask and not obtain, as S. James says, Iam.
4.3.
You ask and receive not, because you ask amiss. Neither, if we repent not
of our sins, Esaias 59.2. John 9.31. Prou. 15.8.29.
shall we be heard; because sin makes a separation between God and us:
neither does the Lord hear impenitent sinners.

But if any shall object that we are to pray and repent continually, and
therefore that this exercise is to little purpose: I answer, that howsoever
prayer is to be performed of us daily and ordinarily, and repentance is to be
practiced of us continually in the whole course of our lives: yet this hinders
not, but that as the Lord gives us extraordinary occasion, so we may and
ought after a solemn and extraordinary manner to humble our selves before him
by prayer and repentance, Mat. 11.21. Job. 42.6.
which our Savior Christ calls, repenting in sackcloth and ashes, and
likewise Job, repenting in dust and ashes.

29. Now whereas I said, The two parts of repentance concurring with both the
parts of prayer
that this inward fast is an extraordinary exercise of prayer joined with a
profession of our repentance for the obtaining of our suit: we are to know,
that as of prayer, which expresses our suit, there be two parts, and two
especial properties: so of repentance, which secondeth our prayer, there are
also two parts. The parts of this prayer are, first, deprecation or praying
against some evil which we bewail, and desire to be removed, whether it be
the evil of sin alone, or the evil of affliction also caused thereby.
Secondly, precation for the obtaining of some good, whether it be only the
assurance for the remission of our sins, and grace to withstand them, or also
some other special blessing which we crave. The two especial properties of
our prayer, are feruencie of desire, and assurance of faith. The two parts of
repentance are, humiliation in respect of our sins past, (...), panitentia.
which is penitencie; and an unfeigned purpose of amending our lives for the
time to come, both in forsaking our sins, and also in embracing the contrary
duties, which is (...) (that is, amendment of life) properly. (...),
resipiscentia.
Both these parts of repentance must concur with both the parts of prayer.
And both of them afford their necessary help to both the properties of
prayer. For deprecation of pardon, must be joined not only with humiliation*
in respect of our sins past, but also with a loathing of our sins, and an
unfeigned desire and settled purpose to forsake them for the time to come. And
prayer for grace and assurance of pardon, must be joined not only with a
desire and purpose of amendment, but also with a sense and acknowledgement of
our infidelity and want of grace. And our feruencie in prayer, as it must
proceed from the sense of our want: so may it not be severed from a desire of
obedience and purpose of amendment. And lastly, the promise of hearing our
prayer, whereon our faith is grounded, is made both to those that are humbled
for their sins past, and unfeignedly desire and purpose amendment for the time
to come. Notwithstanding, there is a more special concurrence of humiliation
with deprecation, and of an unfeigned purpose of amendment with precation: and
also a more special reference, as of humiliation to the feruencie of our
desire, so of repentance, which consists in eschewing evil and doing good to
the assurance of faith. Yea the inward sense and sorrow, and the outward
bewayling and confessing of our sins in deprecation, are acts of humiliation:
and the desire, the promise, the vow of obedience and amendment of life
expressed in our precation, are acts of repentance. But for distinction sake we
are first to speak of humiliatio^, which is as it were a preparatiue to
prayer: secondly, of the parts and properties of prayer thirdly, of repentance
and amendment of life, which must as it were second ou^ prayer: Humiliation is
partly inward, which stands in two things* 1. An inward sense of our misery
and sorrow for the same: 2. King. 22.19. Act. 2.37. Joel 2.13. Psalm. 51.17.
Mat. 9.15.
And therefore for plainness and distinction sake, I will first speak of the
former part of our suit, consisting in the deprecation joined with humiliation:
and after of the second part, which stands in the precation joined with
amendment of life.

30. For as touching the former: if we would be humble and earnest suitors
for the remoouing of evil, whether it be sin, or punishment, or both; it
behooves us first to be affected and touched with a sense and feeling of our
misery, and to be inwardly grieved for our sins, that by them we have
offended God, who has been so gracious a God, and so merciful a father unto
us, and also have provoked him to threaten or to execute his judgments against
us for the same. This then is the first thing which we are to labor for in
this exercise, that in regard of our sins, which have made us obnoxious to
Gods judgments, our hearts may melt within us, and be resolved into a
fountain of tears; that they may be pricked with sorrow and remorse, that
they may be rent with grief, that they may become contrite and broken with
godly sorrow. For mourning is so perpetually annexed to fasting, that our
Savior Christ uses these words of fasting and mourning indifferently, to
signify the same thing. For being demanded, why his disciples fasted not; he
said, can the children of the marriage chamber mourn, as long as the
bridegroom is with them? but the days will come when the bridegroom shall
be taken from them, and then shall they fast. For further evidence whereof,
Mark 2.9. Luke 5.34.
we may observe, that where Matthew uses the word mourn, the other Evangelists
have fast. And to the same purpose, when the Jews demanded of the Prophets,
whether they were still to observe the fast of the fifth month, etc. they
propose their question in these words, Z^ch. 7 3.
Should I weep in the fifth month, and separate my self, viz. from company
and delights? And this mourning, they which fasted were wont under the law to
signify by outward signs: Ios. 7.6. 1. King. 21.27. Joel 2.13. Esaias. ^8.1.
Psalm. 35.13. and 69.12. Es^h. 4.1.3. Ion. 3.5, 6, 8. Psalm. 69.11. Joel 2.13.
as by renting their garments, putting on of sackcloth, sitting in the ashes,
putting earth upon them. In stead of which signs, the thing signified (that
is, the inward mourning of the heart) is commended unto us, according to the
example of David, Psalm. 69.11. In fasting I wept with my soul: or as others
read, I wept in the fasting of my soul. For so the Prophet exhorts, Rent
your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord with all your
hearts, and with fasting, weeping, and mourning.

31. And to this godly sorrow must be added an humble conceit of our selves:
An humble and vile estimation of our selves.
that as we be grieved with our selves because of our sin, so also we should
think vilely and esteem basely of our selves, as being worthy not only of
that judgment which is upon us, but of all the plagues threatened in the law,
and unworthy of the least of Gods mercies: unworthy of food, signified by our
abstinence therefrom: unworthy of our garments, which therefore we lay aside:
unworthy to tread upon the earth, Exodus 33.4.
which they were wont to signify by putting earth upon them. In a word, the
outward abstinence is therefore ordained, that by afflicting the body, the
soul may be humbled. Yea such an usual companion of fasting is the
humiliation of the soul, that not only the faithful in the Scripture are
said to humble their soul by fasting, Psalm. 35.13. Esaias 58.5. Leuit. 23.27.32.
1. King. 21.29.
but sometimes also even the outward fasting is called the humbling of the
soul. This inward humiliation consisting partly in the godly sorrow, and
partly in this base estimation of our selves, is very needful for us, if
indeed we would be humble suitors unto the Lord, with hope to obtain: Psalm.
51.17.
For, the sacrifices of God are a contrit spirit, and a broken heart, which the
Lord in no wise will despise, Esaias 66.2.
yea he has respect to those who are of a contrit spirit, Psalm. 34.17.18.
and he is near unto them when they call upon him.

32. And that we may attain to this humiliation, How we are to attain to this
humiliation.
we are seriously to meditat of the judgments of God presently either
threatened or laid upon us: for therefore the Lord does threaten his judgments,
Ezekiel. 33.11.
that by humbling our selves before him, Amo^ 4.12.
and preparing our selves to meet him, they might be prevented and turned from
us: and that judging our selves we might not be judged of the Lord. 1. Cor.
11.31.
And therefore also does the Lord inflict his judgment, that we might be
humbled under his mighty hand: Ier. 5.3.
For not to sorrow when the Lord smites, it is a sign of an hard and
incorrigible heart: And secondly, we are to enter into a serious meditation of
the haynousnesse of our sins, and of our wretched estate in our selves by
reason thereof, which we may conceive: first, by the deserts of them; and
namely by that judgment of God which perhaps is the occasion of this exercise:
For whatsoever other causes there may be thereof, the author and inflicting
cause is God, 1. Cor. 11 32.
and the meriting cause is sin. And not only that judgment, Lam. 3.39.
but also all those plagues both temporal in this life, and eternal in the
world to come, which in the word of God are threatened against transgressors.
And these threatenings of the law we are both undoubtedly to believe, and also
effectually to apply to our selves. Again, the same appears by the
sufferings of Christ: For hereby it is most evident, that our sins are so
heinous and grievous in the sight of God, that nothing in the whole world could
be found a sufficient ransom to satisfy Gods justice, and appease his wrath
for them, or to expiat us from the guilt thereof, but the precious death of our
Savior Christ the son of God. And therefore if God has given us the spirit
of grace and supplication, we shall lament and mourn as a man weeping for his
only son, when we look upon him whom we have pierced. And thirdly, Zach.
12.10.
our sin will appear exceedingly sinful, if we compare and lay together
Gods unspeakable bounties toward us, and our almost incredible unthankfulness
toward him: For if thou do truly and impartially consider, what thou have
rendered to the Lord for all his benefits which he has bestowed on thee, and
find nothing but a heap of sins, whereby thou have showed thy self so
ungracious toward him, who has been so gracious unto thee, and dishonored
him that has so honored thee: this, if anything in the world, will make thy
Abraham when he was to entreat the Lord in behalf of the Sodomits, Behold,
says he, Genesis 18.27.
I have begun to speak to my Lord, and I am but

Partly outward, arising from the inward humiliation: whereof also are two
branches, first, Lamentation arising from the inward sorrow,
33. From the inward humiliation two other things arise, which usually accompany
deprecations: Namely, from the inward sense of our woe and sorrow for our
misery, proceeds an outward bewailing and lamenting of our estate, which in
the faithful sometimes breaks forth into expostulation. And from the base
esteeming and judging our selves, arises confession of our sins, in respect
whereof we acknowledge our selves unworthy of the lest of Gods mercies, but
worthy of his greatest judgments. Lamentation is the outward expressing of
our inward mourning, whereby we particularly bewail our woeful estate before
the Lord, making our moan unto him, and pouring forth our grief as it were
into his bosom. Examples hereof we have in David's Psalms, as Psalm. 6. and 22.
and 38. and 79, etc. in Ieremies Lamentations. In Ezekias, Esaias 38.14.
who in his grief did chatter like a crane or a swallow, and mourned like a
dove. Thus some expound that place, 1. Sam. 7.6.
1. Sam. 7, where it is said that the Jews bewailing their miserabe estate,
Drew water and poured it soorth before the Lord, that they used this ceremony
before the Lord to signify, that without his special mercy and assistance,
they were as water spilt upon the earth: to which purpose David says unto the
Lord, Psalm. 22.14. 2. Sam. 14.14.
Psalm. 22.14, I am like water poured out: and the wise woman of Tekoah unto
David, 2. Sa. 14, We shall be like water that is spilt on the ground, which
cannot be gathered up again. And to this bewailing of our estate before the
Lord, we may be induced by consideration of Gods mercy, who because he is
merciful, does hear the cry of his creatures in their distress: Exodus 22.
for if the Lord does hear sometimes the cry of wicked men in their anguish,
Genesis 21.17.
although perhaps it be not a prayer, but the voice, which the extremity of
their grief expresses from them; Psalm. 147.9 and 104.21.27.28.
yea the cry of unreasonable creatures, as of the young Lions and the ravens,
etc. how much more will he have respect to the mournful cry of his own
children? But the faithful sometimes in there mourning and lamentations do
proceed, And sometimes breaks forth into exp^stulations.
as I said, to expostulations, which are vehement interrogations expressed from
them by their grief: whereby they do expostulat with the Lord, Exodus 5.22.
Ios. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 6.3. and 22.1.2.
concerning either the greatness, or continuance of their affliction: As Moses
Exodus 5. Joshua, chap. 7. David, Psalm. 6.3. and 22.1, 2. Job oftentimes, the
Church afflicted, Psalm. 79. and 80, Psa^. 75.5. and 80.4.
Lam. 5. And our Savior on the cross, Math. 27. But here we are to take great
heed, that our expostulation be an holy fruit of a lively faith: Lam. 5 20.
Math. 27.46.
lest if it proceed from want of patience, it do degenerat into murmuring
against God.

Confession of our sins, arising from the humble and base estimation of our
selves. Psalm. 51.4. Dan. 9.7.
34. The other thing which must concur with deprecation, is confession of our
sins, which is both profitable and necessary in these respects. First, that
God in his judgments may be justified. And to that purpose it is very
expedient, that the praise of the Lord may appear more glorious, and the
sins which we confess, more grievous; to make a rehearsal, as of our
sins, so also of Gods benefits toward us: notable examples whereof we have
Nehem. 9. from the fifth verse unto 36. and Ezr. 9.6. Secondly, Nehe. 5. etc.
Ezr. 9.6. 1. Cor. 11.31.
that judging our selves, we may not be judged of the Lord: For if we
acknowledge and confess our sins, the Lord is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, 1. John 1.9.
and to cleanse us from all iniquity: But if we conceal our sins we have no
promise of forgiveness: for as Solomon says, Prou. 28.13.
Prou. 28, He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses
and forsakes them, shall have mercy. And this we see notably verified in the
example of David, Psalm. 32. for whiles he concealed his sin, the hand of the
Lord was heavy upon him to afflict him: but when he confessed and acknowledged
his iniquity, Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5. 1. Sam. 7 6. Ezr. 9.6, 7, etc. Neh 16, 7, Dan.
9.3.5. etc.
the Lord forgave his sin. The practice of this duty in solemn fasts is
commended unto us in many examples of the holy Scriptures, as 1. Sam. 7. Ezr.
9. Nehe. 1. Daniell 9.

In and with this humiliation, our prayer, and especially our deprecation is to
be made.
35. Thus therefore in an inward sense and sorrow for our sins, and a base
estimation of our selves for the same, together with a bewailing of our woe and
confession of our sin, we are to make our humble supplication and deprecation
to the Lord, pouring forth our soul before him: earnestly beseeching him in
the name and mediation of Christ, that he would remove his judgments from us,
and for his sake would forgive us our sins which have most justly provoked him
to indignation against us. Joel 2.17.
A lively pattern whereof we have Joel 2.17. Let them say, spare thy people o
Lord, etc. and other worthy precedents, Dan. 9.5.16.17, 18. Nehem. 9.32.
as Dan. 9, and Nehem. 9. And herein we being summoned as it were before the
judgment seat of the Lord, are to immitat the ancient custom of guilty
persons among the Romans, when they were arraigned before the judgment seat;
who that they might move the Judges to mercy and compassion, humbly abased
themselves before them, using long and neglected hair, and putting on mourning
weeds, 1. Kin. 20.31.
etc. And as Benhadad his servants and followers, when they being vanquished by
Achab the king of Israel, desired to make humble suit unto him for their own
and Benhadad his life and liberty: We have heard, say they to Benhadad, that
the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings, we pray thee let us put
sackcloth about our loins, and ropes about our heads, and go out to the king
of Israel: it may be that he will save thy life. So let us, having sinned
against God, and made our selves obnoxious to his judgments, come unto the
Lord with all inward humiliation, and outward tokens thereof, as it were with
ropes about our necks, suing unto him for mercy and pardon, seeing we have
not only heard that he is merciful: but also know that he has commanded us
in our distress to call upon him with promise to hear us: Psalm. 50.15. Joel
2.12, 13.
and also has invited us to turn unto him with all our heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: and that we should rent our
hearts and not our garments: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. Whereunto the other part
of prayer, which is precation for good, is to be annexed. Phil. 4.6. Ephesians. 6.1^.
1. Tim. 2.1. and 5.5.


36. But forasmuch as we are suitors to the Lord, not only for avoiding that
which is evil, but also for obtaining that which is good: we are therefore to
make our requests known unto God, not only by supplications and deprecations
againsts evils; but also by petitions and precation for that which is good: and
therefore the holy Ghost both by doctrine and example has taught us to join
them together: Act. 1.14.
For if we truly bewail our sins, and earnestly desire to be delivered from
the guilt thereof: we will also crave assurance of the remission of our sins
to be sealed up in our conscience by the spirit of adoption: and not that
only, but also we will desire to be renewed and sanctified by the spirit of
God, that sin may die in us, and that we may live unto God in true holiness
and righteousness. And lastly, we will crave the assistance of the holy Ghost
to strengthen and support us against all the temptations of the flesh, the
world and the devil. But if besides the evil of sin we have occasion also
to pray against some evil of punishment, then do we commonly pray for the
contrary blessing: or if the obtaining thereof be not expedient for us (as in
temporal petitions it many times falls out) we must willingly submit our
selves to Gods good will and pleasure, and in steed of asking preservation from
that which is present, we are to crave patience and comfort in affliction, and
to beseech the Lord that he would bless his visitation unto us, and cause it
to turn unto our good. And therefore these temporal benefits are not (as I
have elsewhere showed) to be asked absolutely, In Psalm. 50.51.
but with this condition, If they may stand with Gods glory, and our
spiritual and everlasting good.

The 2 properties of prayer.
37. And these two were the parts of our prayer. Now in them both there are two
things required: feruencie of desire that we may, and assurance of faith that
we shall obtain our request. 1. Feruencie.
As touching the former: Feruencie is required always in our prayers, but
especially when upon extraordinary occasion we humble our selves before the
Lord in prayer: for then we must not only pray, Joel 1.14.
but also cry unto the Lord; whereby vehement prayer is signified: Ion. 3.8.
yea as the Niniuits speak, we are to cry mightily unto him. And forasmuch as
this feruencie of desire proceeds from the feeling of our want, and is
commonly proportionable thereunto: therefore does the Lord afflict us, that in
the sense of our want we might the more earnestly pour forth our souls
before him: and to the same purpose do we afflict our selves by the outward
fast, that we might the better give our selves to prayer: for therefore do we
abstain from food and delights, that the sense of our want might be increased,
and so our feruencie inflamed; therefore do we abstain from our bodily labors
and worldly business, that we might the better attend and intend our prayer;
and therefore also do we abridge our selves of unnecessary sleep, that we
might watch unto prayer. For this cause some have called fasting, The wing of
prayer: because the earnestnes thereof being inflamed by fasting, it does the
more forcibly ascend before the Lord. De ieiunio Sermon. 1.
(...) (says Basil) (...): Fasting sends up prayer unto heaven, being as it
were a wing unto it, Tom. 4. homil. ad pop. 71.
to help it in the ascent. And to the like purpose, Chrysostom, He that
prays with fasting has two wings (says he) namely to lift him up from the
earth. And forasmuch as this is one maine end whereunto fasting is referred,
hence it is that so often we do read in the Scriptures of fasting joined with
prayer. See Ios. 7.7. 1. Sam. 1.10. and 7.5.6. 2. Sam. 12.16. 2. Chron. 20.6.
Ezr. 8.23. Neh. 1.4. and 9.1.6, etc. Psalm. 35.13. Dan. 9.3. Joel. 1.14. and
2.15.17. Jonas 3.5.8. Math. 17.21. Luke 2.37. Act. 9.9.11. and 10.30. and 13.3.
and 14.23. 1. Cor. 7.5. In quadrages. Sermon. 4.
For as Bernard says, Ieiu^ium orationem roborat, oration sanctificat ieiunium:
Fasting fortifieth prayer: prayer sanctifies fasting.

38. 2 Faith, which must be grounded first on the mediation of Christ,
The second thing required in prayer, is Faith: for as we are in our prayers to
call upon God in the name of Christ; so are we to believe, that for Christ his
sake the Lord will hear us, and so far forth grant our requests as shall be
most for his glory, and our good: for howsoever when we fast, we are to be
humbled in our selves, mourning for our sins and bewailing our wants; yet we
must not so cast down our selves, that we cast away hope, but contrariwise we
are to cast our selves upon the mercies of God in Christ: yea therefore does
God touch us with a sense of our want, that feeling our misery, we might fly
unto him for mercy. And therefore are we to humble our selves before God, Luke
18.14.
that being cast down in our selves, we may be exalted in Christ. Wherefore
in our fast we are so to deplore our misery, that withal we implore the
mercy of God; being well assured, though in our selves we are unworthy to
appear in his presence, or to lift up our eyes to heaven, yet coming unto him
in the name of Christ, we and our prayers shall be accepted of him in his
son. 2. On the promises of God.
This faith is to be grounded also on the gracious promises of God made unto us
in Christ: John 16.23.
As namely, that whatsoever we shall ask the father in his name, Psalm. 50.15.
he will give it unto us, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee and thou shall glorify me. And more specially the Lord promises by his
Prophet Joel to the people of the Jews being afflicted with a grievous famine,
Joel 2.18.19.
That if they humbled their souls before him in fasting and prayer, he would
grant their desire.

And is to be confirmed, 1, by experience of those who have used this exercise
with happy success: Ez^. 8.23.
39. And the same may be confirmed by the experience of those, who having used
this exercise, have obtained their requests at the hands of God. Call to mind
the examples in the places before alleged, of Annab 1. Sa. 1. of the Israelits
1. Sam. 7, of Iosaphat 2. Chr. 20. of Neb. cha. 1. of Daniel, chap. 9. of Ezra,
who professes his experience in this behalf: We fasted, says he, and
besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us. Of Esther, Mordochay and
the Jews, who ordained the fast of Purim to be celebrated yearly on the
fourteenth and fifteenth day of the month Adar, Esth. 9.22.
as days of feasting and joy, and as perpetual monuments of that great
deliverance which they had obtained by fasting and prayer: In which sense they
are called, Verba seu document a ieiuniorum and clamoris sui, Esth. 9.31. Verse
31.
And for the better confirmation of our faith, let us to this experience of
Gods dealing with the faithful, add the examples even of Rehoboam, of Achab,
and of the Niniuits: For if when the Lord had threatened destruction to
Rehoboam, by Shemaiah; to Achab, by Elias; and to the Niniuits, by Jonas:
notwithstanding by fasting and humbling themselves, Rehoboam, who with his
people had forsaken the Lord; 2. Chron. 12.5.7.12.14.
Achab, who had sold himself to commit wickedness; and the Niniuits who being
not only aliants from God, 1. King. 21.29.
but also the posterity of cursed Cham, had filled heaven and earth with their
transgressions, Ion. 3.10*
escaped that judgment which was threatened against them: how much more is this
exercise to be undertaken of all those that truly repent and believe in Christ,
with assurance of good success? Fear not my little flock (says our Savior
Christ to all the faithful) for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom, Luke 12.32.
and therefore he will not deny you small requests, if they may be for your
good. And if the Lord has so loved us, as that he has not spared his son,
but has given him for us all; how shall he not with him, Romans 8.32.
give us all things also that may be expedient for us? He does not think any
thing too good or too dear for us, who has given his son to us in pretium,
for a ransom, and reserueth himself in pramium, for a reward.

40. 2, By the religious performance of this exercise, whereby we may be the
better qualified according to the condition implied in the promise.
But you will say: If our faith must be grounded upon the promises of God,
what help then does fasting afford unto it? I answer, first, That fasting
being commanded and ordained of God, it is to be undertaken with expectation
of a blessing upon his own ordinance. And secondly, although our faith may not
rely upon the merit of our fasting (which indeed is none) but only on the
promise of God in Christ; yet being rightly performed, it affoordeth a good
testimony to our conscience, that the promise belongs to us: for although we
believe in general, the promises of God to be true; yet we shall have small
comfort by them, unless we can be persuaded that they belong unto us. And how
can we persuade our selves that they belong unto us, if we have not the
condition implied in the promise? As for example: The Lord has promised to
have respect to the humble, to be near unto them when they call upon him, Esaias
66.2. Psalm. 34.18. 1. Pet. 5.5. Luke 18.14. Mat. 5.6. John 7.73.
to give grace unto them, and to exalt them: Likewise to them that hunger after
righteousness, and thirst for his grace, he has promised, that they shall be
satisfied. If therefore thou would apply these promises to thy self, thou
must humble thy self before God, and not be lifted up with pride: thou must
hunger and thirst after the grace of God and righteousness of Christ, and not
be full with a conceit of thine own righteousness. But by fasting, our
humiliation, as I have showed, may be furthered, and our spiritual hunger
increased, and so our selves better qualified, according to the condition
included in the promise: which condition if we find in our selves, then may we
from the promise as it were the proposition, applied to our selves by the
testimony of our conscience, as it were the assumption, gather to our selves a
comfortable conclusion. Of which comfort they bereave themselves, who perform
this exercise in an opinion of meriting thereby: for when fasting is joined
with a conceit of merit, it does not so much humble the body, as puff up the
soul, and so make it incapable of the grace of God: for the Lord gives grace
to the humble, and he resists the proud. 1. Pet. 5.5.
And as the blessed virgin says, He fills the hungry with good things, Luke
1.53.
but the rich he sends empty away.

3. By the practice of repentance, concurring also with our prayer in this
exercise.
41. Another notable means to confirm our faith in the assurance of obtaining
our suit, is to forsake our sins (which make a separation between God and us)
and to promise amendment for the time to come, which also is testified by our
fast: For it is not sufficient to confess our sins, Esaias 59.2.
if we would find mercy with God; but also we must forsake them. Prou. 28.13.
And if we desire to be delivered from the evil which does afflict us, and to
obtain the contrary blessing which does affect us: then it behooves us to
forsake our sin, which is the cause of the affliction, and also an obstacle,
and as it were a partition wall betwixt God and us, Ezekiel. 43.8.
to keep his blessings from us. Would thou then have thine affliction
removed? remove the cause, which is thy sin. And if thou would have God
to repent him of the evil of affliction, Ion. 3.10.
which he has either threatened or inflicted, then must thou also repent of the
evil of sin, which has merited the affliction. Now if we shall truly repent
of our sins, and vnsainedly purpose amendment of life for the time to come,
then may we persuade our selves that our preservation and deliverance shall be
joined with Gods glory; and consequently may be emboldned with better
assurance of faith, to desire the Lord to preserve and deliver us even for his
own glory, and for his names sake. But here, as we desire any sound comfort, so
must we deal soundly with the Lord: and not as the common practice of the
most, in the time of affliction, to promise greatmatters unto the Lord, which
they have no true purpose to perform: for this is to fly unto God, and to go
about to deceive him with our lips. Psalm. 78.36.


42. And hereby appears the great necessity of joining the practice of
repentance with the exercise of prayer in our fast. This repentance or
amendment stands in two things:
And therefore fasting as it was ordained to be an help unto our prayer, so
also to be both a testimony and furtherance of our repentance, as I have
showed. Now our repentance stands in two things, in the eschewing of evil,
The former, is eschewing evil:
and doing of good. As touching the former: abstinence from evil and ceassing
from sin, is signified in our fast, by abstinence form food and delights, and
by cessing from our labors: For therefore the Lord does the rather require in
our fasts the abstaining and ceassing from things in themselves lawful, that
thereby we might be admonished much more to abstain from that which is
unlawful. Sermon. 1. de ieiunio.
In which respect, Basil calls fasting, (...), a medicine to take away sin.
And Augustine, De tempore sermon. 64.
this is (says he) the profit of fasting, that whiles we fast from lawful
things, we are admonished more and more to forbear unlawful things. If
therefore we avoid things which sometimes are lawful, let us chiefly avoid
sins which are never lawful: if we fast from meats, much more let us fast
from sins: Quid prodest vacuare corpus ab escis, and animam replere peccatis?
What avails it to keep the body empty from meats, and to fill the soul
with sin? For abstinence from things lawful, if it be not joined with
abstinence from things unlawful, that is to say, if our fasting from food and
other delights be not joined with fasting from sin, it is odious and
abominable in the sight of God. Esaias 1.13. Non possum far iniquitate^ and
diem interdicti.
A day of rest, and not resting from sin, the Lord cannot endure together. It
is not the emptiness of the belly or cleanness of the teeth, but the purity
of the foul and cleanenesse of the heart; nor the outward rest from labor,
but the spiritual rest from sin that is acceptable unto God: without which,
the outward fast as it causes us to smell worse to men, Arist. problem. sect.
13. quest. 7.
according to the prouerbiall phrase, (...) so makes it us to stink before
God.

Which is the true fast.
43. It is well said of the heathen man, that we ought to fast from sin. For
as Sermon. 1. de ieiun.
Basil truly says, (...): (...); Plutarch de cohibend. ira.
true fasting is abandoning of evil. And to the like purpose others of the
fathers: Chrysostom, True fasting (says Tom. 4. homil. 72. ad populum.
he) is abstinence from evil: and again, Homil. de iejun. ad Pop. Antioch. De
tempore Sermon. 173. In Leuit. lib. 10
the commendation of a fast is not abstaining from meat, but avoiding of sin.
Augustine, The fasts of Christians are rather spiritually to be observed, than
carnally. Wherefore let us principally fast from sin. For what a thing is
this, that any deceiuer should abstain from meats which God has created, and
should grow fat with sin? principally therefore let our mind fast from evil:
for seeing fasting is the humbling of the soul, what a thing is that, to be
humbled and abated in food, and increased in sin? And likewise Cyrill, Will thou have me show thee what manner of fast thou must observe? fast from all
sin, take no food of malice, receive no dainties of pleasure, inflame not
thy self with the wine of lust, fast from bad practices, abstain from evil
speeches, contain thy self from wicked thoughts: such a fast pleases God.
But these testimonies of men were of little weight, if the Lord himself did
not avouch the same truth. See therefore Esaias 58. and Zach. 7. where the Lord
rejects the fasts of the Jews, Esai. 58.2.3.4. etc.
because whiles they fasted and forbear their food, Zach. 7.5.7.
they did not forbear their sins. We must therefore remember when we observe
a fast, and consecrate a Sabbath of humiliation unto the Lord, Esaias. 58.3.15.
that we turn away our foot, that is, our affections from doing our own will
therein: neither must we follow our own ways, nor seek our own delights,
nor speak a vain word.

44. And as we are to abstain from all sin in general: Especially we are
to abstain from those sins wherein we have chiefly offended, and whereby the
anger of the Lord is or has been especially provoked against us.
so especially from those wherein we have chiefly offended, and have thereby
provoked the Lord either to shake his rod at us, or else to correct us
therewith. For they being the cause of the judgment, must be removed away, if
we would have the judgment it self removed. And therefore the Niniuits, when
they proclaimed a fast, gave in charge, that every one should turn from his
evil way and from that violence (for that was the crying sin of the
Niniuits) which was in their hand. And when God saw their works, that they
turned from their evil ways, he also repented of the evil that he had said
that he would do unto them, Ion. 3.8, 10.
that is to say, he did it not. And we must so abstain from our sins, as
that we may not seem to have laid them aside for a day or two, but to have
cast them off for ever. Esaias. 58.5.
For that is not the fast which the Lord has chosen, that a man should afflict
his soul for a day, and hang down his head like a bullrush. For as the son
of Syrach says, He that washes himself because of a dead body, and touches
it again, Eccles. 34.27.
what avails his washing? so it is with a man that fasteth for his sins, and
commits them again: who will hear his prayer, or what does his fasting
help him?

Sermon. de temp. 173. The latter part is ensuing or following after that which
is good. By practicing good duties for the present toward God and our
neighbor, Zach. 7.9, 10.
45. But for as much as Augustine says, It is but a slender fast to abstain
only from sin, unless we also add good works: therefore we must know it
is our duty, especially on the day of the fast, not only to eschew evil, but
also for the present to be exercised in well doing: and for the time to come to
purpose and to promise amendment. The duties wherein we are to be exercised,
are both the duties of piety and religion toward God, which in the time of
the fast are to be performed in a special manner: and also the duties of love
and mercy toward our brethren; as to execute true judgment, to show mercy
and compassion every man to his brother. For is not this the fasting that I
have chosen (says the Lord) to loose the bands of wickedness, Esaias 58.6.
to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that
ye break every yoke? Especially the duties of mercy and almes-giuing.
Among the rest, the duty of almes-giuing and relieuing the poor is commended
unto us, as it follows in the Prophet: Is it not to deal the bread to the
hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander, Verse. 7.
unto thine house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not
thy self from thine own flesh, for so he calls thy poor brother. Then
shall thy light break forth, Verse. 8.
etc. then shall thou call, and the Lord will answer, Verse. 9.
thou shall cry, and be will say, here am I. If thou take away from the
midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger (whereby is meant
even the least injuries) and wicked speaking: Verse. 10.
if thou pour out thy soul to the hungry (that is, if with the bowels of
compassion thou do relieve his need freely and chearefully) and refresh the
troubled soul, then shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy
darkness shall be as the noone day: that is, thine adversity and affliction
shall be turned into peace and prosperity.

46. Wherefore it has been and is the custom of the godly in the time of
their fasts, Which must concur with our fast.
by doing works of mercy and giving alms, to relieve the poor. For as our
Savior has joined the doctrine of these three together, alms, prayer, and
fasting; so must we after the example of Cornelius join them in practice. Mat.
6. Act. 10.30.31. Mat. 5.7. Esaias 58.9. Prou. 21.13.
For as the Lord has promised to show mercy to the merciful, and to answer
their cry: so on the other side, he that stops his ear at the crying of
the poor, himself shall cry and not be heard. And surely, unless we will
fast for sparing, after the manner of niggards, who will be glad of so good a
pretense to spare from their bellies, and to deprive their families of their
ordinary allowance, for the increase of their worldly estate; In alimentis
pauperu^ abrupti apparatus ^tipe^dia largiatur. August. de temp. Sermon. 173. In
Esaias 58. Ser. de temp. 64.
we ought to give so much to the poor, as by our abstinence is saved: Vt
ieiunium tuum (says Jerome) non sit lucrum marsupij, sed saturitas animae;
that thy fast be not the gain of thy purse, but the saturitie of thy soul. For
as Augustine says, Then are our fasts acceptable to God, when as they, whom
need does force to fast, are refreshed by us. And again, Ieiunium tuum te
castiget, sed laetificet alterum: Let thy fasting chastise thee, but let it
comfort another. So fast, that thou may be glad that thou have dined in
another that eats by that means, De temp. sermon. 65.
for the Lord loves a cheerful giver: for when a poor man eats of thine
allowance, in him Christ, who affirms himself to be hungry in his poor
members, does dine. And elsewhere, De tempore, sermon. ^57.
Accipiat esuriens Christus, quod ieiunans minus accepit Christianus. Let
Christ, being hungry in his poor members, receive that which the fasting
Christian has spared. Castigatio volentis, fiat sustentatio non habentis: Let
the chastisement of him that has and is willing to forbear, be the sustenance
of him that has not and feign would eat. In Leuit. lib. 10 in fine.
And to conclude, Cyrill, In a certain book (says he) we find it said of the
Apostles, Blessed is he who fasteth to that end, that he may feed the poor.

47. And as we are thus for the present to be exercised, By purposing and
promising amendment for the time to come.
so for the time to come we must unfeignedly purpose and faithfully promise
amendment, in performing duties heretofore omitted, and in eschewing sins
heretofore committed. And to this purpose it shall be needful for the better
settling of our resolution, to bind our selves by a solemn vow, and with the
Jews in the book of Nehemiah to put our seals unto it, Nehem. 9.38.
that so we may impose a necessity upon our selves of well doing: and we are
to know, that it is a happy necessity which forces us to better things. The
necessity of this unfeigned purpose to be had in this exercise, is evident:
because without it we remain in our impenitencie. And being impenitent
sinners, the Lord will not hear us: as the Lord threatened the impenitent
Jews, When they fast (says he) I will not hear their cry, Ierem. 14.12.
Ierem. 14. And therefore unless we repent of our sins, and resolve to
amend; this exercise, which we (being suitors) undertake for the obtaining of
our suit, is performed of us in vain. For this we are to know and to be
assured of, John 9.31.
That the Lord hears not impenitent sinners. Wherefore true is that saying,
though of an Apocryphal book: Teb. 12.8.
Prayer is good, with fasting, alms, and righteousness.

The sorts of the religious fast, vz. private, or public. The private fast
48. And thus we have heard what the religious fast is, and the parts also
wherein it does consist. Now we are to consider the sorts of it: for the
religious fast is either private, or public. The private fast, is that which is
observed privately: as the fast of some one man, or of a private family. And
this is to be undertaken either for private, or public causes: for private,
concerning either our selves and those that belong to us; so fasted Annah, 1.
Sam. 1. Cornelius, Psalm. 35.13.
Act. 10. David, 2. Sam. 12: or others, as David for those that proved his
enemies: and Darius (though an heathen) for Daniell, Dan. 6.19.
when he was cast into the Lions den. But we are to fast privately, not only
upon private occasions, but much more upon public causes. For as it is the
duty of the faithful, Ezech. 9.4.
privately to mourn for public calamities and common corruptions, which
ordinarily are the fore runners of common calamities: so also they may fast
therefore. Neh. 1.4.
And such was the fast of Nehemiah, chap. 1. and of Daniel, Dan. 9. Mat. 6.16,
17, 18
chap. 9. In private fasts our Savior Christ requires that they be so secretly
performed, as that unto men we may not seem to fast, but only to our heavenly
father, who seeing in secret, will reward us openly. And for as much as the day
of the fast has the nature of a Sabbath, wherein we are to cease from bodily
labors and worldly business: therefore those which be under the government of
others, Number. 30.14.
as wives, children, and servants, may not take upon them to observe a fast on
a working day, without the leave and liking of their governors.

49. The public fast is that, The public fast Ier. 36.9.
which being upon public cause, by public authority proclaimed before the
Lord, is both publicly and privately to be sanctified of all as a Sabbath of
humiliation unto the Lord. In which definition there are four things to be
observed: first, who are to appoint the public fast; secondly, upon what
cause; thirdly, who are to observe it; fourthly, how. As touching the first:
Who are to appoint it.
The appointment of public fasts appertains to those who have public
authority to call the people together to the public worship of God, and to
cause them to cease from their bodily labors and worldly affairs: as appears
in the examples of public fasts recorded in the word of God: as 2. Chron.
20.3. Ion. 3.7. 1. Sam. 7.5. Ezr. 8.21. Joel 1.14. And this they are to do by
proclaiming of the fast, that is, both by giving public notice of it, and
also by charging all men to assemble themselves at the time appointed, to
observe it; according to the direction of the holy ghost by the Prophet Joel:
Joel. 2.15, 16.
Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, that is, by your proclamation
(which is meant by sounding the trumpet) appoint a fast to be sanctified,
proclaim a day of rest, or Sabbath of humiliation, assemble the people, etc.
And here we are to observe that which is further added out of Ierem. 36. Ier.
36.9.
that this fast is to be proclaimed before the Lord, that both they which have
authority, do proclaim it not in any wicked or worldly respect, 1. King.
21.9, 12.
but in uprightness of heart, as before the Lord: and also that those who are
to observe it, assemble themselves as before the Lord, to sanctify a fast unto
him.

Upon what occasion.
50. The next thing to be considered, is the cause whereupon the fast is to be
proclaimed: that when there is just cause, those which are in authority may
take knowledge of their duty in this behalf. And that is (as I have generally
noted before) when we have some important and urgent occasion to become humble
and earnest suitors unto the Lord, As first, for the obtaining of some public
blessing.
either for the obtaining of some special and public blessing, or for the
remoouing of some public evil: and this either for our selves, or for other
churches of Christ. Act. 13.2.
As for example, when some public matter of great importance is to be
attempted, then, as we have extraordinary occasion to crave the blessing of
God upon us, so also we have just cause to fast. Consider to this purpose the
examples of Ezra, chap. 8. and of the faithful in the primitive Church, Act.
13. and 14. both which being to crave the blessing of God; the former upon
their voyage toward Jerusalem after their captivity; the latter upon the
ministry of his servants whom they either ordained or sent forth to the work
of their ministry, commended their suit unto the Lord by public fasting and
prayer. Which examples may be a sufficient direction for appointing public
fasts, upon occasions of no less importance. 1. King. 21.9.12.
In the history of the Kings it appears to have been the custom of the
Israelits (though that practice was monstrously abused by Iezabell) that
public matters of importance should be enterprised with a fast.

For removing some public evil: whether some public sin, Esaias 64.5. 1.
Cor. 11.31.
91. As touching public evils, they be either public sins, or public
judgments of God for sin. For if the people of God have committed some
common or public sin, and thereby have provoked the Lord to wrath and
indignation (as indeed when we sin, he is angry) then it behooves them to
judge themselves, if they would not be judged of the Lord, and by humbling
themselves before the Lord in fasting and prayer, to appease his anger, and to
prevent his judgments. The people of Israel, when many of them had sinned by
idolatry, and by reason of their sin stood in fear of the Philistims: the
Prophet Samuel assembleth them together to Mizpeh, 1. Sam. 7.6.
where they solemnized a fast, and pouring forth water before the Lord,
acknowledged and bewailed their sin. Likewise, when many of the Jews, who
were returned from captivity, had mingled themselves in marriage with the
heathen people of the land, contrary to the commandment of God, Nehem. 9.1.
they humbled themselves before the Lord in a public and solemn fast. If we
therefore would avoid the judgments of God as they did, we must follow the
example of their repentance, when we have not been behind them in sin. Or
public judgment: and that either threatened.
But if it please the Lord to manifest his wrath, either by threatening his
judgments, or by inflicting them, then does the Lord as it were call us to
this exercise. Now the Lord threateneth his judgments, first, by his Prophets
and ministers, Ion. 3.
as by Jonas against the Niniuits, whereupon they fasted; secondly, by some
manifest tokens of his wrath, as by earthquakes and other prodigious signs,
whereby the ancient Romans being also Gentiles, have been moved to proclaim
public fasts: thirdly, by giving us notice of some imminent danger; as when
we hear of an open invasion intended by foreign enemies, Ier. 36.9. 2. Chron.
20.3.
which consideration moved Iosaphat to proclaim a fast: or understand of some
more secret plot or conspiracy, against the Church, the prince, or state, such
as was the conspiracy of Haman against the people of the Jews, Esth. 4.1.3.
for the disappointing whereof the Jews did fast. If therefore the Lord do in
like sort threaten us, and as it were shake his rod over us: we must prepare
our selves to meet our God and to turn unto him by repentance, Am. 4.12.
with fasting and prayer.

or inflicted:
52. And if judgments threatened should move us to fast, how much more are we
bound to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, when it is upon us,
scourging and afflicting us for our sins? As for example, when the Lord
sends any of the public messengers of his wrath, as the sword, famine,
pestilence, captivity. The ten tribes after two discomfitures received at the
hands of the Benjamits, As the sword, Judge. 20.
wherein forty thousand of them were slain, humbled themselves before the
Lord by fasting and prayer. The Prophet Joel, when the Lord sent a grievous
famine upon the land, Famine, Joel 1.14. and 2.12.15.
earnestly exhorted the Jews in the name of the Lord, to turn unto him with
all their heart, with fasting, with weeping and mourning, etc. Likewise for the
time of pestilence as well as of famine, Pestilence, 1. Kin. 8.37, 38. 2. Sam.
24.
Solomon gives direction, that men should humble themselves before the Lord.
Which course his father David had taken, when the Lord sent the pestilence
among the people of Israel: which judgment was occasioned by his numbering of
them, but caused by their own sins. Moses also, when the plague was begun
among the people of Israel for their murmuring, he commands Aaron to take
his Censer, Number. 16.46.
and putting therein incense, to go among the people, and to make an atonement
for them: which Aaron having done, and standing betwixt the dead and them that
were alive, the plague ceased. Which does teach us, that the means to pacify
the wrath of God, and to remove the plague, is to offer up our hearty prayers
unto the Lord, Apoc. 5.8. Psalm. 14^.2. Apoc. 8.3.
signified by incense, in the name and mediation of Christ our high priest, who
standing before the altar with his golden Censer, perfumeth the prayers of the
faithful with the odours of his own sacrifice, and makes them acceptable
unto God. And for the better humbling of our selves in prayer, and testifying
of our repentance, it is very needful, that as in all other public
calamities, so in this of the pestilence, we undertake this exercise of
fasting. Only this we are to be admonished of, That in places of infection,
the utter abstinence from food is not so precisely to be urged, but that the
people may, yea ought to take something before they come abroad, as a
preservative against infection.

53. Lastly, for the time of captivity, Captivity. Zac. 7.5, and 8.19 Ier.
52.4.
we have the example of the Jews, who during their captivity in Babylon,
observed four fasts in the year: the first in the tenth month, because on
the tenth day of that month Nabuchadnezar with his armies began to besiege
Jerusalem: the second, in the fourth month, because on the ninth day of that
month, king Zedekiah and the men of war flying out of the city of
Jerusalem, Ier. 52.7, 8.
were taken by the Chaldeans: the third, in the fifth month, because on the
tenth day of that month the temple was ouerthrown, Ier. 52.12.
and the city sacked: the fourth in the seventh month, because therein
Gedaliah, 2. Kin. 25.28* 29
together with the Jews and Chaldeans, who were at Mispeh were slain;
whereupon, the rest of the Jews who were left, flying into Egypt for fear of
the Chaldees, there was an utter desolation in the land. These fasts they took
upon them to observe during their captivity, that therein they calling to mind
the former judgments of God, as it were in four degrees for their sins,
they might the better be humbled to implore the mercy of God for the time to
come. But when as these fasts by long custom grew ordinary, and many of the
Jews observed them for custom rather than conscience (insomuch that they
thought this custom was to be observed after their deliverance from
captivity, the cause of their mourning and consequently of their fasting being
taken away, and accordingly moved that question, Zach. 7:) the Lord, as he
reprooueth their former hypocrisy, in resting in the outward fast without
repentance; so he promises them for the time to come, that if they would truly
repent, and walk in the obedience of his ways, Zach. 8.19.
their days of fasting and mourning should be turned into days of feasting
and joy.

54. From whence we are to observe, that if we according to the examples of the
faithful in the scriptures, shall in the time of our distress turn unto the
Lord with all our hearts, and with fasting and prayer humble our selves before
him, the Lord will take away the cause of our mourning, and turn our fasts
into feasts. The which I speak not as though this exercise had been altogether
neglected among us: For to Gods glory, and to the stopping of our adversaries
mouths, the Papists (who know not what the true exercise of fasting means) it
is to be acknowledged, that howsoever we have not been so frequent in this
exercise as were to be wished, yet notwithstanding upon diverse public
occasions, there have been public fasts observed and solemnized among us,
with good and happy success. As for example, in the time of the great plague,
Anno 1563: after the great earthquake, Anno 1579: after intelligence had of the
Spanish invasion, Anno 1588: in the time of the famine, Anno 1596, and 1597:
and now of late in this time of the pestilence, Anno 1603. Besides the private
and secret fasting of the faithful, as it has pleased God to move them
either by private or public occasions.

Who are to observe the public fast.
55. The third thing to be observed, are the persons: who, when a public fast
is proclaimed, are to observe it. The Prophet Joel, Joel 2.16.
besides those of years appoints, that the children, even those that suck
the breasts, should be assembled to the fast. And the Niniuits proclamation for
observing the fast, Ion. 3.5.7.
was extended not only to all men, women and children, but also to their
cattle. The reason whereof was twofold: first, that the pitiful sight and
lamentable cry of the children and cattle might increase their sorrow: and
secondly, that they might be brought to a deeper sight, and more serious
acknowledgement of the heinousness of their sin, which had pulled upon them
such an universal judgment of God, as should not only afflict themselves,
but also extend to the very infants, yea and to the bruit beasts. But this
practice is to be reckoned among the ceremonies which in those times were used
to augment their sorrow and increase the sense of their sin, and is no more
to be imitated of us than their sitting in the ashes, the renting of their
cloths, their girding of themselves with sackcloth, their putting of earth upon
their heads, and such like: among us, the Lord requires no more to observe the
outward fast, than such as by reason of their understanding and discretion, may
the better be fitted thereby to humble themselves before him in this solemn
exercise of prayer and repentance: For the outward fast observed (as it is
ordinarily among the Papists) without any exercise of religion concurring
therewith, is nothing worth. But to all those that are come to years of
discretion, and are exempted by some present necessity, is the equity of that
law to be extended, Leui. 23. Leuit. 23.29.
Every person that humbles not himself on the Sabbath of humiliation, shall
even be cut off from his people.

56. There remains the fourth and last thing, How the public fast is to be
observed.
viz. how the public fast is to be observed. And this also I signified in the
definition, when I said, it is to be sanctified both publicly and privately, as
a Sabbath of humiliation. Where three things are to be noted: for first, when
as I say it is to be observed as a Sabbath (which before has been proved) we
are to understand that therein a double rest is required: Viz. 1. as a Sabbath
or day of rest.
the one outward, from bodily labors and worldly business; the other inward,
from sin. And contrariwise, that the profanation of this Sabbath is
condemned, whether it be by neglecting the outward rest, and employing the time
in bodily labors and worldly affairs; or else by abusing our rest, either to
idleness, or to vanity, or to sin: To idleness, when men resting in the
outward rest, imagining that nothing else is required at their hands, do
nothing, and by doing nothing they do evil; as appears by the disjunction
included in that question of our Savior Christ, Luke 6, Luke 6.9.
Is it lawful on the Sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? Whereby our
Savior plainly signifies, that if we do not good on the Sabbath day, we do
evil. To vanity, when as men give themselves to sports and pastimes: for if
that be unlawful on the ordinary Sabbath, much more is it unseasonable on the
Sabbath of humiliation. Lastly, to sin, for if the works of our lawful
callings be forbidden on the Sabbath, much more the works of darkness:
whereunto whosoever addicteth himself on the day of the fast, he celebrateth a
Sabbath to Satan, and not unto the Lord. As a Sabbath of humiliation
Again, whereas I said it is to be observed as a Sabbath of humiliation, we
learn, that we are therein to abstain not only from labors, as on the
ordinary Sabbath; but also from food, from exercise of sleep, from bravery
in apparel, and from all worldly delights, etc.

To be sanctified both publicly
57. Thirdly, whereas I add that it is to be sanctified both publicly and
privately as a Sabbath of humiliation: I signify, that not only rest is
required, but also an holy rest; and not only the outward fast, but much more
the spiritual exercise of prayer and repentance. And that this sanctification
of the day of the fast (which stands in using the means of sanctification)
is partly public, and partly private. The public, is in the assembly: for
this, as every other Sabbath, Leuit. 23.27. Joel. 2.15.16. By the ministers
is a day of an holy assembly, Leuit. 23.27, Joel. 2.15.16. Here therefore we
are to consider the office of the ministers, who are the chief actors in the
public sanctification of this, and every Sabbath; and the duty of the
people. The office of the minister is noted in general terms, Acts 13.2, Acts
13.2.
(...), as they performed the public function of their ministry unto the
Lord and fasted: more specially Neb. 9, Nehem. 9.4. Nehem. 8.8.
where they are noted to have read and preached the word of God (as before
chap. 8.) and that four times, and so often also to have called upon the name of
the Lord-Likewise Ierem. 36, when Jeremy being shut up, could not go into the
house of the Lord, Ier. 36.6, 7, 9.10.
he sends Barach with a book written from his mouth: wherein were specified
the judgments of God threatened against the Jews, that he reading it in the
audience of the people upon the day of the fast, they might be brought to a
serious humbling of themselves in prayer, and to unfeigned repentance. The duty
therefore of the ministers is, to stir up themselves in a more than ordinary
measure of zeal to discharge their ministry, both in preaching the word of
God, and also in prayer. In preaching, that it may be through the blessing of
God a powerful means to work in the people those things which in this
spiritual exercise are required, viz. humiliation, prayer with feruencie and
faith, and repentance. In praying, that it may be an effectual means in and
through the mediation of Christ our Savior, and available with the Lord, for
the removing of those evils, and for the bestowing of those good things for
which this exercise is undertaken.

58. The duty of the people is, By the people
first, to be present at public assembly: for if we will sanctify a Sabbath
unto the Lord, Leuit. 19.30. and 26.2.
we must reverence his sanctuary: where, as the Lord has promised his
presence, so he requires ours. And for this cause, Mat. 18.20.
as I said before, this and every other Sabbath is appointed of the Lord to be
an holy convocation: Leu. 23.2.27.
We must therefore take heed that we absent not our selves without very just
and necessary occasion, lest we may seem either secretly to neglect, or
profanely to contemn the presence of Christ, the gathering together of the
Saints, Heb. 10.25.
the public worship and service of God, the call of the holy Ghost, the
means of our salvation, the public occasion of the fast; as though neither
the public judgment nor the common good did concern us. But it is to little
purpose to be present in the public assembly, unless we join together with
the assembly in the sincere worship of God. That being assembled together in
the name of Christ, Math. 18 19. Act. 1.14. and 4.24. and 8.6.
we may as it were with one consent call upon God, and hear his word: praying
with humility, in respect of our own unworthiness, with reverence of Gods
majesty, in sense of our wants, with sorrow for our sins, with earnest desire
to have our wants supplied, our sins remitted, and the judgeme^ts of God
removed, with faith and assurance to find help to obtain mercy in convenient
time, with promise and purpose to amend our lives: that in sincerity and truth
we may subscribe to the prayer of the Church, Nehem. 8.6.
and say Amen. Hearing also the word, with reverence, with attention, with
faith, with desire to profit, with purpose to practice, with submission to
every part thereof: In a word, so hearing the word of God, as in this our
present suit, we desire to be heard. Unto these duties of religion and means
of sanctification, we are to join a public duty of charity, as a work of
sanctification: for it is and has been a laudable custom of the Church of
God, that in public fasts there should be public collection made for the
relief of the poor.

And also privately
59. But we are not only publicly to sanctify the day of the fast, but also
privately: both by using means of sanctification, and also by doing works of
sanctification. The means are especially meditation and prayer: which are to
be used both with reference to the public sanctification; and that not only
before, to prepare and fit our selves for the profitable and saving use of the
means (which Daniel calls the setting of his face, and the settling of his
mind to seek the Lord, Dan. 9.3. and 10.12.
) but also after, to fit and apply the means to our use: and besides, as
private means by themselves, without reference to the public. The works of
sanctification are the duties of repentance, whereof I spoke before; but
especially the works of mercy and charity, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. Neh. 13.16.


60. Wherefore the day of the fast is to be obser^ed and sanctified as a
Sabbath of humiliation, not only by outward abstinence and rest, but also by
using the means, and doing the works of sanctification both publicly and
privately, spending the whole day besides the public sanctification, and the
time which is to be spent in our preparation before, and in our meditation
afterward, in the private means of sanctification, as reading, meditation,
prayer; and in the private works of sanctification, as the duties of repentance
toward God, and the works of mercy and charity toward our brethren. Which
course whosoever shall take in sanctifying a fast unto the Lord, he shall be sure
to obtain at the hands of God, either that particular request for which he is
an humble suitor unto the Lord, or that which is better: the Lord always
hearing his children thus suing unto him, and granting their requests, as shall
be most for his glory and their singular good.

61. Having thus set down the doctrine of fasts according to the rule of Gods
word and practice of ours and other reformed churches, A survey of the popish
fast^.
we are now to take a brief view of the Popish fast: that it may evidently
appear how little cause they have with the Pharisey to despise others, Luke
18.11. and 5.33.
who do not fast as they do. And first as touching their moral and chaste
fast, whereby they would seem to chastise their bodies, and to keep them
under, that they some not out lust: they show themselves unskillful Physicians,
who prescribe this medicine to all indifferently, as well to those who need it
not, as to those who do: For as medicines are not good but when they are
necessary; so this Physic where it is not needful, is hurtful; and where
it does no good for the observation of the seventh commandment, it is many
times a transgression of the sixth. For those who living single and have the
gist of continency, as also those who may lawfully use in marriage the remedy
which God has ordained against lust, to them daily sobriety and temperance in
diet is needful, but often fasting every week is hurtful and pernicious: to
such, an ordinary fast imposed for keeping their bodies chaste, is like a new
piece of cloth set upon an old garment, which impaireth the garment, and makes
the rent much worse. Math. 9.16.
And it is against reason, that because their Abbie-lubbers and pampered
clergy (who having vowed to live single, though they be never so incontinent,
and living in such idleness and and belly-cheere ordinarily, as that no true
fasting at times would suffice to keep them chaste,) had need to fast oftener
than the Pharisey, who fasted twice a week: that therefore others, which live
painefully in their callings, and chastely either in single life or marriage,
should be bound to the like observation of fasts; many of them needing rather
kitchen-phisicke and cordials to comfort them, than fastings and vacuations to
keep them down.

62. But indeed their fasting is but one of their hypocritical pretenses of
their not intended chastity: for as if flesh and whit-meats were the only
prouokers of lust, they forbid all use thereof in the time of their fast, but
permit a fullness of all other food: whereas not only some other kinds of food
in respect of the quality, but also any other kind almost in a greater
quantity, is a greater enemy to chastity than the moderat use of flesh or
whit-meats. Nay that which were strange (if they meant seriously) they permit
in their fasts the free use of wine and the strongest drinks, than which,
nothing is more forcible to inflame men with lust, and that not only at their
mea^ in the middle of the day, but also in the mornings and euenings. And
besides this, the richer sort among them may truly be said to forbear the
grosser diet, that they may feed upon more costly and delicat dainties, and as
August^ne says in the like case, De tempor^ Sermon. 56.
Corpori suo magis commutasse, quam subtraxisse ciborum abundantiam videntur:
For besides their drinking in the morning, and their supper at noone, wherein
commonly they pamper themselves with diverse kinds of broths, and great variety
of fishes, with wanton sauces to provoke their appetit, and strongest wines to
help their digestion, and choicest dainties to make up their meele withal;
they have also a banquet in the evening, which may not be called a supper, but
a collation, wherein with wine and spiced breads, they have raysins, almonds
and figs, marmalade and suckets, with many other confections and junketting
dishes. So that of the Popish fast it may most truly be said, that it is not
(...), but (...), not fasting, but feasting. As for the vulgar sort of Papists,
their usual manner is, either on the day before their fast so to pamper
themselves, as that the day of the fast (though they fasted indeed) would be
scarce sufficient to digest their former repletion: or else at their meele
which they take at noone on the day of their fast, so to gorge themselves, that
their drinking or collation in the evening may seem altogether superfluous.
Wherefore to them may be applied that censure of Augustine, De tempor^ Sermon. 157.
Tantum capiunt manducando, quantum digerere non susficiunt ieiunando: They
take so much in eating, as they cannot digest by fasting. But look how they
chastise their bodies in their fasting, such commonly is their chastity: Let
the stews permitted among them as necessary evils, and the huge number of
bastards begotten where the Romish religion is professed, and these Popish
fasts observed, be witness.

63. But come we to their irreligious fast, which they doubt not to call a
worship of God. Howbeit first, it is Psalm. 104.15. Prou. 31.6.7.
would be unseasonable: For wine makes glad the heart of man, and is given to
the sorrowful to expel grief. Bellarmine teaches, that it is not sufficient to
a fast, that a man eat but one meele in the day, unless his meele be so late,
as that it may be called a supper, De bones operib, in particular. lib. 2. ca.
2.
and not a dinner: and withal professes, that it is a thing never heard of,
that any fast should be dissolved before the ninth hour, which is three a
clock after noone: For they say, in Lent they may not eat before evening, and
at other times not before three a clock. But the received custom of the Church
of Rome, which Bellarmine with flat contradiction to those former assertions
does defend, is to take their meele either at noone or before: besides some
bread and drink in the morning, and their drinking or collation in the
evening. And because by their canons they may not in Lent go to supper before
their evening service be ended: they do therefore dispatch their evening prayer
in the morning, that they may be at supper by noone. But indeed both in Lent
and other times, their suppers which should be in the evening at the end of the
fast, are turned into dinners. And therefore whatsoever they pretend to the
contrary, their fast stands wholly in choice of meats, and abstinence from
flesh and whit-meats. Durandus says, because the Pope and Cardinals, and
Prelates, and other religious men when they fast, do eat at the sixth hour, that
is, at noone; therefore custom does wholly excuse all others.

64. Again, their fasts are statarie, and observed at set times. Wherefore as
they are seldom or never vnderdertaken upon any special occasion, so are they
for the most part unseasonable, and consequently hurtful, even as new wine in
old vessels: Luke 5.37.
and yet imposed upon all, under the penalty and guilt of mortal sin. If
any man object that the same times are observed among us: I answer, that it is
not a fast which is observed among us at those set times, but an abstinence
only from flesh in a civil respect, viz. that fish and other meats might be
used and spent as well as flesh: and that flesh being spared and forborne at
such times, might be the more plentiful, and consequently the more cheap. And
further, they are also Col. 2.16.21.23. 1. Tim. 4.1.3.4.
standing in the prohibition of meat for religion sake, which is a doctrine of
devils. And so far are they gone in this superstition, as that in their times
of fasting, they seem to place the top of holiness in abstinence from meats
forbidden, and the height of iniquity in eating flesh: for, to eat one mor^ell
of flesh in Lent is a greater sin and more sharply punished among them, than
not only drunkenness or gluttony in other meats, but also than whordome or
idolatry, to say no more. Lastly, whereas their fast being a more external
fast, and

(...)

THE SECOND TREATISE: OF HOLY INVOCATION ON GODS NAME.
Psalm 50.15. And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee and
thou shall glorify me.


THIS Psalm (as some of the learned judge) was written by David, at what time
the Angel of God (after the three years famine, and three days pestilence,
mentioned 1. Chron. 21. and 22.) had showed unto him the place which the Lord
did choose for his worship and service: For after that place was once known and
prepared for Gods worship, the laws concerning sacrifices, and the whole
worship of God, were more accuratly and fully to be observed and kept, as
appears Deuteronomy. 12. But forasmuch as the greatest part of the Israelits did
rest in the performance of the external and ceremonial worship, as though
that in it self were acceptable to God: the Lord therefore reasons with his
people concerning his worship, from the 7. verse to the 16, teaching and
enforming them, That howsoever he had ordained laws concerning sacrifices,
which now were more precisely to be kept; yet that he neither required nor
esteemed the external sacrifices in or for themselves, but that there are
certain other sacrifices which he far prefers before those sacrifices of
the law: and those are, the sacrifice of praise, verse fourteen; and the
sacrifice of a broken and contrit heart, poured forth before the Lord in hearty
and earnest prayer, verse fifteen. For we may not think that the Lord did
wholly condemn sacrifices which himself had commanded, but so far forth as
men rested in them, as though they in themselves did please him. For if they
were rightly and duly offered, namely to testify the parties humiliation for
his sin, and the acknowledgement of his guilt, Le. 1.4. and 3.2.
which was signified by laying his hand on the head of his sacrifice; secondly,
to signify his faith in the all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ, figured by
that legal sacrifice; and thirdly, to be an obligation for the sacrificing of
himself unto God in all thankful obedience; Romans 12.1.
they were so acceptable unto God, that they are called the sacrifices of
righteousness. Psalm. 4.5. Psalm. 51.19.
Neither does he simply and absolutely reject outward sacrifices, but in
comparison of those other sacrifices of praise and prayer, in respect whereof
he would have his temple (wherein alone the sacrifices were offered,) to be
called the house of prayer: Esaias 56.7.
and thus these places of Scripture are to be understood, Ierem. 7.22.23, Psalm.
51.16.17, Hos. 6.6, to wit, comparatively; according to that of Samuel, 1. Sam.
15.22, Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, 1.
Sam. 15.22.
as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? behold, to obey is better then
sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of rams. Out of this context
therefore and coherence of these words with the former, we may for our
encouragement and stirring up our selves to the performance of these duties of
invocation, observe, That the calves of our lips, as Hosea calls the
sacrifices of praise, Hos. 14.3.
are preferred before the sacrifices of Bulls: and the sacrifice of an afflicted
soul poured forth before the Lord in prayer, before the sacrifices of the law.

But now let us come to the words themselves, which may be divided into two
parts: a precept, and a promise. The precept, enioyneth the faithful to call
upon God in the time of trouble: wherein four things are to be considered.

1 The first is the person to whom this precept is directed, namely the
faithful man: as appears not only by the 5. and 7. verses, but especially
by the words which immediately follow this text, verse. 16. But unto the wicked
says God, etc. Which plainly show the words of this text not to be directed
to the wicked, but only to the godly. Whereas therefore the Lord commands
the faithful to call upon him in the time of trouble, we gather, that the
godly have their times of trouble, and that it is the lot of the faithful to
be under the cross, and to be exercised with affliction: as the Scriptures
elsewhere do testify. Ioh. 16.20. John 16.20.
You shall mourn (says our Savior Christ to the faithful) and the world
shall rejoice: you shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Act.
14.22. Act. 14.22.
Through manifold afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. 2. Tim.
3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus* shall suffer persecution. This
therefore our Savior Christ said, Luke 9.23.
to all (that none should think himself exempted) if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, Heb. 12.6, 8. Apoc. 3.19.
and take up his cross day by day and follow me. For whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he receives.

Here therefore first the godly are taught patiently and cheerfully to bear
their cross, 1. Pet. 4.12. Heb. 12.8.
because no strange thing happens to them, but that which is common to all
the faithful. Yea the sufferings of the godly, are the sufferings of the body
of Christ, Act. 9.4. Col. 1.24. 2. Cor. 4.10.
yea of Christ himself. For such is the communion of Saints, that when the
godly are afflicted, with them both Christ himself and the church also which
is his body, does suffer. Secondly, those which are not afflicted, are taught,
not to be hasty (as many are) in censuring and judging those who are in
affliction, as though they were wicked men or hypocrites. Which was a foul
oversight in the three friends of Job: who condemned him to be an hypocrit,
because God had so grievously afflicted him. And herein those curious persons
did offend, which we mentioned Luke 13. for they supposed that those Galileans,
Luke 13.1.
whose blood Pilat mingled with their sacrifices, were grievous sinners in
comparison of themselves. In like sort, the Barbarians, when they saw the viper
light on the Apostles hand, They said among themselves, surely this man is a
murderer, Act. 28.4.
whom, though he had escaped the se^, yet vengeance has not suffered to live.
The use then which we are to make of Gods judgments upon others, is in steed
of censuring them, to judge our selves; and by the example of Gods correction
upon them, if we will not be like to Balthazar, Dan. 5.22.
our selves to learn repentance. For if we in this time of the plague shall
take occasion by the judgment of God upon others, to think better of our
selves and worse of them, we may fear least that sentence of our Savior may
worthily be applied to us: Do you think, that they which are visited are
greater sinners than those commonly are which escape the plague? I tell you
nay, Luke 13.3, 5.
but except you amend your lives, you shall all likewise perish. Neither let
the Papists or Atheists think the worse of that religion which is professed
among us* because the hand of God is upon us: 1. Pet. 4.17.
for as Peter says, Judgment begins at the house of God. And those sins
which the Lord seems to wink at, or to pass over in others, he will not
suffer to go uncorrected in his children. Which course the Lord takes with
his children, both in respect of his glory, and their good: for if the Lord
should spare them, having committed some open sin, 2. Sam. 12.14.
the enemies of God would be ready to object, that God were a favorer of such
offenses, and that such sins were the fruits of that religion which his
servants profess. But in respect of their good also the Lord corrects his
own children sometimes, when he seems to spare the wicked, least with the
wicked they should go on in their sins, to their destruction. 1. Cor. 11.32.
As the Apostle says, When we are judged, we are chastified of the Lord, that
we should not be condemned with the world. Thirdly, from this doctrine let
Atheists and Papists, and all other wicked persons receive this terror: for if
the Lord does correct his own dear children with whom he is reconciled in
Christ, how shall his enemies think to escape, who have no part in Christ? For
as Peter says, 1. Pet. 4.17, 18.
The time is, that judgment has begun at the house of God. But if it begin
with us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the Gospel of God? And if
the righteous scarcely be preserved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? Behold (says Solomon) the righteous shall be recompensed, Prou. 11.31.
that is, corrected, in the earth; how much more the wicked and the sinner?

2. We have heard that it is the lot of the righteous to be afflicted in this
world, let us now see what is their duty when they are afflicted: for that is
the second thing which is here to be considered, namely, to pray that God would
deliver them, or else arm them with patience. Call upon me (says he) in the
day of trouble. Iam. 5.13.
In like sort James, Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.

But here some body will object (who seems to himself wiser than his
fellows) that our times are set and appointed of God in his immutable decree,
which we may not hope to alter or change by our prayers. I answer, that
Daniel, although he knew by the prophecy of Jeremy that seventy years were
appointed to the captivity of the Jews in Babylon; Dan. 9.2,
yet notwithstanding he thought it his duty in the end of those years to call
upon God for the deliverance of his people: for he well knew, which we must
also acknowledge, that as the Lord appoints the end, so also he appoints
the means, among which the principal is prayer. Esaias 38.1.5.
On the other side, Ezechias, although he heard by the Prophet the sentence of
the Lord, That he should die and not live; notwithstanding, by prayer obtained
the prolonging of his life. For as God had decreed to add to his life fifteen
years, so he decreed prayer to be the means whereby that addition should be
obtained. And so the Niniuits, though the Prophet Jonas had told them, and they
believed him, that their city within forty days should be destroyed; Ion.
3.4, 5.
yet by humbling themselves before God by fasting and prayer, and repenting
from their evil ways, they escaped that common destruction. And hereunto may
be added the examples of the faithful in all ages, who having called upon God
in their trouble, have been delivered out of their distress. Add also the
testimony of James, Iam. 5.16.
that the prayer of a righteous man avails much with God: and also the
commandments of God, and his gracious promises, both in this place and
elsewhere in the Scripture. And let us know that it is damnable curiosity,
under a pretense of submitting our selves unto the secret will of God, to
rebel against his will revealed: For as Moses says, The secret things belong
to the Lord our God: Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the revealed things unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do
all the words of this law. But by this reason a man might as well refuse his
food, because the day of his death is appointed and cannot be altered by him,
which every man knows to be both wicked and foolish. Let us therefore know,
that whatsoever the secret will of God is concerning us, that his revealed will
is, that in this time of affliction we should according to the example of
David, 2. Sam. 24.
pray unto him: and let us assure our selves of this, That if God in his secret
counsel has decreed to deliver us for our good, he has also decreed that our
deliverance shall be begged and obtained by prayer.

Yea, but says another, afflictions must be borne patiently and meekely, and
therefore we may not pray against them.

I answer, that these things may well stand together: for we must patiently
bear afflictions, and yet pray against them. Indeed we may not pray against
them absolutely, but in our prayers we are willingly to submit our selves to
the good will and pleasure of God, and resign our selves into his hands,
following therein the example of our Savior Christ: Mat. 26.39.
O my father (says he) if it be possible let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. 2. Sam. 15.26.
And of David, who in his greatest distress said, Behold, here am I, let the
Lord do to me, as seems good in his eyes. Wherefore whiles it pleases God
to continue the affliction, we are patiently to bear it, Luke 18.1.
and yet without fainting to call upon God for deliverance: for so the Lord
has commanded us in this place.

Now if it be our duty in affliction to fly unto the Lord by prayer, it may
not be denied, but that we are to pray in a sense of our want; and
consequently, that we are to be humbled under the mighty hand of God, and
that we are to mourn under the cross, because by our sins we have offended
God our gracious and loving father, and provoked him to lay his rod of
correction upon us. It becomes not Christians when they are afflicted, to be
like Stoics or stocks, without sense and feeling: for it is a sign of an
hard heart not to mourn when God afflicts, Ier. 5. Ier. 5.3.
Lord thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed: thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction. Neither is there patience
where this (...) or want of feeling is, neither is it possible that any man
should profit by affliction, who takes it not to heart, neither has any sense
thereof. Job, though the most notable pattern of patience, yet was he notably
humbled under the hand of God: For when the tidings were brought him of those
manifold calamities which had befallen him, Job. 1.20.
it is said, that he arose, and rent his garment, and shaued or polled his
head, and fell down upon the ground and worshipped. And David, who was both a
valiant man, and a man according to Gods own heart, professes of himself,
Psalm. 6. Psalm. 6.6.
That he fainted in his mourning, that he caused his bed to swim every night,
and that he watered his couch with tears. And Psalm. 38. Psalm. 38.6, 8.
that he went mourning all the way, that he roared for the very grief of his
heart, etc.

Wherefore the hardness of their hearts is greatly to be lamented, who are
touched with no sense of this common judgment, neither take to heart this
fearful plague: for of such may the Lord most justly take up that complaint,
Ier. 2. Ier. 2.30.
I have smitten your children in vain, they received no correction. And yet
more fearful is their estate, of whom that complaint of the Prophet Esaias is
verified, chap. 22. Esaias 22.12, 13.
In that day (the day of public trouble and common calamity) did the Lord
God of hosts call unto weeping and mourning, and to baldness and girding with
sackeloth: and behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep,
eating flesh, and drinking wine, eating and drinking, for to morrow we shall
die. But what follows? Verse. 14.
And it was declared in the ears of the Lord of hosts. Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till you die, says the Lord God of hosts. But to
conclude this point, let us follow the advice of the Lord by his Prophet Joel:
Therefore also now the Lord says, Joel. 2.12.13.
Turn you unto me with all your heart, and with fasting and with weeping and
with mourning, rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord
your God, etc. And thus it appears, that if we are to call upon God in the
day of trouble, then are we to humble our selves before God in the sense of
our misery. Again, if we are to pray in affliction, we must pray with
feruencie and with faith: for the sense of our want must not dismay us or
discourage us from calling upon God, but must serve as a spur to prick us
forward, and to stir us up to pray with feruencie of spirit, Romans 8.26. Joel
1.13.14. and 2.12, 13, 14, 15.
and with sighs that cannot be expressed. And that we may pray with the more
earnestness, it is very expedient, that with our prayer we should join
fasting: only let us take heed that our fasting be not external only, but
that it be an extraordinary exercise of prayer and repentance, least we seem
to fast no better than the beasts of Niniuie. Ion. 3.7.


And as we are to pray with feruencie, so also with faith, being assured, that
the Lord does not only accept of us and our prayers in the name and mediation
of Christ, but also that our request shall be granted to us, so far forth as
is expedient for Gods glory and our good. For as James says, Iam. 1.5.6.
If any man want wisdom (namely, how to demean himself in affliction) let
him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally and reprocheth no man, and it
shall be given him. But let him ask in faith and waver not, etc. For it is the
prayer of faith that saves the sick, Iam. 5.15.
and helps in affliction. And this faith, as it must rely upon the
intercession and mediation of Christ our Savior, who presents our prayers
unto God, Apoc. 8.3.4.
and perfumeth them with the odours of his own sacrifice, that they may be
acceptable unto him: so also upon the gracious promises of God made unto us in
Christ, and namely and especially upon this promise, Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee. Which promises of God if we cannot find in
our hearts to believe, to what purpose should we pray? We are therefore to
pray in faith, 1. Sam. 30.6. Ps. 3, 4, 5. and 4.8 Romans 8.28.
and thereby to comfort our selves in the Lord our God, and to rest quietly in
his good will and pleasure, assuring our selves, That God will cause all things
to work together for the good of those that do love him.

Lastly, Luke 18.1, 2.
we must pray with perseverance, and without fainting, as our Savior teaches
us by the parable of the widow and the judge, Luke 18. And therefore we must
not think, that every delay is a final repulse; but by the delay of the
benefit which we ask, our desire of obtaining it should be increased. And
hereunto belong the exhortations of the Apostle, Romans 12. Col. 4. Romans 12.12.
Col. 4.2.
to persevere in prayer, and to watch in the same with thanksgiving. And to
apply this exhortation to the present occasion: If God in this common
visitation does not seem to hear us at the first, and according to our desire
remove his plague from us; we must neither faint in prayer, as though he did
altogether reject us, neither must we circumscribe or limit him; as, that if he
deliver us not by such a time, Judith 8.10.
we will call upon him no more: but we are with faith and perseverance to
crave, and with hope and patience to expect his grace and mercy, Heb. 4.16.
(...), to help in due and convenient time.

As therefore it is our duty to call upon God in the time of trouble, so must
we be careful (if we would be heard) to pray according to God, (...), Romans 8
27. 1. John 5.14.
or as John more plainly speaks, according to the will of God: and namely and
especially that we pray with sense and feeling of our want; with feruencie of
desire to have our wants supplied, and our requests granted; with assurance of
faith grounded on the mediation of Christ, and on the promises of God; and
lastly, with perseverance and patience (without fainting or circumscribing of
God) to wait upon him for his mercy to be exhibited unto us in due time. And
forasmuch as we know not what to pray as we ought, Romans 8.26, 27.
we must therefore crave the assistance of Gods holy spirit, the spirit of
grace and supplication, Zac. 12.10.
that he may help our infirmities, and teach us to pray according to God.

3. The third thing to be considered, is the person to whom our prayer is to be
directed. Call upon me, says the Lord our God, the mighty God described verse.
1. He sends us not to any other, either as deliuerers, or as intercessours,
but commands us to come directly unto himself. For of them which in their
necessity fly unto others, may that complaint of the Lord be verified, My
people have committed two evils, Ier. 2.13.
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, to dig them pits, even
broken pits, that can hold no water. Now we are to call upon God, first,
because it is he that afflicts us: For when we are judged, that is,
afflicted, we are chastised of the Lord. ^. Cor. 11.32. Esaias 45.7. Am. 3.6.
It is he that makes peace and prosperity, and it is he that creates evil
and affliction. And shall there be evil (namely of affliction) in a city, and
the Lord has not done it? Seeing therefore it is the Lord that afflicts us,
it behooves us, acknowledging the author of our affliction, Esaias 9.13.
to turn unto him that smites us, as the Prophet Esaias speaks. But here some
man will say: If God were the author of mine affliction, there were great
reason that I should both patiently bear it, and also fly unto the Lord for
deliverance: but this affliction which I sustain, it is to be imputed to the
unfaithfulness of such a pretended friend, or to the malice and injury of
such an enemy, etc. and therefore I see not why I may not wreake my self upon
them. But I answer, whatsoever is the se^ondarie cause of thine affliction, be
it the devil himself, it is the instrument of God, who is the author and
principal cause thereof. When it was told Job, that the Sabeans and Chaldeans
had carried away his oxen and cammels, he acknowledged the hand of God, Job.
1.15.17.21*
and said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord. When Shemei reviled David, Iam. 3.6. 2. Sam. 16.10.
although his tongue were set on fire from hell, as James speaks of such
cursed tongues, notwithstanding David acknowledged the cursed tongue of railing
Shemei to have been Gods rod to correct him. And Joseph likewise, though he
knew that his brethren for malice and envy had sold him into Egypt, yet he
acknowledges them to be the instruments of God, Genesis 45.5.8.
who by their means did in great mercy send him before them, to provide for
them in the time of famine. Which must teach us, when we are wronged, not with
the dog to snarle at the staff wherewith he is beaten, but to turn to him
that smites us, and to pray unto him that it would please him to remove his
hand from us. Secondly, as the Lord afflicts us, so it is he alone that can
and will deliver us. For who is able without his leave to remove his hand from
us? Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 46.1. Hos. 6.1.
He is our refuge and deliverer, he is our hope and strength, and a most
present help in trouble. Come therefore and let us return to the Lord; for he
has spoiled and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind us up.
Thirdly, he only that commanded us to call upon him, he only has promised
to help us, he only is able to hear our prayers and to grant our requests.
Psalm. 65.2.
Therefore thou which hear the prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.
Fourthly, when as we fly unto the Lord in time of trouble, we glorify him,
acknowledging him to be infinitely good, and therefore willing; omnipotent and
all-sufficient, and therefore able to help and deliver those which call upon
him. And for this cause the Lord in this place prefers the sacrifice of
prayer before all the sacrifices of the law.

Wherefore grievously do they offend, who when the hand of God is upon them,
do not call upon him: for they are not only injurious to themselves, but to
the Lord also, whom they rob of that honor which is due unto him. And this
comes to pass, either because they do not acknowledge the hand of God, but
think it to be some misfortune, or rest altogether in the secondarie causes,
1. Sam. 6.9.
after the manner of carnal and heathenish men: or because they distrust Gods
help, and therefore either fly to witches and wizards (that is to say, to the
instruments of the devil, that by his help the hand of God may be removed
from them) or else to some other unlawful means, whereby they make shift to
save their bodily life for a time, with the woeful loss both of body and
soul for ever: or else because they believe not the promises of God made to
our prayers, and therefore are discouraged from praying, and become desperate,
as though it would nothing avail them to call upon God. Job. 21.15.


4. The fourth and last thing to be considered, is, the time when we are to
pray unto God. Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
We are to pray always, and without ceasing; but especially, as here we are
directed, in the day of trouble: and that for these reasons. First because our
prayers then are most necessary: for then we feel, and feeling do confess,
that Gods help is so necessary for us, as that we utterly are undone, unless
the Lord do help and succor us. Psalm. 28.1. and 143.
Unto thee O Lord (says David) do I cry, o my strength be not deaf toward
me, least if thou answer me not, I be like to them that go down into the
pit. Secondly, because our prayers then especially proceeding from the inward
sense of our want, are most fervent and effectual. For even as water whiles it
runs at large has a still motion, but being gathered into straits, runs
with violence: so it fares with many men, who being at large in ease and
prosperity, either pray not all, or very coldly; but being brought into
straits, they pour forth their souls before the Lord like to a stream of
water, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks. To which purpose Esaias says, Lord in
trouble have they visited thee, they poured out an Lam. 2.^.^ Esaias 26.18. (...)
humble and effectual prayer, when thy chastening was upon them. Thirdly,
because the Lord does therefore afflict us, that we should fly unto him,
therefore does he bereave us of other helps and means, that we might the
more firmly rely upon him. For if we were not afflicted, it may be we should
not seek to him, or if we had other means, we would rely upon them. This is
testified by the Lord himself in the prophecy of Hosea: For I will be (says
he) unto Ephraim as a Lion, Hos. 5.14, 15. and 6.1.
and as a Lions whelpe to the house of Judah. I, even I will spoil, and go
away, I will take away, and none shall reseue it: I will go and return to my
place (that is, I will withdraw my comfortable presence from them for a time)
till they acknowledge their fault and seek me. In their affliction they will
seek me diligently, saying, Come let us return to the Lord, for he has
spoiled and he will heal us, etc. And the same may be confirmed by the
examples of men in all ages, Psalm. 107. Psalm. 78.34. 2. Chr. 33.12.^3.
who in their trouble do call upon the Lord. The Israelits, though a
rebellious people, yet when the Lord slew them, they sought him, and they
returned, and sought God early. Manasses, though the most wicked of all the
kings of Judah, yet when he was in tribulation (being taken captive and bound
in chains and carried to Babylon) he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and prayed unto him, etc. The
prodigal son, though he had run a leaud course, yet when he was pinched
with penury, then he did bethink himself of returning home to his father,
and falling down before him, said, Father, I have sinned against heaven, Luke
15.21. August
and before thee, etc. And this is that which some do well gather out of this
text, that God does therefore afflict us, that we may call upon him, that
calling upon him we may be delivered, that being delivered we may glorify him.
Fourthly, because the Lord many times does therefore delay his help and
defer our deliverance, that our desire may be inflamed, and our faith
exercised, as appears by the parables of the two friends, Luke 11.5.8. and of
the widow and the judge, and the scope thereof, Luke 18. Luke 18.1.
by the practice of the Lord with the Israelits, Iud. 10.10, 13, 16
Judge. 10. to whose request he would not at the first condescend; but when
they persisted in prayer, confessing and forsaking their sin, it is said that
his soul was grieved for the affliction of Israel: by the behavior of our
Savior Christ toward the woman which was a Canaanit; Matt. 15.22, 23, 28.
for when she had cried after him to have mercy on her because her daughter
was miserably vexed with a devil, and our Savior answered not a word, she
notwithstanding persisted in calling upon him, insomuch that his disciples came
unto him and besought him saying, Send her away, for she cries after us: And
although he answered, that he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, notwithstanding she importuneth him again, and coming unto him,
worshipped him, saying, Lord help me: And having received another repulse, our
Savior answering that it was not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast
it to whelps: she acknowledged her self to be such a one, but yet expected
such crumbs as it were from his table. Whereupon our Savior Christ having tried
her sufficiently, commends her faith, and grants her request. And lastly,
because the Lord in this place has not only commanded us to call upon him in
the time of affliction, but also has promised to deliver us. And therefore in
obedience to this commandment, and in faith in this promise, we are to pour
forth our souls before the Lord in the day of affliction.

But some man will ask, When is this day of affliction, wherein we are to call
upon God? Affliction is every thing that crosses our lawful desires: and that
is either private, or public: private, either belonging to our selves, or to
others: to our selves, either in our souls, as the anguish of the soul for
sin, which is the greatest affliction, or other heaviness and passions
melancholic: or in our bodies, as sickness, infirmity, hurts, or wounds: or
in our goods, as poverty, want, losses, debts: or in our good name, as infamy
by evil reports or slanders: or in those that belong unto us, as wife,
children, and servants. To others, as to our kindred, friends, acquaintance,
neighbors, countrymen, brethren in Christ, as all Christians are to be
esteemed of us, though forrainers in respect of place, and in respect of
affection, not well minded to us: for such a sympathy there ought to be
betwixt those that are members of the same body politic, but much more of the
same mystical body of Christ: especially when other respects also concur of
kindred, amity, acquaintance, neighborhood, etc. that in a fellow feeling and
Christian compassion, we should mourn when other members of the same body are
afflicted. When the affliction therefore belongs to our selves, we are in our
own behalfes to call upon God: when to others, we are in tender compassion of
their grief to commend their cause to God in our prayers. David when those who
indeed were his enemies, were afflicted, he humbled himself in fasting and
prayer for them, Psalm. 35.13. Psalm. 35.13. 1. Chro. 10.12.
In like sort he mourned and fasted for the death of Saul and Jonathan, 1.
Chron. 10. and also of Abner, 2. Sam. 3. 2. Sam. 3.35.


Public affliction is, when the country, the Church or Commonwealth is
afflicted with any common calamity; as famine, sword, pestilence, desolation,
captivity, and such like.

Let us therefore consider, whether this present time be a time of affliction,
or not: and if it be, let us know that this commandment belongs unto us,
and that the Lord calls us to fasting and prayer. Esaias 22.12.
Be it that in respect of thy self and those that belong to thee thou have no
cause of mourning (as who almost is free?) yet thy brethren, thy sisters, thy
friends, thy countrymen, thy fellow members in the body of Christ are visited
by the hand of God, or the places of their dwelling at least infected with this
contagious sickness. Did David fast and mourn and pray for his enemies when
they were in affliction, and do not thou mourn for thy dear brethren and
friends? But though we had no private cause of grief, yet the common calamity
should most of all affect us: seeing the chief cities and many other places of
the land (the Lord shooting his arrows on every side) are visited with the
fearful plague of pestilence. What? shall we think because we as yet through
the goodness of God have escaped this plague, that therefore it is not a time
of affliction, wherein we are to humble our selves before God by fasting and
prayer? Far be it from us, that we should be so hard-hearted, as that we
should not take to heart the affliction of Joseph: Amos 6.6.
or such unnatural members of the body politic, or unsound and rotten
members of the mystical body of Christ, as that when the chief city, and as
it were the head of our country, besides many other places and persons, is so
grievously afflicted, that we should not condole and mourn together with them,
and pray to God for them? Or may we think, that because our selves, and perhaps
also the places where we dwell are free, that therefore this affliction and
judgment does not concern us? yes beloved, it does nearly concern us. For
that this affliction is laid upon the land for sin, we need not doubt, seeing
the Scripture so often does teach that truth. Psalm. 107.11.17.34. Esaias 64.5.
Psalm. 39.11. Lam. 3.39.
Behold (says the Prophet Esaias) thou art angry when we offend. David
testifies, that the Lord with rebukes does chastise men for sin: and
Jeremy, That men are punished for their sins: insomuch, that afflictions and
punishments in the Scripture are often called iniquities and sins. But for
whose sins I beseech you is this public judgment laid upon the land? For
their sins alone, who have been visited, or are dead of the plague? No I
assure you; but for the sins of us all. For although God having mercy on us,
does for our sins among the rest afflict others and spare us, that we
beholding this common judgment in others, deserved by our sins as well as
theirs, might meet him in his judgments, Amos 4.12.
and turn unto him by repentance; yet may not we think our selves more
righteous than they, or esteem them as more grievous sinners than our selves,
because the Lord has hitherto spared us, unless we would have that sentence
of our Savior Christ to be most justly applied unto us, Luke 13.5.
I tell you nay, but unless you repent, you all shall likewise perish.

Wherefore let us humble our selves under the hand of God, let us turn unto
him that smites us; that of us, that at the least may be verified which is
said of the Israelits, when the Lord slew them, Esaias 9.13. Psalm. 78.34. Joel.
2.12.
they sought him, and turned unto him. Let us I say turn unto him with all our
hearts, and with fasting and mourning: let us call upon God with upright hearts
in this time of our trouble, that being delivered out of the same, we may
glorify him. Who knows if he will return, and repent of this evil; nay,
who knows not, or who doubts but he will have mercy on us and deliver us
(if our deliverance may be for his glory and our spiritual good) seeing he
has so graciously promised in this place, that if we call upon him in the day
of trouble, he will deliver us, and we shall glorify him.

Having spoken of the commandment, we are now to entreat of the promise,
which is added as a reason or motive to stir us up to the obedience of the
commandment. For as the commandment teaches us, that if we desire
deliverance out of affliction that we may glorify God, we are to beg the
same at the hands of God by hearty prayer: so the promise assures us that if
we call upon God in the day of trouble, he will deliver us for his own
glory and our comfort: for so he says, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

In which words two things are promised, deliverance, and the end or fruit
thereof, which is the glorifying of God.

As touching the former, we are to consider the circumstance of the person
promising, and the thing it self which is promised. The person is God: for as
it is he that afflicts, so it is he only which delivers, as the Prophet
Hosea shows: Hos. 6.1.
this therefore teaches us unto whom we are both in affliction to fly for
deliverance (not to Saints in heaven, nor to wisards on earth, but to God
alone;) and when we are delivered, to return thanks. And secondly, we may
here observe the unspeakable clemency of our gracious God, who is so ready
(as this promise imports) to answer to our prayers, and to grant our
requests: yea, in that he allureth us to call upon him by his gracious promise,
it is evident that he is more ready to hear, than we to pray. So the Lord
himself testifies by his Prophet Esaias 65.24, Esaias 65.24.
Yea before the call, I will answer, and while they speak I will bear: and
the same is signified in the parable of the prodigal son: Luke 15.20.
for when he was about to return to his father (by whom is signified God our
father) his father saw him being yet a great way off, and had compassion and
ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. And this, as it is the privilege of
Gods people to have God near unto them in all things which they ask at his
hands, Deuteronomy 4.7.
as Moses says: so also this is the assurance of the faithful, 1. John 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we know
that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that
we have desired of him.

The thing promised, is deliverance: for so he says, I will deliver thee. And
the same is promised elsewhere: for that which our Savior Christ has taught
us to ask, the Lord has promised to grant: But Christ our Savior has
taught us to pray that we may be delivered from the evil of affliction,
therefore the Lord has promised deliverance therefrom. The like promise we
have, Psalm. 34.17.
Psalm. 34, When the righteous cry the Lord hears them, and delivers them
out of all their troubles. Psalm. 34.19.
And again, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
him out of them all. Likewise Psa. 91, Psalm. 91.15.
to such as love the Lord this promise is made, He shall call upon me and I
will hear him, I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him and glorify
him. We are therefore with faith in this promise to call upon God, in the time
of trouble, not doubting of the performance thereof: for God who has made this
promise, is merciful, and therefore he will in mercy hear those which in
trouble and misery do call upon him: For so he says, Exodus 22, Exodus 22.27.
When he cries unto me, I will hear him, for I am merciful. And he is also
faithful which has promised, 1. Cor. 10, 13.
and therefore will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but with
the temptation will give an issue that we may be able to bear it. It is
impossible that God in his word or promise should lie: and therefore heaven and
earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of this word and promise of
God, rightly understood, shall fall to the ground unaccomplished. The same
^aith may be confirmed by the experience of the faithful in all ages, who
having called upon the Lord in the time of trouble, have been delivered out of
the same. The Israelits were in grievous thraldom in Egypt, but when they
cried unto the Lord he heard their voice, and delivered them as themselves
profess, Number. 201.6. Number. 20.16.
Likewise when they cried unto him, he delivered them out of the hands of the
Amorits, Judge. 10.10, 11.
the Ammonits, the Philistines, the Sidonians, the Amalekits, and other their
enemies, as himself tells them, Iud. 10. Sampson after he had slain a
thousand Philistines with the jawbone of an Ass, he cried unto the Lord being
ready to die for thirst, Judge. 15.19.
and obtained a well in Lechi (for so the place is called) which for a
perpetual monument of prayer, was called the fountain of him that prayed.
Psa. 116.1, 2, 3, 4 Psalm. 118.5. Psalm. 34.4.6.
David often confesses to the glory of God, that he had diverse times called
upon God in trouble, and that the Lord heard and delivered him. Ion. 2.
Jonas when he was cast into the sea and swallowed of the whale, cried unto
the Lord and was restored safe to land. Ezechias having received the sentence
of death, Esaias 38.5.
the Prophet Esaias telling him that he should die and not live, notwithstanding
by prayer obtained the prolonging of his life. Manasses, though the most wicked
of all the kings of Judah, yet being in trouble he prayed unto the Lord and
humbled himself greatly before God, 2. Chr. 33.12, 13.
and was received to mercy, and restored to his kingdom. And to omit other
particular examples, David testifies of diverse sorts of men, being in diverse
kinds of troubles, that when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble he
delivers them out of their distress. Psalm. 107.6.13, 19, 28.


But for as much as some man may object out of his own experience, That he
being in trouble has called upon God, and yet has not been delivered; and
that this is not his case alone, but is and has been in all ages the case of
many thousands: It behooves us therefore diligently to consider how this
promise is to be understood; for that is the matter of greatest importance
which offers it self to be considered of in the unfolding of this text.
For, that the promise is not to be understood absolutely and generally of every
prayer, of every man, in every affliction, the experie^nce of all times does
sufficiently declare. But by conference of this promise which other places of
Scripture, it may appear, that it does admit a threefold limitation or
restraint: The first, in respect of the party that prays: the second, in
regard of the prayer it self: the third concerning the thing which is prayed
for.

For as touching the first, If any wicked man or impenitent sinner shall object
against the truth of this promise, that he having called upon God in the time
of trouble, has notwithstanding not been delivered: let him hear what
immediately follows this promise in the next words of the Psalm verse 16, But
unto the wicked, says God, what have thou to do, to declare mine ordinances,
or to take my covenant into thy mouth, as though my promises belong unto thee?
For indeed not only in this place but in many other places of the Scripture,
the promise concerning the hearing of our prayers is restrained to the
faithful, and denied to the wicked, Prou. 15, Prou. 15.8, 29.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the
righteous is acceptable unto him. And again, The Lord is far off from the
wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous. Likewise, Psalm. 34, Psalm.
34.15, 16.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
cry: But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off their
remembrance from the earth. The man which had been blind, John 9, delivers
this sentence as the received opinion of the faithful in those times, John
9.31.
We know (says he) that God hears not sinners (meaning impenitent sinners)
but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him hears he. It is
therefore the faithful man whose prayer is accepted of God: the just man, who
is just before God by faith, and before men by repentance, James 5, Iam. 5.16.
The prayer of the righteous man avails much. Psalm. 34, Psa. 34.17.
When the righteous cry, the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
their troubles. The man that fears God, Psalm. 145, Psalm. 145.19.
The Lord will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will bear
their cry, and will save them. That loves God, Psalm. 91, Psalm. 91.14.15.
Because he has loved me, therefore will I deliver him, I will exalt him
because he has known my name. He shall call upon me and I will hear him, I
will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and glorify him. That walks
uprightly, Psalm. 84, Psalm. 84.11.
For the Lord God is a sun (that is, the author of light and all comfortable
blessings) and a shield (that is, a protector from all evil:) the Lord will
give grace and glory (grace in this life, and glory in the life to come) and
no good thing will be withhold from them that walk uprightly. That
perseuereth, John 15, John 15.7.
If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask what you will, and it
shall be done to you. That has an humble and contrit heart, Psalm. 34.18, The
Lord is near unto them that are of a contrit heart, and will save such as be
afflicted in spirit. Esaias 66.2.
Esaias 66. To him will I look (says the Lord) even to him that is poor and of
a contrit spirit, and trembles at my words. Psalm. 51, Psalm. 51.17.
The sacrifices of God (that is, that which God esteems in steed of all
sacrifices) is a contrit spirit; a contrit and a broken heart, o God, thou will
not despise. But as for the wicked, the Lord plainly professes that he will
not hear them, Mich. 3. Mic. 3.4.
Though they make many prayers, Esaias 1.15.
Esaias 1. though they cry loud in his ears, Ezech. 8. Ezech. 8 18.
Wherefore beloved in the Lord, if we continue in our sins, whereby we have
provoked the Lord to execute his judgments upon us, and if the Lord seem not
to hear us, neither does deliver us according to our desire: we may not object
against God, either that he is untrue in his promises, or unable to help us;
but let us hear what the Prophet Esaias says in this case: Behold the Lords
hand is not shortened that it cannot save: Esaias 59.1.
neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you
that he will not hear. Verse 9.11.12.
Therefore judgment being far from us, and justice not coming near unto
us: we wait for light, but lo, it is darkness: for brightness, but we walk
in darkness: for health, but it is far from us: for our trespasses are many
before the Lord, etc. And that we may descend to some particulers. If we be
guilty of cruelty and oppression, the Lord will not hear us. Esaias 1, Esaias
1.15.
When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and
though you make many prayers I will not hear: for your hands are full of
blood: or if we be unmerciful to the poor: Prou. 21.13.
for he that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also cry
and not be heard, Prou. 21: or if we refuse to hear and obey the word of God:
for as Solomon says, Prou. 28.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayers shall be
abominable: for as in prayer we speak to the Lord, so in the preaching of the
word the Lord speaks unto us. And good reason it is, that the Lord should not
hear us, if we will not hear him. Therefore it is come to pass, says the
Prophet Zachary, Zach. 7.13.
That as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I would not hear
says the Lord of hosts. Or if we be close sinners and hypocrites, making fair
shows openly, and yet be addicted to secret sins: for as David says, Psalm.
66. If I regard wickedness in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Wherefore (beloved) as it is certain that our sins are the cause of our
affliction: so we must be careful to avoid our sins, if we desire that our
affliction may be removed: for they are as a wall of separation betwixt God and
us. Ezech. 43.8.
If therefore thou will not cease to sin, neither will God cease to afflict
thee; unless perhaps he will give thee over as one that is incurable, as
Physicians sometimes give over their patients, when they think them past cure.

And to conclude this point: if when thou call upon God in the time of
trouble, the Lord does not deliver thee, examine they self whether thou do
not continue in sin without repentance: and if thou do, break off thy
sin by repentance, and turn unto the Lord, and he will hear thee: for so he
says by the Prophet Esaias, after he had protested that he would not hear
their prayers whiles they continued in their sins; Esaias 1.15, 16, 17.
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, Verse 18.
defend the widow: Come now, and let us reason together says the Lord: though
your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they were
red like scarlet they shall be as wool.

The second limitation, is in respect of the prayer it self: For we have no
assurance that God will hear every prayer, but only such as is made
according to his will revealed in his word, as John says, this is our
assurance, that if we ask any thing according to his will, 1. John 5.14.
he hears us. We must therefore be careful that our prayer be conformable to
the word of God, both in respect of the manner and form how we pray, and also
in regard of the end: as touching the manner, there are three things which are
especially required. First, that we pray in truth: for it maybe that when thou
call upon God, thou prayest in hypocrisy and not from thine heart, either
because thou prayest with wandering thoughts, or with fained lips. With
wandering thoughts: when as thy tongue uttering a prayer, thy heart goes a
wandering or whoring after the vanities of this world, or is otherwise
distracted with other unseasonable thoughts: For if when thou come near to
the Lord with thy lips, thou remouest thy heart from God, thou may justly
fear left in steed of the blessings which thou seem to ask, thou pull down
the judgments of God upon thee, Esaias 29.13, 14.
according to the threatening of the Lord by the Prophet Esaias, chapter 29. For
if thou should join into one speech, the thoughts of thy mind, and the
words of thy mouth (both which the Lord does understand a like,) thou would
be ashamed to deliver such a speech to a mortal man, which thou art not
ashamed to utter unto the immortal God. Or how can thou look that God
should hear or regard thy prayer, when thou do not hear nor regard thy
self?

With fained lips thou prayest, Psalm. 17.1.
when the desire of the heart does not agree with the prayer of thy lips;
when thou ask with thy mouth, that which thou do not desire with thine
heart: or when thou pretendest that in thy prayer, which thou do not intend,
or promisest that, which thou do not mean to perform: this is no better
than lying unto God, Hos. 7.13, 14.
when men cry unto God, but not from their hearts, as the Prophet Hosea
speaks: for what does a man but lie, when he speaks otherwise than he
thinks? This is a common fault of men when they are in affliction, to promise
and pretend great matters; when notwithstanding their heart is not upright with
God, and therefore the more carefully to be avoided of us, lest we seem with
the unsound Israelits when the hand of God was upon them, Psalm. 78.36, 37.
to go about to deceive the Lord with our mouth, and with our tongue to speak
lies unto him.

It is true indeed that God has promised to hear the prayers of them that
call upon him: but this promise is to be understood with restraint to them
that call upon him in truth. As David most plainly teaches, Psalm. 145, The
Lord is near to all that call upon him: Psalm. 149.18.
what to all? yea to all that call upon him in truth: For that payer which is
acceptable to God, is not only the moving of the lips, or the speech of the
tongue, or the lifting up of the eyes or hands, Psalm. 25.1. Lam. 3.41.
but it is the lifting up of our souls, as David describes his prayer, Psalm.
25, A lifting up of our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens, as
Jeremy exhorts us to pray: it is the pouring forth of our soul before the
Lord, as Anna expresses her prayer, 1. Sa. 1, 1. Sam. 1.15.
and as David wills us to pray, Ps. 62. Psalm. 62.8.
The second thing required in respect of the manner, is, that we pray with
feruencie of spirit. It may be when thou call upon God, thou prayest for
fashion rather then for feeling, and so vtterest a cold or lukewarm prayer
like to thy self; Apoc. 3.15.
which thou may justly fear, is no more acceptable unto God, than lukewarm
water to the stomach. Iam. 5.16. Eccles. 35.17.
It is true, that the prayer of the righteous man avails much, but with this
addition, if it be fervent. This is that prayer which pierces the clouds, and
is effectual with God. If therefore we would obtain our suit, let us crave
the assistance of Gods spirit, by whose help and direction we may pray with
sighs that cannot be expressed, let us learn to pour forth our souls like a
stream of water, Romans 8.26. Ier. 2.26. ^. These. 3.10.
let us as the Apostle speaks in the Epistle to the Thessalonians; pray (...)
superabundantly or exceedingly, let us (with reverence be it spoken to the
glorious majesty of God) wrestle with the Lord in our prayers, Romans 15.30.
Col. 4.12.
as the Apostle speaks: Genesis 32.24.28.
which kind of wrestling Jacob having used, Genesis 32, he became Israel, that
is, one which prevails with God, Hos. 12.3.4.
as the Prophet Hosea shows chapter 12.3, 4.

The third thing required in the manner is, that we pray with faith. It may
be when thou prayest thou art in doubt whether thou shall be heard, and
therefore may not look to obtain thy suit: For it is the prayer of faith,
to which the promise is made: Iam. 5.15. Math. 21.22. Mar. 11.24. Iam. 1.5, 6,
7.
whatsoever you ask in prayer, says our Savior Christ, if you believe, you
shall receive it. Likewise James, If any man, says he, want wisdom, let him
ask it of God, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in says and waver
not, for he that wauereth is like a wave of the sea tossed of the wind and carried
away. Neither let that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
If therefore thou would pray acceptably, Heb. 11.6.
thou must pray with faith: for without faith it is impossible to please God.
With faith I say in God: for how can thou call upon him in whom thou do
not believe? with faith in Christ, Romans 10.14.
being assured that both thou, though sinful in thy self, and thy prayer
though imperfect in it self, are accepted of God in Christ: for this is to
pray in the name of Christ, by whom and in whose name we have confidence and
access with assurance through faith in him: John 16.23. Ephesians. 3.12.
with faith in the promises of God made to our prayers* and consequently thou
art to believe not only that thou and thy prayers are accepted of God in
Christ, but also that thy particular request shall be granted unto thee: Ask,
says Christ, and it shall be given you, Math. 7.7, 8. John 16.23.
etc. for whosoever asks, receives, etc. And again, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you.
And thus were we to pray in respect of the manner, viz. in truth and from our
hearts, otherwise our prayer is dead and without life: in feruencie, otherwise
our prayer is cold and lukewarm: in faith, otherwise it is turned into sin.

Again, our prayer must be conformable to the will of God, in respect of the
end. It may be thou ask riches, to spend the same upon thy lust: or thou
ask deliverance out of thine affliction, that thou might follow the
pleasures, or have opportunity or leisure to follow thine accustomed sin,
etc. But we may so ask, and yet notwithstanding the promise, we may miss our
desire: for as James says, you ask and receive not: how so, seeing Christ
has said, Iam. 4.3.
ask and you shall receive? Because you ask amiss: and wherein did they ask
amiss? in respect of the end; that you might consume it on your lusts. But we
must remember that in this promise the Lord has joined these two together, I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And therefore if we ask
deliverance, we must ask it to this end, that we may glorify God. Wherefore
as it is good for the stirring up of our feruencie and spiritual hunger, with
our prayer to join fasting: so also it is expedient for the confirmation of
our faith, and settling our resolution in glorifying God, to join with our
prayers godly vows of some things whereby God may be glorified. Genesis 28.20.21,
22. 1 Samuel 1.10, 11. Psalm. 66.13, 14.
And this has been the practice of the godly in all ages, as of Jacob Genes.
28. of Anna, 1. Sam. 1. of David, etc.

The third limitation is in respect of the thing which is asked: for if the
cause why thou art not heard and delivered, is not to be imputed either to thy
person, being one that does believe and repent; or yet to thy prayer, being
framed in some measure according to Gods will, both in respect of the manner
and the end; then art thou to be assured and undoubtedly resolved, that the
thing which thou ask, is either not good for thee at all, or else not yet.
And that God does always hear his children praying unto him effectually,
though not ad voluntatem, according to their desire, yet ad vtilitatem,
according to their profit. Math. 7.11.
For if earthly parents who are evil, can give to their children good gifts,
how much more shall our father which is in heaven give good things to them that
ask him?

Thou ask deliverance out of affliction, and God has promised to deliver
his chileren that call upon him; but it may be, it is not a good thing that
thou should be delivered: and therefore in that case, deliverance is neither
included within the compass of Gods promise, nor yet intended in thy prayer,
if it be conceived aright: For a promise, unless it be of some good thing, it
is a threatening rather than a promise: we must therefore remember that God has
promised to give good things to them that ask him. Math. 7.11.
And that prayer which is conceived aright for temporal benefits (such as
deliverance out of affliction is) must not be made absolutely, but with the
condition of Gods glory and our everlasting good. Whereas thou therefore
ask deliverance out of trouble that thou might be restored to thy former
estate, it may be that it is better for thee to be taken out of this world,
that thou may change thy mortal life for an immortal, and that a final
end may be put both to thy trouble, Apoc. 14, 13.
and to thy sin, which is the cause of thy trouble. It may be, if thou
should live longer, thou would be infected with the common corruptions of
the time, Wisd. 4.11.
and therefore as it is said of Enoch, Thou art taken away, least wickedness
should alter thine understanding, or deceit beguile thy mind. For when we are
judged, that is, afflicted, though it be by bodily death, 1. Cor. 11.32. Verse.
30.
we are chastised of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. Or, if thou should be continued longer in this life, it may be that
such common calamities as the Lord is intended to bring upon the land, should
happen in thy time; and therefore God in great mercy takes thee away, as he
did the godly king Josias, 2. King. 22.20.
that thou should not see the evil which is to come: as it is said of Esaias
57. Esaias 57.1.
The righteous perish, and no man takes it to heart: merciful men are taken
away, and no man understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil
to come.

Or else it is good for thee, that the affliction which thou desire to be
removed from thee, should be continued upon thee: thine estate and disposition
being such, that it is very needful for thee to be trained up in the school
of affliction, and to be daily exercised under the cross. And therefore, if
God do see it good to take that course with thee, thou must resolve with
patience and comfort to take up thy cross, Luke 9.23.
(...), day by day, as our Savior Christ has warned thee: and remember, that
it is good for a man, if God do so appoint, to begin betimes, Lam. 3.27.
and to bear the yoke of affliction even in his youth.

Or at the least, it is not good for thee as yet to be delivered, because the
Lord has not as yet attained to that end for which he does afflict thee. For
if it have been good for David and the rest of Gods children that they have
been afflicted, Psalm. 119 71.
not in respect of the afflictions themselves* but in regard of those
profitable and excellent fruits which the holy ghost by their afflictions
works in them: then assuredly, it is not good for thee, that thine affliction
should cease before it has wrought such good effects in thee, as the Lord by
it intends to work: unless thou would give the Lord occasion to
complain, that thou art one of those whom he afflicts in vain. Ier. 2.30.


Now the Lord afflicts his servants, either for their trial, or for their
chastisement. The Lord tries them by afflictions, either that his graces may
appear in them to his glory and the good example of others, or that their
weakness may be manifested, for their own amendment and instruction of
others. If he try men for the manifestation of his graces in them, it is
expedient that they should be tried by a trial proportionable to the measure
of their graces, either in respect of the greatness, or of the continuance,
Iam. 1.4.
that patience may have her perfect work in them.

And hence it is that the best men have endured the greatest trials, as
appears in Abraham, David, and Job, Iam. 1, 2, 3, 4.
etc. Wherefore James exhorts us to count it exceeding joy, when we fall into
manifold temptations: knowing, that the trial of our faith (for so he calls
affliction) brings forth patience. And let patience (says he) have her
perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. If the Lord
do try us to discover and bewray our weakness, that so he may abate our
pride, and humble us before him; it is sometimes expedient that the affliction
should be prolonged, though to our grief for the present, Deuteronomy. 8.16.
yet to our good in the end. Because many men are able to endure the first
brunt, and therein greatly please themselves, who notwithstanding in the
continuance of the affliction, do notably bewray their weakness. But because
this kind of trial is also a chastisement, let us consider those fruits and
effects which the Lord by chastisements does work in his children.

1. First therefore the Lord does chastise us, that he might teach us to know
our selves, and acknowledge our sins, Genesis 42.21.
and might humble us under his hand: for prosperity puffs men up, and makes
them forget themselves. 2. That he might stir us up to call upon him often,
Hos. 5.15. Luke 18.1. Esa 26.16, 17, 18
and that with feruencie of spirit: for when men enjoy their ease, they are not
usually either so fervent or so frequent in prayer. 3. That he might reclaim
us from sin, 1. Pe^. 4.1.
and might mortify our corruptions: for as fire purges gold, so does
affliction the children of God. 4. That he might teach us obedience by those
things which we suffer. Heb. 5.8.
5. That he might waine our souls from worldly desires. 6. That he might
exercise and strengthen our faith and patience.
Well then, call thy self to an account, thou which think it so long till
thou be delivered. First, art thou not yet humbled under the mighty hand of
God, but continuest still as proud and as vain as in former times? assure thy
self it is good for thee that thine affliction should be continued, that thou
may learn humility and the knowledge of thy self, and may be brought
to a more serious consideration of thy sins and of thy wretched estate in thy
self.

2. Do thou not fly unto the Lord by prayer, or if thou prayest, do thou
pray but coldly, and as it were for fashion sake? therefore the Lord delayeth
to help and deliver thee, that thou may learn to call upon him seriously
and fervently.

3. Have thou not yet repented thee of thy sin, whereby thou did provoke
the Lords anger against thee? Have thou not yet turned to him that smites
thee? Therefore does he continue thine affliction as thou continuest thine
impenitencie: Esaias. 9.13.
and as thou delayest thy repentance, so does he delay his help.

4. Have thou not yet learned obedience by that which thou do suffer?
Therefore does he still continue thine affliction, to teach thee obedience, and
to make thee partaker of his holiness: Heb. 12.10.
for although the chastisement of God upon thee seem grievous for the time,
yet in the end it will bring forth the quiet fruit of righteousness unto thee
who art exercised thereby. Heb. 12.11. Psalm. 119.71.
For which cause David, as he professes of himself, that it was good for him
that he had been afflicted, that ^e might learn the statutes of the Lord: so
he pronounces that man blessed whom the Lord does chastise and teach in his
law, Psalm. 94.12.
etc.

5. Art thou still addicted to the world, minding and affecting things below,
more than the things which are above? Therefore the Lord mingleth thy worldly
prosperity with the gall of affliction, that as nurses by laying bitter things
unto their dugs, do waine their children from them, so he by affliction might
waine thee from the world: and that through bearing the cross thou might
be crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14.
and the world to thee.

6. Have thou not yet learned patiently to bear the cross, and to repose
thine affiance in God more than in the means which God permits to thee?
Therefore does he still continue thine affliction, that thy patience might be
exercised, and by exercise confirmed, as the Scriptures testify: therefore
does the Lord bereave thee of other means, Romans 5.3. I^m. 1.3.
that thou might rely only upon him. Here then we are to be admonished to
make a right use of our afflictions, and as we desire to be delivered for our
comfort, so to labor, that these or such like effects may by our affliction be
wrought in us: for if we desire to be delivered out of affliction, before it
has wrought any good effect in us, we desire unawares that God should give us
over as incorrigible.

When as therefore a faithful man has prayed effectually unto the Lord for
deliverance out of affliction, and yet is not delivered, let him know that it
is not good for him to be delivered as yet. And withal, let him be persuaded
of these two things: First, that God does chastise him in Apoc. 3.19.
love, for his Heb. 12.10.
profit, according to his necessity, as being not Lam. 3.33.
delighted with our afflictions: and therefore inflicteth upon him no greater
measure of affliction, than in his fatherly wisdom he thinks necessary.
And therefore we ought to possess our souls in patience, committing and
resigning our selves into the hands of almighty God, as of a most wise and
loving father, and most expert physician of our souls. A son that has any
grace in him, will meekely submit himself to the chastisement of a wise and
careful father: Heb. 12.9.
how much more ought we to submit our selves to the correction of our heavenly
father? A man that has in his body any wounds or sores, he will not only be
patient, but thankful also toward the surgeon that launceth or seareth his
body, that he may cure it: how much more ought we patiently and thankefully
to suffer the Lord to afflict our bodies, that he may save our souls?

Secondly, let him be assured that the Lord does never reject the effectual
prayer of a faithful man, but always hears the same graciously, if not
according to his desire, yet according to his profit: yea, that he always
grants it, if it be rightly conceived. For as we are to ask spiritual
graces necessary to salvation absolutely; so we are to believe absolutely,
that God will grant the same unto us: yea this is a certain and comfortable
truth, that whosoever has thus much grace, truly and earnestly to desire any
sanctifying grace, the same grace is already begun in him, the Lord accepting
in his children the will for the deed. And as we are to ask temporal
blessings conditionally, so far forth as the granting thereof may stand
with Gods glory and our everlasting good; so we are to believe and to be
assured that God will grant the same, so far forth as may be for the glory
of his name, and for our spiritual good.

Wherefore to conclude, if it be good for the children of God to be delivered
out of affliction, the Lord delivers them when they have called upon him,
according to his most gracious promise in this place: but if it be not good
for them to be delivered, then deliverance (being not a blessing) is not within
the compass of Gods promise; 2. Cor. 1.5.
and therefore in stead of that, he gives them patience with the inward
comfort of the holy ghost, blesses and sanctifies their affliction unto them,
causing it and all things whatsoever to work together for the good of them
that love him. Romans ^, 28,


And thus much concerning the deliverance promised, now follows the fruit of
deliverance obtained. And thou shall glorify me. Out of which words we are
briefly to observe four things: the first, for the comfort of the godly and
the terror of the wicked. For if we therefore ask deliverance, that we may
glorify God, and have a certain purpose and settled resolution, after we are
delivered to glorify him, especially if we confirm our purpose and
resolution by a godly vow; we may from hence conceive certain hope that we
shall be delivered, for so much as we hereby do plainly see, that our
deliverance and safety shall be joined with Gods glory: Psalm. 6.4.5. and
142.7. and 143.11.
and therefore may be bold for the confirmation of our faith to entreat the
Lord (as the faithful have used to do) that he would spare us for his names
sake, and that he would deliver us even for the glory of his name: that being
delivered, we may praise and glorify his name among men, which being dead we
cannot do: For as David says, In death there is no remembrance of thee: in the
grave, who shall praise thee? But if we have a purpose to continue in our
sins, and therefore desire deliverance that we may have freedom to follow
our own courses; as we cannot entreat the Lord that he would deliver us for
his own name sake, so can we not conceive hope that we shall be delivered for
our good, seeing our life after our deliverance is like to be joined with the
dishonor of God.

The second thing serves for our instruction. That as we are here taught, so
we should not only acknowledge the glory of God to be the end of our
deliverance and preservation, but also be careful to refer the same to the
glorifying of God: for this is the supreme end of our life and being: Whereunto
if our life be not referred, we live in vain. Many when they are in distress
will promise and vow a study and care of glorifying God after they are
delivered, of which vow notwithstanding afterward they are unmindful. But it
may be asked, how are we to glorify God? I answer, both inwardly, and
outwardly. Inwardly, in our minds, by intending the glory of God in all
things, or as the Prophet Malachie speaks, Mal. 2.2.
By putting into our hearts to give glory to his name; that whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, all may be done to the glory of God. 1. Cor.
10.3^.
Outwardly in our words and deeds. In our words, that we make the glory of God
both the matter of our speech, when we praise and magnify God, giving him
thanks for our deliverance, and all other his blessings, for this is (...) to
glorify God, Luke 2.20.
as Luke speaks chapter 2, and as the Lord professes in the last verse of
this Psalm, Psalm. 50, 23.
He that sacrifices praise, does glorify me. And we are the rather thus to
glorify God, because this fruit the Lord requires both in this place and
elsewhere in the Scriptures, Psalm. 50.14, 15. Psalm. 107.
and also expects the same at our hands. And further, he esteems himself
to be honored and glorified, when he is praised and magnified, and therefore
far prefers the sacrifice of praise, Heb 3.15. Hos. 14.3.
that is, the fruit or calves of our lips confessing unto God, before all the
sacrifices of goats and bulls prescribed in his Law. And for this cause the
faithful in their affliction, use to promise by vow these sacrifices of
praise; which being delivered, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14, 17, and 118, 21.
they are careful to perform. Howbeit it cannot be denied but that the
greatest part of men forget to be thankful, as appears by the story of the
ten lepers, Luke 17 17.
to whom being all cleansed, one only returned to give praise and thanks to
God, But let us in this our affliction for the confirmation of our faith
seriously vow these sacrifices of praise unto God: and if it please God to
deliver us, Psalm. 50.14.
let us be mindful to offer unto the Lord the sacrifice of praise, and pay
our vows unto the most high: for if with David we should deliberat with our
selves what to render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward us, we must
resolve as he does, to take the cup of salvation, that is, of thanks for his
preservation of us, Psalm. 116.12.13.
and so pay our vows unto the Lord. And if this be the only thing almost
which we can render unto the Lord, we are exceedingly unthankful, if we be
wanting therein. We are also to make the glory of God the end of our speech,
by avoiding all idle words, Mat. 12.36. Ephesians. 4.29. 1. Cor. 15.33. Col. 4.6.
and rotten speeches, whereby good manners might be corrupted. And contrariwise,
endeavoring that our speech being gracious always and seasoned with salt, God
may be glorified thereby, and our brethren edified. Lastly, we are by our deeds
to glorify God, by bringing forth the fruits of good works: For by this means
we shall not only glorify God our selves (as our Savior Christ says, John
15.8. Math. 5.16. 1. ^o^. 2.12.
Herein is my father glorified that you bring forth much fruit) but also be
authors unto others of glorifying him, to which purpose he exhorts us so to
let our light shine before men that they seeing our good works may glorify
our father which is in heaven.

The third thing to be observed, is a twofold doctrine. For first, when God
does promise us this grace to glorify him, this proves, that or care and
study to glorify God, is not a matter in our own power, but is the free gift
of God. And therefore as the Lord here promises and elsewhere swears to give
us this grace, so are we by earnest prayer to beg the same at his hands, as
we are taught in the first petition of that form of prayer which Christ has
prescribed to us; Math. 6.9.
namely, that God would give us grace to glorify his name. And secondly,
whereas the Lord promises to the faithful that they shall glorify him:
hereby it appears that the children of God have a great desire to glorify
God, and esteem it as a greater benefit than their deliverance it self, if
God will vouchsafe to make them instruments of his glory: for that they
acknowledge to be the end whereunto their deliverance is to be referred. Now
the end is always better than that which is destinated thereunto. And the same
thing is signified by the order of petitions in the Lords prayer, whereby we
are taught to prefer the glory of God, before those things which concern
not only our temporal, but also spiritual good.

The fourth and last thing is a reproof and check of those who have no zeal
of Gods glory: for seeing the Lord promises to the faithful that they shall
glorify him, and elsewhere by oath confirms that to those that he
re-redeemeth he will give this grace to worship him in holiness and
righteousness: Luke 1.73.74.
therefore we may easily discern in what number they are to be reckoned, who
have no care to praise God for this deliverance, neither have any desire to
glorify him.

To conclude therefore, that this affliction, and hand of God afflicting us may
be removed; let us fly unto God by humble, hearty and effectual prayer, as
we are commanded in this place; let us humble our selves under the mighty hand
of God, Esaias 9 13. (...) 4.12.
let us turn^ unto him that has smitten us, let us be careful to meet him in
his judgments, let us repent of our sins, let us unfeignedly vow the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and a serious care hereafter to glorify
God, that so with better assurance of faith we may entreat him to deliver us,
let us be mindful to glorify him, and to render our vows unto the most high:
that so it may plainly appear, that our preservation and life is joined with
the glory of God. Otherwise if we shall forget this great mercy of God, and
dishonor him by our sins, we are to fear lest some more grievous judgment
shall befall us. As our Savior Christ said to the man whom he had cured, John
5.14.
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

(...)

FINIS.

