A brief Discourse of the most heinous and traytorlike fact (...) Thomas
Appeltree: For which he should have suffced Death on Tuisday the one and
twentieth of Iulie last: wherein is set down his Confession.

Whereunto is annexed, the Report of the message sent to the place of execution
from her most excellent Majesty, by the right honorable Sir Christopher
Hatton Knight, Vizchamberlain to her highness.

printer's device of the brazen serpent, passed to Henry Bynneman in 1574-75

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Bynneman. Anno Domini. 1579.

To the Reader.
FOr as much as the nature of man is affected to listen after news, by the
report whereof either the mind is delighted, or else stricken with fear, I
have thought it convenient to publish unto all the world, and namely to all
good and godly subjects, a thing of no small importance, very strange, and
not so strange, as most certain true. May it therefore please thee to peruse
this little book, wherein as in a loking glass, thou shale behold to thy
great comfort, the very effects of justice, justly executed against an
offender, worthily condemned to death: and further, thou shall to thy joy
behold the rare and singular mercies offered unto him, that had most
grieuouslie trespassed against the royal estate of this noble realm of
England, even by the Queens most excellent majesty, for whose prosperity all
faithful hearts are bound continually to pray to the Almighty, who guide
and govern her, highness with his holy spirit, pour upon her the
everlasting deawes of his heavenly grace, prosper her in all her affairs,
grant her long life, health, peace, and quietness of body and mind, where
unto all true hearted subjects vouchsafe with me to say. AMEN.

THe. 17. day of July this present year of our Lord God. 1579. the Queens most
excellent Majesty being on the river of Thames, betwixt her highness Manor
of Grenewich, and Detforde, in her privy Barge, accompanied with Mounsier
Schemere the French Ambassador, the Earl of Lincoln, and M. Vizchamberlaine.
etc. with whom she entered discourse about weighty affairs: it chanced that
one Thomas Appeltree a young man and servant to M. Henry Carry, with.ii.
or.iii. children of her Maiestes Chapel, and one other named Barnard Acton,
being in a boat on the Thames, rowing up and down betwixt the places
aforenamed, the aforesaid Thomas Appeltree had a Caliuer or Harquebush, which
he had three or four times discharged with bullet, shooting at randone very
rashly, who by great misfortune shot one of the water men (being the second man
next unto the bales of the said Barge, laboring with his Dare, which sat
within six foot of her highness) clean through both his arms: the blow was
so great and grievous, that it moved him out of his place, and forced him to
cry and scritche out piteously, supposing himself to be slain, and saying he
was shot through the body. The man bleeding abundantly, as though he had had a
hundred daggers thrust into him, the Queens Majesty showed such noble courage
as is most wonderful to be heard and spoken of, for beholding him so maimed,
and bleeding in such forte, she never bashed thereat, but she wed effectually
a prudent and magnanimous heart, and most courteously comforting the poor man,
she bad him be of good cheer, and said he should want nothing that might be
for his ease, commanding him to be covered till such time as he came to the
shore, til which time he lay bathing in his own blood, which might have been
an occasion to have terrifyed the eyes of the beholders. But such and so great
was the courage and magnanimity of our dread and sovereign Lady, that it
never quayled. To be short, this said Thomas Appeltree and the rest were
apprehended and brought before her honorable Counsel who with great gravity
and wisdom employed their times very carefully, and with great diligence
examined the said Appeltree and his companions, and finding the case most
heinous and wicked, justly pronounced against him the sentence of Death, and
committed him to the Marshalsea in Southwarke, from whence the Tuisday
following he was brought through the City with the Knight Marshals men, lead
up to the Tower hill, and sore Radcliffe, up to Black wall, and so down to
the water side, where was a Gibet set up directly placed betwixt Desforde and
Greenwitch, for the execution of this malefactor, who in teede very pitifully
bewailed the offense he had committed, and as well in prison as by the way
prepared himself very penitentely and willingly to offer his body to the
death, loathing this world and the pleasures of the same, and constantly by
faith flette unto JESUS CHRIST, affirming that without him there was no
saluatien, and often said and protested very vehemently, that Jesus Christ the
son of the living God, was his only hope and comfort, in whose precious
blood he was purged and made clean, and in him by faith he was fully assured,
that his sins (were they never so many in number) should be freely for given
and forgotten: such was his immovable constancy, and so strong he was in
CHRIST JESUS, that although he confessed his imperfection to be such and so
great that of himself he was not worthy to lift up his eles to heaven, yet by
faith he was assured that though his life were wicked and worthy the sentence
of everlasting damnation, his Lord JESUS CHRIST his merciful savior had for
him satisfied the law, pacifyed Gods indignation, made an agreement betwixt
God and him, to whom he was by grace reconciled, conceived and borne again,
not according to the flesh, but in spirit by grace, in the precious death and
blou^shedding of his Mediator, and in him assured, that neither sin, death nor
all the power of hell should harm him, but that his faith firmly fixed in that
mighty conqueror that had overthrown Sin, subdued Death, and convinced
Satan, should be sufficient for him to combat and maintain fight against his
enemies, which traueled for the utter spoil and destruction of his body and
soul, over whom in Christ his hope persuaded him to triumph. But when he came
to the place of execution, he fell on his knees, and desired all the people to
pray with him, where he very devoutly and with a constant courage prayed in
this wise: O bountiful Jesus, O sweet lesu. etc. a necessary prayer to be
said at the hour of Death: after this he said the Lords prayer, and then
discoursed very godly, that the Lord Jesus Christ was the rock whereon he
laid his foundation, and that his only death and passion was the mean to wash
away his sins and offenses, and that he for him and al other sat on the right
hand of his heavenly father, pleading and making continual intercession,
representing his bloody and paineful wounds which never could be dried up,
which being seen in the eyes of his glorious majesty, his anger was converted
to love: his fury, to kindness and fatherly pity. Thus very godly he
purposed to finish his miserable and wretched life, and so prepared himself to
ascend and go up the ladder, and being on the same, he turned himself, and
spoke to the people as follows: Good people I am come hither to die, but GOD
is my judge, I never in my life intended hurt to the Quaenes most excellent
Majesty, nor meant the harm of any creature, but I pray to God with all my
heart, long to prosper and keep her highness in health, who bless and
defend her from all perils and dangers, who prosper her in all her affairs,
and bless her most honorable counsel, giving them grace to do all things to
the glory of GOD and the benefit of this realm: But of all things, I am most
sorry for my offense, and woefully bewail the same: and more, I am penitent and
sorry for my good master, M. Henry Carry, who has been so grieved for my
fault, suffering rebuke for the same: I would to God I had never been borne
that have so grievously offended him. And with that the tears gusht out of his
eyes very fast. This said, he persuaded al men to serve God and to take an
ensample by him, and every night and morning moved the deuoutely to say the
Lords prayer. And as the executioner as one greedy of his pray, had put the
roape about his neeke, the people cried, stay, stay, stay, and with that came
the right honorable sir Christopher Hatton Vizchamberlayne to her highness,
who enquired what he had confessed, and being certified as is before expressed,
he veiled his bonet, and declared that the Queens majesty had sent him
thither both to make the cause opento them how heinous and grievous the offense
of the said Thomas Appeltree was, and further to signify to him her gratipus
pleasure: and so continued his message, as ye may read it priuted by it self,
and annexed to this discourse. Which when he had declared, the hangman was
commanded to take the roape from his neck, clean contrary to his
expectation, and I think (as was seen to the people) sorry to lose his pray:
but whether it were so or not, whether that Appeltree had cause to be joyful or
no, I leave to your judgments, who being come down from the ladder, received
his pardon, and gave GOD and the Prince praise, for so great a benefit as he
had by her most gracious bounty received. This done, M. Vizchamberlaine said:
Good people pray for the Queens majesty, and then was this prayer said,
which is usually readde (for the preservation of her Majesty) in the church:

O almighty and everliving God, the Lord of Lords, and king of kings, which
do from thy throne behold all the dwellers of the earth, most heartily we
beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most gracious sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth. etc.

Whereunto all the people ioyefully accorded to say AMEN, crying, God save the
Queen, and casting up their cappes.

Thus was the dead man restored to life, and brought back to the Marshalsea
again, even as he was led thence to the place of execution, where he by the
way most ioyfullye prayed for the security of the Queens Majesty.

Lo thus good reader have thou heard discoursed unto thee, the offense of
Thomas Appeltree, justly condemned for his trespass to die the death, and most
graciously (notwithstanding the greatness of his crime) by the singular mercy
and bounty of our dread and sovereign Lady Queen EIIZABETH preserved, for
the which cause and al others, like faithful and true subjects strongly armed
with an earnest love, let us not cease to pray to ye Almighty with loyal and
faithful hearts for her highness safegarde, who with his mighty and
outstretched hand protect and deliver her as he has done wonderfully from the
hands of all her enemies, and so mercifully look upon us her subjects, that
to our continual joys, the advancement of sin, religion and virtue, the fall
and overthrow of all iniquity, we may possess the presence of this our royal
virgin Queen even to the coming of Jesus Christ in the clouds of the skies:
whereunto let all that fear God and love the Queens majesty from the bottom
of their hearts, say AMEN.

The night before he should suffer, he wrote this prayer following with his own
hand, and on the backside of the paper wherein the same was set down, he wrote
these words:

To the Queens most excellent Majesty, whom I beseech God long to continue
over the Realm of England in prosperous felicity.

This was the title.

The humble prayer of Thomas Appeltree, yielding himself to die, as innocent
from any pretended cause, as the Infant this night borne.
AS I here pray earnestlye to God the Father, who by his divine providence
has ordained me to come to this place, I do not pray only for my self, but
also for the whole Church, especially such as be persecuted for thy word: O
Lord grant unto them, that whether it be by death or life, they may glorify
thy name to their lives end: be merciful unto this Church of England and
Ireland, we beseech thee good Lord, and preserve every part and member of the
same, especially thy servant ELIZABETH our most gracious sovereign Queens
grant her al such gifts as be needful for so high a calling, to the
aduauncemente of thy glory, and benefit of this common wealth, to the
establishing of a perfect government of thy church, according to the rule of
thy blessed word, to the rooting out of all superstition and relics of
Antichrist, to the governing of her subjects in all peace and tranquillity:
defend her o Lord from all conspiracies, treasons and wing her authority to
come from thy heavenly majesty, they may with obedient hearts humbly obey her
in thee and for thee O Lord preserve the whole counsel, and the Magistrates
of the Realm, that being lightened by thy holy spirit, they may defend thy
truth, suppress wickedness, and maintain equity: behold all the preachers
and pastors of the whole world, bless their labors, increase the number of
the, place over every Church a painful watchman, and remove all idle lubbers,
confouud the power of Antichrist, and turn the hearts of the people, that they
may be obedient to thy tructh Blessed be the two Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, with all the Schools of learning, and the students in the same:
behold good Lord all those that be afflicted with any kind of cross, that
they may profit by thy correction in newness of life, also beseeching God to
send her majesty no worse nor disobedient subject, than in my heart and
mind (God is my witness) til this innocent cause did chance toward me, I
have bin, which is the first offense that ever I committed. And so, in whose
name I was baptized, and in whom only I hope to be saved at the day of
judgment, I trust the Lord will receive my Soul into heaven.


