THE French History. That is; A lamentable Discourse of three of the chief,
and most famous bloody broiles that have happened in France for the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

Namely; 1 The outrage called The winning of S. James his Street, 1557. 2 The
constant Martyrdom of Annas Burgaeus one of the K. Council, 1559. 3 The
bloody Marriage of Margaret Sister to Charles the 9. Anno 1572.


Published by A. D.

All that will live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution.

1. Tim. 3. 2.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for William Russell, dwelling at Exeter.
1589.

To the right worshipful her loving Bro-Master Pearse Edgecombe, of Mount
Edgecombe in Deuon. Esquier, mercy and peace from Jesus Christ.
RIght worshipful, and my loving Brother, I have heard it often and truly
reported; That, Laws may be broken, but Nature cannot be forgotten. I find
the force of this in my self: if I find not the like in you, I blame not your
nature, but the contrary crossings of those politic affections that hinder
the working of it. When I had ended this present Pamphlet, I saw that the
simplicity of it required a Patron; and the often remembrance of your former
courtesies enforced me to make bold with you. Consider not therefore the
worthiness of the work, but rather the will of the worker: for though the one
may justly be condemned, yet the other deserves to be accepted. This Book
which proceeds under your protection, if you consider the matter, I assure you
it is most excellent and well worth the reading: but if you weigh the manner, I
confess it is base and scarce worth the seeing. This is therefore my desire;
that the simple attire of this outward form, may not discourage you from
seeking the comfortable taste of the inward substance. You shall find here many
things for comfort worthy the considering, and for policy the observing. This
has been my ordinary exercise for recreation at times of leisure for a long
space together: If I were sure that you would but take half so much pleasure
in reading it, as I have in collecting and disposing it: I should not need
any farther to commend it. If you find any thing that fits not your liking,
remember I pray, that it is a woman's doing. The thing it self will
sufficiently prove this to be true. Thus committing the patronage of this my
recreation unto your protection, and you withmy good sister in law your wife,
and all your children to the Lords tuition, I cease to troble you: Honiton, the
25. day of Iulie. 1589.

Your loving Sister Anne Dowriche.

PEARSE EDGECOMBE.
The sharpest EDGE will soonest PEARSE and COME unto AN end.
Yet DOWT not, but be RICH in hope, and take that I do send.
A. D.
P PVt not your trust in fading earth puffed up with fainting stays;
Possess the Lord, so shall you still persist in godly ways.
E Exalt your eyes from common shapes, esteem not of this pelf;
Express in deeds what faith you have, examine well your self.
A As winds disperse the wau'ring chafe, and toss it quite away;
All worldly pomp shall so consume, and pass without delay.
R Repleated often with wandering change recount your life to be;
Remember well, no blessed fruit remains on cursed tree.
S So shall you trace the perfect path salvation to attain;
So shall you see this glittering gloss set out to be but vain.
E EXtinguish then the carnal course exempted from above;
Expel the qualmes of fond delights, excel in godly love.
D Depart not from the living Lord, delight to read his word;
Delaie no time, for he does still defend us with the sword.
G Give to your God your soul and life, good gain insues thereby;
Grieve not the Spirit that warns you great dangers for to fly.
C Cast all your care on him alone, care for no other pray,
Considering he your greatest griefs can quickly take away.
O Of all things lent unto this life one thing account the best,
Only the truth and fear of God, on which our souls must rest.
M Make no account of trustles trash, molesting misers mind;
Mark how these maskers oftentimes much care and sorrow find.
B Beware betimes of had I wist; be not these pleasures vain?
Believe in Christ, and so you shall be sure to live again.
To the Reader.
AMongst many excellent precepts which Saint Paul gave unto the Church, this
is to be considered; Let al things be done unto edifying. If this had been of
all men well considered, many things which now fly abroad, might well have
been spared. That my only purpose in collecting and framing this work, was
to edify, comfort and stir up the godly minds unto care, watchfulness,
Zeal, and feruentnesse in the cause of Gods truth; you shall easily perceive
by the choosing and ordering of these singular examples which hereafter ensue.
In which these special circumstances are to be considered. First, The great
fury and rage of Satan likely to be displaced from his Kingdom of error
and blindness; the frantic madness of the ignorant possessed people, delighting
in darkness, and striving to uphold the Kingdom of their Master; and the
prompt facility and readiness of Satan's ministers to put in execution any
kind of wickedness: al which is to be seen both in the first example of The
winning of Saint James his Street, and in all the rest of the book.
Secondly, The power, majesty, and dignity of the Devil, possessing the
chiefest States of the earth, and seeming to the outward appearance to weild
the Truth unto his obedience, in suppressing the strongest that dared openly to
withstand him: in the Story of Annas Burgaeus. Thirdly, The policy and
craft of Satan and his members in devising by subtlety to circumuent the
godly; under the shadow of trust, to exercise tyranny; under the color of
courtesy to practice cruelty; and under the veil of a sacred oath, to cover
most shameful villainy. This is to be seen in the third example, of the
miserable Massacre at the bloody marriage. We had need therefore to be
watchful, strong, and wise: watchful in prayer, that we be not taken sleeping;
strong in faith, that we be not overthrown by Satan's might; wise as serpents,
that we be not deceived by the devils allurements. We are to learn also, what
trust we ought to repose in the promises and oaths of professed Papists, what
show so ever they make of love and friendship. Here as in a glass, you shall
plainly see the picture of all the moral virtues most lively described, in
the strange patience, the godly perseverance, the comfortable orations, sweet
speeches, and the constant and famous endings of these sacred Martires.
Wheresoever thou shall find the Devil brought in Poeticallie to make any
oration to the King and States of France, as in many places he is: then
understand, that under those speeches are expressed all the subtilties,
villainies, cruelties and policies that were devised, and by devilish means put
in practice against the godly, more lively to set them down in their colors, as
if it came from the devils own mouth, as no doubt it came from his spirit.
Again, in all the orations of the Martirs, and of the King, the Queen, the
Guise, and all other that have speeches in this book, mark that of purpose
the nature both of the person that speaks and also of the matter that is
spoken, are lively set down: so that here are not bare examples of virtue and
vice, but also the nature and qualities of those virtues or villainies are
manifestly depainted to them that will seek for it. The noble Martirs of
England are known sufficiently almost to all; these excellent French
Histories were seen but of few, being in worthiness nothing inferior unto the
other.

The causes why I have described it in verse are 3. First for mine own
exercise, being a learner in that faculty; Secondly, to restore again some
credit if I can unto Poetry, having been defaced of late so many ways by
wanton vanities. Thirdly, for the more novelty of the thing, and apt
facility in disposing the matter framed to the better liking of some men's
fantasies, because the same Story in effect is already translated into
English prose. Many of these orations that are here fully and amply expressed,
were in the French Commentaries but only in substance lightly touched, and the
sum set down without amplifying the circumstance, and yet here is no more
set down, than there is signified. I have also, for the more terror unto the
wicked, diligently collected the great plagues and just judgments of God
showed against the persecutors in every several History, and have set them
down so in order, and amplified them by the like judgments against sinners out
of the word and other histories, that every proud persecutor may plainly see
what punishment remains due unto their wicked tyranny. To speak truly
without vain glory, I think assuredly, that there is not in this form any
thing extant which is more forceable to procure comfort to the afflicted,
strength to the weak, courage to the faint hearted, and patience unto them
that are persecuted, than this little work, if it be diligently read and well
considered. So wishing that all the excellent and rare wits that now flourish
in England, and show them selves many times in vain devises, would all learn
to consecrate their singular gifts to the glory of God, the edifying of his
Church, and the salvation of the souls of Gods chosen. Then would the Lord
still bless their labors, and give their names a perpetual memory.

So I commit thee to Gods protection, and commend this my pleasant exercise to
thy good liking: which, if I perceive to be accepted, thou shall encourage me
to proceed, to make thee acquainted with more excellent actions. Honiton in
Deuon, this xxv. of July. 1589.

A: Dowriche.

To the Reader that is friendly to Poetry.
What so thou be that readst my Book,
Let wit so weigh my will;
That due regard may here supply
The want of learned Skill.
A: D:

THE FRENCH History.
AS walking on a day,
the woods and forests nie:
In shrilling voice, and mournful tunes,
me thought I heard one cry.
Which sudden fear so dashed
my blood and senses all,
That as one in a trance I staid
to see what would befall.
A thousand thoughts oppressed my fearful wavering brain,
In musing what amid the woods that fearful voice should mean
I feared least thieves had robbed and cast some man aside:
Because it was the common way where men did use to ride.
Among the savage beasts that in these woods remain,
I doubted least some trauler stood in danger to be slain.
But casting fear apart, I ran toward the place,
To see the wight that did lament, and wail his woeful case.
Alone, no peril nigh, within a bushie dale,
A stranger sat: I got aside to hear his doleful tale.
O noble France (quod he) that bor'st sometime the bell, The pitifu(...)
mentation (...) godly Fre(...) Exile, whi(...) for persecu(...)on forsook
(...) Country.

And for thy pleasure and thy wealth all Nations did excel!
How art thou now of late with mischief so possessed,
That all the Realms of Christendom thy falsehoods do detest?
Where is thy vernant hiew? thy fresh and flowring fame?
"What fell unlucky spot is this, that so does stain thy name?
"Where is thy mirth become? where is thy smiling cheer?
"Where is thy ioiful peace, that erst did make thee shine so clear?
"Where are thy youthlie troops, the Nobles of thy Land?
"Where is thy faith; without the which, no realm can ever stand.
"Where is the mutual love that Prince and people had?
"Where is the noble union, that makes the Country glad?
"Where is the due regard that Princes ought to have;
"From all the bands of tyranny their people for to save?
"Where is thy pity gone, where is thy mercy fled;
"That Lion-like in every place such Christian blood is shed?
"But these of late to thee o France have bid adieu,
"That rigor reigns in mercies seat: alas, it is too true.
"For having no remorse to hear thy childrens groan,
"Like as a widow comfortless thou shall be left alone.
"For they that fear the Lord, and have for him a care,
"Have learnd too late the costly wit thy treasons to beware.
"Therefore thy children have their native Coasts resignde,
"With better hope in foreign Lands more mercy for to find.
"And that which is the worst, I see thou do not way
"The Spiders spite, that long has woue the web of thy decaie.
"Therefore if thou will know the cause of all thy woe;
"Then mark the judgments of the Lord, from which thou can not go.
"If Judah now (says he) should ask the causes why ^emie 9. 12.

"Their Land was like a wilderness that no man passed by;
"He makes no long delaie, but bids the Prophet show,
"This plague does always follow them that do despise his law.
"For they that Idols serve, and from the Lord do shrink,
"They shall be fed with bitter gall, and wormwood water drink.
"And why at sundry times was Egypt plagued so?
"But for because he would not yield to let Gods people go.
"Why was the Lord with Saul so wroth and full of ire, Samuel 15.

"In sparing Agag and the beasts the people did desire?
"For he had now accursed both Agag and his Land,
"Commanding Saul without remorse to kill them out of hand:
"Because this Amalek would not at all vouchsaue
"Within his Land Gods chosen lock a passage for to have:
"But falsely did conspire to work their open shame, Exedus 17. 4.

"To snare their feet they lay in wait from Egypt as they came. Numb. 24. 20.

"And thou Jerusalem, what sin did file thy fall,
"When Titus and Vaspasian did tumble down thy wall?
"Why did the Lord depart from thee that wast so brave,
"And to thy foes made thee a pray, a jest, a servile slave?
"Because amiddes thy mirth thy God thou did forget,
"And would not have his prophets live, but did the^ il entreat.
"O France therefore be wise, learn ere it be too late
"By these examples, to begin these bloody sins to hate.
"For thou with Judah land have done thy God great wrong, France compared with
Judah, Egypt, Agipt and Jerusalem.

"To serve and set up other Gods to run a whoring long.
"Thou have for wooden Gods, Gods lively Image spilde:
"And with the streams of christian blood the streets and canels filled
"Thou have with Egypt long Gods word in prison pent*
"And wilfully refusde the light that he to thee has sent.
"The M^ses that begins this light for to unfold,
"Thou seekst to lap him presently in chains and irons cold.
"Thou do with Amalek with all thy wit assaie
"To lie in wait that in thy land the truth may have no way.
"And thou a cruel nursse to Gods elect have been,
"To blemish thus the shining light that in thee has bin seen.
"And with Jerusalem Gods Prophets thou have slain,
"That in thy popish ignorance thou might still remain.
"If Judah shall be fed with wormwood mixed with gall;
"If wilful Egypt plagued were that kept Gods Church in thral;
"If God no pity showde, and mercy none would have
"Upon the land of Amalek, nor man nor beast to save;
"And if the blinded pride that in Ieruslem dwelt,
"Could not escape Gods heavy wrath, but man and child it felt.
"What shall become of thee thou blind and bloody land?
"How do thou think for to escape Gods just revenging hand?
"But since I do not doubt God will revenge our case,
"And for his chosen when he list provide a dwelling place;
"I will no more lament in sad and mourning style,
"But thank the Lord that set me safe within this pleasant I Will.
"O happy England, thou from God above art blessed,
"Which have the truth established with peace and perfect rest.
"God give thee therewithal a good and thankful mind,
"That to thy loving God no way thou show thy self unkind.
"But still thou may remain as thou have been of yore,
"A Nurse to Gods afflicted flock, that he may bless thee more?
"But now will I depart, the Lord direct my way,
"And send me in this pleasant I Will some simple slender stay:
"Till God grant me return, or otherwise provide.
The French (...)lgrime ha(...)ng espied the (...)uthour com(...)eth to him.
But is not that an Englishman that I have yonder spide?
The t^^^g be(...)eene them.
Well met my friend, tell what thou art that make this moan?
And why within these desert woods art thou thy self alone?
The Pilgrim.
"I am a stranger wight, and France my native soil,
"From which, of late, by luckles chance, and need, am forced to toil.
"Such troubles and such wars of late have there befell,
"That such as fear the Lord aright no surety have to dwell
"Within that woeful Land: so God me hither sent
"To live with you in happy state, which he this Land has le^t.
The English(...)n the Au(...)or.
Oh happy then am I: my friend I thee desire
Come go with me, for of these wars I greatly long to hear.
And if that thou will stay, as long as thou will crave
My house as thine, and all therein thou shall be sure to have.
Therefore my friend I pray, thy wit and tongue prepare,
The cause of all these bloody broiles in verse for to declare.
And first of all describe the matter, and the man,
The place, the time, the manner how this Civil war began.
The Exile.
"O Sir, but this request does pierce my wounded heart,
"Which gladly would forget again my woeful countries smart.
"For who can well displaie the treasons and the guiles,
"The bloody murders merciless, the snares and crafty wiles
"Which France has put in ure these thirty years and more,
"The like of which in Christendom was never seen before?
"But since it is your will to know the woeful state hate.
"Of Christ's afflicted Church in France, which Antichrist does
"Come rest you here a while, and mark what I shall tell,
"Great wars and broiles I must declare, God grant it may be well.
"And first to pitch the plot that you do so desire,
"I will unfold the cheifest cause that kindled first this fire.
ABout the very year of Christ his Incarnation
A thousand five hundred fifty seven by just co^putation: The French P^^grime
describes the caus^ of the Civil wars in Fr^^^

Henry ware the Crown the second of that name,
In whose unhappy Reign began this fearful fiery flame.
For now in France began Gods truth for to appear,
Whose ioiful beams in Germany at this time shone full clear.
But as the Jews sometimes Gods Prophets did despise,
And as the Scribes and Pharisees did set their whole devise
To shade the shining light, which God to them had sent:
So France in fury blindlie set against Gods truth is bent.
Which truth but lately sown, and scant appearing green,
They seek by force, by fire and sword to root and raze it cleene.
But though proud Pharao did Gods chosen long oppress,
Yet still amiddes the fiery broiles his people did increase.
So now amiddes the flame Gods word a passage found,
Which did increase his chosen flock by force of silver sound.
Which sound in Gods elect did work such sudden change
In all estates, that at the first in France it seemed strange.
Gods mighty Spirit did work his mercy still was pressed,
That some of all estates were calde their blindness to detest.
Though riches be a let, and noble birth some stay,
That very few of these (says Christ) do find the perfect way:
Yet God to bring to pass the work he did intend,
Did also raise some Noble men the poorer to defend.
So now they fall at square, now here began the strife:
For Satan could not bear to see a new reformed life.
That Prophecy is true (for Christ did speak the word)
I came not to give peace to mine, but strife, debate, and sword. Matthew. 10. 34.

The son against the sire, Luke 12* 31.
one friend against another,
The word shall brothers part, and set the daughter against the mother.
So fell it out in France, his word did now divide
His chosen, from the rest of those that took the adverse side.
The Land divided thus, two parts there fell at first;
Gods people were in number least, the greater was the worst.
Now Satan was afraid, for now he striued sore
To keep the King and chiefest States in blindness as of yore.
It pincht him to the quick to lose his kingdom so,
It greeude him to the heart that he should let his servants go.
He sits not idle now, he calls his wits in place,
Some cunning knacke for to contriue to help him in this case.
His wily wilful craft by long experience bred
Has taught him now an ancient feat to crush the gospels head.
Now summons he his men and servants to appear; The first crati^^^ of the
devil (...) the king, the Queen mother and Court of ^aris.

Now help me at this need (quoth he) my friends and felows deer:
Now is the time to stir while matters yet be new,
While blinded minds in doubting hang, not knowing what istrue.
For if the word of God do once begin to shine,
"Then farewell all, I shall be feign my kingdom to resign.
"But if you will agree and follow mine advise,
"We shall cut off this sown word, as fast as it shall rise.
"And first we must give out some vile and lewd report
"Of such as do profess the truth, and such as do resort
"Unto their Sermons: so this way it will be best,
"To make the King and many more their dealings to detest.
"And when as they shall meet in Church to serve the Lord,
"We Will say they do defile themselves, to make the^ more abhord.
"And when in fields they join their ioifull Psalms to sing,
"We must give out that they conspire which way to kill the King.
"So to their filed talk the King will give no heed,
"But give us leave, and join with us against them to proceed.
"And many that shall hear this smooth invented lie,
"VVil never seek the truth: but then condemn them by and by*
"So shall we have our will, so shall we set a stay
"For those that seek to know the truth to stop the^ in their way.
"And that we may the more their dealings quite deface,
"I must devise to point you all your office and your place:
"For some must Captains be to lie in wait for blood,
"And burn them in their temples all, to do your master good
"And such must always be abroad to range the coasts,
"In every place to lie in wait, and meet them at their hoasts.
"And some must stay at home to lie in Princes ear,
"That of these men within his sight not one may dare appear.
"If force will not prevail, if Nobles take their part,
"By flattrie then some must attempt these Nobles to subuart.
This said it was agreed, the Counsel cried, Amen.
And every one to play his part did give his promise then.
O poor unhappy place, o France how art thou led,
Thou gleanst the sap of deadly food in steed of lively bread.
The Mother Queen as chief does promise to begin,
By treason joined with flattery to trap them in her ginne.
And he that was ordaind to watch the Princes hall,
Was bloody Jews of Loraine town that filthy Cardinal.
And they that took in hand false rumors for to sow,
Were Priests, and friars, with device Gods truth to overthrow.
The Captaine^ that were glad to take this cause in hand,
The blinded Guis^s were, which swore to lead this bloody ba^d.
Now let us see the end, how these their parts do play;
And mark where all things fall not out as we have heard them say.
The first outrage and horrible murder of the the Godly, called The winning of
Saint James his Street.
NOw at this very time
when Philip King of Spain
In the reign of Henry the second, Anno 1557.
Came to Sanquintines, guarded with
a great and mighty train:
The Constable of France
to meet him made some have,
Whose power was vanquished there,
and he fell Philip King of Spain having married Marie Queen of England,
gave the Constable of France a great overthrow, which afterward was called the
over throw of Laurence Day.
prisoner at the last.
The faithful which beheld great danger nigh at hand,
Which God did threate^ now to fall, on the^, their prince, and la^d.
With one consent they meet, to God they cry and The godly in danger fall
to pra^er, as their best refuge.
pray:
Which is the only means for sin Gods heavy wrath to stay.
But once above the rest, as in S. James his street
In Paris town they did agree great numbers for to meet,
To pray unto the Lord to quench this flaming fire,
They might receive his Sacraments, and eke his word to hear;
The wicked cannot abide ^nie good exercise.
The spies that lay in wait such vantage for to get,
In tumult armde the common sort their houses to beset.
Whose folly thus abusde, which fury did incense,
With weapons rann, as if these men had done some great offense.
The faithful closed thus, no way there was to fly,
The The violent and mad rage of Satan against the word.
rage and tumult was so great, they yielded all to die.
To God they did commend their bodies and their life,
And with their humble suits assaid, to swage their raging strife.
But all could not prevail, their words could not be heard,
For fury to their just excuse did give but small regard.
But God that never fails his servants at their need,
By stretching out his helping hand, did stand the^ now in steed.
For as to Peter once in prison closely pent,
To lose his locks and set him free an Angel there was sent; A certain gate in
this assault by the providence of God was wonderfully opened, for the sauegard
of many, when the houses were on every side beset.

So God now made a way a passage strange to give,
By opening of a mighty door the weaker to relieve.
By which the fainter sort without all danger fled,
The greater sort were taken then, and straight to prison led.
Among which godly troop that did their bodies yield,
Were women of great parentage which were with shame reuilde
(Of them whom fury fed) to prison as they went,
Yet for all this these noble minds their deeds did not repent.
And that which was the worst, Murder with Satan's Misters, finds more
friendship tha^ the truth.
in prison where they were,
The thieves and bloody murderers did find more favor there.
For they that death deserude were taken from their clinke,
And in their cold and ugly pits which breathd a deadly stink
These men were thrust and bound, and kept with watch and ward,
That al access of worldly joy from them might quite be bard.
Yet now because they had not room enough for all,
In diverse wards alone to pen, these captives thus in thrall;
Great numbers they were feign together for to place,
To comfort them God did devise to bring it so to pass.
The prisons now did ring with Psalms and ioifull songs, The exercise of the
godly.

They prayed god when he thought best to ease the^ of these wro^gs
When this was noisde abroad and some were thither sent
To know the cause: Commandment was given by the King, that some meet men
should be chosen to consider the causes of these captives.
then this was found the sum of their intent,
The cause of this great tumult.
At first when they did meet, a lecture there was red
In vulgar tongue out of Gods book, whereby their souls were fed.
Then did the preacher show, and there he did recite
The use of that most sacred feast whereof S. Paul did write,
Unto the Corinthes once: In which he showed plain
The use and abuse of the same, to comfort or to pain.
When this was done, again they fell upon their knees,
And for the King and Commons all they prayed with watrie eyes:
That God would yet withhold his just revenging hand,
And bless with perfect truth and peace, their King, and eke their land.
Then did they all receive Communion bread and wine
To stay their faith in Christ his death, whereof this a sign.
Now this was all the hurt which they did then procure*
For which this raging tumult rose, and they these pains endure.
But mark the creeping craft of Satan in this case, ^^thans wick^d policy,
by ^is ministers to ^^^face the ^^^uth with ^^^ined lies.

How he by false report does seek the truth for to deface.
His servants now he sends, and bids them ride in post,
These new invented lies to spread abroad in every Coast.
First how the Lutherans, ^he first lie ^^at Satan ^readeth a^^inst the god^^.
(so Satan did them name)
Great wickedness did put in use in places where they came.
And how that in the night when other were at sleep,
In darkness where no candles were, great numbers on a heap

To match themselves; for to fulfill a stinking filthy sport.

Upon the tables where they sat, great dainties there were found,
As wine, and belly cheer, and each with others wife,
In these their privy Bacchus feasts did lead a filthy life.

Their usage was (o shameless lie!) their infants for to kill.
These godly men (say they) that seem to shine so clear,
Now under show of godly life most filthy do appear.
The Monks as Legates leaud of Plutoes bloody mind, The devils am^assad^rs.

Do sweat and some to blaze abroad this stinking hellish wind.
As men that were most fit to spread this lying same,
Which in their lives as does appear do daily use the same.
But they in open place these matters so dilate,
That in the minds of blinded fools, they raise a deadly hate
Against these seely souls, which never meant this ill,
That eke the common sort did long these godly men to kill.
And not the common sort are now deceiud alone,
But this assailes the Noble men, and strikes the Princes throne.
Which lie no sooner came before the Princes face, Princes are many times
abused by lying Parasites.

But stood in hope by Satan's means, to find assured grace.
Whose mind by light belief in fury so was bent,
That to destroy these hurtles men he plants his who^^ intent. The chief
angels of Satan which fight against Michael our Christ, are the wicked Princes
and potentates of the world, Revel. 12. 7.

So now he gives in charge to have their dealings tri^^*
And chosen men he did appoint the same for to decide.
These men in office put, no time could idle spend,
But hard against these seely sheep their woluish wits do bend.
This poor afflicted flock that now in prison lay,
In godly joy, but worldly grief did pass the time away.
And they that were in faith more stronger than the rest,
To comfort those that were but weak, They that of the Lord have received
greater portion of knowledge and faith, are bound to comfort the weaker.
their will was ever pressed.
And those that were at large did trudge from place to place,
To ease the outward grief of such as saw this heavy case.
Declaring by the word that this came not by chance:
But God was he for some intent which lead this woeful dance.
Perchance to show his will, The comfortable speeches of the godly one tewards
another.
perchance to try their faith,
Perchance to plant his hidden truth by their most happy death:
Perchance to be a means their foes for to confound,
As once amids the floods he struck proud Pharao to the ground.
"Perchance amidst our mirth, our God we did forget:
"And youthly bent, to vain delights perchance our mind did set
"So God in mercy now to call us home again,
"And see our selves: has thought it good to let us feel some pain.
Yet still amids the flame let this be all our rest, Patience a notable token
of Gods election, and love.

That all things done to Gods elect are always for the best.
Thus did they still remain; to God they did commend
Themselves, Fasting and praie^ the only best weapons of the godly ^n
adversity.
their case, content to bear what ever God should send.
And now with solemn fasts and prayer put in ure,
And eke by writing they assaie, some favor to procure.
The King they do request that truth might try their deeds, The godly
captives write to the King.

That Justice cicle might divide the Roses from the weeds;
That fickle flying tales from credit might be bard,
"Till that by just and equal proof both parties have been heard.
"And if it were his will that they might now dispute,
"They doubted not by written word the Sorbons to confute.
Yet this could not prevail for all this good device: ^^thaa alwaie ^^^idie at
a ^^^ch.

For some stood by, that told the king, their writings al were lies
The godly grieved thus, as reason did them bind,
By other letters try to change the Kings affected mind. (...) earnest
^^^ters the se^^d time wr^t^^n to the king, (...) the innocent ^^^tiues.

In which they warn his Grace to look unto himself,
Not to prefer before his God this wicked worldly pelf.
And therewithal to view the state of that his Land,
How all things prospered well which he did take in hand,
"So long as to the truth he bent a willing ear,
And to the godly Christian flock a faithful heart did bear. (...) his K.
Henry (...) 2 was once (...) enemy to (...)e Pope, and ^^^emed to fa^^^r the
Gospel.

But since he brake his faith he gave the German band,
And to that greasy Priest of Rome again did give his hand,
How all things since have gone a clean contrary way,
"And nothing prospered well since he the truth did so betraie.
"And now o Prince (quoth they) except thou do repent,
"Assure thy self to plague this sin the Lord is fully bent.
"And he that now has lent to thee this happy Reign,
"Will for thy sin most surely turn thy pleasure into pain.
"The Constable of France a looking glass may be,
"In who^ the end of swelling pride your Grace may plainly see.
"Who proudly swearing said, If he returned sound,
"He would not cease till he had quasht Geneua to the ground.
But God that sits above his folly did deride, ^^od for his ^^^ercie many
^^^^es gives ^^^yrants little ^^^wer.

And at Sanquintines did confound his purpose and his pride.
So he that lately swore against the Lord to fight,
Was taken captive by the foe, his army put to flight.
"Of wicked wilful wits this is the woeful end,
"When fancy ruled by witles will, their strength will strive to bend
"Against the Lord. But now o King we do not care;
"For whatsoever God shall send we willing are to bear.
But yet of this be sure, The blood of the Martirs i^ the seed of the Church.
the blood that thou do wring
From us unjustly, is the seed whereby the Church does spring.
And though our bodies be consumed in the flame,
Yet of our ashes God will raise that shall defend the same. Truth, the true
Phoenix.

To shade the shining light, no wit can well prevail:
So vain, to strive to stay the truth which God does now reveal.
Thus while the Godly work their causes to defend,
The wicked impes of Satan lurk to bring them to their end.
But one above the rest their death did daily crave,
Munerius that bloody wretch, that false and periurde knave.
Who having now of late by falsehood cracked his fame,
Did hope by hate of Gods elect again to win the same. Such are worthy men
to be the devils ch^pions.

And having now attaind the Princes bill assignd,
In Paris town before the States he shows the Princes mind:
Which was, that presently (all business set aside)
The King would have the prisners calde, their dealings to be tried.
And that they should proceed to judge, and eke believe
According to the evidence Munerius then should give.
These letters being read, the Senate all agree
Not to receive Munerius, He that ha^ bin once false for sworn is n^^ to be
receive a witness in a (...) matter.
nor any thing that he
Should lay against the life of those that faithful were,
For that himself had falst his faith, which lately did forswere.
And yet they did proclaim, that they would not refuse
If any other would step forth the faithful to accuse.
So, willing to perform the Kings intended mind,
Their cankred malice plant the plot to have the day assignde,
When these afflicted souls from prison to their dome,
Before the whelps of Pilates brood to judgment now should come.
The day is come, and they that were before ordaind
To show the glory of the Lord, could not be now constraind
By all their brave device the truth for to deny: The wicked make quick
dispatch in (...) demning the godly.

But for the same amidst the flame they willing were to die.
The bloody sentence past, (which was the Kings desire)
The valiant troop of godly men were drawn unto the fire,
And chained to their stakes all naked as they stood:
Unto the Lord their cry was heard from out amids the wood.
But to the wicked troop which longd to see that day,
They knowing sure their causes good, this or the like did say.
NOw shall you have your will, ^he triumph (...) the godly o^^^r their
ene^ies, even in (...) midst of (...) fire.
now shall you do your worst:
Now shall ye have out guiltles blood, for which ye long did thirst.
We fear not of this death, we know that al must die,
Yea happy are those silly souls who^ thus the Lord does try.
O welcome ioifull day, o welcome happy pain;
"A crown immortal with this flesh, ^m. 1. 2.
we shall receive again.
"Now has the Lord here brought, ^b. 5. 17.
and placte us in this death,
"Not for because he hates his truth, Cro. 32 31
but for to try our faith.
"The counsel of the Lord has sent what we receive, ^ct. 4. 28.

"And you to us shall do no more than God shall give you leave. ^^ohes. 1. 11.
(...)

"And you that are our foes, ^hil. 1. 28.
beware the deadly sign,
"Which shows you none of Gods elect, while thus ye do repine
"Against his known truth: for which we undertake
"To spend our blood in his defense, and suffer for his sake.
"The blood of Abel cride for vengeance to the Lord, ^^nes. 4. 10.

"Which fell on Cain and al his seed, (who^ men and earth abhord)
"From which the Lord defend both you, and eke our land:
"O Lord revenge not this our wrong, but stay thy furio^s hand;
"And give them yet some space for to repent this thing;
"And for our death we do forgive both them and eke our King. ^ct 7. 60.

"Whose life the Lord preserve in health and perfect peace,
"And grant that under him the truth may have some ioiful ease.
"And though you have some power this flesh for to destroy,
"Yet cannot us your rage divide from Christ's immortal joy.
"And though our breakfast seem to flesh and blood some pain,
"Yet shall we sup with Jesus Christ, and ease receive again.
"Into thy blessed hands, o Lord our souls receive:
"For of this earth and earthly trash o Lord we take our leave.
Thus on the Lord they cride, which was their only trust,
Till that the flame had staid their voice, and body burnt to dust.
Now we that do remain our parts are yet to play,
But when o Lord our time shall come, grant us like happy day.
And when our trial draws, no matter where nor when,
That God will give like constant faith; let us cry all Amen.
The judgments of the Lord showed upon these bloody persecuters in this first
outrage, by the example of many the like out of the Scriptures.
But let us here behold
Gods judgments just and true,
Which never fail to follow them,
which do his truth pursue. Genes. 4. 15.

As wicked Caine did long
poor Abels blood to have,
So did the Lord mark him to be
a vile and vagrant slave.
When Esau did intend his brother for to kill, Genes. 27. 41.

The Lord did bless good Jacob so, he could not have his will.
When Pharao followed fast Gods people to have slain, Exodus 14. 27.

Amiddes the floods then justly fell both he and all his train.
As Miriam grudgde against the truth which she did know, Nomb. 12. 20.

So did her fault soon find her out a leaper white as snow.
When Korath and his mates good Moses did deprave, Nomb. 16. 33

The earth did gape, and they went all alive into the grave.
And whilst at Bephidim Gods people did remain, Exodus 17. 8.

The Amalecks of Esaus brood poor Jacob would have slain. Deuteronomy. 25. 17.

But God did not forget this foul and filthy thing, 1. Sam. 15. 33

Which after smote with fatal sword, Wisdom. 11. ^
both them and eke their King.
Though Saul did persecute Gods chosen Prophet long, 1. Sam. 19. 10.

Yet did the Lord at length revenge poor David and his wrong:
For now the hand that itcht this David's blood to spill, 1. Sam. 31. 4.

Was it that framde the deadly blade his master for to kill.
That Nabal which refusde his help to David send, 1 Samuel 25. 10.

Was stricken so, verse. 38.
that there he made a short and woeful end.
And Shimei that reuilde King David to his face, 2. Sam. 16. 5.

It was not long but that he died in poor and woeful case. 1. King. 46. 1.

And as Achitephel great mischief did intend, 2. Sam. 17. 1.

So did the Lord from traitors all his chosen still defend:
Whose counsel being quasht (for so the Lord assignde,
He got him home and hanged himself to case his careful mind. verse. 23.

So Ierebeam felt Gods judgments sharp and cold, 1. King. 13. 4.

When he thrust out his wicked hand his Prophet for to hold.
So Iezabel which did Elias once pursue, 1. King. 19. 3.

When Iehu came to Iezrael, her faithful servant threw
Her carcass headlong down from window high to streate, 2. King. 30.

Where tra^pled down the greedy dogs her cursed flesh did eat.
Against Christ the Pilate which wrong judgment erst did give, Euse. eccl. hist.

Did kill himself, 2. book 7.
as one that was not worthy for to live.
And when against the truth proud Herodes hand was bent, Chapter.

He killed James, Ibid cap. 9.
and Peter was in prison closely pent:
The Angel of the Lord of pride did show the price, Acts. 11. 23.

That in a while his cursed corpse was eaten all with lice.
As Judas was content his master to betraie, Matthew. 26. 47.

So guilty conscience did consent to work his own decaie. Acts. 1. 18.

Like as in former age to rebels stout and strong, Maxentius, (...) ^ulianus,
Va^ens, being per^ecuters of the ^aithfull, had he like end Munerius put ^o
open shame and banished its country.

Gods justice has been plainly seen in lieu of cursed wrong*
So all this faithless troop, which leudlie did conspire
This murder in S. James his street, have likewise felt his ire.
For first the Praetor, which Munerius had to name,
For just desert, in public view received open shame.
And yet besides all this, they straightly did proclaim,
That he should void his native soil, and not return again.
But whilst he was in hold his conscience did confess,
This plague was just; for that he sought Gods chosen to oppres
A A Judge that gave sentence, was strike^ with sudden death.
Judge that sentence gave against his known faith,
An angel struck him from the Lord with sharp and sudden death.
Another Judge that was now sick and like to die,
"Cride out; O the dedlie sting of a guilty conscience.
I see my judgment just, for that vile caitiffe I
"By malice have been feign Gods people for to kill:
"Who pray, and live most godly bent according to his will.
Two Two others cruel in the former slaughter, died suddenly in the sight of
all me^.
others being chief in murder that was past,
By sudden death in view of all like vengeance now do taste.
And other Other two as they returned from the murder, fell at contention, and
at last were slain one of an other.
two which now of blood had drunk their fill,
As they came from this murder, they did one other kill.
Now let us learn by this, Gods truth for to embrace,
That we feel not by due desert his anger in like case.
The notable, famous, and constant Martyrdom of Annas Burgeus, which, being
one of the Kings Counsel, was burnt for the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
ABout this very time
by force of sudden jar, The second example of the French cruelty.

Between the Kings of Spain and France,
was likely to be war.
But Herod to agree
with Pilate was content, Luke 23. 12.

And for to murder Jesus Christ
they both do join consent.
So now there was a league, where both did give their word
To root and raze Gods sown truth, by faggot, fire and sword.
The The graffe that grieved Satan, was the Truth, which now in France
increased daily: which was the cause of this present Persecution.
graffe that Satan greeues did yet begin to spring,
The tree of life some joyful fruit as now did seem to bring.
Whose bud enameld green, and blossom sweet to see,
Enraged Satan's fiery mood with malice; so that he
In fury headlong runs: he frets, he fumes, he raues,
And of the King some speedy help in present danger craves.
The spea(...)s of the (...)uell to K. (...)enrie the (...)cond.
"The fate that files my fall, o King faith he, is this;
"Your Senate favors truth too much, your Judges too remiss:
"They are not sharp enough to shred appearing ill,
"They suffer impes of Luthers sect too much to have their will.
"The The King appointed an assembly to be (...)ade, to consider of the Edict
of Ca(...)ellobrian.
King not well content, provides out of hand
"Some new assembly to be had, to have this matter scand.
"The Senate being set, the Kings Attorney first
The speeches of the godly against the Papists cruelty.
"Does gravely show unto them al; how that the K. does thirst
"To have them all agree in matters touching faith,
"And to consent that Luthers brood should all be put to death: The speeches of
the K. Attornie ^o the Assembly.

"For that some strife of late there was between them found,
"Concerning this. But to their shames this iarring would redou^d.
"Because for Heretics some first would have them tried,
"And some would have them banished, and some would have the^ fride.
"And therefore wishes all with him to give consent,
That death might end this strife, which thing the king has alwaie meant.
This was a This was Satan's subtlety to bewray such of the Judges, as were
suspec(...)ed for Religion: which after was the cause of Annas Bargaeus death.
subtle slight the godly to betray;
That such as spoke against the same, their conscience should bewray.
But yet among the rest some freely spoke their mind;
That reason for so cruel act as yet they could not find.
"The King would have (say they) but Heretics to die:
"And what are they but such as dare the Scriptures to deny?
"If any such be found, let them be wroong to death;
"Because the word is all our stay, and Author of our faith.
"But if for Heretics the godly should be slain,
"God would revenge their blood, and we by this should reap no gain.
"And those which you do think the truth do now deny,
"Their reasons, deeds and faith we see, wherein they stoutly die.
"Therefore if from the Lord this counsel do proceed, Acts. 5. 39.

"To strive against the same, it were a vain and sinful deed.
Thus did the better sort their godly thoughts bewraie;
Which being crossed with cou^ter cranks, was cause of their decaie.
For Satan fearing least their sentence would prevail,
Sent two in post unto the King these dealings to reveal.
The limbs of Pluto which this bloody message went,
Egidius and Minardus were fit hounds for such a sent. 2. Counselors of the
same Senate.

Who coming to the King most falselie did declare,
"That in the Senate such were found which stoutly now did
"Religion to deride, The Orati^^ of the wicked Counselors to the K. colourea
with lies, the more to move him to wrath.
and speeches let to fall dare
"That for his Laws and Edictes past they made no count at al.
"Now therefore is the time your Grace must look about,
"That springing shows of future ill your wisdom may root out.
"For if you should permit these rebels thus to thrive,
"Great peril is least of your crown your Grace they would deprive.
The King inflamed thus, does make no long delaie,
But to the Senate where they sat he takes his ready way.
Where placed in his throne, and having pausde a while,
Thus spoke in presence of them all in high and princely style.
"THe Lord that lends all and weeldes the golden sphere
"Has sent us now a wished peace, The speac^ of K Hem the second unto the
S^nate.
deuoid of foreign fear.
"Which peace is aye confirmde by band of solemn vow;
"And plighted faith of solemn match, which none can disalow.
"Yet one thing there remains to perfect this my State;
"That in Religion one consent might banish all debate.
"Which is the only cause that moves my pensive heart
"In this your meeting for to join, and bear a careful part.
"This is therefore in few our crave and eke request;
"That every man do show his mind as he shall think it best.
Here some that had before in words been very rife,
Began to stay; and doubted much the danger of their life.
Yet there were some which now a noble courage take,
Annas Burgeus as the chief this doubtful silence brake.
The not a(...) Oration (...)f Annas Burgaus, (...)eliuered (...)efore the King
in the (...)at house.
"Who lifting up his hands, in heart began to pray,
"With thanks to God that he did live to see that happy day
"Wherein the Lord had wrought such care within his grace,
"That he would be^d his willing ear to judge so weighty case.
"The cause says he is Christ's which we have now in hand,
"For which the Lord will surely bless both you and eke your la^d.
"This is the blessed He sets (...)ut the po(...)er and ver(...)ue of the
(...)ord of god, and what a (...)lessing it (...)ringeth to them that
(...)wfullie re(...)iue it.
Arc that came to Edomes hall,
"For which the Lord has blessing sent on him, his house and al.
"This is the dustie book which good 2. (...)im. 6. 11.
Hilkiah found:
"Which read before the King, did give a sweet and silver sound,
"This is the Angel which to (...) Cren 15. 1 and 16. 8.
Gedeon did appear:
"This is the deaw upon the fleece, which set him void of fear.
"This is the sword that made blind (...) 2. Kings. 22 8.
Balaams Ass to speak.
"This is the Judge. 6. 11 37.
flame the Prophet forced his silence for to break.
"This is the Numb 22 23. 28.
lively spring, which cooles the thirsty heat
"This is the shining lantern, which gives light unto our feet.
"This is the (...)rem. 20. 9
flame that erst by night did show the way:
"This is the blessed cloud that led Gods chosen in the day.
"This is (...)sal 42 1 (...) 119 (...) 5. (...) 13. 21.
Elgathes flake that made his offering fume:
"And this the (...) Kings. 18. 31. 2. King. 1. 10. Numb. 16. 15
blast which from the Lord great rebels did consume.
"This is the mighty Psalm. 19. 5, 9.
voice that makes the mountains shake,
"This makes the Liban cedars stoop, Ierem. 20. 9
and fearful hindes to quake.
"And this the pleasant Esa. 55 1.
wine to weak that comfort gives: Psalm 42 1. and 119. ^05.

"And this the wholesome 1 Pet. 2 22.
milk whereby the sucking Infant lives.
"Now as the Lord does bless the land that loves the same: Exodus 13. 21.

"So for contemners of his truth he still prouides a shame.
"For why came Hoshea the King and al Israel were carried captive to Babylon by
the King of the Assyrian for dispising the Word and Commandments of the Lord
2. Kings 17. 4, 5, 6.
Ashur up Gods chosen to molest, 1. Kings. 18. 31.

"And led the King with Commons all in Babel for to rest? 2. King. 1. 10.
Numb. 16. 15.

"But for because they all their God did often grieve,
"Which hated truth, and were content their faith to idols give.
"And if he do not spare a King; o King take heed:
"If people all to thraldom go; this land, o Lord had need
"To weigh the cursed cause of this their final fall;
"Least for the like, the like consume our King and Commons all.
"Now is the Reave. 10. 2^
Angel come with open book in hand,
"Which long ere this was sealed close from us and eke our land.
"Now must the godly crave of this to eat their fill:
"So God with plenty will not fail to love and feed them still.
"Now see this Angel which to us does offer grace,
"Is Jesus Christ, which by his death our sins does quite deface.
"If we Heb. 4. 16
by lively faith of him can take good hold,
"Then void of fear before the Lord to come we may be bold.
"It Is he that shows the Luke 24. 3^
way the truth to intertaine,
"It Is he that 45
cleares the blinded eyes, it is he that parts plain
"The truth from popish lies, the son from mystie shades;
"It Is he that calls our straying steps from Satan's sinful trades.
"O well is he that can this book this truth embrace;
"O ill is he that shall refuse when Christ does offer grace.
"And though this book at first be sweet unto our taste;
"Yet Satan's rages makes the same seem bitter at the last.
"And what though Satan rage, what though the end be gall?
"Shall bitter blasts make us forsake our Christ, our life, and all?
"No, God forbid, o King, that he should knock in vain:
"Least being gone we justly doubt when he will come again.
"As yet he stands without, and knocks at thy door;
"O King receue that blessed guest, that he may bless thee more.
"If that Apo. 3. 2^
we let him in, his promise is to stay:
"But when from us he shall depart, o most unhappy day.
"The Luk 14. 1
supper is preparde, the Angels sent to call
"The straying guests of this your Land unto his sacred hall.
"But if by fond excuse we shun his proffered grace,
"He shuts the door and will admit some others in our place.
"The marriage of the Lamb, (...) 19. 7. and 18. 2.
that blessed Lamb is nie;
"Which makes with all her Romish tricks that whore of Babel fly.
"Then happy is the man and blessed from the Lord,
"That with the Lamb may have a place, and sit at sacred board.
"If now we see the light that danted Saul to ground, (...). 9. 3, 4.

"If now we hear that sacred voice, that sweet and ioiful sound:
"Then let us now inquire, what voice it is that calls;
"And let us yield unto the truth; that from our eyes the scaies
"Of darkness may depart. For vain it is to kick;
"And labor lost for wilful colte to strive against the prick.
"And if the hidden Truth the Lord will now reveal;
"To daunt the same (o noble King) your force shall not prevail.
"What Giant can withstand of Truth the piercing might?
"What earthly force of shining Sun at noone can quench the light?
"If Truth do conquer Kings; (...). 3. 12. (...) 4. 33, 40
if Truth do co^quere al?
"Then leave to love these Popish lies, let whorish Babel fall.
"Grieve not that blessed Spirit of life that seals the band, ^atth. 16. 18.

"For which king David did request; (...). 21. 15.
by which we understand
"Our calling to be sure, (...). 6. 10.
our striving not in vain;
"By which we know we are ordaind for Christ to suffer pain. ^^ue. 18. 2.

"Now since we have the seal from fear that makes us free, (...) 4 30.

"And shining light from popish shades the Lord has made us see: ^^al. 50. 11

"We may no longer then dissemble in this case: Pet. 1. 10

"But what we think must plainly show (o King) before your face.
"We cannot (as you would) the certain Truth deny; ^ill. 1. 29

"But that defend: (...). 8. 15.
though for the same we were co^demnd to die.
"And whereas you do thirst to suck the guiltless blood
"Of them who^ you name Lutherans, Cor. 13. 8
o King we think not good
"To strengthen that device which Satan did invent:
"Least that with Caine our bloody fact too late we should repent.
"For those whom you do hate, and push with heavy hand;
"In very truth are godly men, the best in all your land.
"Whose faith you do not see, whose life you do not know;
"Take heed least you in them do seek the Lord to ouethrow.
"Which feate by wa^ton will if now your Grace assay;
"Be wise in time, least that in this, you frame your own decay.
"But this we think the best, that straight way out of hand
"A lawful Counsel may be calde to have the matter scand.
"Till which, let godly men whom envy cannot stain,
"In lieu of all their cursed wrong, in rest at home remain.
"But if to this (o King) you stop your princely ear:
"Lest God with blindness strike your heart, Romans 1. 18. 28.
your friends may justly fear.
"For they that do not care aright to serve the Lord,
"He leaves them to their filthy lusts to make the^ more abhord.
"Remember Ahabs fall that sold himself to death; 1. Ki. 21. 20

"Forget not those two wicked men which long withstood the faith.
"Corrupted men shall fade, Exodus 7. 11. 12. Iannes and Ia^bres.
the reprobates shall die:
"God will not long maintein their reign that shall his truth deny. 2 Timothy 3. 8. 9

"Their madness shall be plain, their follies seen, and then
"The godly shall deride the rage of sinful wicked men.
"Because (says God) you staid to come when I did call, Prou. 1. 26

"I will be deaf when you lament, and laugh when you do fall.
"Which plague the Lord withhold from you and eke your land;
"The lord preserve your noble grace, and shield ye with his hand.
"That long in perfect peace your Grace may rule and reign;
"That in your time Gods known truth may once revive again.
"And this is all we wish, and this the worst we crave;
"That Christ will open once your heart, by faith your soul to save.
"This said, he sat again. The King in fiery heat
"Scant able to forbear so long; spoke thus from out his seat.
"Indeed, The King answer v^ to Burge^^ wherein (...) shows his deadly
anger and malice against the Tru^^
and is it so? well then we know the worst:
"To speak or think as we have heard we deemd no subject durst.
"But now with grief we see that this infectious seed
"Has taken rooting in our Court, whereof this is the seed.
"But most we marvel why the Nobles of our land
"So blinded are, that they will needs these matters take in hand?
"We thought it most unlike that men so grave and wise,
"Should ever stoop to give consent unto so leaud devise.
"But now we must correct our mind and former thought,
"And give these new religious me^ the guerdo^ they have sought
"And trust us, so we will, now that we know the crew,
"We doubt not but the proudest shall this day and dealings rue.
"Now since we know the good, the rest shall know our mind:
"We doubt not for these bleding wounds some healing salve to find.
"Such tools we have in store to fell this rotting moote,
"That quickly shall pull up and raze the branches with the root.
"This seed of Luthers sect which now begins to spring,
"Shall to the fields where it does grow a woeful harvest bring.
"It Is time to look about, it is time to set some stay:
"For if we sleep, we see there be that watch for our decay.
"But they shall have their meede, they shall not lose their hire.
"They shortly shall with sorrow feel the weight of Princes ire.
Thus said, in raging wise he turns quite about;
And pausing staid a while, as one that seemde to doubt.
But yet such rankor rose and boiled in his breast,
That presently he gave in charge that there they should arrest
Annas Burgeus as the chief, and him to prison bring:
Who was, he thought the only root by who^ the rest did spring.
When this was said, ^urgeus sent (...) Prison.
and that the King had so decreed,
Mongomerie Captain of the guard was he that did the deed.
Now good Burgeus is in linkes and irons fast,
Which sudden fall did sore appall, and make the rest aghast.
The King unwilling was to have the cause deferd:
But time and Judges were assignde to have the matter heard.
But such appointed were to judge this weighty case, The Bishop of ^^aris and
De^^echaris.

Which hated him, and sought the truth by falsehood to deface.
Which partial minded men Burgaeus did refuse;
And to the Senate did recount their old and ancient use:
Which was, if any one of them did chance to slide;
The order was by all the rest his dealings should be tried.
Which they no sooner gave the King to understand;
But letters came, which did command him answer out of hand.
The letters read, he said; my Prince I will obaie:
But otherwise you had not heard a word of me this day.
Then questions were proposde of Saints, and Popish Mass,
Of Purgatory, and such trash as then in credit was.
Whereof he spoke his mind, and freely did protest;
That all these leaud and filthy toys in heart he did detest.
Burgaeus protestation concerning Popery, and Popish ceremonies.
"I serve (said he) no Saint, but Christ my only stay;
"I will not yield to any man his honor to betraie.
"He is the Sacrifice by death that made me free;
"He is the only Paschall Lamb that shed his blood for me;
"He is the only Christ ou(...) only Purgatory.
heat by faith that purges sin
"In them that now believe, or those that heretofore have bin.
"Therefore I do defy your popish arifles all, Heb. 1. 3.

"And thank the God that gives me grace to come when he does call.
Which answer being made, to sentence they proceed;
Who was condemned then: for that the King had so decreed.
The sentence being read, he had but one refudge;
He did appeal to Burgaeus appealed often from this unjust sentence: but
seeing his appealations could not be admitted, he lastly appealed to Jesus
Christ.
Jesus Christ, as his supernall Judge.
And being sent again to place from whence he came,
He was content for Christ to bear this grief, rebuke and shame,
But Satan did rejoice his matters framde so well;
Whose bloody mind had cast the plot Christ Jesus to expel.
Great troubles did he stir, and mischife still devise
To shred the truth in every place so fast as it should rise.
And though Burgaeus did from sentence often appeal;
Yet Satan seeking for his blood this thing could not prevail.
So now from out again the prison he was brought,
And then Burgaeus (...) his (...)ecea(...)taine (...) Or(...)
disgraded solemnly, which thing the Bishop sought.
Which being done, he gave a sweet and smiling cheer,
And being not dismaide at all, he said deuoide of fear.
(...)spea(...) Bur(...) his (...)ding.
"I thank my God that lent me life to see this day,
"Wherein these badges of the Beast are taken clean away;
"That Antichrist henceforth in me may claim no part;
"Whose whorish art and Romish rags I hate with all my heart.
"This Popish sinful oil I gladly here do leave;
"For this, of God a glorious crown I know I shall receive.
"If you could see the way that leads unto life;
"If you could know the perfect truth, the^ ended were this strife.
"But yet you are too dull, your eyes are yet too blind;
"Farewell therefore you Romish rags, which here I leave behind.
"For these (my God) when I before thee shall appear;
"Give me (o Lord) a quiet heart, a conscience void of fear.
"So shall I stouthe stand and still profess thy name;
"So shall my foes be turned back, and quite be put to shame;
"So shall I gladly go unto that wished place;
"And in defense of this thy truth, my stake I shall embrace.
"Now Satan do thy worst, I will appeal no more,
"The truth (I know) which I profess is it that gals thy sore.
"Now let me know (I pray) my sentence and my doom;
"My blood it is which you do seek, now let my sentence come.
Which being said, indeed, they did provide again
The final sentence to pronounce, which should for aie remain:
Which then in solemn wise with words demure and grave,
By Pilates brother was pronounst, who once like sentence gave.
(...) sentence (...) a(...) Annas (...) pro(...)d by the (...)ris, the (...) 9.
Burgaeus, I pronounce the sentence of thy death,
For that thou like an Heretic have slidden from our faith.
And tied to a stake, there still remain thou must
Till that thy flesh by fiery flakes be all consumde to dust.
Which when Burgaeus heard he did no white repine:
But cheerfullie for Christ he said, my life I will resign.
To The speeches and behavior of Burgaeus at the receiving of his sentence.
God he lifted up his hands with thankful heart
That he was worthy made, for Christ to feel this ioiful smart.
And meeklie kneeling down with holy Stephen did Burgaeus prays for his
persecutors and forgiueth the^.
pray
For them that had most wrongfully condemned him that day:
That God in mercy would his Judges all forgive,
And not to lay unto their charge the sin that might the^ grieve.
So he forgave them all, though they in fiery mood,
For seeking Christ, had long deuisde to shed his guiltles blood.
But here we may not pass, what counsel sage and grave,
And to the Senate what he said, and what advice he gave.
"AS thus. The Pathet. call speeches of Burgaeus to the Senate of Paris at his
condemnation.
Are Plutoes Nymphs instald within your breast?
"Does dire Megara now posses the place where Christ should rest.
"Has Satan (which deceit and lies has used long,
"Enforced you against the truth and Christ to practice wrong?
"And are you gone so far, that you can be content
"For love ye bear to Satan's lies, to kill the innocent.
"What, is there not a God that searches every vain?
"And will he not revenge the blood of Abel spilt by Cain?
"And can you now account the truth to be a lie?
"And can you think within yout heart that Christ can go awrie?
"And dare you to blaspheme that great and sacred name?
"And fear you not by fained gloss his Gospel to defame?
"And will you be so bold to say that we do straie,
"Which have for us the written word, and Christ our only way?
"We are the sons of God whom thus you do pursue,
"If you persist, you shall too soon perceive it to be true.
"We know that he does live, his voice does show his love:
"If you refuse his proffered word, your sins shall you reprove.
"By him we can do all; If he do hide his face
"We may not hope without his help for mercy, love, or grace.
"What boldness is it then for ashes, filth, and claie,
"By fond attempt for to resist the thing that he shall say?
"And can you be content that Christ for to deprave;
"Whose wounds have washed our sins, whose mercy does us save?
"Shall we deny our King, our Prince, our joy, our might?
"Shall we consent to do him wrong, that does defend our right?
"He is our princely Guide, our Captain, and our stay;
"He wakes for us when we do sleep, and keeps us from decay.
"Then hear, what shall we do? Shall fear make us to fly?
"Shall any earthly force make us our Captain to deny?
"Shall we unconstant be our duty to forgo?
"Shall we repaie such courtesy to him that loud us so?
"No, no, we are but earth, to earth we must return;
"O happy earth, if (earth) for Christ thou be content to burn.
"Our time is here but short, our deadly foe but weak;
"The Lord is able when he list his malice for to break.
"But what would Satan have? what does this flesh require?
"But only this; that from our God and truth we should retire.
"If any do blaspheme, we must them not control:
"If any wily wantons sin, we must their deeds extol.
"If truth be trodden down: If we will live at ease,
"We must be then with heavy hearts content to hold our peace.
"Which since we do refuse, you run with open cry;
"Lo these are wicked Rebels, which most worthy are to die.
"And are we Rebels then? how will you prove this thing?
"Yes sir; you do refuse, with us to Baal your offerings bring.
"O mercy now good Lord! what wicked times are these?
"How long shall these ungodly men keep these ungodly ways?
"How long will thou forbear to bridle this their lust?
"And when shall all their fleshly pride be raked in the dust?
"Why do thou wink so long? why do thou so delaie?
"Why do thou not cut off those Impes, that stir this fiery fray?
"But if it be thy will that they should longer reign:
"And if thou think it best for us that they should yet remain:
"Restrain them yet (good Lord) least they do go too far;
"For they against thy godly Saints intend a cruel war.
"And till thy pleasure be for to destroy them quite;
"Withhold their cruel jaws (o Lord) with thy most mighty Bitt.
"Have mercy still on us (o loving Father dear;
"Maintain us in defending thee, from danger, falls and fear.
"And make them Lord to know, that they those Rebels are:
"That from the simple (which do seek) the light and truth debar.
"And while that I have breath I will declare the same;
"That Satan may not with his lies thy blessed truth defame.
"Is this a Rebels part when men to Princes give
"Their bodies, goods, and al things else without repine and grief?
"Is this a traitors pranke unto the Lord to pray;
"That he will keep both Prince and Land from troble and decaie:
"And that he will vouchsafe to take from them the myste
"Which keeps the^ from the knowledge of their savior and their Christ.
"Or rather is not this a most rebellious part;
"To seek by all rebellious means Gods glory to subuart?
"To give the honor due unto the Lord alone,
"To Saints that you have made: or else, to senseles stock and stone?
"To use blasphemous oaths; to suffer common stews;
"To justify your own device; and such like filthy use?
"Your Conscience shall be judge, to you I do appeal:
"Has God delivered you the sword against his truth to deal?
"If not, beware betime, and mark what I shall say;
"This malice which you bear to Christ will be your own decaie.
"And what, are you so blind, that you perceive not this;
"How in this sentence you pronounce, that you are none of his?
"Recount within your selves and call to mind at large,
"Where any sin or wickedness be laid unto our charge.
"If not; then judge again, and tell me if you can:
"Which is the best; to serve the Lord, or follow sinful man?
"Now if you love your goods, your credit, and your life;
"If you prefer before your God your household, child, or wife:
"Then know you are not fit with Christ to have a part;
"But fear, least for your sin in hell you find a lasting smart?
"But if you do not fear the judgments of the Lord:
"Yet know, your deeds in foreign lands to strangers are abhord.
"How many sinful acts, and deeds deuoyd of wit,
"That ruddie purpled Phalaris has made you to commit?
"Who for his cursed gain has set about the King,
"Such as will Prince and Commons all to deadly ruin bring.
"And when that Beast does bid, you run at every call;
"You rack and tear Gods known truth, not caring what befall.
"To please him, you do yield the godly to torment
"With such outrage, as you are forced the same for to lament.
"But what; me thinks I see the tears tril down your cheek?
"What, have I spoken that which now your conscience does misllike?
"Well, then beware betime, for yet the time is well;
"But if you shun this proffered grace, beware the pains of hell.
"Your conscience must be known, your deeds must al appear;
"Then call for grace, and so repent while yet you tarry here.
"But if you quake in rest as Felix did before,
"And if you fear without remorse your pain will be the more.
"You see how they rejoice whom you condemn to die;
"No terror can assail the heart on Christ that does rely.
"We way not all your force, your malice, and your strife;
"We do account this cruel death to us a happy life.
"Why should it grieve my heart for Christ to hang or burn;
"For little pain, I know the Lord great pleas^re will return.
"But they unhappy are, and cursed from above,
"Which from themselves and others seek the truth for to remove.
"But this I know from Christ nothing shall me depart,
"And from assured hope in him none shall remove my heart.
"For though you tear my flesh, and heart to powder grind;
"Yet this shall never so prevail, as once to change my mind.
"And when that you have done the worst you can devise;
"We know that in the latter day with Christ we shall arise.
"This death therefore to us we reckon little pain:
"For we believe assuredly that we shall live again.
"Now hap what may befall, to hang, to burn, to fry
"I have professed Christ: and so, a Christian I will die.
"Why therefore do we stay? Come hangman do thy part;
"Thy fact in this, lo here I do forgive with all my heart.
"And this he did repeat, Come hangman do the deed;
"Till that the stoutest heart that heard, for grief began to bleed.
"Put out, put out (said he) your frantic fiery brands;
"That Christ may only rule and reign, set to your helping hands.
"Repent your wicked thoughts forsake your filthy ways:
"And if you hope to have release, then use no more delays.
"But why do I so long draw this forsaken breath?
"Farewell my mates; for now behold, I go unto my death.
Thus having said his mind, and ready to depart;
The hangman takes, and ties his hands, and lays him on a cart.
In which he was conuaid unto a place fast by;
Where chained to a stake, it was ordainde that he should die.
The streets of Paris town were kept with watch and ward,
There went with him of armed me^ four hundred for his guard.
The ways on every side that lead unto the place
Were stopped up, as if they had foreseen some doubtful case.
And where we plainly see these tyrants all afraid;
The godly man for all this broile was not a whit dismayed.
For when he was unbound, there was in him no fear:
He put his clothing off himself with bold and constant cheer.
Where standing naked then and stripped unto his skin,
With cheerful voice he did at last this heavy speech begin.
Bur^^us ^seth but this short speech t^ the People, for so he had promised
before: whereupon the use of his tongue was permitted unto him, which to others
was deut^^
The cause why I am come (good people) to this death:
Is not for murder, theft, or wrong; But for a lively faith.
Which said, he held his peace: and kneeling on the ground,
With sighs he praid, til to the stake by hangma^ he was bound.
Where he did often repeat; (...) last (...) of An(...)geus (...)ied to (...)ke.
O Lord forsake not me,
Least by the frailenesse of my flesh I hap to slide from thee.
O Lord receive my soul into thy blessed rest,
Give me thy strength while I do live O Lord I thee request.
Thus with a quiet mind, and heart deuoide of strife,
For Christ amidst the fiery flame, he yielded up his life.
But (...)clusion of (...)ench pil(...): with a (...)tion of (...) and li(...)f
Bur(...)
what a joy is this to us that do remain,
That God does give to his elect such strength to conquer pain.
This is the godly end that blessed man did make,
Whom life and honor could not be^d his Christ for to forsake.
He liude with good report, his death deserves fame,
And he has left unto his foes a leaud and filthy shame.
A rare and passing sign no doubt the Lord did give,
To see that noble constancy in him while he did live.
Whose constant death in France and blood did sow the seed
VVherby the church did much increase, and godly yet do feed.
He came of honest house, in learning spent his youth,
And being plac'te in high degree he sought to learn the truth.
Whereof when he had felt the sweet and pleasant taste,
He ioinde himself unto the Church, and sticks to them at last.
Well, he is gone before; and we that are behind:
Lord grant to us in Jesus Christ like faith and constant mind.
Amen.
The judgments of the Lord which fell upon King Henry the second after he had
caused Burgaeus to be imprisoned Anno 15^9. Dilated by the examples of Ahab,
Amaziah, and Zedechiah, wicked Kings, which used the like cruelty against the
word.
THe Lord on Elies sons
and sins, this sentence gave;
They that do love and honor me,
great honor still shall have:
But they that do despise
my word, 1. Sam. 2. 30.
my law, and will;
They shall be sure of every man
to be abhored still.
Which sentence of the Lord for ever shall be true:
As by examples we may see of such as do ensue;
For when as Ahab was in fond and foolish rage
To Ramoth Gilead stoutly bent, unjustly wars to wage:
A Prophet from the Lord did tell him very plain,
That if this war he took in hand King Ahab should be slain.
But to the prison straight this Prophet then was led;
The king gave charge that he should be with bread and water fed,
Till he returned safe from Gilead home again:
But what befell? It came to pass the King indeed was slain.
So Amaziah (which by idols did offend)
Unto the Prophet would not yield his willing ear to bend.
But did with bitter scoffs and scorns reprove the word: Cron. 25. 16. 2

For which he was by Iehu spoild, and taken by the sword.
So Zedekiah proud from sin would not return:
But Rebel-like, Iere. 36. 23.
the word of God he did with fire burn.
And Jeremy by him was often in prison pent; Iere. 20. 2. (...) 32. 3. and 38

Because he said, the King and all to Babel should be sent.
But let us see his end; the King of Babel came,
Who took him captive with his men, (...) 9 5.
and put them al to shame.
And he that was content Gods Prophet to disgrace,
Was forc'te to see the murder of his sons before his face; (...) 6.

His eyes that would not see Gods truth and shining light,
The King of Babel put them out as they deserude of right. (...) 7.

So Henry King of France which all his force did bend
Against the truth, (...) se^^
did from the Lord receive a fearful end.
For now amidst the ruff of all their mirth and joy,
When every man devised how the godly to destroy.
The time appointed came, for marriage of the King,
Which to the Court and Courtiers did great mirth and pleasure bring.
And for the greater pomp of all this princely train,
A solemn Just the youthlie King by Crier did proclaim:
In which he meant to show his manhood and his might.
And being horst with limber spear in armor shining bright,
He chose among the rest (the challenge now begun)
Mongomerie Captain of his guard against him for to run.
Which he did often refuse, and wisely did withstand,
Till that the King the fatal spear put in his Captains hand.
Where charging with their spears, and forcing might and main,
A splinter pierst the Princes eye, and ran unto his brain.
The King with sudden wound and bleeding much dismayed,
Within the next adjoining house to bed he was conuaide.
Where plungd with grievous pain, his conscience did lament
The wrong which he had done to those who^ he to prison sent.
"I greatly fear (said he) least I have done some ill
"Against Burgaeus and the rest, (...) it
whose blood I sought to spill.
But Elimas the witch does spend his cursed wind,
From such remorse to keep in thral the Kings afflicted mind: (...) is ^^he
Car^^f Lo^^

"It is (said he) thy foe, that does assault thy faith;
"In which take heed that thou remain still constant to thy death.
This heavy hap befell (as many men have told)
Nere to the place wherein as then Burgaeus was in hold.
And many did observe that he did kill the King
Which was commanded to the Iaile Burgaeus for to bring.
The King did often brag those eyes of his should see
Burgaeus burnt; but lo the Lord did alter that decree.
For ere Burgeus was unto the fire led, King Henry died the 10^ August, an^
1559.

Mongemerie had those eyes of his thrust clean out of his head.
Now here we plainly see the life, and heavy end
Of the^ which persecute the truth, which God does often send.
And let us warning take by this most fearful fate,
For to return and loath our sin, before it be too late.
Amen.
The bloody marriage, or butcherly murder of the Admiral of France, and
diverse other noble and excellent men, at the marriage of Margaret the Kings
own sister, unto Prince Henry son to the Queen of Navarre, committed the
24. of August in the City of Paris Anno 1572.
NOw have you heard before,
of faggot, fire, and sword
Inhaunst by Satan, for to quell
Gods truth and blessed word.
But now I must begin
such treason to unfold,
As former times for cruelty,
And ages new and old
Have never seen the like in Christendom, till now
When sacred faith by flattery, and oath of Princely vow
By treason, did contriue to shed the guiltless blood
Of the^ which now by peace did seek to do their country good.
For when the Lord did send his truth into the land,
He raised up some Noble men to take this cause in hand.
Among the which, as chief and sovereign of the field,
There was Prince Henry of Navarre, with such as would not yield
Unto the Guisian race; the Prince of Condee next;
The Admiral, (...) Co^^rall (...).
and D' Andelot, with others that were vexed
By bloody Guises band, who daily did invent
How to oppress the word of truth, (...) an^^ ro^^ ^tine ^^terie.
which Christ had thither sent.
But when as Satan saw by words and dealings plain,
That many Princes were in arms this truth for to maintain.
It galde him to the heart, that where he did devise
To choke the word, that even there the more it did arise.
He summons all his mates these matters to debate,
How they might choke this springing seed before it were too late.
Where all within a round they come without delaie,
To whom this bloody captain then these words began to say;
"There is a subtle vein that feeds this cankred sore: (...).

"For now the deeper it is launcte it rises still the more.
"We see that fire and sword cannot at all prevail,
"We see that al our bloody broiles their courage cannot quail.
"We see how Noble men their forces daily bend
"To counter cross our planted plots, this cause for to defend.
"Two civil wars are past, the third is now in hand;
"We see how stoutly they are bent our forces to withstand.
"Therefore we must devise to play some other part,
"Or else in vain we take in hand these Princes to subuart.
"Now lend your listening ears, and mark what I shall say;
"A secret thing I have bethought which here I will bewraie:
"You must make show, (...)
as though you loud to live at ease;
"As weary of these broiles, you must entreat to have a peace.
"The King as chiefest man this play must first begin,
"By loving letters, words, and cheer at first to bring them in.
"And look what they mislike, the King must raze it out,
"And yield to all things they request, to put them out of doubt.
"The King must show such face to them above the rest,
"As though he did unfeignedly of all men love them best.
"The worst of all their band the King must intertaine
"With such good will, that no mistrust in any may remain.
"And he must make them know, as though of late he felt
"Some prick in conscience for the cause against the which he dealt.
"And that he will forgive al quarrels that are past,
"In hope that this their new goodwil with love might ever last
"And he must make complaint, as though he did of late
"Mislike the dealings of the Guise, and such as they do hate.
"And then the Guises must awhile from Court retire;
"For thus you shall entrap them all, and have your full desire.
"The King must yield to all that they request or crave,
"And he must grant for to co^firm the thing that they would have.
"The Mother Queen in this must also play her part,
"That no suspect of treason may remain within their heart.
"And here you must give out, as though you would imploie
"Their service in some foreign wars, which does your State annoie.
"As if you would not trust the weight of such affairs
"To any man, but them alone; whose faith and watchful cares
"You long have tried: and so you may your plot prepare
"By these and such like fained things, to trap them in your snare.
"If this prevail not; then I stand in fearful doubt,
"What practice next to put in ure to have them rooted out.
"Now therefore say your mind, if thus it be not best
"To cut them off, that so again we all may live in rest.
The Counsel did agree, this was the only way,
And every man did give his word, this sentence to obaie.
And that they would devise such things to put in ure,
As best might fit this cursed plot, and make the same most sure.
Which Satan hearing rose, and thankt them with his heart,
That they to him so willing were: The King do^^ presently put in practice
Satan's counsel.
and so they did depart.
Then presently the King in post a message sent
Unto the Admiral, to whom he showed his good intent.
"Which was, Kings (...) and ^^ing ^^^ssage (...) Ad^l.
that he was loath more civil wars to have,
"And that he greatly did desire his subjects for to save.
"I will (said he) forget, yea pardon and release
"All former griefs, so that you will now yield to have a peace.
"Which might be now to me a cause of passing joy;
"For that I mean in foreign wars your service to imploie;
"And first we do require, that we may join our band,
"Against the man that causes all these troubles in our land.
"Our Armies being ioynde, we may the stronger go
"Against the Duke of Alua, whom we know to be our foe.
"Great matters move our mind against the King of Spain,
"For he has taken Florida, and late our sister slain.
With lies of like devise the godly to betraie,
Requesting him most earnestly that he would come away;
And that he should obtain what safety he would crave:
Yea, for his surety there, that he his faith and oath should have.
The message being done, the Admiral as wise,
Within himself did half suspect the plot of this devise.
And though that many things did some suspicion bring:
Yet all things else he doubted more than falsehood in the King.
He thought the promise sure, and firmly did believe,
No treason could be meant, whereas the king his word did give.
The Admiral as one that was deuoide of fear,
And willing for to hear of peace, unto the King gave ear.
So now the civil broiles which many did intend,
By this devise were pacified and brought unto an end.
It cannot be expressed what shows of friendly mind,
Both in the King and Courtiers all the Admiral does find.
His friends likewise, which had the Gospel long professed
As County Rouchfaucoult and eke Theligni with the rest,
Like grace and favor found: which made them so rejoice,
That to consent unto the King they all did give their voice.
And if in former wars the Admiral had lost
Either castles, houses, towns or fermes what ever it should cost;
The King commanded straight for to restore them all,
And all things else which he of right of any man could call.
And those whom he perceiude the Admiral to love,
He blinded them with great rewards, suspicion to remove.
Besides, he did command out of his purse to give
To him an hundred thousand pounds his losses to relieve.
And when as it did chance his brother for to die,
The Cardinal Chastilion: the King then presently
The fruits and profits all of livings all one year,
Unto the Admiral he gave his charges to forweare.
Yet not content with this, one thing above the rest
The King most friendly did: the which the godly liked best.
He wrote to Philibert the Duke of Sauoie then,
That he should cease for to molest or grieve those godly men,
The which in former wars the Gospel did defend;
And that to such he should leave off his rigor to extend.
And that the Admiral might no misliking find,
He did by gentle means appease the Duke of Guises mind:
He tried to make them friends, and brought the same to pass;
Although it on the Guises part a fained friendship was.
The Cardinal likewise that was their greatest foe,
To choose a Pope, made the^ believe to Rome that he would go.
So all things being done, t'abandon all suspect,
What they mislikte, the King would seem the same for to reject.
So that about the king they only credit win
Which did defend the Gospel, and which lately were come in.
But nothing did prevail to put them out of doubt
So much as one thing, which as now the king did go about.
Which was, that he did wish his sister for to match
Unto Prince Henry of Navarre: by this in hope to catch
Them all within his snare* for this he did conclude,
Not for good will, but mere deceit the godly to delude.
Which match the King would have consummate out of hand,
That so it might remain (said he) a sure and perfect band
Of that unfeigned love, and inward hearty care,
Which we to those that love the truth and gospel now do bear.
Which made them all rejoice, and quite cast off their fear,
When in the King they did behold such love and friendly cheer.
Yet some did here allege, that conscience did restrain
The Prince to match with her, which yet did seem for to remain
In love with Popish rites; to which the King replide
That he to ease those scruples all such order would provide
Which they should not mislike: For he would there dispense
With all such rites and orders, as might breed the least offense.
Which Courtiers all mislike, and openly repinde;
Much doubting least unto the truth the King had bin inclinde.
The Admiral again was much confirmde besides
By other signs, not douting now their falsehoods and their slides.
The godly did rejoice to see the King so bent
Not thinking of the treachery and treason that they meant.
So, matters being past and parties all agreed,
In Paris town to have them ioinde by both it was decreed.
The Queen of Navarre now (a rare and virtuous dame)
With others to the Princes Court in full assurance came.
Where having staid awhile, she took her leave to ride
To Paris, for this solemn feast the better to provide.
The King to like effect, by message did request
The Admiral that he would go to Paris there to rest.
And see that nothing want for that appointed day,
And that himself would after come, and make no long delaie.
And that he might not fear the malice and the rage
That Paris men did bear to him; he said he would assuage
The same himself: and so he presently did write
To Marcel Provost of the town (perceiving well their spite)
That he should intertaine and use in friendly wise
The Admiral and all his train, that nothing might arise
Which might offend his mind or burst to any flame:
For if there did, he swore he would most fiercely plague the same
The King and Queen also unto the like effect
Unto the Duke of Aniow did their letters now direct.
So that the Admiral not doubting any foe
Resolude himself, and did provide to Paris for to go.
Where being come, he found, the king and all the rest
With friendly welcoms, so as more he could not well request.
But whilst that every man was busy to provide
Within the court, most suddenly the Queen of Navarre did:
Which afterward was known (as some have plainly said)
That by a pair of gloves perfumde this treason was conuaide.
Which leaud and sinful deed was now no sooner done;
But that the Kingdom of Navarre descended to her son.
Heere-manie did rejoice in hope of perfect rest,
Yet this unequal bloody match the Guises did detest..
That dismal day is come, the marriage must begin,
Where were assembled solemnlie the chief of every kin.
And for because the Mass their minds might grieve no more,
The marriage was solemnised before the great Church door
Of Paris, with such words as both were well content:
Which done, into the church the Bride in solemn manner went
To hear a Popish Mass, both she and all her train;
Her husband walked without the door till she returnde again.
Then home at last they go with mirth and passing joy;
They little thought this pleasant day would end with such annoy.
And now begins the plays, the dancings and the sport,
Which were performd by Iusty youths that thither did resort.
The King and Nobles all in pleasures are so mad,
That for to talk of great affairs, no leisure could be had.
And now the Admiral from Court had gone his way,
Had not some causes of the Church enforced him to stay.
Now from the wedding night, five days are come and past:
When as the King and Senate were contented at the last
In counsel for to sit such matters to decide,
As best might fit their fained wars in Flanders to provide.
Which ended, near about the middle of the day
As every man unto his house did take his ready way,
The Admiral himself, with other Nobles more
Along the streets (not doubting hurt) in pleasant talk do go:
A harquebusse was shot from other side the street,
Which charged was with bullets two the Admiral to greet.
Which cursed blow did wound and strike this Noble man,
That thorough both his valiant arms the leaden pellets ran.
Which done, although the wou^d did tuch him somewhat near,
Yet nothing danted with the stroke, he said with wo^ted cheer
From yonder house it came, go look who is within,
What vilde unworthy treachery is this they do begin?
And therewithal he sent in have unto the King,
Such as might show unto his grace this bad and shameful thing.
The message being done (the King as then did play
At tennis with the Duke of Guise) he fiercely threw away
His racket in a rage, as though it grieude his heart,
That thus the Admiral was hurt and straight he did depart
Unto his Castle, where a while he did remain
Close with his brother of Navarre till he might hear again
More certain news: but now the matter was too plain,
That this assault was surely made by one of Guises train.
Now whilst these grievous wounds the surgeons had in cure,
He sent Theligni to the King (because he was not sure
Where he should live or die) for to desire his Grace,
That he would now vouchsafe to come unto that simple place
Where he did lie: for that he had a secret thing
To tell him, which did much concern the safety of the King:
Which was no sooner said, the King was well content,
And with the man the message came without delaie he went.
They went likewise that sought the Admiral to kill,
The Mother Queen, with all her mates, no dout for great good will.
Which all no sooner did within the door appear,
But that the King saluted him with sweet and friendly cheer:
"Alas my dearest friend, The feign words of the King to the Admiral.
how camst thou to this place,
"Where wounded now I see thee lie me thinks in heavy case.
"What arrant villain wrought this leaud and sinful act,
"Would God I knew the wicked wretch that did commit thef fact:
"For though (my Admiral) the hurt be done to thee,
"Yet the dishonor of the fact, and shame redounds to me.
"Both which I will revenge by death of God I swear, This King was a horrible
blasphemer, and used this and such other like filthy oaths.

"As like in France was never seen, to make such wretches fear.
Such speeches had the King, and questions many more
Concerning Judges, health and grief, and how he felt his sore.
To which the Admiral with mild and quiet mind
Such answer gave, as moude them much such patience for to find
In him that had receaude such cause of deadly ire:
Who did request, but only that the King would straight inquire
Upon the fact: which was I surely know said he
Procured by the Duke of Guise, for great good will to me.
Which deed the Lord revenge as he shall think it best;
For if I die, I hope by faith with Christ to be in rest.
The rest he did desire a while to stand away,
For that he had some secret thing unto the King to say.
"Which done, The secret speeches between the Admiral, and the king after the
Admiral was wounded.
he thus began; O King this life to save,
"Is not the thing (I thank the Lord) that I do greatly crave.
"For this I know is true, we all must pay a death
"To God our maker, which has lent this use of lively breath.
"But to your Majesty the great good will I bare
"Is it which now above the rest does most increase my care:
"To see you now beset with such as wish no good
"Unto your health, your crown and life, and such as seek the blood
"Of you and of your friends, to spill your noble race;
"That so they may in future time your Princely stock deface.
"And so at length ingraffe a strange Italian weed,
"Which may in France most furelie choke the Princes royal seed.
"This is the only mark to which they do aspire;
"This is the only wood o King that does maintain the fire
"Of these your civil wars, (although they do pretend
"Religion, and some other thing) this is the chiefest end
"Of all their drift. Therefore o King beware by time,
"Mark this Eclipse, whilst yet ye see the Moon is in her Prime.
"I say the less, because I know your Grace is wise,
"You shall in time most plainly see this plot of their devise
"Your wisdom does perceive (I hope) whom I do mean,
"For of the same with grief before I heard you often complain.
"For though that I do lie here wounded as you see,
"The chiefest treason they intend is not alone to me:
"But to your noble Grace, whose death they daily crave,
"Whose life by treason long ere this and now desire to have.
"I know when God shall take this frail and wretched life,
"Some will not stick to say, that I was cause of all the strife.
"But God that is above, and you my witness be,
"How dear the safeguard of my Prince, and peace has bin to me.
"God grant you see in time your friends from fleering foe,
"That still in safety you may reign deuoide of grief and woe.
"Now I can say no more, but God preserve your Grace,
"And shield you from your fained friends which bear a double face.
"And this amidst your mirth I pray remember still,
"That they that seek to have my life, do bear you no good will.
Which said, the King did give such speech as he thought best:
And then in loud and solemn words in hearing of the rest
He did with friendly cheer request the Admiral
Unto his Court for to remove, what ever should befall.
And others spoke likewise unto the same intent:
His simple meaning could not see the treason that was meant.
But yet upon advise, his friends did think it best,
Not knowing what may there betide, the K. he should request,
That he would them assign some of his Graces guard,
Before his gates both night and day to keep their watch and ward
The motion being made, the King was well content,
And said; to this their good devise he gladly gave consent.
And that he would provide to have it surely known,
That of his life he made account no less than of his own.
And that he would preserve with care more tenderly
The Admiral, than he would keep the apple of his eye.
For that he did admire the valor of his mind,
Who little thought in mortal man such courage for to find.
The Duke of Aniow then commanded out of hand
One C^ssin Captain of the guard, to ward with Princes band
The gates and streates wherein the Admiral did lie;
Which was no sooner said, but was performed presently.
This C^ssin that was set with watch to ward the gate,
Was one that did the Admiral in heart most deadly hate.
And farther, for to put the matter out of doubt,
They did consent that he should have his trusty friends about
The place where he did lie: which came of no good will;
But hoping rather all by this the easier for to kill.
And this among the rest a bloody practice was,
Which cloaked guile by Satan's art too soon was brought to pass.
But here the Prologue ends, The Queen Mother ledd^ out the King the Duke of
Aniow, ^onzag^^, Tan^gues, the Cou^ de Rets calle^, Goudin, into her gardes
c^^led Tegliers.
and here begins the play,
For bloody minds resolved quite to use no more delaie.
The Mother Queen appears now first upon the Stage,
Where like a devilish sorceresse with words demure and sage
The King she calls aside, with other trusty mates
Into a close and secret place, with whom she now debates
The great desire she had to quit them all from care,
In planting long a bloody plot, which now she must declare.
"O The Ora(...)ion of the Queen mother unto the King. (...)nd other of (...)
bloody (...)unsaile.
happy light (quoth she) o thrice most happy day;
"Which thus has thrust into our hands our long desired pray:
"We have them all in hold, we have the chiefest fast:
"And those for whom we waited long we have them all at last.
"Why should we longer stay? what can we farther crave?
"What are not all things come to pass which we do long to have?
"Does not our mightiest foe lie wounded in his bed,
"Not able now to help himself, which others long has led?
"The Captains captive are, the King of Navarre sure;
"The Prince of Condee, with the rest that mischief did procure
"Are close within our walls, we have them in a trap;
"Good fortune (lo) has brought them al, and laid the^ in our lap.
"By force or flight to save their lives it is too late,
"If we (to cut off future fear and cause of all debate)
"Do The queen other was good scho(...) of that (...)uel of Flo(...)nce,
Ma(...)iuel, of (...)bom she (...)rned ma(...) bad les(...)s, as this.
take the proffered time: which time is only now;
"And wisdom matched with policy our dealings does allow.
"We need not fear the spot of any That a (...)ince must (...)t care to
(...) acomp(...) cruel, so (...)at any (...)ir came (...)at. 8. The Politico.
cruel fame:
"So long as we may feel some ease or profit by the same.
"For wisdom does allow the Prince to play the (...) Lesson. (...) Prince
(...) of a Fox and a Lion: a Fox to allure and deceive, a Lion to devour
without (...) occasion is offered.
Fox,
"And Lion-like to rage: but hates the plainness of an Ox.
"What though ye do 3. Lesson, That a Prince may not doubt to forswear, to
deceive, and ^emble.
forswear? what though ye break your faith?
"What though ye promise life, That a ^^ince must (...) care to Accomp^d cruel,
so at any ^^sit come ^it. 8. The (...) Politico.
and yet repay it with their This is a wholesome scholemistres for a young King.
death?
"Is this so great a fault? Naie, naie, no fault at all:
"For this we learn we ought to do, if such occasions fall.
"Our Masters do persuade a 4 Less: That a prudent Prince is (...) to keep
faith, where any ill may grow by it.
King to cogge and lie,
"And never keep his faith, whereas his danger grows thereby.
"Cut off therefore the head of this infectious sore:
"So may you well assure your selves this Byle will rise no more. (...) Lesson.

"The Captains being slain, Prince (...) the natures of a Fox and a Lion: a
Fox to allure, and deceive, a Lion to devour without (...) ben occasion is
offered.
the soldiers will be faint; These be the pillars, and this the fruit of
Popish religion.

"So shall we quickly on the rest perform our whole intent.
"Pluck up therefore your sprites, and play your manly parts,
"Let neither fear nor faith prevail to dant your warlike hearts.
"What shame is this that I (a woman by my kind)
"Need thus to speak, or pass you men in valor of the mind?
"For here I do protest, if I had been a man;
"I had my self before this time this murder long began.
"Why do you doubting stand, and wherefore do you stay?
"If that you love your peace, or life; procure no more delaie.
"We have them in our hands, within our Castle gates,
"Within the walls of Paris town the masters and their mates.
"This is the only time this matter to dispatch;
"But being fled, these birds are not so easy for to catch.
"The town of Paris will most gladly give consent,
"And threescore thousand fighting men provide for this intent.
"So shall we quickly see the end of all our strife,
"And in a moment shall dispatch these rebels of their life.
"But if we stand in fear, and let them escape our hand;
"They will procure in time to come great trouble in our land:
"For if the Admiral his strength receive again,
"Can any doubt but that he will be mindful of his pain? 5. Lesson: That it
is a simple thing to think, that new benefits can make old miuries to be
forgott^.

"It is a simple thing for Princes to believe
"That new goodwil an ancient hate from galled hearts ca^ drive.
"Therefore if we permit these Rebels to retire,
"We soon shall see by wars again our Country set on fire.
"This is a woman's mind, and thus I think it best:
"Now let us likewise hear I pray the sentence of the rest.
This counsel of them all was liked passing well;
And in respect of present state, all others did excel.
Some doubting, mused long which were the better way,
The King of Navarre and the Prince of Condee for to slaie;
Or else to save their lives in hope they would recant:
Because the proof of perfect years they both as yet did want.
But It was of (...)ost thought (...)st, partly (...)r age, partly (...)r
affinity (...)ache, that the King of Na(...)arre should be (...)ued. And for
(...)e Prince of (...)ondee, the o(...)nion of (...)on(...)ague took (...)ace
that he (...)old with (...)are of death (...) drawn from (...)eligion.
here, they did prevail (as God, no doubt would have)
Who thought it best in this assalt these princely youths to save.
Because they were in hope, that when those impes should see
Their mates tormented thus, they would most willingly agree
To bow where they would bind, to go where they would calls
And to forswere their former faith would make no dout at all.
But all the rest remain condemned for to die
Which cruel verdit must be put in practice presently
The It was de(...)eed, that this (...)urder should (...)egin about
(...)idnight of (...)e night next (...)llowing.
night that should ensue then next without delay,
Beginning ere the same were spent long time before the day.
The Duke of Guise was thought the fittest of the train
To take in hand this bloody plot to have the godly slain.
Concluding thus, they go each one unto his place,
The godly doubting nothing less than this so heavy case.
Here is the first part plaide; and here I do lament,
My slender skill wants fitted phrase the sequel to depaint.
The Duke in office put begins for to prepare,
So that in troops the armed men ran busling here and there
With noise and threatening words, as though some tumult were
Preparing now in every street; which made the wisest fear
What would ensue. At length the Admiral did hear
This tumult, and not knowing how the truth for to inquire;
He sent unto the King to know the full intent,
Why in the night in riot wise these armed people went
Thus raging in the streets: and where it were his will?
If so, he would not fear; but rest in hope of safety still.
"The King returned word, and wild him not to fear:
"For this was done by his advise, yet not in every where,
"But in some certain ways these armed men were set:
"The foolish rage of leaud attempts by this in hope to let.
O leaud and filthy lie! unseemly for a King:
What Turk or Devil could devise, a more unworthy thing.
For when the Duke of Guise had all in order set,
And nothing rested which might seem their purpose for to let:
He Marcell calls in have, and wills him have a care
That all the masters of the streets ere midnight did repair
Unto the Counsel hall, where they should hear at large
Great matters from the King himself of strange and special charge.
The message being done, they all without delaie
Assembled were, This Carron^ was made ne^ Provost of t^ Merchants.
to know the thing the Guises had to say.
Where Provost Carron rose with stomach stout and bold,
And guarded with a Guisian troop, this bloody message told;
"My friends (quoth he) give ear, Carro^s bl^^ die crati^ to the Cit^^zens of
P^^^ris.
and mark what I shall say,
"The Kings intent is presently this night without delay,
"Those Rebels to destroy; which now these latter years
"Bore arms against his Grace: which though they be his peers,
"Yet will he quite pull up, and root the lawless race
"Of the^, that long have sought by force his dealings to disgrace.
"And what a happy time (I pray) my mates, is this;
"When fast within our City walls the Captain closed is
"That siercelie brued the broile of this our doubtful strife,
"And many times has put us all in danger of our life?
"Their trust by treason trainde, is cause of this deceit:
"Oh happy she that wrought the molde of this so cunning feat. The Que^^
mother (...) the chief deviser of this blood stratagen^

"Their friends will prove their foes, sweet plesures will have pain;
"And being here they are not like to see their homes again.
"Their chambers prisons are, their beds shall be their grave:
"And ere the day appear we must a glorious Conquest have.
"Be strong therefore my friends, make sharp the fatal knife;
"For of these Rebels ere the day not one shall escape with life.
"Their leader and their guide lies wounded in his bed,
"And therefore as the chiefest foe, we'ill first have off his head.
"And when we have dispatched the Rebels we have here,
"We'ill likewise ransack all the Land of like that shall appear.
"This is the Kings intent, this is his Graces mind,
"To do this feate, let him in us a willing courage find:
"And for a token when this murder shall begin,
"The warlike trumpet shall not sound, ^cck^sein^ ^^as the ^reat bell of ^he
Pallaice which was ^ccustomed ^o be rong ^^elie for ^reat causes
nor banner shall be seen;
"But Tockeseine shall be heard this bloody news to bring,
"For then begin, when as you hear this Palace bell to ring:
"The badge which you shall bear by which you shall be known,
"Shall Be a Linen cloth of white, made fast about the brawne
"Of left side arm; and eke, a cross upon your cap,
"Of white likewise: and these keep fast what ever chance may hap.
"And this is all (my friends) that I have now to say,
"Come follow me, and let us begin and use no more delaie.
This while the Duke of Guise did show his whole intent
Unto the Captains of the guard, and bad them give consent
With courage to perform so great and famous act;
Which service as the case did stand, they might not long protract
Now shortly after this, This Cheua^ier was the ^astard son ^f K. Henry of
France.
the Duke with many more
(Accompanied with the Cheualier and armed men great store)
The Duke of Guise and the (...)heualier come (...)o the Amirals (...)ouse.
Came posting to the gate which C^ssin took to keep,
Woe worth the time when they did trust the wolf to guard the sheep.
The Admiral knew well the tumult of this rout;
Yet this, nor any thing could make his valiant heart to doubt:
For though he had but few, scarce ten within the place;
Yet nothing could at all prevail to make him doubt his case.
"For often he would repeat the Kings assured love, The Admiral advertised of
this ^tir, comfor^eth himself and his copa^y, with the ^^me^brance of the kings
^oue and his ^aths often ^iuen for keep^ng the peace.

"Approved by so many signs as you have heard above:
"What though the Commons rise? what though the tumult rage?
"When they shall see the princes guard, their malice will assuage.
"I know the King will not by treason false his faith,
"Though for the same there might ensue the hazard of his death.
"The oath that he has sworn so often to keep the peace,
"No Christian conscience can assent at all for to release.
"His mother gave her faith, his brothers swear likewise,
"The public records of the Land do witness this devise.
"What band may surer be? what more may you desire?
"What can we farther wish? And yet if more you do require
"The Queen of England is a witness of the same,
"The Prince of Aurendge, The marriage of the Kings sister was solemn(...) sed
but six days before(...)
and the States that from the Germans came;
"This Royal match likewise my heart does well assure
"That such a seal of perfect love for ever will endure:
"Which marriage lately made with counsel grave and good,
"The King will not permit to be so soon defilde with blood.
"For what would strangers say if such things should befall?
"But such things Lord be far from us, and Lord preserve us all?
"What would the future age of impes as yet unborn;
"What would all Nations think, if we by trust should be forlorn?
"The stout and constant mind, and honor of the King
"Will never give consent I know to do so leaud a thing.
Thus whilst among the rest the case he did debate,
His trusty keeper Cossin came and knocked at his gate.
Who was no sooner come within the outward door,
But that there came in after him of armed men great store.
Then after went the Lords, the Nobles, and the rest;
For to dispatch this noble man, whom they did most detest.
And those whom Cossin found within to lie or stand,
He slew them with a Partisan which he had in his hand.
Which woeful news when as the Admiral perceiude, The Admiral^^ perceiving
the treason that was in tended against him, prepares himself with comfort to
receive his death, and patiently comme^deth his soul to God, whilst his
enemies were a breaking open the doors upon him.

"Woe worth the time (quoth he) that I by trust have been deceiude.
"Well, now the time is come, I may no longer doubt;
"Come lend your help, my friends (I pray) from bed to lift me out.
"To Christ my only hope my soul I do betake,
"And in this place from off my couch this life I will forsake.
"Then standing on his feet his night gown on his back:
"Shift for your selves my friends (quoth he) that you go not to wrack.
"And have no care for me; for I am well content
"This life to yield unto the Lord, which he to me has lent.
"It greeues me not to die, Gods will is alwaie best;
"From future fears I know with Christ my soul shall be in rest.
"This plot is not preparde alone to murder me;
"But for the rasing of that truth, which they are loath to see.
"The godly for to spoil which have receaude the word,
"These tyrants seek with cruel hate by falsehood and by sword.
"Which word unto my power I always did defend*
"The malice of which godly course has brought me to my end.
"Which does rejoice my heart and soul exceedingly;
"That for his truth the Lord has thought me worthy for to die.
"For though our sins do cause these troubles in our land:
"Yet shall these tyrants not escape the Lords revenging hand.
"And though our God do seem from us to hide his face,
"And arms our foes with cruel death his people to disgrace:
"Yet if we be content, his mercy will retire.
"Have mercy Lord upon thy Church, o Christ I thee desire.
"And you o traitors vilde that laid this trothlesse train, ^^e Admi^^l
inua^^^ against (...) wicked ^ason of (...) Queen ^ther, the ^^ng, and (...)
Duke Guise.

"Against the Lord have lifted up your wicked hearts in vain.
"For you are puffed up with hope that is not sure;
"For these our pains, you shall receive the pains that shall endure.
"And you that dare to lift your hands against the Lord,
"Before your death most justly shall of all men be abhord.
"Though yet you do not feel the sentence that is due
"To this your bloody traitors act, yet know that you shall rue
"Your breach of plighted faith, your deep dissembling heart;
"There is a God will judge us all, that will revenge our smart.
"The pain that we receive does breed eternal joy;
"But for the wrong that you have done the Lord will you destory
"O Lord confirm my faith, which now must here be tried;
"Reach me thy hand (o Christ) that I from thee may never slide.
"My fearful flesh is weak, my heart and will is pressed:
"Forsake me not my God, but now receive me to thy rest.
"Let not this irksome shade, this dark and doleful night
"Keep from my heart in this assault thy sweet and pleasant light:
"For though the worldly Sun mine eye shall see no more,
"Thy blessed Son let me enjoy, whom I by faith adore.
"And whereas I despair no more to see the day,
"In steed of that, thy loving face show me (my God) I pray.
"Lo then, a blessed chance, and happy change for me;
"That from this vale of wretched life with Christ in joy shall be.
"Now let these traitors come, the fear of death is past;
"And fainting flesh that did rebel, has ye ^ ded at the last.
"Now does my soul rejoice, my heart most gladly say;
"Thou Son of God, my Savior come, my Christ now come thy way?
"For here again to thee my soul I do commend,
"And to thy poor afflicted Church o Lord thy mercy send.
"So shall they be at rest, so shall they praise thy name;
"Let not these tyrants longer Lord thy servants put to shame.
"Least they do proudly brag, and say within their heart;
"Vvher is the God who^ they do serve, that now should take their part.
"Come quickly Lord therefore, and make no more delay
"To end these fierce and bloody broiles; Amen, Amen, I say.
By this came up the stairs ere ended were his words, Three wicked, varlets
brake into the Adm^^rals chamber, whose names were, Benui^ a German, Cossin a
Gascoine, Attin a Picard.

One Benuise and two other mates with targets and with swords.
The chamber broken up, this Benuise swearing came
With sword drawn to the Admiral, and asking for his name;
Art thou the Admiral? the man not much appalde,
With quiet mind gave answer thus; Indeed so am I calde.
Then seeing Benuise bend his naked sword to slaie,
My friend (quoth he) that bloody blade I pray thee for to stay, The Admira^
last words.

And have respect unto my age, and weak estate
To which by treason wrought by trust I have bin drawn of late.
But beastly Benuise would to this no answer give:
But swearing, to this Noble man his pointed sword let drive,
And thrust him to the heart: The cruel and ^^wardly mur^er of the Ad^^irall.
but yet not fully dead,
With force he laid a mighty blow and struck him on the head.
With that came Attin in with Pistol in his hand,
And shot him in the wounded breast; yet did he stoutly stand:
Till Benuise came again with third repeated wound:
And slasht him on the thigh: which done, he fell unto the ground
Where he gave up the ghost. The bloody Guise that staid
This while within the lower court, with lifted voice now said
Hoe Benuise have thou done? who straightwaie did reply,
Yea sir this happy deed is done, and that most perfectly.
Then said the Duke of Guise Come throw him down to me:
That where it be the same, or not, we here may quickly see:
For now our Cheualier will think it but a lie,
Except at window thrown out he see him with his eye.
Then Benuise, with his mates to put them out of doubt,
Took up this bloody corse: and so from window cast him out.
Where from his wounded head sprang out so fresh a flood,
That vizard-like his face was all imbrued with goarie blood.
Whereby they could not well at first discern his face:
Till that the Duke of Guise himself first kneeling in the place
Had with his napkin wipte the clotted blood away,
And searching viewed every part; he rose without delay,
And crying to his crew deuoide of fear and shame:
It Is he (my friends) I know him well, trust me it is the same.
The Duke descending then from out the stately gates,
With bloody heart and cursed mouth he cride unto his mates;
"O happy luck that we so good beginnings have, ^e wicked ^eches of ^e
bloody ^^ise after ^e murder ^he Ad^^rall.

"Lo Fortune frames her willing hand to give that we do crave.
"And since it pleased the fates at first such hap to send,
"It gives me cause of future hope to see some happy end.
"Come on my valiant hearts, so place your warlike bands,
"That marching forward to the rest, not one may escape our hands
"This is the Kings decree, this has he given out;
"We do no more than he commands, to put you out of doubt;
"Let pity take no place till Rebels all be rid,
"Thus says the king, fear not therefore to do what he does bid.
"Let nothing now prevail to dant your hardy mind;
"No, The right picture of bloody Tyrant.
though with tears they pity crave, let the^ no mercy find.
"Have no remorse unto the young ne yet the old;
"Without regard to any one to kill them all be bold.
"Now sanctify your swords, and bath them in the blood
"Of these religious Rebels, which do mean the King no good.
"So shall we quickly find a path to perfect peace;
"So shall we see assured means at length to live at ease:
"For if we can recount the troubles that are past;
"Then happy time wherein we may dispatch them all at last.
Which said; he bad in have the Tockesein for to ring,
Which sounding bell appointed was the fatal news to bring
When as this raging rout this murder should begin:
Which they performde, as though they had no men, but monsters bin.
And therewithal devise a larum for to raise
Pretending with some solemn lie the people for to please.
So now the trumpets sound this lie and shameful thing,
That certain traitors were in arms about to kill the King.
Here, Gonzagues a Italian cut of the Admiral head, and sent it to the Pope.
one among the rest from Rome that lately came,
(Desirous by some valiant act perhaps to get a name)
Cut off the bleeding head (imbrude with reaking blood)
Of that most worthy Admiral in hope to do some good;
And sent it straight to Rome as Lorraine had requirde, The Cardin. of Lorraine.

A present welcome to the Pope, which he had long desirde.
His hands cut off by some, by some his secret parts,
Declares what hate to shining light lies hid in blinded hearts.
His hackt and mangled corpse by space of certain days
Was dragde by rascals all along the streets and filthy ways.
At length this rusticke rage, as fury thought it meet;
At common gallows of the town did hang him by the feet.
Thus came this Noble man to this unworthy death,
Thus do the Papists learn to break the vow of plighted faith.
The Admiral being slain, they likewise murdered most cruelly not only all
such friends, Physicians, Preachers, and al other that were found hidden in the
Admirals lodging, but also as many as were suspected to be of that religion
within the town or any where else, were lamentably put to the sword, as here
following we may plainly see.
THese furies frying thus,
yet thus were not content:
But in the house, from place to place,
like greedy hounds they went.
To search the chambers all
and corners of receipt;
That from the wolf the sheep might save
his throat by no deceit.
And such as sleeping were found naked in their bed,
Or gone to hide or save themselves they first cut of their head,
And after fiercely pierst with wounds both great and deep;
Which being done, like cruel currs they throw the^ on a heap.
Among which woeful troop two Noble youths there were
And Pages of most worthy birth which likewise died there.
With these, among the rest a man of noble fame,
The County Rouchfoucault was forced at length to taste the same.
Whom for his pleasant wit the King did seem to love;
Yet in this fury nothing might the King to mercy move.
But now in have must be to death untimely sent,
To yield again unto the Lord the life that he had lent.
So him at first De Nance commanded was to kill;
But he most stoutly did Mounsier De Nance Captain of the guard, refuses to
kill the County Rouchfoucault.
refuse this guiltless blood to spill.
His speeches used both privately to his friends, and also to the King upon the
refusal.
"Shall I, said he, consent to do this fearful thing
"To shed this blood, because I am commanded by the King?
"No, God forbid, I know I have a soul to save;
"So bloody spot, to save my life my name shall never have.
"I know there is a day, a day that Reu. 6. 10.
Saints desire;
"When of our deeds the king above a reckoning will require.
" Obaie the Romans 13. 1
King; that is true, 1. Pet. 2. 13
in things that honest be:
"When I obey in wicked hests, Tit. 3. 1.
woe worth the time to me.
"For Ioab did not well 2. Sam. 11 16.
King David to obey,
"When wickedlie the King him bad Vriah for to slay.
"Those Elders did offend which shewde themselves too prone,
"Those wicked letters to obey poor 1. King. 21* 11.
Naboth for to stone.
"And cursed 1. Sam. 22 18.
Doeg which obaide a wicked will,
"Shall cursed stand for that he did the Lords anointed kill.
"A murder to be done the King does now request,
"My God commands the contrary: now which to choose were best?
"The King does threaten death, and God does threaten hell,
"If for the King I should forsake my God, should I do well?
"What others see o King, His speeches to the king.
I cannot well divine,
"To kill the uncondemned man it is no charge of mine.
"To slaie my deadly foe except there were some cause
"I would not yield; much less my fre^d against our sacred laws.
"What envy does report, o King I cannot say;
"But this my friend a faithful man to me has been alwaie.
"Therefore I pray your Grace your rigor to assuage,
"Or bid some other whom you list to execute your rage.
"In matters that be good if that you list to use
"My service, you shall see that I no peril will refuse.
Therefore I pray your Grace this answer for to take, ^. Sam. 22. 17.

Which unto Saul his Soldiers once were not afraid to make:
De Nance to kill his friend no wight shall ever see,
Though for refusal he were sure beheaded for to be.
Take heed (o noble King) what sprite you follow now;
Let no man force you do the thing that God does disallow.
While good king David was by whoredom brought a sleep,
He did the thing, which being wakt did force his heart to weep
While Saul in malice was against good David bent,
He ran to that which afterward with tears he did lament.
And whilst that Iezabel great mischief did intend
Against poor Naboth, she at last came to a fearful end.
Look well therefore (o King) before you leap too far,
Least in the end this testie scab do breed a lasting scarre.
Well I can say no more, but God preserve your Grace,
And grant your soul when breath is gone with him a resting place.
But this could not prevail this noble man to save, When De Na^ce ^ad refused
to ^^l the County Rouchfeucault ^ne Laberg an duernois offe.

For bloody Doeg did attend his office for to have.
For which, an Auernois a man of cused fame
Made offer there, before the King that he would do the same.
The King was well content this office for to give
To him, ^ed to do it, if the K. would give him his of ^ice, which was to be
Captain of the horsemen
so that this Noble man of life he would bereave.
We see how Satan does by glory mixed with gain,
Work to procure this worthy wight the sooner to be slain.
There fell in this assault (for malice to the truth)
Theligni famous for his wit, The death of Theligni son in law to the
Admiral.
a rare and passing youth:
Who for his manly heart and courage did excel:
For which, the King in outward show did seem to love him well.
Now when the time was come that martird he should be.
"With courage bold, The words of Theligni uttered before his death
he smiling said; O welcome death to me.
"It grieves me for to live since faith from Princely seat
"Abandonde is, and in her place reigns falsehood and deceit.
"It grieves me for to see this sad and irksome day,
"Wherein so great and famous King, a traitors part should play.
"It grieves me for to hear poor souls deceived cry
"Too late, The Admiral at first doubting some policy and il meaning, staide
a while, and durst not trust the King: but at length euercome with the
persuasions of Theligni his son in law, and other his friends that there could
be no hurt meant, they all being deceived with the Kings courtesies, he yielded
and came in upon trust.
for that they did too much on Princes oath rely.
"Woe worth my harmless heart too soon that did believe,
"And to the kings dissembling words too soon did credit give.
"Woe worth the wicked time when first I did begin
"To work the means, for to persuade my father to come in.
"Woe worth my lying tongue which first assaid to bring
"My fearful Father in the mind, that he should trust the King.
"How often did I commend the Kings assured love?
"How did I think that nothing might us from the same remove?
"How often did I recount the Kings repeated oath?
"How many friendly signs were seen of force to bind us both?
"How often did I urge there was no cause of fear,
"Because for this we saw the King most willing for to swear?
"But since it is too late this error to lament,
"My trusting has deserved death; and therefore am content.
"Since I am not the first whom trust has thus betrayed,
"To suffer death for no offense I am the less dismaide.
"And since my greatest hope has wrought me most despite,
"What shall I say? I say no more: but Lord receive my sprite.
Thus came this noble impe untimely to his grave,
For that he to a Beware of the guilfull promises of the Papists.
Papists oath too great afliance gave
And thus fell many more of Nobles here and there,
Whose names and valiant acts, were now to long for to declare.
Thus did those lawless bands go raging up and down
From house to house, they sought to spoil the welthiest of the town.
So they that beggars were when first this stir began,
At last with rich and flowing wealth the chiefest credit wan.
This while the Duke of Guise these words repeated still,
With crying voice, Kill, kill the knaves, this is the princes will.
And least the soldiers should wax faint with bloody toil;
"Now rid the^ al my friends (quoth he) and you shall have the spoil.
Thus did they all a day from morning unto night
With bloody swords run up and down: no doubt a heavy sight.
They spared none they knew, no sex could pity find,
The rufull cry of tender babes could not assuage their mind.
In great triumphing joy of this their warlike feate,
The bodies slain from windows hie they throw into the streat.
So that there was no way, no lane or passage by;
Where murdered men you might not see in heaps together lie.
Now whilst within the town these things a doing were;
The King of Navarre and the Prince of Condee did appear
Before the King. ^he King of ^auarre, and (...) Prince of ^^onde^ were (...)
to the king
For so before it was agreed
To save these youths to farther hope the counsel had decreed.
For they their lodging had within the Castle wall;
Which for defense is always thought the surest place of all.
These Princes being gone, ^hese Princes (...), friends, (...), with all ^^eir
ret^nue (...) most cru^^lie slain.
and only had away,
The rest were left unto the sword to die without delaie:
Their servants and their friends, their tutors with the rest
Could not prevail to save their lives by suit ne yet request;
But thrust without the doors, and kneeling in the place,
The guard of Switzers slew them all before the Princes face.
And still between the stroke they cried all amain
Upon the Kings fidelity; but faith was calde in vain.
Yet none amongst them all so much lamented was, ^he lamenta(...) murder of
^onsieur De^uilles.

As Mounsieur de Pills that he should come unto so hard a pass.
Because among the rest he past them all so far
For godly zeal in truth, and eke for prowess in the war.
Who lying in his bed somewhat before the day,
And hearing noise of armed men leapt out to see the fray:
And marking well the voice in place and time of truce,
Of cries and killings every where, it made him much to muse.
Which dump De Nance did break, who did this message bring
That straight to void the place he was commanded by the king;
And that he should depart (his weapons left behind)
From out the Court and Castle gate full sore against his mind.
Which was no sooner said but Pills was forced out
Among the bloody weapons of that rude unruly rout.
To hope for longer life he saw it was but vain:
He saw such cruel rage, and eke the bodies that were slain?
Where lifting up his voice, so that the King might hear,
These words he spoke before them al, deuoid of fainting fear.
"O false unworthy King, The vehement word of Monsieur De Pills, upon the
Kings traitrous infidelity.
o whelpe of savage kind!
"O traitrous heart in kingly breast! o base polluted mind!
"Is this a Princely part, by treason to procure
"The murder of thy chiefest friends? Is this thy Popish lure,
"To train us in by trust, to thrust us thus to death?
"Is this thy solemn Kingly oath? is this a Princes faith?
"Is this thy friendly cheer? Is this thy fawning face?
"Is this the fruit of Romish faith? o false dissembling race!
"And do thou honor so thy sisters spousall day?
"And could thou find no other time thy treasons to bewraie?
"Is this the trust that is in mother, son, and kinn?
"Let France the^ curse the man that did first bring this kindred in.
"How are thy wits bewitched? what fury does inrage
"Thy tigers heart, that nothing can thy thirst but blood assuage?
"And wast thou not afraid to give thy leaud consent
"To murder them, which to believe thy promise were content?
"Where are thy friendly words? where is thy feined love?
"What, has thy flintie heart forgot there is a God above?
"And think that thou shall shed our guiltless blood in vain?
"Shall not the Lord (o wretch) of thee require the same again?
"How dare thou to behold the creatures of the Lord;
"When for thy false and bloody fact this place shall be abhorde?
"What answer can thou make to this unhappy town,
"Which for thy traitrous act shall loose his glory and renown?
"What answer can thou give to many a weeping child?
"To many matrones husbandles what reason can thou yield?
"And deemst thou not that God will plague this sinful land
"For this our blood? and fearst thou not Gods just reue^ging hand?
"Yes though at this our grief thou proudly now do jest,
"Yet God will not forget the blood of them that be oppressed. Psalm. 19. 12

"Did Ioab die in peace that had by treason slain
"Two noble men? (...) Sam. 3. 27 and 20. 10.
Did not his blood requite the same again?
"Did Abs^lom likewise that wrought his brothers death
"By treason, (...) Ki. 2. 34.
under friendly show, and falsing plighted faith,
"Thus prosper long? (...) Sam. 13 28.
No, no, for God did quickly send
"To this rebellious wicked wretch a swift and fearful end. Sam 18. 9

"Be sure therefore of this, and mark what Pills has said,
"That this our blood by shedding of thy blood shall be repaid. ^onsieur De ^lies
prophe^eth the kings ^rrible death which shortly after came in^ed so to pass

Which said, from off his back he put a costly cloak,
And to a friend among the press, the same thus saying took.
Take this, and let the same a token still remain,
That Pills thy friend by treason was here most unjustly slain.
With that he did commend his soul unto the Lord,
Upon his knees with lifted eyes still waiting for the sword.
Then one of Princes guard to end this bitter strife, Monsieur De ^illes murdered
(...) one of the ^ard with a Partisan.

Thrust thorough Pills with partisan, who yielded there his life?
This was the cruel end of that most famous man;
To read the same without remorse, I think no creature can.
This Rout in Paris streates which posted up and down, (...) Hundredth ^^ouses
in Paris ^^icked.

Four hundred houses sacked have within that wicked town.
The King therewith directs his letters out in post,
To Cities all his message flies in have to every coast, The king commanded al
C^^^es in his land to follow the example of Paris, in murdring as many as
professed the reformed religion.

That they (as Paris had) with murder should oppress
As many in their towns, as did the Gospel there profess.
Which leaud and bloody charge, a wonder is to see,
How glad and willing to obaie most towns and Cities be.
But one among the rest, The butcherly murder committed upon the professors of
the Gospel at Li^ns in France.
a place of ancient fame,
Did Lion-like behave her self, as Lions was her name.
For though in other towns by murder many fell;
Yet Lions for her cruel heart, all others did excel.
Where then, unhappy then, a Lion as the chief
One Mandelot was Governor a black and bloody thief, Mand^lot Governor at
(...)

Who having once receiude these letters from the King,
With greedy mind, he sets abroach this vile unworthy thing.
Who caused out of hand his Crier to proclaim
That al within the town which did the Gospel then maintain
Should presently resort unto a certain place
Where Mandelot would have them al appear before his face.
This message being done, the godly do obey,
And to the place appointed them they came without delaie,
Where Mandelot they found with visage pale and sad,
Who nothing said, but bids them all to prison to be had.
The godly trapped thus, and thus to thraldom sent;
As sheep unto the slaughter they to prison meeklie went.
Where lying in the Clinke their feet and hands were bound,
And by the cruel Iailors were laid prostrate on the ground.
Then Mandelot commands the hangman for to call,
Whom he enioynes to enter in with axe to kill them all.
But this so fearful fact the hangman did refuse,
"And bad him for so wicked act some fitter man to choose. The co^m^n hangman of
Lions, had more grace and h^nestie th^^ Mandelot the Governor

"For I will not defile my hands with guiltless blood,
"Nor give consent (said he) to do the thing that is not good.
"On such as are condemnde by Justice and by law,
"I only am in public place my deadly blade to draw.
"The man repelled thus, inuents another way;
"He wills the soldiers of the town these prisners for to slaie:
"But they likewise replide; The garrison soldiers also refuse to commit this
vilde ^^urther.
that they would not distaine
"The glory of their martial feats, with fame that they had slain
"Poor simple naked men bound prostrate at their feet,
"It is a service (sir say they) for soldiers far unmeet:
"And therefore if you have this murder thus decreed,
"Choose out some other men that list perform so hard a deed.
"Yet if in Rebel sort their banners were displaide,
"To put them all unto the sword we would not be afraid.
"But now since that we know no fault that they have done,
"Let them (for us) proceed herein that have the same begun.
Again refused thus, the man with fury bent,
For all the butchers of the town, he straight his message sent.
To whom in savage sort his mind he did unfold;
And had them go and kill them all whom he had laid in hold. The butchers
more cruel and ^loodie, than ^ither hangma^ ^r soldiers, obey this wicked
Tyrant, in committing this horrible murder.

These beastly butchers then no conscience made at al*
But with their blodie butchering knives like tigers they do fall
Upon these silly souls, in murder fiercely bent,
Not like to men, but rather as some furies had been sent
From hell, to stop the course of Gods afflicted word;
So quickly did these helhounds put these people to the sword.
Here some that prostrate were, and did for mercy cry,
And other some unto the Lord that lift their voices hie,
They killed not, but did their hands cut off at first,
And after chopped in savage sort with blood to quench their thirst
Such shrikes and wailing cries from prisons did rebound,
That every corner of the town might hear their woeful sound.
The mournful mothers wept, whom nature did compel,
To see these hou^ds before their face their loving babes to quel
The tender infant does for help to father cry,
The woeful father cannot help his child before he die.
The husband to his wife, the friend to friend does call,
With heavy sighs lamenting this their most unhappy fall.
And they that strongest are to weak do comfort give,
That so they may be sugared words their fainting hearts relieve.
Of these captiued souls such was the piteous plight,
That very Papists did lament to see this cruel sight.
And some that loud the Pope, these dealings did detest;
Who for their credit did not think this rigor to be best.
And many women of the town deuoide of crime
With horror of this sudden fear, had child before their time.
For from the common The blood was seen to run warm and smoking through the
streets of the town into the river of Some.
Jail in sight of shining Sun,
The smoking blood from streat to streat with grief was seen to run.
But one amongst the rest, an old and aged man
Calde The valiant and constant death of Francis Collute marcha^t of caps with
2. young men his sons
Francis Collute, for his faith a lasting credit wan.
To whom with bloody axe when butchers did resort,
Upon his Sons with tears he fell, and did them thus exhort;
"You know (quoth The godly and zealous oration of Francis Collute to his 2
sons, lying with them upon the ground, ready to be sacrificed.
he) my Sons, what pain and tender care
"Your loving Father from your youth has had for to prepare
"Your hearts to know the Lord, his truth to intertaine;
"Which far surmounteth fading wealth, and hope of worldly gain.
"Now is our harvest in, now must our fruit appear,
"Now will the Lord require account how we have lived here.
"The final axe is laid to root of falling tree;
"And how we have the truth embraced, the world forthwith must see.
"Be strong therefore my Sons, refuse not profred death;
"Which from the Lord is sent to be a trial of our faith.
"But how should we be strong, when flesh does daily fall?
"O Lord increase our faith, that we may come when thou do call.
"And from the Lord I know this butchring axe is sent,
"Who Satan's sword has losed now no doubt for some intent.
"This is no new devise which Satan puts in ure;
"For they that will embrace the truth of this shall still be sure.
"For unto Truth belongs both fire, sword and rack,
"And naked Truth has always tied a whip unto her back.
"The ages that are past do yet declare the same,
"Whose constant death for Christ, depaints the glory of their name.
"For as the silly sheep between the Lions jaws.
"And like the meek and wailing dove in goshauks greedy paws
"So is the present state of Christ's afflicted flock,
"Who are content with Christ to lay their head unto the block
"Fear not therefore to taste this cup of joyful pain,
"That with the Lord in lasting joy we all may meet again.
"Let nothing force your faith from Christ to go astraie,
"For I your Father (as your guide) will lead you first the way.
"One house has held us all, one Christ has been our joy;
"This sweet and noble union let Satan not destroy.
"And let us join in one this death for to embrace,
"So joined with Christ we shall be sure with him to have a place.
"I was not he that gave your use of lively breath;
"I am not he that sets the time and order of your death.
"It is the Lord alone, which will restore again
"A better life, if for his law by death we suffer pain.
"Come, let us gladly give our throat unto the knife;
"And for our Christ let us rejoice to leave this wretched life.
"And say you all with me; o Lord from these our bands,
"Receive (we pray) our sinful souls into thy blessed hands.
"And lend us Lord thy grace and mercy to the end,
Thy blessed help to come to thee, o Lord of mercy send.
And this repeating often the butchers with their blade,
Their bodies then with deadly wounds a bloody present made.
Then joining on the ground they clasped all in one;
Where groueling lay in folded arms the father with the son
Which sudden heavy chance such woeful sight did give,
That just remorse of causeles death a flinty heart would grieve.
Thus has this blessed man receaud a happy place;
The Lord grant us that be behind like portion of his grace.
Amen.
A cruel, cowardly, and traitrous murder, committed in Angiers in France,
upon one Masson de Rivers a famous and godly preacher, by a wicked enemy
called Monsorrell, who was sent by the King to Angiers in post, to commit the
like murder there, as was in Paris.
NOw Lions fare thou well,
to Angiers will I go,
Wherein also the godly flock,
lackt not a deadly foe.
For there was dwelling then
a famous learned man;
Who for his pains and godly life
a worthy credit wan.
He was the first that dar'de the Gospel for to preach
In Paris town: He was the first that laid the foundation of the Church at
Paris.
where first the same to many he did teach.
Masson De Rivers was this godly preachers name,
Who had the Sorbons many times by learning put to shame.
Now when in Paris town the murder was at most,
The bloody Curre Monsorrell was to Angiers sent in post.
Who was no sooner come within that woeful town,
And that from off his barbed house he was descended down.
But that he did inquire where Masson then did dwell,
For that he had unto the man some secret thing to tell.
And coming to the house, before the entry door
He met with Massons wife; to whom he used then great store
Of filed words, as though he meant nothing amiss,
And like a Courtier courteously salutes her with a kiss: A Judas kiss

And where is now (I pray) your husband to be had?
To see the good man ere I went, I would be very glad:
For that with him I have a word or two talk.
In yonder garden sir (quoth An honest and loving wife m^strusting no hurt,
betraiea^^ her husband to a flattring murderer.
she) my husband now does walk.
And so she did direct the traitor to the place;
Where coming, he most courteously good Masson did embrace.
"And can thou tell (quoth he) why I am ^ether come? The speech^^ of
Mon^rrel to Masson.

"It is to do the Princes will, whereof this is the sum.
"The King commanded has that now without delaie,
"Within this place I should not miss thy life to take away.
"And that thou may be sure the King has thus decreed;
"Lo here are letters from his grace, which letters thou shall read.
With that he plucked forth a Pistol ready bent
Full charged, and to Massons heart now ready to be sent.
"My friend (said Masson) stay, The speech^^ of Masso^ (...) Rivers ^^ttered
be^re his death
on me some pity take:
"And to my God, ere that I die, let me my prayers make.
"I marvel why the King this murder should intend;
"I know not any thing wherein his laws I did offend.
"It does become a King a Princely heart to have:
"And not unjustly for to kill the people he should save.
"And what are you that can the uncondemned kill?
"And what are you that seek my life, which never meant you il?
"And why should you desire to suck my guiltless blood,
"Which in the Lord unto my power have soght to do ye good?
"But stay; I know the cause: you hate the shining light
"Of Gods eternal Truth, which now you think does shine too bright.
"But friend take heed how that thou welter in the dark
"Take heed of Gods eternal, plague and Cayns accursed mark.
"The men that meat refuse with famine shall be pinde,
"To satisfy their hungry souls, they shall no comfort find.
"And they that known Truth do wilfully reject,
"Shall Be deceiude by lying sprites their follies to correct.
"I weigh not for to die, since death the Lord has sent;
"But more to view thy wretched state it makes me lament;
"For after death with me I know it shall be well;
"But for this murder thou may fear least thou be sent to hell.
"There is a fearful law, let it be rightly scand;
"The Lord himself has truly said that blood pollutes the land. Numb. 35. 23

"The Land from bloody guilt shall not be cleansde or quit, God is so mindful
of blood wrong fully shed, that he makes dumb creatures them. tund vengeance
thereof.

"But by his blood which wrong fully the murder did commit.
"Take heed therefore (good friend) and yet beware in time,
"Pollute not this so famous place with this so bloody crime.
"But yet if thou obey a Princes wicked word,
"Know in the end that thou likewise shall perish by the sword.
"Now if my hoarie hairs no mercy can procure;
"Yet let the safety of thy soul to pity thee allure.
"And if the wailing tears of this my woeful wife,
"Can not by any means prevail with thee to save my life;
"Yet see these silly babes, and weigh their woeful moan,
"Which fatherless before their time should now be left alone.
"If nothing yet but blood can quench thy hot desire,
"Then in the end be sure to taste the Lords revenging ire.
"Have mercy Lord on me, whom Satan would destroy;
"Thy godly flock he seeks to quell, thy Truth for to annoie.
"Let them not longer Lord exalt their pridie crown:
"Let the^ not escape that daily seek to throw thy kingdom down.
"Thy promise is my hope, thy word is all my stay:
"My comfort is the living Lord, which shields me from decaie.
"While Christ is on my side by faith that makes me free,
"By death or life I little fear what man can do to me.
"To thee my living God for mercy now I call,
"So in this place my promisd vows shall be performed all.
"O Lord receive my soul, the force of death destroy,
"That presently before thy face I may appear with joy.
"O Christ thy pity send, with mercy come to me;
"For from my youth and tender years my hope has bin in thee.
"My heart is fixed Lord, my heart is surely set;
"To save my soul (my God) let not my sins be any let.
"Now to thy blessed hands whether I die or live:
"My sinful soul, receive it Lord, I gladly here do give.
"And thou that hither came to play this bloody part;
"Lo this thy wicked deed I do forgive with all my heart:
"Desiring God that this my blood now set at large,
"When he does come may not at all be laid unto thy charge.
"Come stay no longer now if God shall give thee power
"To take my life, the^ welcome thrice this sweet and happy hour;
His wife he kissing bade her sorrow to repel,
With her his babes he did embrace, and bade them al farewell.
But Lord what rolling tears, what shrikes and piteous cries
Between the wife and loving babes were sent to airie Skies.
But this could not persuade the traitor to depart,
Who framde his ready dagg to strike pore Masson to the heart.
Then Masson kneeling down, content his life to leave;
The bullet meeklie to his breast from Pistol did receive.
Where falling to the ground, his blessed life did yield
Unto the Lord, with quiet heart as meek as any child.
We see what worthy men the Papists have destroid,
God grant us grace that do remain their treasons to avoid.
Amen.
The Judgment of the Lord against this bloody and perjured King of France,
Charles the 9. Dilated by the sentence of God in the law against murder; by
examples both out of the Scriptures, and other Authors, concerning the horrible
end that has fallen upon wilful murderers; and lastly, the bloody death of
this blood-sucking King himself.
NOw let us see the end
of this perjured King,
And let us weigh in future time
what fearful fruit did spring
From falsed faith. And first
I briefly will repeat
The sentence of the mighty God
against murder and deceate.
Then shall we plainly see how that in every land
The Lord according to his law with just revenging hand
The bloody tyrants strikes, with all their faithless crew;
As by examples we may see of such as shall ensue.
Who so says God shall shed the blood of man in vain,
Shall with the shedding of his blood requite the same again. Genesis 9 6.

And he that by deceit his Exodus 21. 14*
neighbor shall betraie,
Or shall with guile presumptuouslie his brother seek to slaie: Numb. 35. 20.

He shall not escape, The blood of man is of so great price with the Lord that
he will not only require it of men, but also of the very dumb creatures. Genesis
9.
although he to the altar fly.
But Ioab the wi^^full murderer was taken from the altar by Solomon and slain.
1. King. 2. 31.
drawn forth he justly shall without all pity die.
Such cursed bloody men Gods plague does follow still;
For wicked King Abimelech slew 70. of his brethren, and ra^gned (...) king Iud
9 5 at last he perished by the just judgment of God.
Abimelech who was content to kill
His seventy brothers all the kingdom for to have:
From just revenge he could not long his cursed carcass save.
For from a woman's hand a millstone down was sent
From off a wall: which with the weight his brain pan al to rent.
And after by his Page was thrust unto the heart
With sword, ^dg. 9. 53. 54.
lest that a womans stroke his glory should subvert.
As Triphon be(...)g Tutor and (...) counselor ^^to young king ^^tiochus, and
^uing deutsed ^^th himself a (...) of conspira (...) to kill his (...) after,
thought ^at Jonathan ^ing hie priest the Jews, ^^uld be a hin ^^rance unto is
attempt, ^^ing a friend ^^to Antio^^us. Therefore ^^iphon fein^^g great fre^d^^p
unto Ionaan, with flat ^^ing words so ^^ained him by ^^ust, that he ^^^rswaded
him 40 thousand (...) which Io^^^ than brought ^^th him, that should send pay
all sa^^ng one thousand: with which small company when he was entered into the
City Ptolemais under trust of assured promise to have the City delivered unto
him by Triphon: and being come within the gates, he (...) by Triphon taken
prisoner, and all his men slain. 1. Maccab. 12. 41. Josephus Antiquit, Iud
lib. cap. 10.
Triphon did entrap with face of friendly cheer
Good Jonathan, to whom he did a faithful friend appear:
So did he quickly feel the weight of falsed word,
Who shortly was by Simon But Triphon inioyed not this treachery long: for he
was still cruelly pursued by Simon (...) brother of Jonathan, and at last in
Apania was taken and put to the sword. Whose treachery was ^^ight picture of K.
Charles his villainy.
slain, and justly put to sword.
I read also of one Aristobolus after he had put his mother and brother to
^^ath, grieved in conscience, fell into such horrible extremity, that blood
came from him both by vo^^ and otherwise til it brought him to his end.
Aristobolus by name,
Who has for murder left behind a black and bloody fame.
For first he did consent with famine for to pine
His mother, for because she would the kingdom not resign.
And also was content by death to make away
Antigonus his brother dear, which was his own decaie.
For when the deed was done, he felt a present grief
In conscience for so cruel act; which then without relief
Did daily so torment his sore afflicted heart,
That fresh remorse did often give new cause of greater smart.
At length from The Image of K Charles his judgment.
grisly corse his blood by peacemeale came;
For brothers blood from earth did call his blood to quit the same
And thus in fearful wise he yielded up his breath:
So was his fierce and wicked life repaide with worthy death.
Our Charles (...) 9 by the just stroke of Gods revenge died of bleeding at al
parts of his body where was any issue.
Charles like unto this from Gods revenging hand
By bloody death, repaies the blood he shed within his land.
From ears, from nose, from mouth, from heart that was so stout,
From every part his blood was seen, where blood might issue out.
The man that would not yield when men did mercy crave,
For mercy cries unto the Lord but mercy none can have.
For he that will not help the poor when they does call,
Shall call himself when he has need, and not be heard at all.
The heart that was so proud, now feels the bitter pain
Whereat he iested when he saw his faithful subjects slain.
The ears that would not hear the poor afflicted cry;
But greedelie to suck their blood would credit every lie,
With blood are stopped up that they shall hear no more:
Such heavy plagues for wicked men the Lord has still in store.
The mouth that would not speak to do his brother good,
Instead of words does vomit out the clotts of filthy blood.
The nose that did detest of Truth the pleasant smell,
From filthy heart does willingly the stinking blood expel.
So that we plainly see, that blood for blood does crave,
And he shall not escape that seeks his brothers blood to have.
Then cursed be the mouth and Christopher Thaune President of the Parliament,
with a wicked Oration commended the K. for that he had by treason and flattery
now overcome them, whom by arms he could not vanquish.
man that did persuade
This wretched King that he was in a good and godly trade,
In that he did by guile the godly so allure:
And afterward by treason did their wished death procure.
Much like said he you be to Jews the 11 was wont to say, Qui nescit
dissimluare. nescit regnare, he that cannot dissemble, knows not how to
ra^gne.
Jews which heretofore
Said in the Latin that he knew one sentence and no more.
Which was; That he which Truth in words will always bring,
And not dissemble; knows not the skill to be a King.
Naie The riht judgment of the godly concerning this bloody act.
this was rather like the red and cruel reign
Of Mithridates caused with one letter 150000. Romans to be slain.
Mithridates, who did cause of Romans to be slain
A hundred fifty thousand once by message that was sent,
When outwardly there did appear nothing but friendship me^t.
The King of Peter of Arrago^ slew 8000. Frenchmen.
Arragon like mate of cursed crew,
By like deceit in Sicill once eight thousand Frenchmen slew.
To Philip of Macedon suffered misery by breaking often his oath.
Philip once it was his ruin and his death:
In that he often brake his oath, and vow of plighted faith.
Then happy is the man, that timely can beware
Of Popish treason, which does seem great favor for to bear.
"NOw have you heard at large the chief of bruted broile, The Conclusion of
the French Pilgrim unto the English man.

"That lately for the Truth has bin in France my native soil.
"The Lord grant England peace and mercy from above,
"That from the Truth no trouble may their fixed heart remove
"With wished life and health Lord long preserve and keep
"That Noble Queen Elizabeth chief Pastor of thy sheep:
"And that she may find out, and hunt with perfect hate
"The Popish hearts of fained friends before it be too late:
"And that in woeful France the troubles that we see,
"To England for to shup the like, may now a warning be.
"And where our wound is seen as yet so fresh to bleed,
"Lord grant to England that they may in time take better heed.
"Now since you do perceive of France the woeful case;
"Good sir I pray you give me leave to se^ke some other place.
"I fear that I have staid and charged you too long,
"In warping forth these bloody broiles in rude and rustic song.
"Not so good friend, The Englishman to the French Pilgrim.
but if with me thou will remain;
"I shall not think it any charge, nor count it any pain
"To hear and keep thee still: but if thou will depart,
"For thy discourse take this reward, and thanks from friendly heart.
"And so (my friend) farewell, Lord shield thee from annoy,
"And grant us all that we may meet with Christ in perfectioy Amen.
Lord Jesus Christ, the praise be thine:
For blessing of this work of mine.
Anna Dowriche,

Give God the praise.
Verity purtraied by the French Pilgrim.


FRom Seat supernall of celestial Jove
Descended Truth, deuoid of worldly weed;
And with the brightness of her beams she strove
Against Satan, Sin, and Adams fleshly Seed;
Reproouing wrongs, bewailing worldlings need;
Who think they swim in wealth (blinded by guile):
Yet wanting Truth; are wretched, poor and vile.
The World reproou'd; in rage attempts her wrack,
Satan assists, malicious Men devise
Torments for Truth, bind scourges at her back,
Exclaim against her with blasphemous cries;
Condemning her, exalting earthly lies:
Yet no despite or pain can cause her cease;
She wounded, springs; bedeckt with crown of Peace.
FINIS.

