VARIETY OF LVTE-lessons: Viz. Fantasies, Pauins, Galliards, Almaines,
Corantoes, and Volts: Selected out of the best approved AVTHORS, as well beyond
the Seas as of our own Country.

By Robert Douland.

Whereunto is annexed certain Observations belonging to LVTE-playing: By John
Baptisto Besardo of Visonti.

Also a short Treatise thereunto appertayning: By John Douland Batcheler of
MUSIC.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Adams. 1610.



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, WORTHY, AND VIRTUOUS Knight, Sir Thomas Mounson.
SIR, the grateful remembrance of your bounty to me, in part of my Education,
whilst my Father was absent from England, has embouldned me to present these
my first Labors to your worthiness, assuring my self that they being Musical
will be acceptable to the Patron of Music, and being only out of duty
Dedicated, you will daine to receive them as a poor Testimony of his
gratitude, who acknowledges himself for ever unable by his uttermost service
to merit your Favors. All that I can is to pray to Almighty God for the health
and prosperity of You and Yours, which I will never cease to do.

Your Worships in all duty, Robert Douland.

To the Readers whosoever.
GEntlemen: I am bold to present you with the first fruits of my Skill, which
albeit it may seem hereditarie unto me, my Father being a Lutenist, and well
known amongst you here in England, as in most parts of Christendom beside. I
am sure you are not ignorant of that old saying, Labor Deum omnia vendere: And
how perfection in any skill cannot be attained unto without the waste of many
years, much cost, and excessive labor and industry, which though I cannot
attribute to my self, being but young in years, I have adventured like a
desperate Soldier to thrust my self into the Vant-gard, and to pass the
Pikes of the sharpest Censures, but I trust without danger, because we find
it true in Nature that those who have loved the Father, will seldom hate the
Son. And not unlike in reason that I should distaste all, since my means and
helps of attaining what I have, have been extraordinary. Touching this I have
done, they are Collections gathered together with much labor out of the most
excellent Authors, as well of those beyond the Seas, as out of the works of
our own Countrymen. The Treatise of fingering I thought no scorn to borrow of
John Baptisto Besardo of Visonti, being a man generally known and honored for
his excellency in this kind. But whatsoever I have here done (until my
Father has finished his greater Work, touching the Art of Lute-playing,) I
refer it to your judicious censures, hoping that that love which you all
generally have borne unto him in times past, being now gray, and like the Swan,
but singing toward his end, you would continue the same to me his Son, who
in the mean time will consecrate my best endeavors at the shrine of your
favors, and shall ever remain obliged unto you for your courtesies to the
uttermost of my power.

Robert Douland.

Thomas Smith Gent: In Praise of the Work.
WHere Merit far surmounts the pitch of Praise,
The Good-worke there, transcends the reach of Words;
This Work is such: then good-words cannot raise
Their weight so high as these Heau'n-scaling Cords:
Then let their virtue their own glory raise,
Least it be said a Smith has forged their praise.
NECESSARY OBSERVATIONS BELONGING TO THE LVTE, AND LVTE-playing, by John
Baptisto Besardo of Visonti: with choice variety of LVTE-lessons, partly
Invented, and partly Collected out of the best AVTHORS, by Robert Douland, and
John Douland Batcheler of MUSIC.
Here thou have (gentle READER) a fashion of practicing on the LVTE, such as I
could gather out of the Observations of the famous and divine Laurencinus,
others, and mine own: comprehended in few rules, which I have here set out
with as much care and diligence as I possibly could, by which thou may more
easily obtain the right practice on the LVTE. Take therefore this work of
mine in good part, whosoever thou art that read it, with a mind to profit
thy self: yet think not I set it forth to the end to draw thee away from the
lively teaching of thy Master, (whose speech does far exceed all writing,)
or presume to teach those which are Masters in the ART these triuiall ways,
but I offer help to young beginners, and such as oftentimes want a Teacher,
which it will not be unpleasing for them to use, when they find themselves
wearied with those difficulties which lightly befall young learners. Neither
would I have thee think that in this I detract from the other, differing
ways, which other men do use, not unfitly, so that there be reason for them,
and an easy gracefulness in them. For a man may come to the same place diverse
ways; and that sweet Harmony of the LVTE (the habit whereof we do daily
affect with so great travail) may strike our ears with an ellegant delight,
though the hand be diversely applied. Yet know as I am free from all such
ambition, so, that I would with all my heart have given thee the habit and
power to play well, rather then the means of learning to play, if it were
possible to be had without labor.

Whosoever therefore will use these our rules, if he be wholly raw in the Art,
above all other things let him persuade himself, that the knowledge of this
ART though it be hard, yet it is easily to be obtained by him that is in this
sort conditioned. First, if he have no great defect, and have that natural
desire toward MUSIC, which has been the founder of excellency in every
ART; Secondly, if he stint himself in his learning with such labor and
exercise that is moderate, and continual, not such unreasonable pains as many
do weary themselves with: Thirdly, if he be patient for a good long time, for
commonly this brings us whether we will or no to the highest of the SCIENCES.
To these if he adioyne the industrious and lively instructions of a Teacher,
that is a good Artist, he cannot but hope for a reasonable habit in a short
time. If therefore thou shall be thus qualified and minded, and want a Teacher
(whom indeed I would rather wish thee.)

To choose a LVTE for a learner.
First and foremost choose a LVTE neither great nor small, but a midling one, such
as shall fit thine hand in thine own judgment. Yet I had rather thou did
practice at first on a LVTE that were somewhat greater and harder, unless thy
hand be very short: because that is good to stretch the sinews, which are in
no sort to be slackned. For there are which do sometimes without a LVTE
forceably pull and lengthen their fingers. Others there are that laying their
hand on a Table, or some like thing, do spread their fingers as broad as they
can possibly. Others there are that oftentimes anoint their fingers with oil
of Tartar. Though I know the use thereof is good to make a nimble hand; rather
by the often report of many others; then by any approved experience of mine
own. Howsoever, it is most necessary at least for the beginner to handle the
LVTE often, yet never but when thy Genius favors thee, that is, when thou
feel thy self inclyned to MUSIC: For there is a certain natural
disposition, for learning the ARTS naturally infused into us, and showing it in
us rather at one time then another, which if one will provoke by immoderate
labor, he shall fight against Nature. Therefore when thou shall find thy
self aptly disposed, and have time and opportunity, spare no pains, yet
keep this course.

What lesson to begin withal.
Choose one Lesson thy self according to thy capacity, which give not over by
looking over others, or straggling from one to another, till thou have got it
reasonably perfect, and do not only begin it by going through it to the end
at first sight, but examine each part of it diligently, and stay upon any one
point so long (though thou play it over a thousand times) till thou get it in
some sort. The like you shall do in all parts of the said Song, till you shall
find your self prettily seen in it. It will not little help you to get it
without book: for whilst the mind is busy searching here and there for that
which is written, the hand is more unapt to perform the Note, and all the
difficulty the LVTE has, which for the most part is imputed to the fingers,
should rather be attributed to the variety of the Rules, which are in this
respect to be observed, all which do rather depend upon the mind, then on the
hand.

And although most men do use themselves at the first to the hardest Lessons,
that afterward they may have the easier passage, yet would I not persuade
young beginners so, for fear least such difficulties should cause a loathing
in them, and consequently a giving over of their practice: but I had rather an
easier Lesson were set them at first, which is not intricate by reason of many
Gripes or stops (as you call them) and in displaying whereof one shall not
need to lay his fingers cross the neck of the LVTE. And this I would have
used until the hand be a little brought in ure. And in this Lesson I would not
have many or diverse changes of the Time: for I have known by experience that
this has been more hard to many then all the rest. Wherefore in taking such
Lessons be diligently careful in marking both your hands, which being they are
the chief and indeed the isntrumental parts of this practice, therefore for
the use of them take these precepts hereafter set down: beginning first with
the left hand, because that is as it were the mother of the Melody, the other
does unfold the Melody conceived, and so sounds it to our Ears.

For using of both hands together.
Wherefore take special heed, lest the right hand touch the Stringes before
the left hand stop them, and carry your left hand so in holding the neck of
the LVTE with a good grace, your thumb must be set upon the midst on the
back of the neck, which must likewise with the other fingers as they go up
and down upon the LVTE be gently moved and follow them the way they go. Now
if you would know with which finger every letter is to be stopped, first
enquire diligently whether the letter be it self alone, or joined with other
letters: For if it be alone, then this order must absolutely be kept. The first
Finger must serve to stop B, the second for C, the third and fourth for D.
always, so that the fourth finger serve the fifth or fourth string, and the
third finger the other strings, as for example: ^

But if the letters be set in Stoppes lower then D. then keeping the same order
with your fingers you must go lower with your hand, and that letter which
stands nearest the Bridge must be stopped with the little finger and the other
letters which are above with the other fingers, as you may see in these
examples: ^

And in this other. ^

Also if such letters singly placed beyond the fret D shall happen to be in
more strings then two (as for example in these Diminutions following) and no A
put amongst them, A Diminution is a Crochet, Quauer, etc.
they must be stopped with the forefinger laid over half the fret of that
letter which is nearest B, Of laying the finger cross fret.
or with the forefinger laid over the whole fret. The finger must be laid over
half the fret if the Diminution go no farther then three strings: over the
whole if you strike more or all the strings. This Rule will seem more plain
perhaps out of the examples which follow: An example, wherein the first finger
is to be laid over half the fret E. only in the three first strings, where A.
is none of the Letters.

^ An example, wherein the forefinger must be laid over all the strings in the
fret C.

^

In these examples you see the finger is laid over the letter which is nearest
B, the fourth finger stoppes that letter which is farthest from B, the other
fingers stop the middle frets in their order.

But if the letter that we doubt of, be placed not alone but with one or more
other letters, which conjunction we for this time will call a griffe, then the
difficulty is greater, neither can any thing certainly be prescribed in this
case, but that which use and custom does teach us, yet so far as I can I
will provide that thou shall not be destitute of help. For Griping of stops in
B.
First, keep this rule, that how often soever two Bs happen to be on two strings
which stand close together, let them be stopped together with the top of the
finger. Yet understand this only of the first, second or third stringe: for if
two Bs stand together in the other stringes (namely the Base stringes) then
they must be stopped not with the top of the first finger, but with the same
finger laid over the whole fret.

The second Rule is, that whenever two Bs are sounded on two Strings, that
are not close together, but have the Letter A, betwixt them or more Letters,
then let such Bs be stopped with the forefinger, and second finger.

The third Rule is, that whenever the said Bs shall happen to be on two or
more strings, betwixt which is no A, but some other Letter, or a line or more
vacant: wherein afterward some other Letter then A shall be set, then the
forefinger must be laid over the stop B. Let these examples serve for all the
parts of this Rule. ^

And because it is impossible to set down in writing particularly all these
things, which we shall find by daily use, necessary to concern this Chapter,
I have placed here certain of the common griffes or stops, wherein are one B
or many, which must be stopped either laying the finger flat over the Fret, or
otherwise, which you may easily perceive, if they be written together in more
places then two, in such form as you see them here marked. ^

Where mark that the finger must be laid cross the Fret often; nay, very
oftentimes, (though you find but one Letter of a kind in that Fret,) that the
other may be the swiftlier stopped, which cannot by any certain Rule but only
by use be learned. And know besides the same griffes the Letters differ not,
yet are not stopped always after the same sort, by reason of former or
subsequent stops, which thing thou must diligently mark. For the letter C I
think there is no less controversy about it: for some men do stop two Cs in
the same Fret: when no Letter but A goes with them, with the second and third
finger very elegantly: I always stop it with the first and second finger,
unless it happen that B be in the same griffe, for then of necessity must the
two Cs be stopped with the second and third fingers. But if the said two Cs,
and with them other letters then A, you must lay your finger cross the fret,
though not always yet most an end, if those letters be under C which otherwise
should according to the Rule be stopped with the second finger, unless it
chance that after the griffe wherein it is played, another C follows
immediately in some other string: Because to the end the first, namely, the
Letter which is set in some Base may the better be held, it must needs be
stopped with the first finger. And this shall suffice for the Letter C: more
and more certain Rules you shall gather by use and practice, yet have I set
down some examples, lest the obscurenesse of these things I have delivered
might hinder thee. ^

And many other besides which must be done in this manner.

For the Letter D, I said before it must be stopped with the third and fourth
fingers: therefore the Rule will hold in my opinion, whether two Ds being in
one stop have no other Letter betwixt them; or have one Letter or more betwixt
them: yet thus that the D on the less strings be stopped with the fourth
finger, and the D on the great strings, with the third finger: and if happily
three Ds come together, you may for the most part use the second, third and
fourth fingers, or lay your finger cross the Fret, as those stops which go
before or follow will bear it: of this Rule let this also be an example. ^

The same order you may keep in the lower Frets, only in them for the most
part (and very often) were use to lay the finger cross the Fret for more
easiness.

Of Holding.
Therefore I will now speak of holding the fingers upon a string, which is in
this part very necessary: because nothing is more sweet, then when those parts
(the mothers of Harmony) are rightly combined, which cannot be if the fingers
be suddenly taken from the strings: for that voice perishes suddenly, when
the stopping thereof is ended. And besides, nothing is more uncomely, then to
have the left hand moved up and down often, and by that means to occasion too
much motion of the arm, which is with all care to be avoided. Besides, by
staying the fingers on a string you shall so easily run up and down upon the
neck of your LVTE at your pleasure, that the very handling of it, (after a
little labor and time patiently borne) will be no more troublesome to you then
a pleasant walk. Therefore keep your fingers in what strings soever you
strike, (especially when you strike the Base) whilst the other fingers are
stopping other stops, and remove them not till another Note come, which does
immediately fall upon another Base, or some other part. And if you may, hold
the Base and the Treble together, if there be certain middle Notes to be
expressed: but if you may not for want of more fingers, take away that finger
for the most part which stops the Treble: for it were better that Note perish
then a Base. Generally take this for a Rule, the fingers must not be taken from
the strings, without it be necessary: yet take heed whilst you play
Diminutions, that one Note give place to another, and be not held with the Note
following. Thus much for the staying of the fingers on a string, and of the
usage of the left hand, shall suffice for their use which are merely ignorant,
to be slightly spoken, whereof one cannot deliver such plain and certain
precepts, as he may of the right hand, the use whereof to my power I will now
set down.

For the use of the right hand.
First, set your little finger on the belly of the LVTE, not toward the Rose,
but a little lower, stretch out your Thombe with all the force you can,
especially if thy Thombe be short, so that the other fingers may be carried in
a manner of a fist, and let the Thombe be held higher then them, this in the
beginning will be hard. Yet they which have a short Thombe may imitate those
which strike the strings with the Thombe under the other fingers, which though
it be nothing so elegant, yet to them it will be more easy.

Now choosing one of these kinds, learn first to strike the strings more hard
and clear, whether they be one or more that are to be stricken: and that you
may strike them with the right fingers, mark whether one string or more
strings then one are to be stricken: if more then one, keep this rule, let two
strings which stand close together be stricken with the Thombe and fore-fingers:
if two strings be distant one from another so that there be one or two strings
betwixt them, strike them with the Thombe and middle finger: strike also three
strings, with the Thombe, the forefinger and middle finger: four strings with
all the other fingers (excepting the little finger,) if more be to be stricken
(as often there be) keeping the same order with your fingers, let the Thombe and
the forefinger strike each of them two strings, if so many be to be stricken.

To know how to strike single strings, being found amongst full stops.
Now that you may know with which finger you must strike those notes which are
found alone without the Griffes, examine diligently the measure that each has
to it allotted, and if a letter be set immediately after any Griffe, which
letter is of the same measure with the Griffe, then when you have played that
Griffe, you must needs begin the Note following with your forefinger at all
times, and afterward use the Thombe if you meet a third note, and so go
forwards by degrees, keeping such order with the Thombe and forefinger, so
that as long as you play in that measure you begin nothing with the thombe
twice together, nor follow with the forefinger twice together, till you come
to a letter or Griffe where the measure chaunges; which letter (if it were
alone) must needs be stroke with the Thombe at all times. But if after the
griffe you find a Note which has over it any change of time, then having
played that Griffe, begin the Note following with the Thombe, staying a while
upon the said Griffe or Note going before, as the nature of the time shall
require. Yet fails that rule when the time going before has a prick put to
it: for then it must be precisely observed, that after (which has a prick
adjoined) the Note following though it be measured with a new measure, must be
struck with the forefinger, and the other notes with the thombe and
forefinger, one after another. Yet is theran exception in this exception: for
when you find a Griffe measured with a prick, as for example ^ and there
follow it many Notes, the first whereof is ^, or if you meet with such a one ^
and after it such a one ^, although the measure with a prick do go before,
yet must that which follows, contrary to this rule, begin with the Thombe.
For example of this Rule and other things which I have formerly propounded, let
this suffice: for the better understanding whereof, note that the letters which
you shall find without a prick added to them, must be stroke with the right
hand Thombe: Wherefore the numbers before the letters serves.
those which have a prick set by them or under them, with the forefinger, the
other numbers do show the application of other letters played together: the
number of 2. signifies the middle finger: the number of 3. the next finger.
The Example of the first Rule.

^ Example of the second Rule. Example of the third Rule. Example of the fourth
Rule.

^ An Example of an exception from the fourth Rule.

^

These things being well observed, Of playing with the two fingers.
know that the two first fingers may be used in Diminutions very well instead
of the Thombe and the forefinger, if they be placed with some Bases, so that
the middle finger be in place of the Thombe, which Thombe whilst it is occupied
in striking at least the Bases, both the hands will be graced, and that unmanly
motion of the Arm (which many cannot so well avoid) shall be shunned. But if
with the said Diminutions there be not set Bases which are to be stopped, I
will not counsel you to use the two first fingers, but rather the Thombe and
the forefinger: neither will I wish you to use the two fore-fingers, if you be
to proceed (that is to run) into the fourth, fifth or sixth string with
Diminutions set also with some parts. A good Note.
Besides you shall know that low letters placed in the Bases, from the fourth
Chorus to the ninth, if they be noted with this time ^ may more fitly, nay must
all be struck with the Thombe, and most commonly so they are stricken, although
this time ^ be put to them, as you shall more easily see in the example
following: ^

I could wish you take as much pains in marking the Measures, as in the other
former rules, especially if you be a beginner be not too hasty in handling the
LVTE, for I dare promise you faithfully and without deceit, that nothing is
more fit to second this business then patience in the beginning: for nothing
can be gotten in an instant, and you must not think to play your lessons
presently at first fight, for that is impossible. Wherefore take no other care
but only to strike all the Griffes and Notes that are in the middle betwixt
them well and plainly, though slowly: for within a while, whether you will or
no, you will get a habit of swiftness. Neither can you get that clear
expressing of Notes, unless you do use your self to that in the beginning:
which clean delivery every man that favors Music, does far prefer
before all the swiftness and unreasonable noise that can be. This more I will
tell you, you must be careful when you begin to learn to carry your body
comely, and the right hand stedely. Some there be that bind their right hand
with a napkin or girdle whilst they play upon the LVTE, that they may seem to
move nothing but their fingers and joints, which you must use so that in
running they may seem scarcely to be moved: in like sort must you use the
Thombe and the forefinger.

You should have some rules for the sweet relishes and shakes if they could be
expressed here, as they are on the LVTE: but seeing they cannot by speech or
writing be expressed, thou were best to imitate some cunning player, or get
them by thine own practice, only take heed, least in making too many shakes
thou hinder the perfection of the Notes. In sum, if you affect biting sounds,
as some men call them, which may very well be used, yet use them not in your
running, and use them not at all but when you judge them decent.

Take this for a farewell: that this divine Art, which at this time is by so
great men followed, ought to be used by thee with that great gracefulness
which is fit for learned men to use, and with a kind of majesty: yea, so that
thou have any skill in it be not ashamed at the request of honest friends to
show thy cunning: but if thou chancest to get an habit of perfection, profane
not the Goddess, with making thy self cheap for a slight gain.

I have set down no rules* for transposing out of Music to the Scale of the
LVTE, because you have that delivered in the most elegant field of Emanuel
Adrianus, an excellent Musician, and in many other Books. Therefore take in
good part this one Method of practicing on the LVTE howsoever it be: composed
in such sort as an ingenious man, and one that professes another Art could
attain unto: receive it I say with as kind a heart as I offer it with, and so
I shall be ready hereafter to furnish thee with some other work of mine own
more serious. Farewell.

FINIS.
OTHER NECESSARY Observations belonging to the LVTE, By JOHN DOVLAND, Batcheler
of Music.
For Choosing of Lute-strings.
WHen we take in hand to instruct or teach a man on the LVTE, we do suppose
that he knows before (be he never so rude) what a String, a Fret, a Stop, a
Stroke, etc. means: therefore it were not convenient for a Teacher to stand
upon every small point and matter that may be thought appertayning to the Art
of Lute-playing, but to leave and let pass over some things, as apparent of
themselves, or easy to be discerned of every learner, by Nature, Sense,
Reason, or common Experience, and therefore we will only entreat and give
resolution of those things which are most needful: of which choosing of
Lute-strings is not the least, Ordinarily therefore we choose Lute-strings by
the freshness, or new making: the which appears unto us by their clear and
oylinesse, as they lie in the Box or bundle; yet herein we are often deceived,
for Oil at any time will make strings look clear, and therefore this trick
is too too commonly used to them when they are old.

Now because Trebles are the principal strings we need to get, choose them
of a fair and clear whitish gray, or ash color, and take one of the knots in
your hand, but let it not be too small, for those give no sound, besides they
will be either rotten for lack of substance, or extreme false. Also open the
boutes of one of the ends of the Knot, and then hold it up against the light,
and look that it be round and smooth: but if you discern it to be curlie, as
the thread of a curled Cypris, or horse hair, (which you may as well feel as
see) then refuse them, although they be both clear and strong, because those
strings were not well twisted, and therefore will never be true on the
Instrument. For trying the strength of these strings, some do set the top of
their fore or middle finger on one of the ends of the Knot, which if they find
stiff, they hold them then as good; but if it bend as we say, through a
dankish weakness, then they are not strong. Some again do take the end of
the string between their teeth, and then pluck it, and thereby if it break
faseld at the end, then it is strong, but if it break stubbed then it is
weak. This Rule also is houlden for the breaking of a string between the
hands. The best way, is to pluck out an end of the string (if the seller will
suffer you, if he will not assure your self that those strings which he
shows you are old or mingled,) and then look for the cleernesse and faults
before spoken, as also for faseling with little hayres. And again look
amongst the boutes, at one end of the Knot, that the string be not parted, I
mean one piece great and another small, then draw it hard between your hands,
to try the strength, which done, hold it up again against the light between
your hands, and mark whether it be clear as before; if it be not but look
muddie, as a brown thread, such strings are old, and have been rubbed over
with oil to make them clear. This choosing of strings is not alone for
Trebles, but also for small and great Means: greater strings though they be
old are better to be borne withal, so the color be good, but if they be
fresh and new they will be clear against the light, though their color be
blackish.

Now again some old strings will hold well the stretching between your
hands, yet when you set them on the Instrument they will stick, (and rise by
starts) in the Nut, and there break, even in the tuning: the best remedy when
the strings stick so, is to rub the little nickes of the Nut, (in which the
string slides) with a little Oil, Wax, or black lead. If you desire to choose
strings that are not false, that the maker cannot promise you; but there is a
rule for the knowledge thereof by sight after the string is drawn out, which
being it is so ordinary and so well known, I hold it not fit to trouble you
with the relation. Some strings there are which are colored, out of which
choose the lightest colors, viz. among Green choose the Seawater, of Red the
Carnation, and of Blew the Watcher.

Now these strings as they are of two sorts, viz. Great and Small: so either
sort is pact up in sundry kinds, to wit, the one sort of smaller strings
(which come from Rome and other parts of Italy) are bound up by certain Dozens
in bundels; these are very good if they be new, if not, their strength does
soon decay: the other sort are pact up in Boxes, and come out of Germany: of
these, those strings which come from Monnekin and Mildorpe, are and continue
the best. Likewise there is a kind of strings of a more fuller and larger sort
then ordinary (which we call Gansars.) These strings for the sizes of the great
and small Means, are very good, but the Trebles are not strong. Yet also there
is another sort of the smaller strings, which are made at Liuornia in Tuscanie:
these strings are rolled up round together, as if they were a company of horse
hayres. These are good if they be new, but they are but half Knots. Note there
is some store of these come hither lately, and are here made up, and pass for
whole Knots. For the greater sorts or Base strings, some are made at
Nurenburge, and also at Straesburge, and bound up only in knots like other
strings. These strings are excellent, if they be new, if not, they fall out
stark false. The best strings of this kind are double knots joined together,
and are made at Bologna in Lumbardie, and from thence are sent to Venice: from
which place they are transported to the Martes, and therefore commonly called
Venice Catlines. The best time for the Merchant is to provide his strings at
Michaelmas, for then the string-makers bring their best strings which were made
in the Summer to Franckford, and Lypzig Martes. Contrarily at Easter they bring
their Winter strings, which are not so good.

Of setting the right sizes of Strings upon the Lute.
FOR the well ordering and setting on the right sizes of strings upon the Lute,
the senses of Seeing and Feeling is required. Wherefore first have
consideration to the greatness or smalnesse of the Instrument, and thereby
proportionably size your strings, appointing for the bigger Lute the greater
strings, and for the lesser Lute the smaller strings, which being so thought
on, first set on your Trebles, which must be strayned neither too stiff not
too slack, but of such a reasonable height that they may deliver a pleasant
sound, and also (as Musitions call it) play too and fro after the strokes
thereon. Secondly, set on your Bases, in that place which you call the sixth
string, or G vt: these Bases must be both of one bigness, yet it has been a
general custom (although not so much used any where as here in England) to
set a small and a great string together, but amongst learned Musitions that
custom is left, as irregular to the rules of Music. But to our purpose:
these double Bases likewise must neither be stretched too hard, nor too weak,
but that they may according to your feeling in striking with your Thombe and
finger equally counterpoyse the Trebles, yielding from them a low or deep
sound, distant from the Trebles an Interuall called Disdiapason. Now the Base
being ordered, proceed to the Tenor, which strings must be so much smaller
then the Base, that they may reach a Diatessaron higher, that is, a fourth, or
to say better, four Notes higher: that being done, strike the Tenor with your
Thombe, and the Treble with your forefinger both together, and you shall hear
them sound the Interuall Diapason cum Diapente. Thus as the sounds increase in
height, so the strings must decrease in greatness. Likewise by the contrary,
for those Accessories, which are the seventh, eight and ninth string, etc.
keeping the former counterpeise, as if they were equal things waighed in an
even Balance.

Of fretting the Lute.
ALthough it may be thought we do not herein keep a good Decorum, because our
discourse is first of fretting the Lute, rather then of Tuning, which is most
commonly used: yet for that we mean this to Scholars, and not Masters
(seeing both these things are so needful) I have rather chosen this subject
first, hoping hereby to make the easier induction to Tuning: which part is not
the least, and of most desired, because between Fretting and Tuning there is
Simphonie by Antiphonie, that is to say, through the winding up and letting
down of the strings, an Accord rises from Discord, so as of contrary Notes is
composed a sweet Tune, which does concur and after a sort of meeting
together, bring forth by their agreement that sound which pleases the Ear.
Wherefore as that famous Master in Music Andreas Ornithoparcus, says in
lib. 1. cap. 3. of his Micrologus: a voice is compact of a Key and a Syllable:
even so here the sounds on the Lute, by which a Tenor of Notes may be
expressed) are compact of a stop and a stroke; whose distinction is showed by
Strings called of the ancient Musitions Pthongos, and also by Frets called
Nerui, Glarianus lib. 1. Dedocha. Now these frets of late years were but
seven in number, as witnesses Hans Gerle Lutenist, Citizen and Lute-maker of
Nurenburge, (for so he styles himself in his book of Tableture, printed
1533.) and so the seventh fret (according to the Monochord in the Diatonike
order) rested upon the Diapente. Yet presently after there was added an eight
fret: for my self was borne but thirty years after Hans Gerles book was
printed, and all the Lutes which I can remember used eight frets, and so ended
at the Semitonium cum Diapente.

But yet as Plautus says, Nature thirsting after knowledge, is always
desirous to invent and seek more, by the witty conceit (which I have seen,
and not altogether to be disalowed) of our most famous countriman Mr. Mathias
Mason Lutenist, and one of the Grooms of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Chamber, (as it has been told me,) invented three frets more, the which were
made of wood, and glued upon the belly, and from thence about some few years
after, by the French Nation, the necks of the Lutes were lengthned, and
thereby increased two frets more, so as all those Lutes which are most received
and disired, are of ten frets. Now to place these frets aright, whereby we
may make use of these various sounds by them caused, there is two ways: the
one is the divine sense of Hearing, which those that be skillful do most use,
and according to the opinion of the Stoiks, is a Spirit reaching from the
Understanding to the Ears, and thereby (after the Instrument is tuned open)
do set them in their order; yet as Caluisius in de initio and progressu
Musicis says, the sense of Hearing of all others deceives most, and cannot
discern and judge of the sounds in the smaller Interuals. To this agrees
Valla Placentinus in lib. 2. cap. 3. of his Music, wherein he writes that
those sounds must be censured and pondered with natural Instruments, and not
by the Ears, whose judgment is dull, but by wit and reason.

Now the certainty thereof was first sound out (as Petrus Comester in Historia
Scholastica says) by Iubals waighing of his brother Tubals Hammers: but most
Authors attribute this unto Pithagoras, (the son of Mnesarchus a Samian
borne) the first author of the name of Philosophy, who flourished in the time
of Cambices king of Persia, seauenty years after the captivity of Babylon
ended: when Tarquinius superbus the last King of the Romans reigned: more
then six hundred years after the destruction of Troy; and five hundred years
before the birth of Christ, and the manner of it was thus. Pithagoras searching
after a certain distance of Interuals, left the judgment of the Ears, and
went to the rules of Reason: for he would not give credit to man's Ears, which
are changed partly by Nature, partly by outward accidents: as for example, let
a company of Lutenists, Violists, etc. which be skillful, play each after
other, and you see every one as the Instrument comes to him, Tune according
to the judgment of his own Ear. Besides, Pithagoras was given to no
Instruments, amongst which commonly there grows much variety and
uncertainty, being that even now if you will regard the strings, the Air
being moist dulles their sound, or dry, makes them dry, or by some other
accident does change the state of their former constancy. Now being all other
Instruments were subject to the same, he accounting all these things to be of
no weight nor truth, did with great toil study a long time how he might
learn the firm and constant course of Concords. Mean while (as God would
have it) passing by the Smith shops, he heard the beating of their Hammers,
and that of diverse sounds there was as it were one consent. Wherefore amazed at
this, he set to that work which he had long intented, and pondering long
thought that the strength of the strikers did make the diversity of the
sounds: which that it might be more evident unto him, he bad them change
hammers, but the property of the sounds was not in the Arms of the strikers,
but in the hammers which were changed: wherefore marking that, he takes the
weight of the hammers, and being by chance there five hammers, they were found
to be duple in weight, which answered themselves, according to the concord of a
Diapason, and that which was duple to the least, he found to be a Sesquitertia
to another, to whom it sounded a Diatessaron. And again he found that the
same duple was a Sesquialter to that, with which it was joined in a Diapente
concord. Now those two, to whom the former duple was proved to be a
Sesquitertius and Sesquialter, were found to keep a Sesquioctaua proportion
one with another betwixt themselves: and the fifth hammer which was a discord to
all of them was rejected. Whereas therefore before Pithagoras his time, the
Musical concords were called partly Diapason, partly Diapente, and partly
Diatessaron, which was thought the least of all Concords. Wherefore Pithagoras
was the first that by this means found out by what proportion this diversity
of sounds was joined together.

And to make that which is spoken more plain, let there be for examples sake
of hammers four waights, which let be comprehended in the numbers
underwritten, 12.9.8. and 6. Those hammers which weigh 12. and 6. pounds, did
strike a Diapason, or eight Concord in the duple the hammer that waighed 12. to
the hammer of 9. pound weight, and farther the hammer of 8. pound, to the
hammer of 6. pound, according to the Sesquitertia proportion, were joined in a
Concord of a fourth, or in a Diatessaron: then the 9. pound hammer to that of
6. and of 12. to 8. did mingle a fifth or Diapente, in the Sesquialtera
proportion. Again, the hammer of 9. to that of 8. did sound in a Sesquioctaua
proportion. Wherefore returning back again from hence, and searching by
manifold trials, whether the whole nature of Concords did consist in these
proportions, and so fitting the waights (which answered the late found
proportions) to strings, he judged of their Concords by his Ear. Then
ouerseeing the doubleness and half of the strings length, and fitting the
other proportions, he gat a most true rule out of his manifold experience, and
was exceedingly ioyed that he had found that which in all things answered with
the truth: hitherto are Boethius his words.

Thus the Interuals being found out by weight and number, we will endeavor to
set them down by measure: whereby the ignorant may perceive by this undivided
Trinity, that the finger of God framed Music, when his Word made the World.
Wherefore take a thin flat ruler of whitish wood, and make it just as long
and straight as from the inward side of the Nut to the inward side of the
Bridge, then note that end which you mean to the Bridge with some small mark,
and the other end with the letter A. because you may know which belongs to
the one and to the other: then lay the ruler upon a Table, and take a pair of
compasses and seek out the just middle of the Ruler: that note with a prick,
and set the letter N. upon it, which is a Diapason from the A. as appears by
the striking of the string open. Secondly, part the distances from N. to D. in
three parts, then the first part gives you the seventh fret from the Nut,
making a Diapente: in that place also set a prick, and upon it the letter H.
Thirdly, divide the distance from the letter H. to the letter A. in eleauen
parts: two of which parts from A. gives the first fret, note that with a
prick, and set the letter B. thereon, which makes a Semitone. Fourthly,
divide the distance from H. to the letter A. in three parts, one of which parts
from A. upward shows the second fret, note that with a prick, and set the
letter C. upon it, which makes a whole Tone from A. Fifthly, divide the
distance from N. to A. into two parts, there the first part shows you the
first fret, sounding a Diatessaron: in that place also set a prick, and upon
it the letter F. The sixth fret which is a G. must be placed just in the midst
betwixt F. and H. which makes a Semidiapente. Seventhly, divide the distance
from the letter B. to A. in three parts, which being done, measure from the B.
upwards four times and an half, and that will give you the third fret,
sounding a Semiditone: mark that also with a prick, and set thereon the letter
D. then set the fourth fret just in the middle, the which will be a perfect
ditone: then take one third part from B. to the Bridge, and that third part
from B. makes I. which sounds Semitonium cum Diapente, then take a third
part from the Bridge to C. and that third part makes E. which sounds Tonus
cum diapente, or an Hexachordo mayor. Then take one third part from D. to the
Bridge, and that third part from D. makes L. which sounds Ditonus cum
Diapente. Now take your LVTE, and lay it upon a Table upright, and set the
Ruler edgewise, between the nut and the bridge, and thereby set little marks
upon the neck of the Instrument even with those on the ruler, because those
are the places on which your frets must stand.

Thus have you the perfect placing of your ten frets, which takes away that
scruple by which many are deceived, when they say the frets are false. Note
here also, we do not try the frets, as we try the strings: but (now knowing
their places) size them rightly, for which any kind of string will serve, I
mean whether they be true or false, new or old, only take heed that you set
not a great fret where a small one should be, and so by contrary: for every
fret does serve as a Magade: therefore do this; let the two first frets
nearest the head of the Instrument (being the greatest) be of the size of your
Countertenor, then the third and fourth frets must be of the size of your great
Means: the fifth and sixth frets of the size of your small Means: and all the
rest sized with Trebles. These rules serve also for Viols, or any other kind
of Instrument whereon frets are tied.

Of Tuning the Lute.
BEing there is such Symphonie by Antiphonie, which proceeds through the
winding up and letting down of the strings, as is abouesaid, and therein
affirmed by Plutarch, to be one kind of wisdom, which (says he) is called
MUSIC. I wish those who assume unto themselves the name of Master, (by
instructing of others) to provide and find out some good and necessary rules
for the tuning of the LVTE, not only for their own ease, but also for the
Scholars present good, because it is most needful. Again, though the Master
be never so diligent, painful, and industrious, yet three things are required
in the Scholar, necessary for the obtaining, thereof, viz. Nature, Reason, and
Use: because this Harmony depends of Science and humane Art, which the
understanding retains by Musical habit. And from hence it is, that in
MUSIC not only the sense, but also understanding is weakened. Wherefore I
exhort all Practitioners on this Instrument to the learning of their
Pricke-song, also to understand the Elements and Principles of that knowledge,
as an especial great help, and excellent worker in this Science, and soon
attained, if the Teacher be skillful to instruct aright: for which purpose I
did lately set forth the Work of that most learned Andreas Ornithoparcus his
Micrologus, in the English tongue Also the duty of the Lute-master is to teach
them the G vt upon the Instrument, that thereby they may both discern those
degrees which are continual, and also those discreet Interuals, which belong
to the tuning of an Instrument. Now this intellect appears unto us commonly
by the subtle sense of Hearing (which is of so great price, that Plotinus, the
chief of the Platonicall family, makes it like the beauty of the Soul.)
For which cause, some have set forth Rules to approve the agreement of Concords
by Unisons and Octaues, which indeed is true, when the Instrument is tuned,
but by what order those strings must be let up or down, to show the finding
out thereof, I have not seen declared by any. Therefore according to mine own
experience: first, let the Scholar practice to set every one of the paires in
an unison, which being well understood: Secondly, let him tune his Bases and
one of his Tenors in the Unison: Thirdly, let him raise the sounds of the Base,
by stopping thereon, and then make the Tenor sound open, to that sound which
was stopped in the Base: this rule must be followed between the Base and the
Tenor until the Tenor be in the Unison with the Base in the letter F: and then
tune both the Tenors together, but, suppose you have tuned your Tenor too high,
then you shall find it in some of those places above the F, as in G, H, etc.
Wherefore let it down again to F. This same course must be kept through out,
only excepting between the Contratenor and the great Mean, in which the same
course above said must be used, that the great Mean may be in the Unison with
E in the Contratenor, and so by this use the LVTE being tuned, you shall hear
these Interuals or spaces in the table underneath, and very quickly learn to
tune the LVTE by your ear, without stopping, and also place the frets
according to the general custom.



Fantasies for the Lute.
Fantasy. 1
Composed by the most famous Diomedes of Venice: Lutenist to the high and
mighty Sigismundus, 2o. King of Poland.
^ ^

Fantasy. 2
Composed by the most famous, the KNIGHT of the Lute.
^ ^

Fantasy. 3
Composed by the most famous Iacobus Reis of Augusta: Lutenist to the most
mighty and victorious Henricus 4. French King.
^ ^

Fantasy. 4
Composed by the most famous and divine Laurencini of Rome.
^ ^

Fantasy. 5
Composed by the most Artificial and famous, Alfonso Ferrabosco of Bologna.
^ ^

Fantasy. 5
Composed by the most famous Gregorio Huwet of Antwerpe: Lutenist to the most
high and mighty Henericus Julius, Duke of Brunswicke, etc.
^ ^

Fantasy. 7
Composed by John Douland, Batchelar of Music.
^ ^ ^

Here ends the Fantasies.
Pauins for the Lute.
Pauin. 1
Here begins the Pauins: of which the first was made by the most magnificent
and famous Prince Mauritius, Landgraue of Hessen, and from him sent to my
Father, with this inscription following, and written with his GRACES own hand:
Mauritius Landgrauius Hessiae fecit in honorem Ioanni Doulandi Anglorum Orphei.

^ ^

Pauin. 2
Composed by the most famous and perfect Artist Anthony Holborne, Gentleman
Usher to the most Sacred Elizabeth, late Queen of England, etc.
^

Pauin. 3
Composed by the most excellent Musition Thomas Morley Batcheler of Music,
and Organist in the Chapel of the most Sacred Elizabeth, late Queen of
England, etc.
^

Pauin. 4
Composed by the right perfect Musition Daniell Batchelar: one of the Grooms
of her Majesty's Privy Chamber.
^ ^

Pauin. 5 Sir John Langton his Pauin.
Composed by John Douland Batcheler of Music.
^ ^ ^

Pauin. 6
Composed by the most Artificial and famous Alfonso Ferrabosco of Bologna.
^ ^

Pauin. 7 Sir Tho. Monson his Pauin.
Composed by Robert Douland.
^ ^

Here ends the Pauins.
Galliards for the Lute.
Galliard. 1
Here begins the Galliards: the first whereof is commonly known by the name
of the most high and mighty Christianus the fourth King of Denmark, his
Galliard.
^ ^

Galliard. 2
The most sacred Queen Elizabeth, her Galliard.
^

Galliard 3
The Right Honorable Robert Earl of Essex, high Marshall of England, his
Galliard.
^

Galliard. 4
The Right Honorable Ferdinando Earl of Darby, his Galliard.
^

Galliard. 5
The Right Honorable the Lady Rich, her Galliard.
^

Galliard. 6
The Right Honorable the Lady Cliftons Spirit.
^ ^

Galliard. 7
Sir Thomas Monson his Galliard.
^ ^

Here ends the Galliards.
Almaines for the Lute.
Almaine. 1
Here begins the Almaines: the first whereof is commonly known by the name
of Mounsiers Almaine.
^ ^ ^ ^

Sir Henry Guilforde his Almaine.
^

The first of the Queens Maskes.
^

The second of the Queens Maskes.
^ ^

The last of the Queens Maskes.
^

The Witches dance in the Queens Mask.
^

Sir John Smith his Almaine.
^ ^

Here ends the Almaines.
Corantoes for the Lute.
Coranto. 1
Here begins the Corantoes: the first whereof is commonly known by the name
of Mounsier Ballard his Coranto.
^

Coranto. 2
John Perrithon his Coranto.
^

Coranto. 3
^

Mounsier Saman his Coranto.
Coranto. 4
^

Mounsier Saman.
Coranto. 5
^

Coranto. 6
^

Coranto. 7
^

Here ends the Corantoes.
Voltes for the Lute.
Here begins the Voltes.
Volt. 1
^

Volt 2
^

Volt. 3
^

Volt. 4
^

Volt 5
^ ^

Volt. 6
^

Volt 7
^

FINIS.

