A FUNERAL SERMON PREACHED AT WATTON IN Hertfordshire, at the burial of the
ancient and worthy Knight, Sir PHILIP BOTELER, December. 9. 1606.

By G. Downame Doctor in Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by FILIX KYNGSTON and Martin Clarke. 1607.

A FUNERAL SERMON, PREACHED at Walton in Hertfordshire, at the burial of the
ancient and worthy Knight, Sir Philip Boteler, December. 9. 1606.
REVEL. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from thenceforth: ^ea, says he spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow with then.
THE holy Ghost having in the former chapter from The context, and coherence.
the II. verse to the end, described Antichrist, (as all Bellarm. de Pontif.
Romans lib. 3. cap. 10.
do agree) and having in the 8. verse of this chapter foretold the ^uine of
the Antichristian sear signified ^y the fall of Babylon, which was to follow
upon the preaching of the eternal Gospel foreshewed verse. 7: he endeavors
in the verses following even unto the end of this text, by two most forcible
arguments to draw men out of Babylon, and to withdraw them from Antichrist: the
one, importing those fearful punishments, which shall befall them, who after
the revelation of Antichrist by the preaching of the Gospel, shall join
themselves unto him: the other, expressing the happy estate of those, who not
suffering themselves to be seduced by Antichrist, do die in the true faith of
Christ. The former argument is propounded verse. 9. 10. 11. If any ^an (says
he) worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark on his forehead,
(...) upon his hand, that is, (as I have euidenty proved in my treatise of
Antichrist, vhereunto for brevity sake I do now refer you) whosoever lives
and dies a re^lute and absolute Papist, acknowledging the Popes supremacy,
professing the Antichristian faith, and practicing the Idol^tries and
superstitions of the apostatic^ Church of Rome; He shall drink of t^ wine of
Gods wrath, yea, of the pure wine powered (that is prepared to be drunk) in the
cup of his wrath, whereby is meant everlasting damnation, prepared for the
wicked, wherein judgment not to be allaied with mercy, shall be executed
upon them. Which judgment, for the greatness is most horrible, for they shall
be tormented in fire and brimstone: for continuance is not only without end,
for the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore, but also without
intermission, for they shall have no rest day nor night.

And lest any man should think it hard, that men being either terrified by the
cruelty of Antichrist, or seduced by his craft, to join with him, shall
everlastingly be tormented in fire and brimstone: the holy Ghost preuenteth
this objection, verse. 12. Hereby (says he) the patience of the Saints is
tried, and here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus discerned. For howsoever the unsound Christian may be perverted by
Antichrist: yet it is impossible (says our Savior) that the elect should
finally be seduced by him: Matthew. 24. 24. By this argument therefore men are to
be persuaded, as they tender the salvation of their souls, so to beware that
they do not incline to Popery; or if they be Papists already, to come out of
Revel. 18. 4
Babylon, as they are exhorted Reave. 18 4. For as Chrysostom rightly observes
on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Antichrist prevails in In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
them that perish; or as Jerome speaks, in them who are prepared unto
destruction. Ad Algas. Quaest. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. 12.
Upon whom (says the Apostle) because they have not received the love of the
truth that they might be saved, the Lord sends the efficacy of error, that
they may believe lies; that all they might be damned which believe not the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness: whereby he means the mystery of
iniquity, which is Antichristianisme, that is to say, Popery.

The other argument expressing the blessed estate of those that die, not in the
religion of Antichrist (which the Papists do) but in the true says of Christ,
opposed to the religion of Antichrist, and professed in the Churches, which are
reformed by the preaching of the eternal Gospel, is contained in these word^
which I have read unto you. And therefore as the former reason must (if we
would not be damned) dissuade us from Popery; so this argument must persuade
us, if we would be saved, to be sincere and constant professors of the true
faith of Christ, which by the unspeakable mercy of God toward us, is
professed among us. For if we shall live and die in this faith as true and
sound professors thereof, (as our hope is this worthy Knight did) then shall
our estate, so soon as this life is ended, be most happy and blessed, as the
holy Ghost does assure us in this text. Wherein (that The text analyzed.
I may now come to the words themselves) the present felicity of all those
that die in the Lord, is not only affirmed, viz. in these words, Bles^ are the
dead, which die in the Lord from thenceforth, but also confirmed and proved,
both by authority and reason. The authority is, first, a voice from heaven,
not only auouching this truth, but also commanding John to write it. Secondly,
the testimony of the spirit: Even so, says the spirit. The reason why those
which die in the Lord are presently happy, is, because they rest from their
labors and molestations, and their works (meaning the blessed reward of their
works) follow with, or accompany them. As if he should have said, They which
die in the Lord are forthwith happy, because death to them is the end of all
misery and trouble, and the beginning of everlasting happiness.

Now whereas the holy Ghost does not only deliver this assertion, that the
dead which die in the Lord are blessed, but is so careful to countenance and
prove the same unto us, and well are we to be assured, that his care is not
superfluous; this is therefore an evident token, that men commonly in the world
be of another opinion, which is the cause why the holy Ghost saw it needful
not only to deliver this truth, but also to ratify and confirm it.

For first, men commonly account it a miserable thing to die; and naturally are
so affraide of death, as to save their lives they will not stick to commit any
sin almost, as to deny Christ and his religion, and to join with
Antichrist, and by their sin to cast away their precious souls, which they
would not do, if they could be persuaded, that death brings happiness with it.

Again, to die in the Lord, as it is here understood with opposition, and not
in the subjection and faith of Antichrist; not in the communion of the now
apostaticall Church of Rome; of the Papists, who falsely term themselves
Catholics, is counted a damnable thing; of the carnal and backsliding
Gospellers, a more miserable thing, than to live in the says and subjection of
Antichrist. That therefore we may die willingly when God shall call us, and
may be ready to lay down our lives for the testimony of the truth, rather
than to yield to Antichrist, and generally may be more afraid to commit sin,
than to suffer death; let us remember what the holy Ghost says, that blessed
are those which die in the Lord. And let us consider, that this assertion is no
humane invention, or earthly device, but a divine and heavenly oracle. For so
says John, I heard a voice from heaven. Many will say, If I might hear an
Angel from heaven tell me that which you Ministers do teach us, as namely
that to die in the Lord is an happy thing, assuredly I would believe it. If
from heaven it were testified unto me, that it is a blessed thing to die, not
in the faith and communion of the Romish Church, but in the faith of Christ
professed in the Churches reformed by the preaching of the Gospel, I would
rather die than join with the Church of Rome. And yet behold, this truth is
not only avouched by a voice from heaven, but also that (as Peter speaks in
the like case) we might have (...), a more firm word, which is the written 2.
Pet. 1. 19.
word, it is by the commandment of God from heaven committed to writing, as
containing words faithful and Revel. 21. 5.
true; and being spoken and written, has the testimony of the spirit, that it
is the undoubted word of God. Such is the credit of the written word, that if
an Angel from heaven should gainsay it, he Galat. 1. 8.
were to be held accursed, Gal. 1. 8. And he that will not give credit to the
written word, which is the most sure foundation of our faith; neither would he
believe, Luke 16. 31.
though an Angel should come from heaven, or a spirit from the dead. Satan 2.
Cor. 11. 14
can transform himself into an Angel of light, and take upon him the person
1. Sam. 28. 12.
of the dead: and therefore if we should trust to apparitions, we might soon
be deceived. But the word of God cannot deceive us. Seeing therefore this
assertion is pronounced by God from heaven, and at his appointment is committed
by the holy Evangelist to writing, and also has the testimony of the holy
Ghost, who is the spirit of truth: Let us therefore with all reverence and good
conscience hearken unto it as to the oracle of God, and with the full
persuasion of faith give unfeigned credit unto it, as unto the undoubted word of
the Lord; namely, that the dead which die in the Lord, are from thenceforth
blessed because they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

In which words three things are to be considered. First, who they are which be
here pronounced blessed. Secondly, what this blessedness is, and wherein it
does consist, which is showed in the reason, that they rest from their labors,
etc. Thirdly, when this blessedness belongs to them: (...), says he, from
thenceforth, that is, forthwith and immediately after their death, and so
forward.

As touching the first: Blessed (says he) are the dead. What? the dead
blessed? A strange paradoxe no doubt to hypocrites and worldly men, who have
placed their felicity in the fruition of temporal things, and put the day of
death far from them, fearing nothing more than to die, and hoping for nothing
less, than to be blessed after death. But let us remember that it is an oracle
of God delivered from heaven, and testified by the holy spirit. From hence
therefore let us learn truly to acknowledge the immortality of the soul, and
effectually believe, that there is a life immortal, after this mortal life is
ended. And in this belief let us be careful so to live, as that we may hope
after this life is ended, to be happy and blessed. Neither let us be so mad,
as for the momentanie fruition of temporal vanities in this vale of misery,
to lose an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom of heaven.

But he adds, which die in the Lord. For not all that are dead are blessed;
for many die out of the Lord Jesus and out of Gods favor, as those which
depart in the faith of Antichrist, or otherwise die in their sins, as in
ignorance, infidelity, impenitencie, etc. and they are so far from being
blessed when they die, as that by their death their misery is infinitely
increased. But they are blessed which die in the Lord. Which words some
understand as spoken of Martyrs only, and so read them, who die for the Lords
cause. And no doubt, if all they be blessed, who die in the Lord; much more may
we assure our selves, that they which do not only die in the Lord, but also
for him, are most happy and blessed. And this must encourage all true
Christians, as we are persuaded that the Lord has laid down his life for our
sakes; so to be most ready and willing to lay down our lives for his sake,
if it shall please the Lord to vouchsafe unto us both that honor, as to be the
Martyrs of Jesus; as also that favor, as to make our death and afflictions,
which otherwise all of us must look to suffer as chastisements for our sins,
to be sufferings for righteousness.

But yet not only such as die for the Lord, are here pronounced blessed; nor
all they are blesled, who would seem to die for the Lord, but all they and
only they who die in the Lord are blessed. For if any man dying for the
maintenance of heresy shall think he dies for the Lord, (as all in that case
are ready to pretend) notwithstanding he is not blessed, because he does not
die in the Lord. For none are in him, but such as truly believe in him, and
none truly believe in him, which do not love him and his members for his sake.
But they which die for heresy, as they do not truly believe in Christ, so do
they not truly love his members; but by their heresy cut themselves from the
body of Christ which is his true Church. For hs he that gives his body to
be burnt and has not love, 1. Cor. 13. 3.
(says the Apostle) so he that thinks himself to be martyred, and has not
true faith, it profits him nothing. And such is the state, as of all other
heretics, so especially of the Popish martyrs of these times, as they are
esteemed among the^. For besides that they do not die for their religion
properly, but for treason and rebellion, and it is not the punishment but the
cause that makes a Martyr; their religion also is Antichristian, being the
Caholike apostasy, the common sewre of heresy, and the very mystery of
iniquity. Neither do they die in the cause or faith of Christ, but in the
cause and faith of Antichrist; and therefore are the martyrs, not of Christ,
but of Antichrist. The truth whereof none can deny, if this once be proved
unto them, which by our writings is sufficiently proved, that Rome is Babylon,
the Pope Antichrist, and the Papists such as have received the mark of the
beast.

Therefore not only they which die for the Lord, nor all they who would seem to
die for him, but as I said, all they, and only they which die in the Lord, as
the words (...) do plainly signify, are here by the voice of God from
heaven, and by the testimony of the spirit pronounced blessed.

But let us consider who may be said to die in the Lord, for this is the most
material point in all this text. The like phrase is used 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. The
dead in Christ. 1. Cor. 15. 18. They which are a sleep in Christ. Which places
being understood of all the faithful, do cuidently prove, that this phrase is
not to be restrained to Martyrs only, but generally to be extended to all true
Christians. They therefore are said to die in Christ, who being in Christ, do
so and this life; or who being by a true says ingrafted into Christ, do in
that faith depart this life. So that to this happiness two things are required,
first that we be in Christ, for else we cannot be said to die in him; the
second, that we abide in him unto the end, for else we do not die in him.

But you will say, how can we be in Christ, seeing he is in heaven, and we on
the earth? I answer, whosoever truly believes in Christ, he is in Christ, and
being in him is blessed. Here therefore I am to show two things, 1. That the
faithful be in Christ, 2. That their being in him is the ground of their
happiness. For there every faithful man and woman is a true member of the
body of Christ, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and consequently they are in him, and he in them, they being in him by faith,
and he in them by his spirit. And they are not only in him, but also one with
him, according to his prayer, Ioh. 17. For as the body is one, and yet has
many members, and all the members though many are but one body, so is Christ.
For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, namely of Christ, and by
the same were all made to drink into one spirit, viz. of Christ; that is, by
the Spirit of Christ, we are in Baptism engrafted into the body of Christ, and
in the Lords Supper united to his Spirit. 1. Cor. 12. 12. 13. As therefore
there is an union betwixt the head of the natural body, and the members
thereof, which be most remote from it, by reason of the unity of the same
soul, which being chiefly seated in the head, quickneth also the feet; so is
it in the mystical body of Christ. For hereby, as S. John says, We know that
we dwell in Christ, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. This
therefore is my first reason: whosoever is in the body of Christ, he is in
Christ; every one that truly believes in Christ, is in the body of Christ, as
a lively member thereof: therefore every one that truly believes in Christ, is
in Christ. The like comparison our Savior uses, Ioh. 15. where he says that
he is the vine, and the faithful are as it were John 15. 2. etc.
branches in him. As the branches therefore be in the vine, so the faithful
are in Christ.

Again, the Sacraments serve to this end, to assure the faithful that they be
in 2
Christ. For by the one we are baptized into Christ, that is, by Baptism
ingrafted into him, Gal. 3. 27. in the other, we Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 27.
eat his body, and drink his blood which whosoever does, he is in Christ and
Christ in him, Ioh. 6. 56. both which Ioh. 6. 56.
are plainly testified by the Apostle i^ the place even now cited. For (says
h^ 1. Cor. 12. 13
by the same Spirit we are all baptis^ into one body, and made all to drink
into one spirit.

But what need I other proofs, seeing 3
the holy Ghost in the Scripture plainly affirms that the faithful be in
Christ? as 1. Cor. 1. 30. You (says the Apostle to the faithful) are of God
in Christ. And it 1. Cor. 1. 30.
is an usual thing in the Scriptures to term the faithful, such as be in
Christ, as Ephesians. 1. 1. Philip. 1. 1. Colos. 1. 2. to Ephesians. 1. 1. Philip. 1.
(...) Col. 1. 2. Romans (...). 1.
the faithful which be in Christ, to all the Saints in Christ, etc. In the 8.
to the Romans, when he would signify that the faithful are forced from
damnation, he says, There is no condemnation to them which he in Christ Jesus.
When he would signify that the faithful are also regenerate, he says,
Whosoever is in Christ, he 2. Cor. 5. 17.
is a new creature. And finally, as the faithful are here said to die in
Christ, so elsewhere they are said to live in him, and he in them: 2. Tim. 3.
12. Gal. 2. 20. 2. Tim. 3. 12 Gal. 2. 20.


The use which we are to make hereof, is twofold, the one of instruction, the
other of comfort. For seeing the faithful are in Christ, it behooves all them
who would seem to be true Christians, to behave themselves as becomes those
which are in Christ, governed and guided by his spirit according to his Word.
For this we are to know, that the offenses (I mean especially such as be
notorious offenses) of such as be, or would seem to be in Christ, do redound
to the dishonor of Christ our head. For as we seem to have communion with him
(which in sinful actions indeed we have not, but are then affected as members
of the natural body benumbed with the palsy, which though they have union
with their head, yet have not communion of sense and motion, derived to them
from the head) but I say as we seem to have communion with him; so we seem
to draw him into the communion and fellowship of our sin, which is horrible
to be thought. When as therefore we are incited or allured to the practice of
sin, let this consideration restrain us. For seeing we profess our selves,
our souls and bodies to be members of Christ, let us say with the Apostle,
Shall I take the member of Christ; and make it the member of a harlot? G^ 1.
Cor. 6. 15.
forbid. And so for other sins, shall I defile the member of Christ with
idolatry, and make it a member of Antichrist? or shall I pollute the member of
Christ, with drunkenness, with theft, with blood, with witchcraft, etc. and
make it (as much as in me lies) a limb of the devil? God forbid.

The comfort which all the faithful are from hence to reap, is that comfort
of all comforts, namely that they are in Christ; and consequently are so to
conceive of themselves, as being in Christ. I say again, that all they, who
embrace the mercies of God in Christ, and do lay hold upon him by a true and a
lively faith, are to be assured that they are in Christ: and consequently that
they are in the favor of God, and accepted of him in Christ as righteous, and
in Christ adopted as the children of GOD and heirs of eternal life. Many not
well considering this point, do greatly weaken the faith, either of others, or
their own. Of others, as namely they, who halting between us and the Papists,
do affirm, that whiles we consider the mercies of God and merits of Christ,
we have cause of assurance, as the Protestants teach; but when we look into
our selves, we have just cause to doubt according to the doctrine of the
Papists. But I answer, if we look into our selves, as we are in our selves,
considered a part from Christ; the best of us all shall have just cause, not
only to doubt, as the Papists teach, but also to despair. Yea, it were
presumption for a man in that case, to make but a doubtful matter of it. But
although we are to be humbled in the conceit of our own vileness, and are not
only to doubt, but also to despair of salvation in our selves, we being not
considered as in Christ: yet this hinders not, but that we may and ought to
be assured of saluatio^in Christ. For though we be sinful in our selves, yet
are we the righteousness of God in Christ: though in our selves we have broken
the law, and are therefore subject to the curse thereof; yet in Christ we have
fulfilled the law, and are freed Gal. 3. 13.
from the curse: though in our selves we are the children of wrath, and
servants Ephesians. 2. 3.
of sin; yet in Christ we are the children of God, and heirs of eternal
life. As John 1. 12. Romans 8. 16.
therefore the faithful most certainly be in Christ, so let them learn to
conceive of themselves as they be in Christ; that what cause soever they have
in themselves to doubt, they may in Christ assure themselves of their
justification and salvation. Many a one that indeed believes in Christ, does
himself wrong, by not thinking of himself, as he is in Christ. For the more
assured we are of Gods love in Christ, the more shall our heart be enflamed
with love toward God, and our brethren for his sake; the more zealous we shall
be of Gods glory, the more cheerful in his service. And that which is the
happiness of a Christian here we shall lead our lives Tit. 2. 13.
in the expectation of a better life. For the life, as it were, of this life
mortal, is the assurance of life immortal.

Thus you have heard that the faithful be in Christ, and the use which we are
to make thereof; now we are to show, that this being in Christ, is the ground
of our happiness. For it is not our living, nor our dying in it self, that
makes us happy; but our being in Christ whilst we live, makes us happy,
beatitudine viae, that is, with such a happiness as in this time of our
pilgrimage is incident unto us whilst we are in the way: and our being in
Christ, when we die, makes us happy, beatitudine patriae, that is, with
complete and eternal felicity, when we coming to the end of our way, do
arrive into the haven of rest, and heaven of bliss, which is the country and
kingdom, which the Lord has prepared for all those that be in Christ. Now that
our being in Christ is the ground of all our happiness, I show it thus. For
first, if we be not in Christ, we are in the state of damnation. And
contrariwise, the cause why any man is exempted from damnation, is, because he
is in Christ. There is no condemnation Romans 8. 1.
(says the Apostle) to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.

Secondly, If we be not in Christ, we are dead in our sins, neither can we
do any thing (being out of him) which belongs to a spiritual life. But being
in Ioh. 15. 4. 5.
him, we live in him, and he in us a spiritual Gal. 2. 20.
life which never shall have end. For as in the union of the body with the
soul, the bodily life consists: so in the union of the whole man with
Christ, consists our spiritual life. And as the 1. Ioh. 5. 12.
body severed from the soul, is dead; so the whole man severed from Christ,
1. Tim. 5. 6. Luke 9. 60.
is spiritually dead, how lively or cranke so ever he may seem to be, in
respect of the bodily life.

Thirdly, if we be out of Christ, we are altogether foolish in respect of
spiritual things: yea, our wisdom is ^mitie against God; we are in our serves
unjust Romans 8. 7.
and guilty of sin, unholy and defiled with manifold corruptions: and
laffly, in our selves are bondflaues of fin and Satan, but being in Christ, he
is made unto 1. Cor. 1. 30.
us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. For, being
in Christ, we have communion with him, and he with us. So that as our sin
was his by imputation, so is his obedience ours; he being made sin for us,
that we 2. Cor. 5. 21. Col. 1. 24. Act. 9. 4.
might be the righteousness of God in him. And as his sufferings be ours, so
ours be his. But we are not only made partakers of his merits to our
justification; but also being in him, we are made partakers of his graces unto
sanctification. For as the sacred oil being powered on the head of the high
Priest, who was a figure of Christ, rested not there, but descended to his
lower parts: so the oil Psalm. 123. 2.
of grace wherewith Christ our head was anointed without measure, is from him
derived to his members. For of his fulness we doc all receive, even grace for
grace: John 1. 16.
Ioh. 1. 16.

Fourthly, being in Christ, we have not only communion with him in respect of
his merits and efficacy; but also have union with him, in respect of his
person: we being made one with him, and he with us; from which union, the
asortsaid communion does proceed. And therefore in him, as our head, we may
truly be said to have fulfilled the law: in him, we have satisfied the justice
of God: And that which is more; in him, are we not only risen again, but
also are ascended into heaven, and set in the Ephesians. 2. 6.
heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6. And our life is hid with Christ in God
Col. 3. 3. Coloss. 3. 3.
Al which do argue the assurance, which the faithful ought to have, of their
justification, of resurrection unto glory, and of eternal life. For so long
as the head is above the waters, the other members cannot be drowned: so, while
our head is happy in heaven, the salvation of all his members is most sure and
certain.

Lastly, being in Christ, we are not only united unto him; but in him we are
also united to the whole Trinity; and 1. John. 3.
being united unto it, we shall have with it everlasting fellowship; in which
fellowship and fruition of God, perfect felicity does consist.

Thus have you heard, that the faithful are in Christ; and that all which be
in Christ, are happy and blessed. Now if we believe (as our duty is) this
undoubted truth; namely, that al which by faith are in Christ be blested; then
will we in our judgments esteem, and in our affections desire to be in
Christ, above all the things of this world. For what is our happiness, that is
esteemed and affected of us as our chiefest good? If therefore this be our
happiness, to be in Christ, then will we, with the Apostle, esteem all
other things as dross and dung, that Phil. 3. 8. 9.
having gained Christ, by a true faith, we may be found in him: and
accordingly will we give diligence, not only in using the means, whereby we
may believe and be in Christ: but also in gathering testimonies to assure us,
that we are in Christ by a true and lively faith.

The use therefore which we are to make of the former doctrine, concerning the
blessed estate of those which be in Christ by faith, is twofold. First, that
we labor to be in Christ: the second, that we labor to know that we are in
Christ. As touching the former, we are to perform two things. The first, that
we use the means to believe. Secondly, that we do believe. The ordinary
means of begetting faith is the ministry of the word. For as the Apostle
says, Faith comes by hearing the word: Romans 10. 17. and 14.
and again, How can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how
can they hear without a Preacher? For what are Preachers, but Ministers by
whom you do believe? 1. Cor. 3. 5. who, because 1. Cor. 3. 5.
they are by preaching the Gospel, the instruments of God for the begetting of
faith in the elect, by which they are justified, and adopted sons of God; are
therefore said to justify men, and by Deuteronomy. 12. 3.
the preaching of the Gospel, which is the immortal seed whereof Peter
speaks, 1. Cor. 4. 15. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
to beget men unto God. If therefore there be no salvation but by Christ, and
if we have no part in Christ but by faith, and if we attain not to faith
ordinarily but by hearing the word of God; this therefore must teach us, as
we desire to be saved, so to be careful and conscionable hearers of the word
of God, which is his power to our salvation. For how Romans 1. 16.
meanly soever carnal and worldly men esteem of the preaching of the Gospel;
notwithstanding it is the ordinance and good pleasure of God, by the foolishnes
of preaching (for so men esteem it) to save 1. Cor. 1. 21.
those that do believe, 1. Cor. 1. 21.

But our hearing must be mingled with Hebr. 4. 2.
faith, or else it profits nothing. When as therefore the Lord in the
ministry of the Gospel, does not only reveal and offer unto us his
unspeakable mercy in Christ: but also by his ambassadors does desire us,
that we would be reconciled unto him, and that we would accept of his mercy
offered unto us in Christ, by receiving him to be our Savior: we are not only
in general to believe, that he is the only Savior of Mankind; but in
particular, we are to embrace the mercies of God offered unto us in him, and
receive him as our Savior, earnestly desiring in out hearts to be made
partakers of his merits, and unfeigned resolving in our minds to rest and rely
upon him, as our only Savior. He that thus receives Christ, is esteemed Ioh.
1. 1^.
of God (who accepts in weak* Christians their sincere desire to receive
Christ, and unfeigned resolution to rest upon him alone for salvation, for the
deed it self, which is faith) he is esteemed, I say, to believe, and by this
faith whereby he thus receives Christ, he is united unto him. And howsoever as
yet in the court of his own conscience, perhaps he is not justified, being
poor it spirit, and hungring and thirsting after the righteousness of Christ,
which in his own sense he does not yet find imputed unto him: yet
notwithstanding in high court of heaven, he is as surely justified before God,
as by our Savior, Matthew. 5. he is pronounced blessed.

And if any man shall think it strange, Mat. 5. 3. 6.
that so small a measure of faith should be effectual to unite us unto Christ,
and to justify us before God; let him consider, that faith does not justify
us as it is a quality, gift, habit, or work in us, or in respect of the
worthiness thereof; but only relatiuely, in regard of Christ the object, which
it does apprehend. In so much that Peter calls the faith of all 2. Pet. 1. 1.
the faithful, though unequal in it self, (...), that is of equal value or
price, because it does alike justify; though all be not alike assured of their
justification. For the same righteousness of Christ, which by a strong faith is
apprehended to justification, is also apprehended by a weak faith. For as the
alms received by a feeble hand, does as well relieve the party, as that which
is received by a strong hand, and it is not the hand but the alms properly
which does relieve and as the brazen Serpent which was a figure of Christ, did
heal those among the Israelites which listed up their weak eyes toward it,
as well as those which were quicke-sighted: so the righteousness of Christ being
apprehended by a weak faith, does as well justify the believer, as when it is
received by a strong faith, so it is the righteousness of Christ, which faith
does apprehend, and not faith it self which does justify.

But it will be said, faith is a full assurance, therefore he that has not a
full assurance, has not faith. I answer, not all faith is a full assurance,
but the strong and perfect faith. For a man must believe in Christ, before he
can be in Christ, or have remission of sins by him. A man must have remission
of sins, before he is bound to believe it, and a man must believe it, and
have some measure of assurance, before he can have the fulness of assurance,
which is not attained at the first.

But you will say, faith is defined of good Divines to be a full assurance. I
answer, that they define it in the perfection of it: to teach us, not to
content our selves with the less degrees of faith; but to proceed from faith
to faith, until we come to that (...) or full assurance of faith.

For this is the second thing which, as I said, we are to labor for, namely
to know and to be assured that we be in Christ. And to this purpose we are to
perform two things. First, we are to try our selves whether we be in Christ:
and secondly we are to give diligence to make our being in Christ more sure
unto us. As touching the former, it is the advice of the Apostle, that we
should try our selves whether we be in the 2. Cor. 13. 5.
faith. For many deceive, both themselves with a vain opinion, and others with
a bare profession of faith. As first they, who have not so much as the
dogmaticall or historical faith, which is but Hebr. 11. 6.
a degree toward a justifying faith. For though a man may have this general
or historical faith, and yet want the justifying faith; yet a man cannot have
a justifying faith, who has not in some measure the general or dogmaticall
Hebr. 11. 6.
faith. Now this general faith consists of two things, knowledge of the word
of God, and assent unto it that it is true. First therefore, they who have not
knowledge of the principles of religion, are so far from having a true
justifying faith; that they have not so much as the first step or degree
toward it. Therefore, though ignorant persons be most forward to commend their
faith, yet they are to know, whiles they continue in ignorance, they are
altogether void of faith, and consequently of all grace, whereby they might
hope to be saved. For without knowledge there can be n^ faith; and without
faith there is no hope of salvation, or any other saving grace.

Again, those which do not give assent to the whole word of God, and every
part thereof, that it is true; are so f^ from having the justifying faith, the
they have not so much as the general or historical faith, which the diue^
themselves are said to have; as namely those which will believe so much of the
Iam. 2. 29.
Scriptures as they list, and no more then likes them. For although the proper
object of faith, as it justifies, and unites us unto Christ, is Christ our
Savior, or the promises of the Gospel concerning salvation by him; yet by the
same faith, whereby we are justified, we do undoubtedly believe the whole
word of God and every part thereof. The justifying faith evermore including and
presupposing the general and dogmaticall faith.

Secondly, they have not the true evangelical faith who have not also the
legal faith, persuading them of their miserable and accursed estate in
themselves, both in regard of their sins, as also of the punishments; which
by the threatenings of the law, if they did truly believe them, they would
acknowledge to be due unto them. Now, this legal faith, is a necessary
preparatiue to the justifying faith. For until we see our selves to be
accursed in our selves, we will not so much as desire seriously to be
justified by Christ. Until we find our selves to be bondslaues of sin and
Satan, we will not earnestly seek to be ransomed or redeemed. Until we
acknowledge our selves to be the children of wrath, we will not seek to be
reconciled unto God in Christ. In a word, until we find our selves to be
miserable in our selves, we will not seriously seek and sue for the mercies of
God or merits of Christ our Savior; but as much as in us lies suffer his
precious blood to be spilt in vain, without any care to apply it to our
selves. For what need have thou, either of a Savior, if thou art not in thy
self lost; or of a Redeemer, if thou art not a captive; or of a reconciler,
John. 8. 33.
if thou art not an enemy: or what need have thou of mercy, if thou art not
in misery? The whole need not the Physician, says our Savior Christ, but
the Mat. 9. 13.
sick. Well, thou ever have had a good conceit of thy self, thou ever have
loved God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self, thou never did
doubt of thy salvation in all thy life, etc. an evident argument that thou
did never care for Christ, or find thy self to stand in need of a
Savior. But remember who says, I came not to call the righteous, Mat. 9. 13.
(that is, such as be righteous in their own conceits) but sinners (that is,
humbled sinners) to repentance. And again, that he came to seek and to save
that Mat. 18. 11.
which was lost, to preach the Gospel to the poor, namely in spirit, to heal
the Luke 4. 18.
broken hearted, to preach deliverance or redemption to the captives.

Wherefore never persuade thy self that thou have a justifying faith, if thou
do not as well believe the threatenings of the Law, as the promises of the
Gospel. For although faith does not justify, as it apprehe^deth the
threatenings, yet that faith which does justify, (including evermore the
general, and consequently the legal faith) does believe the threatenings of
the law as the undoubted word of God. The same faith therefore, which does
assure thee of thy reconciliation, redemption and salvation in Christ, does
first inform thee, that thou art an enemy of God, a bondslaue of sin, and
utterly lost in thy self; that being with the Publican Luke 18. 14.
humbled in thy self, thou may be exalted in Christ.

Thirdly, they deceive either themselves with a fancy, or others with a show
of faith, who have not an effectual and lively faith. For as there is a
twofold knowledge, the one a literal or speculatiue knowledge, the other
spiritual and operative, and that knowledge is only true which is working, 1.
Ioh. 2. 1. Ioh. 2. 3. 4
3. 4: so there is a double faith, an effectual, unfeigned, and lively faith;
and an idle, counterfeit and dead faith. Now, faith is said to be lively and
effectual in two respects. First, respectu actus primi, in regard of the
effectual and true being of it. Secondly, respectu actus secundi, in regard of
the operation of it. In both senses every kind of faith becomes effectual
by application of that which is believed. As first, the dogmaticall faith is
lively and effectual, when thou do not only believe in general what God
is; but by particular application to thy self, do believe that he is such a
one to thee. As for example, if thou do believe only by a general and
historical faith, that God is omnipresent, that is, in every place present
filling heaven and earth, and that he is omniscient, and as the Scriptures
call Ier. 23. 24.
him, (...) knowing all things, yea the very secrets of men's hearts, and that
by a most perfect and distinct knowledge; thou may be little the better for
this faith. But if thou do believe with application to thy self, that he is
every where present with thee, and that his eyes be always upon thee,
beholding all thy ways; then will this faith be effectual to make thee behave
thy self uprightly, as in his presence and sight, and so of the rest.

The like may be said of the legal faith. For a man may believe in a confused
and general manner the threatenings of the law to be true, and yet never the
more be humbled; but go on securely in his sin, and notwithstanding his
impenitencie and infidelity, promise to himself impunitie. But when as a man
applies the threatening after this manner to himself: If this be true (as I
vnsainedly acknowledge it to be the undoubted word of God) that every one is
in himself accursed and subject to Gal. 3. 10.
eternal death and damnation, who has not continued in all the things which
are written in the book of the law to do them: how can it possibly be
avoided, but that I am in my self a most accursed wight and damned wretch, who
have not continued in all the things which are written in the book of the law
to do them? nay, in steed of doing the things commanded, I have done the
things forbidden; in steed of keeping all the commandments of God, I have
broken them al diversely and grievously; in steed of continuing in a perpetual
obedience, I have continued in the breach of Gods commandments; as indeed
until the time of a man's conversion, he does nothing, nay he can do nothing
else but sin against God. Thus, by application, the legal faith becomes
effectual, and thereby a man is humbled and brought to despair of salvation
in himself, so that if he would be saved, he must seek to be freed from the
curse of the Law, and so be forced to seek for salvation out of himself in
Christ; to which end the Law is said to be a schoolmaster unto Christ.

The very same is to be understood of the Evangelical faith, or faith in
Christ. For many there be (and they as it is to be feared are the greatest
number) who are content to make profession of the Gospel, either because it is
enjoined (being as ready to embrace the religion of Antichrist, if authority
should impose it upon them) or because it stands well with their outward
respects, or to say the best of them, because it promises salvation to them
that believe; but rest in this outward profession of faith, without any
special application of the promises of the Gospel, or apprehension of the
merits of Christ, without which it is not a true and effectual faith, uniting
us unto Christ, or justifying us in him. For it cannot be, that a man seeing
by a legal faith, his own damnable estate in himself, he should be said
truly and effectually to believe the promise of the Gospel, which assures
salvation to all (though most wretched in themselves) that believe in Christ;
who is not willing to receive and embrace him as his Savior, desiring in his
heart to be made partaker of the merits of Christ, and resolving in his mind to
rest and rely upon him for salvation. For whatsoever either Papists, or they
that are Popishly minded, do speak of this applying of the promises of the
Gospel, and particular apprehending of Christ; it is most certain, that
without it, faith does not justify us before God, or unite us unto Christ. For
though (...) sufferings of Christ, be as a sovereign salve to heal our Esaias
53. 5.
sores; though his body be meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, to feed
our John 6. 55.
souls unto eternal life, though his righteousness be as a wedding garment, to
cover our nakedness, and to make us accepted of God: yet his merits do not cure
our diseased souls, unless they be applied; his body and blood do not nourish
us, unless we spiritually eat his body and drink his blood; neither does the
robe of his righteousness cover us, unless we put it on. And surely if faith
does justify us, as it is an instrument to apprehend Christ, who is our
righteousness, and no^ in any other respect; then is it most certain, that it
does not justify, unless it be such a faith as does apprehend the
righteousness of Christ, and apply the promise of the Gospel to our selves.

We must therefore learn to apply the promise of the Gospel to our selves;
which we may do after this manner. Is this true (as I acknowledge it to be the
word of truth) that although I am by the sentence of the law, and testimony of
mine own conscience, an accursed wretch in my self, notwithstanding, I shall
be happy and blessed in Christ, if I receive him to be my Savior, and truly
believe in him, (for in him I shall not only be acquitted from the curse, but
also entitled to the kingdom of heaven?) And does the Lord in the ministry of
the Gospel, which he has vouchsafed unto me, not only reveal the riches of
his abundant mercy in Christ, and offer the same unto us; but also stir us up
to embrace his mercy offered unto us in Christ, and by his Ambassadors
earnestly desire us to be reconciled unto him? I 2. Cor. 5. 20.
do therefore unfeignedly receive the Lord Jesus, to be my sweet Savior, first,
earnestly desiring in my heart to be made partaker of his merits, (to which end
I will daily pray unto God, that as he has desired me to accept of his mercy,
and to be reconciled unto him, so he would be pleased to accept of the merits
and obedience of Christ, as a full discharge for my sins, and that in him he
would be reconciled unto me, pardoning my sins, and imputing unto me the
righteousness of his Son) and secondly resolving in my mind, to acknowledge
him to be my only Savior, and to rest upon him alone, for my salvation, being
persuaded that he died for my sins, and rose again for my justification.
Thus, by application, the Euangelical faith becomes effectual to unite us
unto Christ, and to justify us before God. But as our faith must be
effectual, in apprehending Christ the object thereof, unto justification, so
must it be in some measure effectual in the subject, that is, the believer,
unto sanctification. For true faith inwardly purges the heart, Act. 15. 9.
and outwardly works by love. For when a man is truly persuaded of the
everlasting Gal. 5. 6.
love of God toward him in Christ, this persuasion (which is faith) if it be
true and effectual, cannot but stir up his heart to love the Lord, and his
neighbor for the Lords sake. Faith therefore, as S. James says, must be
demonstrated by good works, which are Iam. 2. 18.
the necessary fruits thereof. For although faith alone does justify, as Paul
shows, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2. 16.
because faith is the only thing in us, which concurreth unto the act of
justification, and is the only grace which serves as an instrument to
apprehend and receive Christ, who only is our righteousness: yet that faith
which is alone, not joined with repentance, and amendment of life, does not
justify, as James proves, because it is not a true faith. For even as the
body (says he) without spirit, that is breath, is judged dead, so faith
without works (which are as it were the breathing of a lively faith) is judged
to be dead. We are to remember that they which be in Christ, have their works
to follow them, as it is here said. For in whom Christ dwells by faith, to
justify them, he dwells also by his spirit, to sanctify the^, neither did
he come wit^ water alone, or blood alone, but as Io^ says, he came both with
water and 1 John. 1. 6. John 19. 34. 35.
blood, both which gushed out of h^ side; the blood, I say, of redemption to
purge us from the guilt of sin, and the water of ablution, to cleanse us from
the corruption. And even as from the fis^ Adam, there is communicated unto us
not only the guilt of his first sin by in^ Romans 5. 12. etc.
putation (because as we were in him a the root, so in him we sinned originally
but also the corruption of his nature which by his sin he had contracte^
derived unto us by generation: So from Christ the second Adam, there is co^
municated unto us, not only the me^ of his obedience by imputation, to a quite
us from the guilt of sin; (beca^ in him, as in our head, we have fulfill^ the
law, and satisfied the justice of God; but also the graces of his spirit, where
we are made partakers of the divine (...) ture, derived unto us by
regeneration. 2. Pet. 1. 4.
therefore we be in Christ, we beco^ new creatures, 2. Cor. 5. 17. walking
(...) 2. Cor 5. 17.
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Romans Romans 8. 1.
81. For if we shall say, that we have communion with him as his members, and
yet walk in darkness, we deceive our 1. John 1. 6.
selves.

But if we esteem it our happiness to be in Christ, we will not only be careful
to try our selves, whether we be in him, but also we will give all diligence
to make our being in Christ more and more sure unto us. And to this purpose we
must earnestly pray unto the Lord, that he would give unto us his spirit
(which he Luke 11. 23.
has promised to give to those that ask him) his spirit, I say, of adoption,
crying in our hearts Abba Father, testifying Romans 8. 15. 16.
to our spirits that we are the children of God, and heirs of eternal life,
Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. 4. 30.
sealing us up to the day of our full redemption, and as the earnest of our
salvation, assuring us thereof.

Secondly, we must not content our selves with the inferior degrees of faith,
but be careful to grow from faith to faith, until we come to the full
assurance of faith. And to this end, we having received Christ, as before was
said, in the earnest desire of our hearts, and unfeigned resolution of our
minds; we must, for the increase of our faith, persuade our selves that we
now are in CHRIST, and so conceive of our selves as being in him, reconciled
unto GOD, and justified by faith; that being in him we have communion with
him, his merits being imputed unto us that be in him, as if we had performed
the same for our selves in our own persons. For being in him, we are to be
assured, that whatsoever he performed for the salvation of the faithful, he
performed for us; and may with the Apostle in particular apply the same to v^
Gal. 2. 20.
Together with Christ (says he, and s^ must every faithful man say) I was
cr^cisied. And I live, no longer I, but Christ ^ueth in me: and the life whith
I now live (...) the flesh, I live by the faith of the son (...) God, who
loved me and gave himself f^ me. And for the confirmation of (...) faith in
this particular assurance, we (...) to make use of the Sacraments. For the
baptism which we received in our (...) fancy, remains as a sure pledge vn^
us to assure us, that we believing in Christ, are ingrafted into him; and the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper serves to assure unto us our union and communion
with Christ.

Lastly, we are, according to the exhortation of S. Peter, to give diligence
2. Pet. 1. 10.
to make our calling, election, justification, and being in Christ more and
more sure unto us, by leading of a godly and upright life. For sanctification,
to a man professing the true faith, is an undoubted argument of his
justification, and of his being in Christ, 1. Ioh. 3. 24. For seeing a 1. Ioh.
3. 24.
man cannot be sanctified before he is justified, nor live a spiritual life
unless he be in Christ; it is therefore most certain that whosoever is
sanctified (as every one is that has an unfeigned purpose to walk in the
obedience of Gods will, though besides his purpose he fail through infirmity
in many particulars) he is also justified and ingrafted into Christ.

But as we must be in Christ, if we will be blessed by dying in him; so must we
^bide in him to the end, or else we do not die in him. He that continues to
the Mat. 10. 32
end, says our Savior, shall be saved. And again, Be faithful unto death
and I will give thee the crown of life: which I speak Apoc. 2. 10
not, as though a man that truly believes in Christ, and is once ingrafted
into him by a true faith, could totally or finally fall away from faith, or be
cut off from Christ; for how can that stand with the maine promise of the
Gospel, assuring Mar. 16. 16. John 3. 16.
salvation, and consequently perseverance to salvation, to every one that does
truly believe? but to this end, that he which supposes that he stands, may
take heed lest he fall. And that he which 1. Cor. 10. 12.
thinks he is in Christ, because he is in the visible Church, which in
respect of the faithful who are therein, is a part on the body of Christ, may
labor not only by a true faith to be ingrafted into the invisible Church,
which is the mystica^ body of Christ: but also to gather infallible tokens to
himself of his being in Christ. For many be in the visib^ Church, which be
not of the Church i^ uisible; and such are subject to defe ction, or falling
away; and the Lo^ fuffereth them to fall away, that it may appear they are not
of us, 1. John 2. 19. 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
There be many branches which seem to be in the vine, which is Christ, Ioh.
15. John 15.
but being rotten branches have no vnio^ with him by faith, nor communion with
him by the holy Ghost, though they be ingrafted into the Church the visible
body of Christ. For as Cions ingrafted which do not take, or rotten boughs
of a tree which being one with the tree in show, and as the Philosopher says,
mathematice by continuitie or union of terms, are not one indeed and naturally
by the unity of the form, which is the vegetative soul as it were of the
plant: so are they in Christ externallie and sacramentally, but spiritually and
in truth they are not. And such branches, as our Savior says, must look to
Ioh. 15. 6.
be cut off and cast into the fire.

As therefore we do now persuade our selves that we be in Christ, so let us
be careful, as our Savior exhorts us, Ioh. 15. 4. 7.
to abide in him, yea and to grow in him. For if any man professing himself to
be in Christ, and by his being in him to be freed and washed from his sins,
shall fall away from Christ, and with the sow that was washed shall return as
it were to his wallowing in the mire; the latter end of such a one shall be 2.
Pet. 2. 20. 22. Ezec. 18. 24
worse than his beginning. If a righteous man (says the Prophet, speaking of
him according to the outward appearance, that he might teach us in like sort
to speak of men according to the judgment of charity) shall turn away from
his righteousness and commit iniquity, doing according to all the abominations
of the wicked, his former righteousness shall not be remembered, but he shall
die in his sins.

And that we may abide in Christ to the end, let us labor to be upright and
sound Christians, believing in Christ by faith unfeigned, walking uprightly
before God and men. For vprightnes hat^ evermore the privilege of perseverance
For though hypocrites which build upon the sand, being hearers only an^ Matthew.
7. 26
not doers of the word, do fall away i^ the time of trial: yet the sound
Christian, who lives according to his profession, and has built upon the
rock, Matt. 7. 24.
with no surges or assaults of temptation can be utterly overthrown. Though
the seed which fell either among thorns (whereby is meant the heart of the
worldly professor) is choked, or on the rockie ground (whereby is meant the
Luke 18. 13. 14. 15.
secure, hard, and impenitent heart of the hypocrite and temporary professor,
covered as it were with the shallow mould of an outward profession) is withered
away in time of heat; yet that which falls into an upright heart, as it were
good ground, is neither choked, nor withered, but brings forth fruit with
patience.

The way then to die in Christ, is to live in him by a true and unfeigned faith,
which purifieth the heart, and works by love, walking uprightly, as it
becomes the members of Christ in the sincere profession of his faith; so
shall we in the end of our life attain to the end of our faith which is the
salvation of our 1. Pet. 1. 9.
souls.

Many there are which could be content to die in Christ, who care not to live
in him. Many with Balaam desire to Number. 23. 10
die the death of the righteous, but lead the life of the wicked. But be not
deceived, it is an old saying, (...) Chrysostom.
(...), of an evil life commonly there is an evil end. Presume not that thou
shall die in Christ, unless first thou live in him. In all the Scripture there
is but one example of a man who after a wicked Luke 23.
life was converted at the hour of his death. One there is, that men should
not then despair; and but one, that they should not before hand presume. And
forasmuch as nothing is either more certain than death, or more uncertain
than the time thereof; it behooves us carefully to provide, whiles we have
time, to be in Christ; that death, whenever it comes, may find us in him.
Let our life be a preparation for death, and let this be the chiefest care of
our life, that we may be found in Christ at the time of our death. This life,
as our Philip. 3. 9.
Savior says, is the day wherein we are to work, afterward is the night when
John 9. 4.
no man can work or turn unto God, but as the tree falls, so it lies; and
as Eccl. 11. 3.
the day of death does leave us, the day of judgment shall find us. This
therefore must teach us not to defer from day to day our repentance toward
God and faith in Jesus Christ, but presently whiles it is called to day to
turn unto Hebr. 3.
the Lord, that we may be in Christ to day before to morrow, because we have
none assurance that we shall live until the morrow.

And so much may suffice to have spoken of the first and chief point, namely
who they are, which here be pronounced blessed, to wit, they which die in the
Lord. Now are we in the second place briefly to consider, what this blessedness
is, and wherein it does consist. This is showed in the words following, that
they rest from their labors, and their works follow with them. So that their
happiness is twofold, first privative, in that they rest from their labors and
molestations, (for there is a sabba^sme or rest, reserved to the people of God,
Hebr. 4. 9. whereof the Sabbath was a type.) For then the Lord shall wipe away
Apoc. 21. 4. and 7. 17.
all tears from their eyes, and they shall be no more subject to sin, or the
punishment thereof, as sickness, weakness, mortality, labor, wearines, troubles,
wrongs, death. Death is the haven and the end of al misery unto them. But their
happiness is not merely privative, like that of beasts, which after death have
no more sense of pain, (where, by the way we are to note, that the state of
the beast when it dies, is better then of the wick^d, who die in their sins)
but it is also positive. For their works, that is, the reward of their faith
and obedience, (...) God shall cro^ne with everlasting happiness, shall (...)
^th them. This does teach us, that (...) (...) good (...) cannot merit any
thing (...) the (...) (...) God (as Christ himself has t^ld (...) Luke 17.)
and ^ch (...) eternal (...) Luke 17. 10. Romans 6. 23.
and therefore (...) are not said to go before our acceptance to eternal
(...) as (...) cause, but follow as fruits: yet the Lo^ of his free grace,
according to his promise, does plentifully reward them. The consideration
whereof, as it must encourage us all to be fruitful in good works knowing that
our labor shall not been (...) Cor. 15. 58
vain in the Lord, so especially those, who^ the Lord has enriched with his
blessings, whether temporal or spiritual; that they be rich in good works,
laying up 1 Timothy 6. 18. 19.
for themselves a good foundation, against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life.

Again, whereas it is said, that the works of the faithful, do accompany
them after death, this shows, that although death strippe us of all temporal
things yet it does not bereave us of our works, but brings us the reward of
them. And that when all our friends and followers, and all other worldly,
either delights or commodities do fa^e and forsake us: y^ our works do
follow with us, to our ^all comfort. Which should make us to esteem the
keeping of faith and a good conscience, above all the things of this world.

Now what this reward is, which God has prepared for these that die in Christ,
though neither the eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
nor the ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived, yet thus much we may
gather out of the Scriptures, that it shall consist in eternal and most
perfect glory, and gladness. The glory standing partly in the excellency of
those heavenly gifts, wherewith they shall be adorned, being in respect
thereof, like unto the Angels, and renewed perfectly according to the glorious
image of God, yea, made conformable to Christ our head, in such a proportion of
glory, as his several members 1. John 3. 2.
be capable of; and partly in the fruition of heavenly blessings, as the
possession of heaven, and all heavenly good things, the fellowship of the
blessed Saints and Angels, and that, which is all in all, the enjoying of God
himself, who is the chiefest good, In whose presence there is fullness of joy,
and at whose right hand there be pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. 11


And that is the second thing, their eternal joy and gladness arising from that
glory. For as they shall be most happy, so shall they rejoice in it, with un
speakable and endless comfort, and in the sense thereof, shall evermore be
stirred up with wonderful alacrity, to glorify God.

In expectation of this happy hope, we are to live soberly, justly, and holily
Titus 2. 13.
in this present world. For if we set this joy before, as the mark toward
which we contend, we will not suffer our selves to be withdrawn from our
obedience to God, neither by any worldly desires, which in comparison hereof,
are to be esteemed as mere vanities, nor by any terrors of the world, which,
in respect of Romans 8. 18. Hebr. 12. 2.
the joy that is set before us, we are to contemn.

The third thing remains, that is, the time when this blessedness does belong
to them, (...), says he, thenceforth, that is, from the time of their death,
and so forward, for presently they rest from their labors, and their works
follow: he does not say (...) after them, but (...) with them. This therefore
is a most evident place, not only against wandering of souls, but especially
against Purgatory and prayer for the dead. For whereas they object, that the
place is understood of Martyrs only, I have before plainly proved, that it is
generally understood of al those that die in Christ, whether as Martyrs, or as
Confessors, who neither by the tyranny nor fraud o^ Antichrist can be drawn
away from Christ. For these being in Christ, and consequently made partakers of
his merits, Christ has by his blood, so fully bo^ purged their souls, that
they shall no^ need the fire of Purgatory (which wa^ devised to purge men's
purses, rathe^ then their souls,) and also satisfied the justice of God for
their sins, that as other purgations, so other satisfaction^ are blasphemies
against Christ, our alone, all sufficient and most perfect Savior. But in this
text there be three evidences against the Papists. First, in the he says they
are blessed from thenc^ forth, forthwith, immediately, and no^ many years,
much less many thousan^ years after, as the Pope in his Antichr^stian pardons
would bear us in han^ Secondly, they are said to rest, or to b^ eased (as the
word signifies) from the (...)
labors, and therefore are not at all to^mented in Purgatory, which as
themselves reach, burns as hot as the fi^ of hell. Thirdly it is said, that
their wor^ that is, the reward of their faith and obedience does accompany
them, which reward, I hope they will not say, is the fi^ of Purgatory. And
further observe, that he does not say, other men's works are to be sent after
them, to redeem them forsooth out of Purgatory, but their own works follow
with them

Know therefore for certainty, that Purgatory is but a fire serving for the
Popes kitchen: and prayer for the dead is but preying upon the living, being a
mere device serving for the maintenance of the Popish, that is to say,
Antichristian clergy.

Thus have you heard the explication of this text, and the uses which the
several branches thereof afford, there remains in a word the application
and use which is to be made of the whole text, both in general concerning all
those that die in the Lord, and in particular concerning this our brother, who
who is asleep in Christ.

For seeing the dead which die in the Lord, are presently blessed, because they
rest from their labors, etc. this therefore does reach us, that death, of a
Christian man who is in Christ, is not to be feare^ as an evil thing, but
rather to be wishe^ and desired, because it brings happiness with it. For to
him that is in Christ death is advantage, in that he changes a life mortal
and miserable, for a life, blessed and immortal; changes the company of
sinful men, for the company of God, his Saints and Angels* changes a sinful
and miserable condition in this valey of tears, with a mo^ blessed and
glorious estate in heaven wherein there is no possibility of falling either
into sin or misery. And this mu^ also move us to labor for assured
testimonies, that we be in Christ, that w^ may desire even to be dissolved,
and (...) be with Christ. For he that does no^ fear, but rather desire
death, he will n^ Philip 1. 23
for fear of any creature be withdrawn either from his faith or obedience. F^
the worst thing which any creatur^ (...) threaten, is death. And that is it
whi^ he desires, especially if it be not only (...) Christ but also for him.

Again, if the dead which die in t^ Lord be thencefoorth blessed, etc. (...)
are not we to mourn for them which are dead in Christ, as in respect of them,
left we may seem to envy their happiness. For though their bodies be
committed to the earth, yet are we no more to mourn thereat, than the husband
man mourns for committing his seed corn to the earth, because they, as well
as the seed, having purified in the 1. Cor. 15. 36 42. 43. 44.
earth, will come up against the great harvest with plentiful increase, when
this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality. 1. Cor. 15. 53
And as touching their soul, that, so soon as it departs from the body, is
by the holy Angels conveyed into the bosom of Abraham, the place of heavenly
bliss, where they have the fruition of God, and fellowship of the blessed
Saints and Angels.

This opinion, which the holy Ghost does here teach us in general, to conceive
of all those that die in the Lord; Christian charity binds us to entertain,
concerning this our worthy brother departed in the faith of Christ. For if all
they which die in the Lord are happy and blessed, and our assured hope be,
that he died in the Lord; why should not we conceive assured hope, that his
estate is happy and blessed? Now that charity binds us the to con^iue of
him, I will make it manifest. For besides that there is no evidence to the
contrary, and charity evermore judges the best; we have also sufficient
evidence, whereupon to conclude, according to the judgment of Charity: that
he died in the Lord. (...) say according to the judgment of charity, for as
the judgment of certaine^ belongs unto God, so the iudgemen^ of charity,
unto us. Let us therefore take a brief view of such fruits (according to which
alone being charitablie interpreted, true charity does judge) I say, o^ such
fruits and signs as have appeare^ both in the time of his health, and also
(...) the time of his sickness, until his death.

For whereas there are three things which every Christian must be careful^ in
this present life, namely, that he li^ soberly in respect of himself,
religiou^ toward God, and justly among me^ Titus 2. 12.
the first (I hope) will be confessed of (...) that knew him, that he was a
sober, grave, discreet, frugall, temperate, and chaste man. And as for his
religion toward God, first I say, though he were borne in the time of Popery:
notwithstanding he has professed unto me, and to others in my hearing: that
from his youth he has been persuaded, that the Pope is Antichrist, and that he
abhorred the Idolatrous superstitions, and damnable doctrines of the Church of
Rome; against both which I have heard him by way of discourse inueigh seriously
and to good purpose. But as he was no Papist, so no neuter or nullifidian,
which is too common a fault among the politicians of this world; but a
professed Protestant and open professor of the true faith of Christ, that is to
say, one that did Revel. 14. 1.
bear the mark of God in his forehead, as the faithful are described in the
beginning of this chapter. And this (beloved) was no small favor of God
vouchsafed unto him. For as here they are pronounced blessed, who die in the
true faith of Christ, and not in the religion of Antichrist: so Revel. 20. 6
they are pronounced blessed and holy, who have their Revel. 20. 6.
part in the first resurrection, whereby as they rise from other sins and
corruptions: so especially from the grave of Antichristian, that is, Popish
pollutions: as the context or coherence in both places shows. Neither was he
a backward professor (as many are, who have no care of religion:) but
manifested his forwardnes by diverse good signs. As first, by frequenting the
holy exercises of religion abroad, and having them duly performed at home.
Secondly, by loving, reuerencing, and countenancing faithful Ministers and
Preachers of Gods Word. For this I doubt not to avouch, that the religion and
devotion of me^ toward God, may be discerned by n^ one sign better, then by
the respect which they have to Gods Ministers. For as our Savior says, he
that receives y^ Ioh. 13. 20. Luke 10. 16.
receives me, and he that desp^seth you, despises me. For as he that
despises a Minister in respect of his calling, does evidently bewray himself,
neither to ha^ any grace, nor yet to desire any, because the grace which either
he has or desires, ordinarily is procured by the Ministry, as I could show
at large; so he that loves and reuerenceth a Minister, for his calling sake,
(as this worthy Knight did,) he does show, that he has found the Ministry of
the Word, to be the power of God to his salvation.

Of his love to other my brethren in the Ministry, the great concourse of
Ministers at this present, to honor his funeral, is a sufficient evidence. As
touching my self, I do with thankfulness, acknowledge the greatness of his
love manifested toward me diverse ways: wherein he may seem to have followed
the grave advise of the Greek Orator, in Isocrates ad Daemonicu^: (...).
that he has made me to inherit that love and friendship, which from a child,
he did ever bear to my father. Thirdly, his forwardnes appeared, by loving and
favoring those that were honest and religious, and hampering those who were
otherwise disposed; who now perhaps will utter their spleen, and by their
slanderous speeches prove, that (...) he honored, and loved those that feared
God; so such vile and naughty persons as themselves, were odious in his sight.
Which is one good note of the child of God, as the holy Ghost witnesses Psalm.
15. 4.

Beloved in the Lord, it is no small token of a member of Christ, when a man
loves the members of Christ, for their godliness and virtues sake. For they
their are of the world, hate those that be in Ioh. 15. 19.
Christ. And as a wicked man is an abomination Prou. 29. 27
to the godly; even so, a godly man is an abomination to the wicked. John
therefore sets this down as a special sign: hereby (says he) we know that
we are translated 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
from death to life, because we love the brethren.

I hasten to his carriage among men: and first, in his dealings, as a private
man, wherein he was (I speak of his general course) a strict obseruer of
truth in hi^ words, of justice in his deeds, of fidelity in his promises. But
chiefly conside^ him, in the discharge of his calling For a man's calling is
that standing, wherein God has placed him, to exercise his faith and obedience,
that therein he may glorify God, and do good to men. Consider his private
calling, as he was an householder, or head of his family. And therein
acknowledge with me, his great love and fidelity to his wife, his fatherly
providence toward his children and nephews: his great wisdom and care in
governing his servants, and preserving them from those horrible vices (which as
they be usual now adays, in great families, so no doubt, will pull down the
fearful judgments of God upon them) I mean swearing and swaggering: and
finally, his goodness and bounty toward those, whom he found diligent,
honest, and frugall.

But his public calling, as he was a Magistrate, and governor in the
Commonwealth, does now call me unto it. Wherein, all (I doubt not) who did not
mislike him for his just severity, either against themselves, or such as were
near unto them, will freely acknowledge, that he was a very good Iusticer, and
a very notable good Commonwealths man, both for his sufficiency and
wisdom, (which was great) and also for his great zeal, and good affection
toward his country; and courageous resolution, to show himself forward in
good causes. The truth whereof, if we did not sufficiently see, whilst we
enjoyed him: I dout we shall too well feel, by wanting him. And thus you have
heard of his sobriety, and government of himself, of his faith, and religion
toward God, and of his justice and charity toward men. In all which, you are
not to understand me, as though I went about to maintain, that he had no
infirmities, or that he never failed in any particulars: for alas, is many
things we offend all; and highly i^ James 3. 2.
that man to be commended, whose general course is such as I have described.
Yea, happy, and thrice happy is that man, who has a settled and vnfaine^
purpose, of observing those duties, of sobriety, justice, and piety; though
besid^ his purpose, he fail in many particula^ through infirmity: for (...) a
one, no doubt, is the true child of God.

And as these signs did show, that he lived in the Lord: so the same added to
his demeanor, in the time of his sickness, will prove that he died in the Lord.
I will begin with his Christian charity, in forgiving those that had offended
him, in giving satisfaction to such as thought themselves wronged, in seeking
to be reconciled, with such as he might think did bear any grudge toward
him, which being considered, together with the greatness, both of his mind and
state, will seem no small argument of great Christianity. And herein he did
acknowledge (as he had cause) the good providence of God toward him, in giving
him occasion whilst he was alive, and able to answer for himself, to clear
himself, (as to my understanding he did) of diverse imputations, which
otherwise might perhaps have proved scandalous after his death.

No less commendable was his Christian piety toward God, showing it self in
the time of his sickness, not only in the exercises of religion, as often
hearing of the word preached, receiving the Sacrament more than once to assure
him of his union and communion with Christ, daily invocation of the name of
God: but also in approouing his faith and patience, being by a long and sharp
sickness so thoroughly tried. In respect whereof I may not forget his behavior
at two especial times; the one a week before his death, when as his speech
being taken from him, he supposed the time of his dissolution to be at hand.
And therefore minding to prepars himself for death, he calls by signs for
ink and paper, and (as he could) writes the names of diverse Ministers, and
some other his faithful friends, whom he would have sent for, that they might
be both assistants unto him by the^ prayer and godly counsel in the agony
of death, as also witnesses of hi^ faithful departure. But before the^ came,
it pleased GOD to restore h^ speech; whereby to his own and the^ comfort, he
made a notable confession of his faith; which also he then sealed, by the
receipt of the Sacrament. Again, not long before his speech began to fail him
the second and last time, he delivered (as many times he had done before)
diverse good and godly speeches. Among the former, I remember one argument which
he used to comfort himself, Christ Jesus (says he) who was my Savior, he and
no other shall be my Judge. Among the latter, and indeed one of the last that
I could understand, he professed his undoubted faith and assured hope of
salvation, but (as he said) trusting only to the mercies of God in Christ Jesus
my Savior; and in that faith as we need not doubt, he ended his life, or as
the Scripture speaks, he fell asleep; for such indeed was the manner of his
death. All which premises being weighed in the balance of charity, we may
be bold to conclude according to the judgment of charity, that he is in the
number of those, whom the holy Ghost in this place pronounces blessed.
Wherefore, though we have just cause to mourn in respect of our selves, as
namely his grave and virtuous Lady, that the Lord has taken from her so
loving and kind an husband; his nephews, that they be deprived of so wise and
provident a grandfather; his welwillers, that we are berest of so good a
friend; the country, that it has lost so prudent and careful a Iusticer, and
so good a commonwealths man, as I said: but yet so, as that with meekenes and
humility we submit our selves to the gracious providence of God our heavenly
father, giving him leave to call whom and when it pleases him: yet in respect
of him we have little cause to mourn, but great cause to be thankful unto
God for him: In that after so many favors which it pleased the Lord t^
vouchsafe unto him throughout ye whole course of his life: he has been now
pleased, to receive him into the numbe^ of those whom the holy Ghost here
pronounces blessed. The Lord for h^ mercies sake grant, that we after the
example of all the faithful departed, may be careful to live in the Lord
Jesus by a true and a lively faith; that living in him, we may die in him; and
dying in him, may be found in him at the resurrection; that rising in him, we
may be glorified with him by the fruition of God himself the chiefest good: To
which most gracious and most glorious God, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, be all praise, honor and glory, both now and for ever, Amen.

(...).

