FOUR TREATISES, TENDING TO DISSUADE ALL CHRISTIANS from four no less
heinous then common sins; namely, the abuses of Swearing, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, and Briberie. WHEREIN THE GREATNESS AND odiousness of these vices is
discovered; and the means and remedies, which may either preserve, or weane
men from them, are propounded. WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED a Treatise of Anger. By
JOHN DOWNHAM Batcheler in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word.

ESAIAS 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show
my people their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for WILLIAM WELBY, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN, LORD HARRINGTON, BARON OF EXTON, AND TO THE
NOBLE AND VERTVous LADY his wife: I. D. wishes all increase of grace, and
true honor in this life, and eternal happiness and blessedness in the life
to come.
IF ever there were a time (Right Honorable) wherein Gods Ministers should
cry aloude, Esa. 58.1.
and lift up their voice like a trumpet, to tell the people of their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob of their sins; then surely it is now
in these our days, and in this our land. For howsoever the light of the
Gospel has for many years clearelie shined among us, showing unto us the
way of righteousness, in which we walking may attain unto happiness, and the
manifold bypath of error and sin, to the end we may avoid them; and though
we have had Gods faithful Ministers, sometimes piping unto us the sweet tunes
of the Gospel, to allure us unto holy obedience; and sometimes thundering out
the dreadful sound of Gods fearful judgments due to sin, to restrain us
from running on in wicked courses; yet there is little reformation and
amendment, but rather we are grown from ill to worse, and wax every day more
secure and sensual in our sins. And because men have not embraced and loved
Gods truth, nor submitted themselves to be ruled with this scepter of his
kingdom; therefore many are given up of God to their own filthy lusts, and to
a reprobate mind, and through the hardness of their hearts, all the means of
their conversion and salvation become not only ineffectual and unprofitable,
but rather cause them to be more obdurate in their sins. The resplendent
light of the Gospel does make them more blind, so as they go groping in
ignorance even at noone days; the sound of the word, and loud cries of Gods
Ministers in their ears calling them to repentance, do make them more deaf
to all instruction and admonition; the comfortable beams of Gods gracious
promises shining upon their hearts, do not supple and soften them, but rather
make them more hard and obdurate; and as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 2.16.
the word of God, which in it own nature is the savor of life unto life,
becomes unto them the savor of death to their deeper condemnation. And as
this is the state of all the who have sold themselves to work wickedness, and
lie frozen in the dregs of their sins; so even the better sort who have given
their names unto Christ, have been so intoxicated with the sweet cups of
prosperity, and through long rest, peace, and plenty have so rusted in their
corruptions, that it is to be feared, they will not recover their ancient
purity and brightness, until the file of affliction with an heavy hand has
come often over them. But neither the crying sins of those who are
notoriously wicked, nor yet the gross corruptions of such as make profession
of religion, do cause the state of our land to be so dangerous and almost
desperate, as the nice wantonness of sin, which makes it impatient of the
least touch; for howsoever it is in it self of the most slavish nature, yet is
it so backed in these times with the numerous multitude of offenders, and so
countenanced and befriended by men of best quality, and greatest power, that
it is grown to be a matter far more dangerous to reprove sin then to commit
it, especially when it is cunningly acted, and plainly reprehended. Gods
spiritual Chirurgions may indeed in these times make as many corrasiues as
they will, but if they love their peace and life, they must take heed that they
do not apply them; for patients wounded with the sores of sin, when they
admit them to the cure, hold the dagger of revenge in their hands, ready to
stab them, if they but touch them to the quick. And therefore needs must these
impatient patients fester in their corruptions to the very death of body and
soul, seeing they will by no means endure to have their wounds searched.
Nevertheless all this must not daunt and discourage those whom the Lord has
called to the function of the Ministry, from the performing of their duty,
but the more dangerous and desperate their state is who are committed to their
charge, the more earnest and diligent should they show themselves in seeking
their preservation. For they ought to prefer the spiritual health of those
who are by God committed to their cure, before their own temporary life; and
being appointed the Lords watchmen, the more securely the people sleep in
sin, the louder must they cry till they have awakened them, when they see
Gods judgments approaching and ready to seize upon them: Ezech. 33.7.8.
otherwise the people shall die in their sins, but their blood shall be
required at the watchmens hands. The consideration of which duty, and the
entire love which I bear to my dear country, has made me willing, whom the
Lord has vouchsafed this great and excellent calling, to beat down, as much
as in me lies, four capital sins of this land, profane Swearing, beastly
Dru^kennes, filthy Whordome, and corrupting Bribery; both because they are so
odious and abominable in Gods sight, that they make our whole country liable
to his wrath, and to stand endangered to the fearefullest of his judgments;
and also because I perceive that they are not in the wane, but in the increase;
and that like fretting cankers, they spread further and further in the body of
our State; so that if those members which are already infected be not either
cured by Gods Ministers, or cut off by his lawful Magistrates, it is to be
feared that these sores of sin will grow desperate, and past hope of any
cure. The which my poor labors I desired should offer themselves unto the
public view under the safeguard of you honorable patronage, being moved
thereunto both by mine own love, and your fitness: my love toward your
Honors, being chiefly grounded upon your love toward God, and to his true
religion, showed both in your holy profession and Christian practice, has
imboldned me to leave unto the world this perpetual testimony of your worth,
and my good will; and makes me believe, that these my works shrouded under
your names shall find with you kind acceptance, not upon presumption of their
worth, but because it is the nature of love to cause a man hopefully to expect
for correspondencie of affection in them whom it loves, though there be almost
no proportion in desert. Neither could I find fitter patrons for treatises of
this nature; for who are more fit then the virtues and religious to defend and
countenance such discourses as tend to the upholding and advancing of virtue
and piety, and to the suppressing and beating down of vice and wickedness?
and who are more able to daunt the courages of the vicious and malicious, which
are daily ready to wreck their spite upon those who inueigh against their
darling sins, then they, whose virtuous disposition is both graced and
strengthened with honor and eminency of place, and also with the gracious
favor of our dread Sovereign? As therefore I have respectiuelie dedicated
these my labors unto your Honors, so accept them with your wonted kindness,
and vouchsafe them at your leasured your perusal, and me your honorable
favors; so shall I be more and more bound to pray unto the Lord, that he will
grant unto your Honors a daily increase of grace and true honor in this world,
and eternal glory and happiness in the world to come.

Your Honors in all humble duty to be commanded, JOHN DOWNHAM.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, I have endeavored to discover and lay open the ugly
filthiness, and heinous wickedness of four sins, wherewith our land is
much corrupted and defiled; namely, the abuses of Oaths in vain swearing and
impious forswearing; Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Briberie. I am not ignorant
how distasteful these discourses will be to their palats, who have already
rellished the sweetness of these sins, and do still nuzle them in their
bosoms, as their dearest darlings. But I have already learned, that if it be
the chief end of my labors to please men, Gal. 1.10.
I shall but thereby get this testimony unto mine own conscience, that I am
not the servant of Jesus Christ: yet may I truly say thus much for the
answering of all cauils and calumniations, that I have not willingly intended
to displease any man, but have labored to advance the good of all. For God and
mine own conscience can bear me witness, that I have not in any spleneticke
and satyricall humor, aimed at the disgrace of any man's person, profession, or
calling, but have had mine only quarrel against their sin; nor yet
discovered their nakedness that they may be laughed to scorn; but that
themselves taking notice of it, may hide it, and turning from their sins by
true repentance, may escape those judgments which they have deserved in the
day of Gods visitation. If any notwithstanding my just apology shall yet take
exceptions, they shall but by their kicking show that I rub on their sore, and
by their complaining manifest their guiltiness; for in particular I accuse
none, who do not stand accused before God, by the testimony of their own
consciences. And these of all others have least cause to be offended, seeing if
at all I handle them roughly, it is not to hurt, but to cure them of their
wounds of sin, which otherwise might fester to their destruction. And thus
praying that these and all other my labors may tend to Gods glory, and the
salvation of his elect, I commend thee to Gods protection, Act. 20.32.
and unto the word of his grace, which is able to build thee further, and to
give thee an inheritance among them which are sanctified.

From Lothburie in London the 30. of October. Anno Dom. 1608. Thine in the
Lord. I. D.

A TREATISE OF SWEARING: WHEREIN IS SHOWED THE LAWFVL USE OF an oath, and also
the diverse abuses thereof, both by vain swearing, and impious forswearing.
CHAP. I. What an oath is, and of the diverse forms, ceremonies and ends
thereof.
ALthough it is not my purpose, in this my discourse of swearing,. Sect. 1. The
maine scope of this treatise.
to entreat copiously and fully of the doctrine of oaths, and of all
questions coincident thereunto, which would require a larger tractate, then one
so bounded within the straits of time, and distracted with multitude of
business can conveniently publish; and is not so necessary, because many
others have excellently and happily labored in this argument; but principally
to speak against the abuse of oaths, by vain swearing and impious
forswearing, whereby the glorious name of God is exceedingly dishonored in our
times: yet forasmuch as contraries compared and opposed do best illustrate one
another, and lest together with the lawless abuse, I should seem to take away
the laudable and lawful use of swearing; I will briefly touch the principal
points of this common place, and especially those which make way to that
discourse of unlawful oaths, which I chiefly intend.

And first to begin with the general definition:. Sect. 2. What an oath is.
An oath is a religious and solemn attestation of Gods holy name, where we
invoke him as a witness and suertie to confirm the truth of our speech, and
as a Judge to punish us if we speak falsely.

Of this there are diverse forms, and diverse ceremonies. In respect of the
diverse form, an oath is either simple and direct, or compound and indirect.
Simple, when as we plainly and directly call God to witness. So the Apostle,
Romans 1.9. God is my witness whom I serve in my spirit, Romans 1.9.
etc.

Compound, when as there is prayer or pawn annexed. The prayer annexed to an
oath is either the desire of some good; as, So God help, save, or prosper me:
or the imprecation of some evil if we swear falsely, as, God do so, or so
unto me, if I do not speak the truth. So also in our oaths we sometimes
pawn and pledge unto God those things which are dear unto us, as it were
suerties of our truth; as, By my soul, by my faith, etc. that is, I pawn my
soul and faith unto God, for the confirmation of this truth. So Joseph swore
by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42.15. 1. Cor. 15.31.. Sect. 3. Ceremonies and
rites used in swearing. Genesis 14.22.
Genesis 42.15. and Paul, 1. Cor. 15.31. By our rejoicing which I have in Christ
Jesus our Lord, I die daily.

The ceremonies used in swearing have bin diverse in diverse times. In Abraham's
time when they took an oath they lifted up their hand toward heaven; thereby
signifying that they swore by him whose throne was seated in the highest
heavens. The like ceremony was used by the Angel, Dan. 12.7. So also
inferiors in the same time swearing unto their superiors and Masters, Aben.
Ezra.
put their hand under their thigh, by which ceremony, they signified their
subjection, and that they bound themselves to perpetual servitude if they did
not speak truly. Genesis 24.2. and 47.29.


In Salomons time when as they took an oath they touched the Altar, 1. King.
2.31.
the which ceremony was also used amongst the Gentiles; whereby was signified
that they did call him to witness who was worshipped with sacrifices offered
upon those Altars.

The Jews when they solemnly swore by Gods holy name, used to touch the
Bible, the which ceremony is also in use in these times; whereby is signified
that they call him as witness, who is the author of these holy Scriptures;
and that as the contents of this holy book are of undoubted and certain
truth, so that which they deliver is of like nature, and free from all untruth
and falsehood.

And thus have I briefly showed what an oath is,. Sect. 4. The ends of an oath.
together with the forms and ceremonies thereof. Now the ends why it was
instituted and ordained, were first and principally that God might be
glorified, when as by an oath he is appealed unto as the supreme Judge of
heaven and earth, and his omniscience, truth, justice and power is
acknowledged. Secondly, that truth and justice might be maintained and
preserved in things secret and unknown: for when all other arguments and
reasons are wanting to demonstrate a weighty and necessary truth, then God,
who is the searcher of the heart and reins, the patron of truth and revenger
of falsehood, is inuocated as a witness above all exceptions. Thirdly, an oath
was ordained to maintain truth, peace, concord and justice, and to put an end
to al doubts and controversies, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 6.16.
Heb. 6.16. For we can have no further appeal when as the matter has been
decided before the supreme Judge of heaven and earth; neither can we bring any
stronger argument for proof, then when we produce God as our witness to give
testimony to our speeches, who is the alone searcher of the heart and secret
thoughts. And therefore an oath is fitly called the greatest proof amongst men
to confirm their speeches, Plutarch. Romans quaest.
and the Christians rack, whereby though he be the Lords freeman, he may
nevertheless be enforced to confess any hidden truth. And lastly, for the
common good of mankind, both of our neighbors, and also our selves: for our
neighbors have good and benefit by our oaths, when as thereby they are
persuaded to believe a necessary truth, or when their right is defended, and
their good name preserved from slanders and false imputations; in which respect
also the benefit of our oath redoundeth to our selves, when either our own
name or right is called in question, we wanting other reasons and means to
maintain them against injury and injustice.

CHAP. II. That it is lawful to take an oath, contrary to the doctrine of the
Manichees and Anabaptists.
Nevertheless,. Sect. 1. That all manner of swearing is not condemned
howsoeur a lawful oath is the ordinance of God, and a part of his glory, and
to the furthering of our own and our neighbors good, yet the Manichees of old,
and the Anabaptists of latter days, have simply condemned all manner of
swearing both public and private, as evil and unlawful. But that this their
opinion is false, heretical and wicked, it may evidently appear by these
reasons: First, because a lawful oath is a part of Gods worship and service,
which is expressly commanded in his word. For whereas in the third Commandment
he forbids to take his name in vain by usual or false swearing, there in
the affirmative part he inioyneth that we should use the holy name of God in
a lawful oath, for the setting forth of his glory: and thus this
commandment is expounded by Moses and the Prophets. So Deuteronomy. 6.13. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and 10.20. Esa. 65.16.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall swear by his name.
And Deuteronomy. 10.20. Esa. 65.16. He that shall bless in the earth, shall bless
himself in the true God, and he that swears in the earth shall swear by
the true God. Iere. 4.2. Ierem. 4.2.
Thou shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness.

Yea so excellent and necessary a part of Gods service is a lawful oath, that
sometimes it is put for his whole worship. Psalm. 63.11. Psalm. 63.11.
All that swear by him shall rejoice before him, that is, all that worship and
serve him. So Esa. 19.18. it is said that the Egyptians shall speak the
language of Canaan, Esa. 19.18. and 48.1.
and shall swear by the Lord of hosts; that is, shall make profession of his
true religion. And chap. 48.1. Hear this O house of Jacob, which swear by the
name of the Lord: that is, profess the religion of the true God.

So that a lawful oath is singular part of his worship,. Sect. 2.
which, A lawful oath is a part of Gods worship.
as occasion serves, he will not have omitted: and therefore he not only
commands it, but also has sworn, that those who worship him shall swear by
his name: Esa. 45.23. Esa. 45.23.
I have sworn by my self, etc. that every knee shall bow unto me, and every
tongue shall swear by me. Which duty that they may be encouraged to
perform, he has promised to reward it in this life: Iere. 12.16.
Ierem. 12.16. If they will learn the ways of my people, to swear by my
name, the Lord lives etc. then shall they be built in the midst of my
people: and in the life to come with eternal happiness: for he that swears
and changes not, though it be to his own hindrance, he shall dwell in Gods
holy mountain. Psalm. 15.4.. Sect. 3. By a lawful oath God is glorified.
Psalm. 15.4.

Secondly, a lawful oath is commendable, because it tends to the advancement
of Gods glory, and the good of mankind. God in a lawful oath is glorified:
first, because therein we acknowledge his omnipresence; for in vain do we
call God to witness, unless he were present every where and ready to hear
us.

Secondly, his omniscience: for when we call God to witness of our secret
actions, thoughts and intentions, which can by no other means be demonstrated,
we acknowledge that he is of infinite knowledge, Job 42.2. Psalm. 139.2. Ierem.
17.10. Heb. 4.13.
and that nothing is hid from him, that he is the searcher of the heart and
reins, and that all things lie naked in his view.

Thirdly, his truth is acknowledged when as men appeal unto him as unto a
witness who cannot deceive nor be deceived, and who speaking the truth
himself does also defend it in others, and punish the contrary falsehood.

Lastly, his justice and power is in a lawful oath confessed and acknowledged,
when as we appeal unto him as a witness of infallible truth, and impartial
justice, who will give a just testimony without respect of persons; and as
unto an upright and most powerful Judge who is able to patronize and reward
truth, and to punish falsehood and untruth.

Secondly, it is profitable for men, because it is the chief confirmation of
our assurance in any truth,. Sect. 4. A lawful oath is profitable for men.
and more to be credited and respected, then the most manifest arguments and
truest witnesses that can be produced: and therefore the Apostle says, Heb.
6.16.
that an oath for confirmation is the end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. And
consequently great is the profit which is brings no mankind, seeing it is a
notable means, not only for the maintaining of truth and justice, but also for
the taking away of discord and dissensions, and for the establishing of peace
and Christian friendship.

Lastly,. Sect. 5. The use of a lawful oath warranted by examples.
the use of a lawful oath is not only warranted, but also commended unto us by
manifold examples in the Scriptures. As first, the Saints and holy men of God,
for the confirmation of necessary and vndemonstrable truths, and to put an end
to controversies and dissensions, have used to swear one to another: As
Abraham and Isaac to Abimilech, Jacob to Laban, Joseph to Jacob, David to
Jonathan, Elias to Obadiah, and many other. And lest it should be objected,
that howsoever they were holy Saints of God, yet they were men, and might
therefore err; we are further to know, that the holy men of God as they were
the penmen of holy Scripture, immediately inspired by the holy Ghost, and
consequently exempted from all error and sin, did in the penning of the
Scriptures confirm the truth of God by a lawful and pious oath. Examples
hereof are manifold: Romans 1.9. God is my witness, Romans 1.9. and 9.1.
whom I serve in my spirit. And 9.1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not my
conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost. The like paces we have, 1.
Cor. 15.31.2. Cor. 1.23. and 11.31. and 12.19. Gal. 1.10. Phil. 1.8.1. These.
2.5.10.2. These. 2.1.

So likewise the holy Angels, who are privileged from sin and error, have used
the name of their great Lord and Master in swearing by it. Dan. 12.7.
Dan. 12.7. it is said that the Angel held up his right hand and his left hand
unto heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever. Apoc. 10.5.6.
So Apoc. 10.5.6. But what should I stand upon the example of the creatures,
when as the great Creator of heaven and earth has approved the holy use of
an oath in his own practice? Genesis 22.16.
Genes. 22.16. By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou have
done this thing, etc. Numb. 14.28. Numb. 14.28.
As I live (says the Lord) I will surely do unto you even as ye have spoken
in mine ears. So Psalm. 110.4. and 132. 11. Esa. 14.24. and 45.23. and 54.9.
Iere. 44.26. Luke 1.73. Romans 14.11. Heb. 6.13.16.

Against this the Anabaptists object the saying of our Savior,. Sect. 6. An
objection out of Math. 5.34. answered.
Mat.chap.5. verse.34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by heaven,
for it is the throne of God, etc. Whence they gather, that howsoever swearing
was used and allowed under the Law, yet no manner of oaths are lawful in the
time of the Gospel. To which I answer, that their interpretation of these
words is both wicked and absurd: first, because they hereby make this Scripture
contradict other places which directly inioyne a lawful oath. Secondly, hereby
they make Christ condemn the practice of his holy Saints, and even of the
penmen of the holy Scriptures, yea of God the Father himself, as before has
bin showed. Yea they make Christ's precept contrary to his own practice, for
he himself upon weighty occasion used that earnest and solemn asseueration,
Amen, Amen; Verily, verily: which though it should be no oath, Heb. 6.14.
as the Apostle seems to implie that it is, Heb. 6.14. yet is it at least a
vehement asseueration, and consequently more then, yea, yea, and nay, nay. And
moreover, they make our Savior to contradict his own words, verse 17. where
he says, that he came not to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill
them: for if he should take away the use of a lawful oath, he should destroy
part of the Moral law, which inioyneth it as a part of Gods service, and
consequently should spoil God his Father of a part of his worship, which was
not only required under the Law, but also it was foretold that the Church of
Christ should also use it in the time of the Gospel: Esa. 19.18. and 65.16.
Esa. 19.18. and 65.16. Thirdly, hereby they overthrow the law of nature and
nations, which established a lawful oath in weighty and necessary causes even
before the law of Moses, as appears in the story of the Patriarchs. Lastly,
they hereby weaken truth, by plucking from it the chief band whereby it is
strengthened and confirmed; they take away the means to end controversies, and
together with it peace, amity, and agreement, and so leave a wide door open
to jealousy, suspicion, discord and dissension.

This interpretation therefore is not to be received,. Sect. 7. Math. 5.34
expounded.
but rather another which admits none of the former absurdities, and better
agrees with the maine drift and scope of Christ in this place. Now the drift
of Christ was not to take away the use of an oath, and so to disanull a part of
the law, against which in the beginning of his speech he protested, but to
vindicate and free it from the corrupt glosses and false expositions of the
Pharisees; who took away the spiritual understanding which is the chief life
of law, and expounded the Commandments (like the Papists in these days) in a
litterall and gross sense only, namely, of the outward fact alone in the
grossest kind. For example, that the sixth Commandment only forbids
actual killing; the seventh, actual uncleanness; and the third, perjury and
false swearing by the name of God. For howsoever they had the name of God
himself in some outward reverence, yet they taught that it was lawful to
swear in their ordinary communication by the creatures, which did not
immediately appertain to Gods worship and service, as the heavens, the earth,
the altar, their head and such like; because the Commandment only forbids
to take the name of the Lord our God in vain. And secondly, they taught that
if a man had sworn by these creatures, and did not keep his oath, yet he
sinned not, Leuit. 19.12.
because it is said, Leuit. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely,
neither shall thou defile the name of thy God. And this appears both in the
5. Matthew. 5.23.
and 23. Chapters of Mat. where Christ labors to confute this false
doctrine, and to reform these abuses. In the fifth Chapter, and verse 33. he
propounds their doctrine; Ye have heard that it was said to them of old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to
the Lord: but I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is
the throne of God, etc. Where he shows that they had in their doctrine
condemned forswearing, and not vain swearing, and this false swearing by the
name of God alone, and not by the creatures. So in the 23. Mat. 23.16.17.
Chapter, verse 16.17.18. they taught that they might swear by the Temple, by
the Altar, and by their head, and that all this was nothing, neither in regard
of their vain swearing, nor yet forswearing by these creatures. Now our
Savior labors to free the pure law of God from these spots of their false
interpretations, and shows, that not only he who had slain a man was a
murderer, but he who had been unjustly angry with him in his heart, and had
reviled him with his tongue; that he also was an adulterer before God, who in
his heart had lusted after a woman, as well as he who had lien with her.

So likewise he refuteth their false doctrine concerning oaths, and shows
that we must not in our ordinary communication swear at all, no not by the
creatures, because in these oaths the name of God is obliquely and indirectly
taken in vain, there remaining in them some prints and characters of Gods
power and Majesty: for they who swear by heaven, swear indirectly by God,
because heaven is his throne; so they what swear by the earth, swear also by
him, because it is his footstool; and in like manner the Temple and Altar
belong to his worship, and our heads they are his workmanship; and consequently
his name in them is taken in vain by usual swearing in ordinary
communication, and much more in perjury and false swearing, though not
directly, yet indirectly and obliquely.

But they further urge that our Savior expressly forbids us to swear at
all,. Sect. 8. The former objection further urged and answered.
and therefore we must not swear neither by the creatures, nor by God
himself, neither truly nor falsely, neither in ordinary communication, nor
yet before a Magistrate. To which I answer, that these words, at all, are not
to be referred to the oath it self, as though Christ should forbid to swear
in all cases, which reference; as I have showed, implies many absurdities: but
it is to be referred to the form and manner of the oath, namely, that we must
not swear at all falsely, rashly, and usually in our ordinary communication,
neither directly by the name of God, nor indirectly by the creatures, which
notwithstanding the Pharisees taught to be lawful. For that our Savior
speaks here only of private oaths it is manifest, in that they did not in
their public oaths before the Magistrates swear by the creatures, but by the
name of God alone. And so also it may be gathered out of the text it self:
for he says, let your communication, or ordinary speech one to another be,
yea yea, nay nay: neither does he forbid them to swear by the name of God,
which was used in public oaths, but by the creatures, namely, the heaven,
earth, altar, etc.

Yea,. Sect. 9. That an oath in private may be used lavvfully.
will some man say, but howsoever public oaths before the Magistrates, and
for the confirming of new Conuerts in the truth of Christian religion, may be
lawful, yet private oaths are here utterly condemned. I answer, that Christ
here only forbids rash, vain and usual swearing, when neither the
waightinesse nor necessity of the cause requires it, as being a matter which
is not worth the proving, by such a sovereign witness and Judge, or which may
be proved by other arguments and witnesses. Otherwise in weighty and
necessary causes, it is lawful for the confirmation of truth, the ending of
controversies, the taking away of doubtings, iealousies, and suspicions, and
for the preserving of a man's good name and credit, Exodus 22.10.
to swear privately as well as publicly, seeing the maine ends of a lawful
oath are attained unto, as well in the one as in the other. Examples hereof we
have in Abraham and Isaac swearing to Abimilech, Jacob to Laban, Joseph to
Jacob, David to Jonathan, and in many others.

Lastly,. Sect. 10. Object. 2. Iam. 5.12.
they object the saying of James, chap. 5. verse. 12. But above all things, my
brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath:
but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation. The
which words are all one in substance with those of our Savior Christ's, and
therefore admit of the same interpretation, and consequently the objection
needs no other answer; otherwise James should condemn Paul, the holy Ghost
should be contrary to himself, and all those absurdities before spoken of
must necessarily follow.

CHAP. III. Of the object of lawful oaths: where is showed that it is only
lawful to swear by the name of God alone.
ANd thus have I showed that a man may in some cases take a lawful oath..
Sect. 1. what things are required to a lavvfull oath.
In the next place we are to show what oaths are lawful, and what unlawful;
unto a lawful oath diverse things are required, whereof some respect the object
of our oaths, some the end, and some the manner. We must swear only by the
name of the true God. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
In respect of the object it is required that we swear only by the name of
God, as may appear by these reasons; first, because the Lord has as straightly
commanded us to swear by him alone, as to worship and serve him alone. So
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, Esa. 45.23. and
65.16.
and shall swear by his name. Esa. 45.23. I have sworn by my self, etc. that
every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me. And 65.16.
He that that shall bless in the earth, shall bless himself in the true God,
and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the true God. And
contrariwise the Lord has as strictly forbidden us to swear by any other
besides himself, Ios. 23.7.
as appears, Ios. 23.7. Make no mention of the name of their gods, nor cause
to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow unto them; which when the people
of Israel neglected, the Lord threatens to punish them for it. Ier. 5.7.
Ier. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and
sworn by them that are no gods. Exodus 23.13.

Secondly, Exodus 23.13.
a lawful oath is a part of Gods worship, as being a kind of invocation, and
therefore they commit gross idolatry who give it to any other.

Thirdly, all our actions must proceed from faith grounded upon Gods word, but
in the whole Scriptures we have no warrant, neither by precept nor example, to
swear directly by any thing saving by the name of God, or to call either Angel
or Saint as witness to confirm a doubtful truth.

For whereas it is objected that Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh,. Sect. 2.
Of Joseph's oath.
and that therefore it is lawful to swear by the creatures; unto this we may
answer: First that Joseph, to the end he might continue unknown unto his
brethren, took upon him the custom of the Egyptians, and therein sinned
through infirmity, and therefore his example is no president for us. Secondly,
Joseph may be excused by the manner of his speech; for he does not say by the
life of Pharaoh, but, Pharaoh lives, or, so let Pharaoh live, as you shall not
go hence; which is not properly an oath, but a prayer added to an oath,
wherein he desires God to grant that Pharaoh might as certainly live, as they
should not depart.

Fourthly, whatsoever we swear by, that we deifie, in communicating unto it
Gods incommunicable attributes, as his omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotence,
whereby he can powerfully protect his truth, and punish al falsehood; al which
are so peculiar to God as that they cannot be communicated with any creature.

But is it then simply unlawful to use the name of any creature in our
others?. Sect. 3. Whether we may use the name of a creature in our oaths.
I answer, that it is unlawful to swear by them simply and directly;
nevertheless they may be lawfully used in a compound form of an oath, when
as God by them is inuocated, as when we pray for some good to befall us, or
them who are dear unto us, upon the condition of our truth: or imprecate some
evil, if we speak falsely, or when we oblige those things of which we make
greatest esteem, to Gods justice, as sureties of our truth. Examples whereof
we have 1. 1. Sam. 1.26. and 25.22.
Sam. 1.26. and 25.22

In respect then of the object we swear lawfully,. Sect. 4. Our oaths are
unlawful when we swear by any thing besides the true God, or join any
thing with him.
when we swear by the true Jehovah only, and consequently our oaths are
unlawful, when as we swear directly by any other thing. In which regard there
are two kinds of unlawful oaths: first, when as we swear by any thing
besides the true God; secondly, when as in our oaths we join any other with
him. They who use the former kind of swearing commit the most impious kind of
theft, robbing God of his glory, to bestow it upon an Idol: the other show
their graceless folly in making base Idols, and silly creatures, corriuals
in honor and compeeres in the throne of justice, unto the Lord, who is the
Creator of heaven and earth, and the supreme Judge and sole Monarch of all the
world. Of the former the Lord accuses the people of Judah, Ier. 5.7.
Ier. 5.7. Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods.
Whereby is plainly implied that they who swear by any thing besides the Lord,
do renounce him and his true worship; Zeph. 1.4.5.
and for the latter he threatens destruction, Zeph. 1.4.5. I will cut off them
that worship and swear by the Lord. and swear by Malcham. For the Lord being
the peerless sovereign of heaven and earth, cannot endure that any other
should have, Esa 48.11.
or share with him in, his glory, as himself also professes, Esa. 48.11.

Here therefore are condemned all oaths which are not by the name of the true
God;. Sect. 5. Petty and childish oaths unlawful.
of which there are many kinds: first those petty, diminutiue, and childish
oaths which are so much in use in these days; bodikin, lakin, by cock, by my
fey, and such like; all which are the fruits of ignorance and superstition:
for men seeing the inexcusable evil of profaning the glorious name of God, in
their ordinary communication, upon every trifling occasion, and having so
inured their tongues to swearing, that they think there is a kind of
necessity of using some kind of oaths, either for ornament of speech, or to
gain more credit to their words; they imagine that God will excuse them if
they do not directly take his name in vain, but use only these trifling and
petty oaths in their ordinary speech. But what is this but to jest with holy
things, and to mock the Lord, who will not be mocked? As though he regarded
the pronunciation and outward sound more than the oath it self; or being
displeased, to have his titles and attributes commonly used, should be
contented to have them nicknamed in a ridiculous manner. What is it but quite
to overthrow the lawful use of an oath, which is ordained by God, only for
the confirmation of a weighty and necessary truth, and not to be used
ordinarily and upon every trifling occasion? so that if the matter be light
and vain we must not swear at all; if so weighty that we may lawfully
swear, then likewise is it lawful to use the glorious name of God in an holy
and religious manner.

Secondly,. Sect. 6. Swearing by the creatures condemned. Matthew 5. and 23
here is condemned swearing by the creatures; as, by the Sun, light, fire,
bread, and such like: which kind of oaths were in use among the Pharisees, as
our Savior shows, Matthew. 5. and 23. and are commonly used amongst ignorant
worldlings in these days; wherein as they rob God of his glory, and as it
were spoil the Creator to enrich the creature, so do they hereby exceedingly
dishonor themselves, in that being their superiors by creation, they make
themselves inferior unto them in swearing by them: for as the Apostle
speaks, men swear by him that is greater then themselves, Heb. 6.16.
and make them their Judges, whom God has made their servants.

Of this kind also are Papisticall oaths,. Sect. 7. Papisticall oaths
condemned as unlawful.
by the Angels, Saints, and their relics; by their Idols, the Mass, Roode,
and such like; for as they worship the Saints by invocation, oblations,
pilgrimages, etc. so also by swearing by them, the which their practice is
impious and vain; the impiety hereof is manifest, in that they rob God of his
glory, and deifie the creatures by ascribing unto them divine worship; the
vanity of such oaths herein appears, in that they are idle and bootlesse,
for in vain it is and to no purpose to invoke any to bear witness of our
truth, and to punish falsehood, unless we acknowledge them present every
where, the beholders of the most secret actions, yea even the searchers of the
heart and reins, and almighty to patronise truth, and to inflict deserved
punishments upon perjured persons: but all these are Gods proper and peculiar
attributes, which are not communicable unto any Saint or Angel, for neither
are they omnipresent, omniscient, nor omnipotent; and therefore it is idle and
vain to invoke them by an oath, as witnesses of truth and reuengers of
falsehood.

Thirdly,. Sect. 8. Elasphemous oaths condemned.
here is condemned those blasphemous oaths by the several parts of Christ's
body, which are commonly used by impious men, even in ordinary communication,
wherewith as much as in them lies, they tear the precious body of Jesus
Christ in pieces and crucify him afresh: or if these blasphemies proceed from
superstitious ignorance, then this their practice is idolatrous, in yt they
deifie the members of Christ, by ascribing unto the^, whilst they swear by
the^, Gods incommunicable attributes. For howsoever we may lawfully swear by
Christ man, yet it is not lawful to swear by his humanity, and much less by
the parts of his body.

Lastly,. Sect. 9. Heathenish oaths condemned. Exodus 23.13. Hos 2.17. Genesis
31.13. Iere. 14.16.
here is condemned Heathenish oaths by the gods of the Gentiles, which we are
forbidden so much as to remember by their names, as appears Exodus 23.13. Hos.
2.17. An example whereof we have in Laban, Genesis 31.53. in the Israelites,
Ierem. 14.16. and in many scholars amongst our selves, who affecting the
Latin elegancie, use in their orations and exercises Heathenish oaths, as
aedipol, mehercule, per Iouem immortalem, etc. But accursed be that elegancie
which is joined with idolatry, and robs God of his glory, to bestow it
upon Idols.

And so much concerning the object of our oaths.. Sect. 10. Of the end of a
lavvfull oath.
Now we are briefly to speak of the end, in regard whereof it is required,
that our oath does principally respect the glory of God, and secondarily our
own, or our neighbors good. We glorify God in our oath, when as confirming
thereby a necessary truth, we magnify his omniscience, justice, and power: we
benefit our selves, when as we maintain our own right, or defend our own
innocence; our neighbor, either when we persuade him to believe a necessary
truth, or take away the causes of discord and contention.

In respect therefore of the end we swear unlawfully,. Sect. 11. How an oath
is unlawful in respect of the end.
when in taking our oath we do not respect, either the glory of God, or our
own or our neighbors good; as when through rage and anger men burst out into
swearing, as though they would revenge themselves upon God for the injuries
they have received of men. When in ordinary dealing they countenance a
profitable lie by a false oath; and when as by stuffing their ordinary talk
with vain oaths, they affect the praise of a generous and courageous spirit,
or seek for their oaths sake to have all their words credited. But that is
but a weak proof either of Gentilitie or Nobility, which is a manifest
argument that we are the slaves of Satan; it is no true courage desperately to
leap into hell fire; and ordinary swearing is no sign of truth, seeing it
usually proceeds from a gulitie conceit of their own want of credit: for if
they thought their word worthy respect, to what purpose should they use
oaths? Nay rather usual swearing is a sign of the swearers falsehood; for
therefore they swear because their simple word is of no credit. And when they
have done all they can, an honest man's word is better to be esteemed then al
their oaths, nam qui deierat peierat, he that often swears, often
forsweareth.

CHAP. IIII. Of the properties of a lawful oath.
ANd so much for the end of our oaths. In respect of the manner, we swear
lawfully when we swear in truth, justice, and judgment; all which are
required unto a lawful oath by the Lord himself: Iere. 4.2. And thou shall
swear the Lord lives, Iere. 4.2.
in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

First,. Sect. 1. 1. We must swear in truth.
it is required yt we swear in truth, that is, first that in our oath, our
speech agree with the thing: and secondly, our mind with our speech. And
contrariwise we swear unlawfully, when we fail in either of these; that is,
when we swear a thing that is false, or falsely. A thing false, when as we
swear an untruth, the speech disagreeing with the thing; which is done
purposely or unadvisedly.

Falsely, when as we swear the truth, but deceitfully and with a purpose to
deceive, the heart and tongue not agreeing together, the which sin is
forbidden and condemned, Leuit. 19.12. and punished with Gods fearful curse,
Leuit. 19.12. Zach. 5.4.
Zach. 5.4. Nevertheless, howsoever this be condemned as a great sin in Gods
word, and abhorred as a detestable practice even amongst the ancient Heathens;
yet it is justified as lawful by the Papists, both in their practice and
writings; who avouch that a man may use in his oaths, equivocations, and
mental reseruations, wherein oftentimes the mind and tongue are opposed to one
another in flat contrariety.

And this is that false swearing, which in the word of God is principally
condemned, and therefore to be of all Christians avoided, as being a mother
sin who in her fruitful womb contains diverse impieties, and a compound
wickedness, comprising in it diverse enormous transgressions; as hereafter
shall appear.

The second property required to a lawful oath,. Sect. 2. 2. We must swear
in justice.
is that we swear in justice, which property has his special place in a
promissorie oath; which when we make we are carefully to take heed, that that
which by oath we promise be just and lawful; otherwise we are not to swear
it, or having sworn, not to perform it: for an oath ought not to be the bond
of iniquity; and, as one says, those oaths are laudably broken, which are
unlawfully made.

In this respect therefore our oath is unlawful, when as thereby we promise
any thing which is unjust and dishonest, whether it appear unto us presently
when we make the oath, or afterward. For this is a horrible wickedness, when
as we make God not only a witness, but also our suertie, that we will
perform an unjust or dishonest action. And such was the oath of David, 1. Sam.
25.21. of Gehezie, 1. Sam. 25.21. 2. Kin. 5.20. 2 Kin. 6.31. Act. 23.12.
2. King. 5.20. of Achab, 2. King. 6.31. of the Jews, Act. 23.12. And such is
the oath of the Popish Clergy, who having not the gift of continency, vow
virginity; and of those who being young, swear themselves to the Cloisters
against their parents will, etc.

So if after the oath is made, we find that there is impiety and injustice
in it, which we did not discover at the making thereof, then such an oath is
rather to be broken then observed; for we sin not in breaking, but in making
of it. Whereas he that performs such an oath, adds sin unto sin, that
is to say, unto rashness in swearing, wickedness in performing: as we may see
in the example of Herod, who after he had made a wicked oath, Mar. 6.23.
did perform it with greater wickedness. And this David knew well, and
therefore he made no conscience of breaking that unlawful oath, which he had
unconscionably made, as appears 1. Sam. 25.21.3.

The third property required to a lawful oath is,. Sect. 3. 3. VV must swear
in judgment.
that we swear in judgment, that is, that we use the name of God in our
oaths reverently, and holily, conscionably, and with great deliberation and
circumspection. And secondly, that we use it sparingly, when as we are
necessarily urged thereunto. As when the person unto whom we swear can no
otherwise be persuaded of a necessary truth, when as the truth cannot be
demonstrated, by reason, testimony, or other arguments, when as it is
necessary for the advancement of Gods glory, or for the furthering of some
charitable work, either public or private, respecting either our neighbor or
our selves. For seeing an oath is not absolutely good but upon the condition of
necessity, therefore we must not swear but when some necessary cause
constrains us; for, bonum necessarium extra termines necessitatis non est
bonum: that is, a necessary good is not good but when it is necessary. And
hence it is that the Hebrew word used for swearing being passive, Iere. 4.2.
Esa. 65.16.
signifies to be sworn rather then to swear; whereby is implied that we are
not to take an oath as voluntary agents, but oly as patients when as
necessity urges us thereunto, as Pagnine has observed.

We therefore swear unlawfully when as we do not swear in judgment, that
is, when we swear irreverently, rashly, and unnecessarily; in which respect
men principally offend when as no necessity urging them, upon every slight
occasion, idely, rashly, and vainly they profane the holy name of God in
their ordinary communication. The which manner of swearing justified by the
Pharisees, Christ condemns, Mat. 5.34. Matthew. 5.34. Iam. 5.12.
And the Apostle James disswadeth from it, Iam. 5.12. Yea even the Heathens
themselves who had only the light of nature to be their guide, did dislike
this vain and rash swearing by their Idols and false gods. And therefore, as
Plutarch records, the Romans would not suffer their children to swear by
the Idol Hercules within doors, Plutarch. quaest. Romans
but inioined them first to go abroad, that hereby they might restrain them
from rash swearing, and give unto them time to deliberate of their oath.

Notwithstanding, Sect. 4. Of profane and vain swearing in ordinary
communication.
howsoever the Lord has straightly forbidden and condemned this sin, and
though the Heathens themselves made some conscience of it, yet this horrible
profanation of Gods holy name so exceedingly reigns in our times, even
among those who profess Christianity, that by reason of these vain oaths
and impious blasphemies, the land mourns, being oppressed with the heavy
burden of this sin, and Gods fearful judgments which usually accompany
it, Iere. 23.10. That all sorts of men are corrupted with this vice of vain
swearing. 1. Magistrates.
as the Prophet Jeremy complains of his times. Neither has this graceless
vice of profaning Gods name, corrupted some few persons in this our country,
but has ouerspread all states and conditions of men. Our Magistrates who
should restrain men from this sin, by their laws, examples, and
punishments, make no laws against swearing, lest they should prepare a net to
catch themselves; nor inflict any punishments upon offenders in this kind,
because their own consciences are guilty of the same sins; or to speak the
best, because such is the multitude of blasphemers, that they think it vain
to make laws, seeing there is no likelihood of execution, there being not enough
innocent to punish the offenders. And howsoever they severely punish any
reproachful speeches uttered against themselves, yet when God is blasphemed
they wink at it, and leave the revenge wholly to himself, saying in their
hearts, as Ioash said of the Idol Baal, Judge. 6.31. Iud. 6.31.
Why should we contend in Gods cause? if he be God let him plead for himself,
against those who blaspheme his name. But let such know that the Lord will
surely take them at their word; and howsoever through his patience he suffers
long, yet in the end he will severely punish such Magistrates, as make their
own evil practice a pernicious president to the people; and such also who
having authority to punish this sin, do carry the sword in vain, never
drawing it out against these impious swearers, no nor so much as touching them
with the scabberd.

Our Nobility likewise for the most part are much infected with this vice,.
Sect. 5. Our Nobility tainted with vain swearing.
who more contend to show their spirit and valor by desperare swearing, then
by feats of arms; not caring in most profane manner to dishonor his holy
name by usual and vain swearing, who has advanced them to all their honor,
and made them like glorious stars in the globe of the earth in comparison of
the common sort. But who so they be that continue in this sin of vain swearing,
they show no sign of true courage, or Christian valor, but rather their base
subjection unto sin and Satan, in whose bondage and thraldom they cowardly
remain, never making any resistance, nor striving to recover their
Christianliberty which Christ with the precious price of his blood has
purchased for us.

Our Gentilitie also are much corrupted with this sin,. Sect. 6. The Gentilitie.
who uses oaths as rhetorical elegancies and ornaments of their speech,
foolishly imagining yt they much grace themselves, when they disgrace and
dishonor their Creator; that they proclaim their gentilitie, when by
blasphemous oaths, they spread (as it were) their flagge of defiance against
all piety, that they make all men give credit to their speeches, when by their
often redoubled oaths it appears, that they scarce believe themselves. But
such as vaunt themselves in this wicked practice, they glory in their shame,
and their end will be damnation, Phil. 3.19.
as the Apostle speaks, unless they turn from their sin, by unfeigned
repentance.

And as they use their impious swearing in a devilish bravery to grace
themselves,. Sect. 7. Oaths used to hide Cowardice.
and to gain credit to all their assertio^s; so also oftentimes in a dastardly
cunning to hide their cowardice: for it is not seldom seen that the veriest
henhearted gulls, are most rife in ruffenlie oaths, to strike an awefull
terror in the hearts of their hearers, and to work in them a conceit, that
they are such desperate hacksters, as may not without extreme danger be
gainesaid, much less withstood; there being no likelihoode that men can escape
their desperate fury, seeing in their audacious hardines they are ready to
provoke God himself, and offer a kind of devilish violence against his
powerful majesty by their hellish blasphemies. Whereas it will plainly
appear if these ruffians be unmasked by the least trial, and this outward
skin of lion-like fury be pulled from these Asses, that they are only
valiant in bearing blows, and only resolute and desperate in provoking Gods
wrath by their bloody oaths, and in wilful leaping into the fire of hell.

The like may be said of their Seruingmen,. Sect. 8. Seruingmen much addicted
to vain swearing.
and attendants: for like master, like man; neither are they more ready to
follow and wait upon their persons, then to imitate their corrupt manners; yea
and as they are more base in condition, so are they usually more barbarous and
brutish in their impiety. In all which their graceles carriage, they are much
graced by their irreligious masters, and exceedingly animated in their
wickedness by their liking and approbation. For are not those in our times
most respected and countenanced by profane gentlemen, as being the fittest men
to grace them by their service, that can desperately swear, swagger like
ruffians, bear most drink, and put up least injury, without taking sharp
revenge? are not those thought to advance most their masters credit, who in
every sentence rap out an oath, and who in their talk wanting either words or
matter, supply the defect of both, and bumbast (as it were) the empty places
of their sentences with impious blasphemies? whereas contrariewise, if any that
fears God be entertained into these services, who walks in the sincerity
of his heart before God, makes conscience of an oath, and sets a watch
before the door of his lips that he offend not with his tongue, he is accounted
by his master to be but a shallow and simple fellow, altogether unfit for any
employment, and wondered at amongst his fellows, like an owl amongst little
birds.

Neither are these men before spoken of,. Sect. 9. Our Citizens given to vain
swearing.
guilty of this vice alone, amongst whom we are taught by long experience to
expect no better fruits; but even our citizens, who in respect of their
profession should be of a sober and civil conversation, and in regard of the
spiritual means which they have long inioyed, ought to be virtuous and
religious, do exceedingly abound in this sin; sometimes ruffian-like,
swearing for a graceless grace; sometimes miser-like for their gane and
advantage, selling their souls unto Satan by vain and impious swearing, that
hereby they may make the better sale of their wares. But that is a miserable
bargain, when the soul is given in to boot for some trifling gain, which
cannot be ransomed with the whole world.

Nor yet does this sin reign only amongst the youth of this City, who are
in the heat of their blood, and (in respect of that licentiousness which this
age challenges unto it self) in the height of sin; but it bears sway also
amongst our grave citizens, whose old years and gray heads, should teach them
more wisdom; amongst householders, masters, and parents, who as they should
be paternes of piety unto their family, and (in respect that they are Gods
lieutenants, and as it were petty Kings in their own house) punishers of all
manner of impiety; they contrariwise become presidents and patrons, as of all
other vices, so especially of swearing; and by their bad example, both teach
and encourage their children and servants in this impiety.

And hence it is, Apprenties and children nuzled up in swearing.
that their Apprentises, who heretofore were brought up by a seuerer
discipline, in modesty and sobriety, are now ready to swagger and swear like
graceless ruffins: yea even their young children following their example,
learn their oaths with their language, and as soon as they are come to the
use of speech, abuse their tongues to blasphemous swearing, which were given
them to be the instruments of Gods praise. No marvel therefore seeing they
begin so young, if they grow to be exquisite swearers when they come to elder
age; neither is it any wonder if they ripen in wickedness faster then they
ripen in years, seeing such a foundation of impiety is laid in their tender
youth. But let such parents and masters know, that Gods heavy curse lies upon
them for the wicked education of their youth, that their blood shall be
required at their hands, at the dreadful day of judgment, seeing they have
perverted and destroyed them, by their bad example and loose government; in
which respect, much better were it for them, that a millstone were tied about
their necks and they cast into the sea, then that they should thus offend
these little ones, and by their ill presidents, lead them into their sins,
and so plunge them headlong into eternal perdition.

And as all sorts of people are poisoned with this sin of profane swearing,
No place privileged from this sin of vain swearing.
so is there not any place free from this wickedness. If you go into the
Court, you would think that you are come into a school of blasphemy; if you
walk in the streets of the City, you would imagine that you are come amongst
their scholars, who have heard this lecture of impiety, and are now repeating
it, that they may grow more perfect. Turn aside into the country, and you
shall find, that the silliest are wise enough to this evil, and that the
rudest in speech can be eloquent in blasphemy; as though howsoever they are
excelled by courtiers and citizens, in riches and costly attire; yet they
disdained that they should surpass them in bravery of swearing, and in
variety of new fashioned oaths.. Sect. 10. No time nor occasion thought unfit
for this sin.


There is no time thought unseasonable for this sin, no company priuledged,
no occasion so unfit which will not minister to these miscreants matter of
blasphemy. Are they merry? then oaths fly out apace as though they were the
music of their mirth. Are they incensed with furious anger? they can express
their rage no better, then by despiting God with their bloody oaths. Are they
recreating themselves in games and pastimes? If they be crossed in their
pleasures, or sustain any loss, they express their passion by cursed
swearing. Are they employed in their worldly business, in buying and selling,
or laboring with their hands? on every occasion, they blaspheame Gods holy
name, either when they would get profit, or do sustain any damage and hurt.
Are they offended with any? they show their displeasure in the language of
oaths. Are they satisfied and well pleased with any occurrent? then as
ravished in some wondrous ecstasy of joy, they make their oaths express their
contentment. Are they resolved to perpetrate any wickedness? they confirm
their purposes with bloody oaths, bringing upon themselves a wilful
necessity of doing evil, because they have obliged themselves thereunto, with
the religious bond of an oath, and have made God himself the suertie of their
sin. In a word, unto such a custom and habit of swearing are men come in
these days, that (like men desperately diseased) their excrements and filth
come from them at unawares, in so much as when a man reproues them for their
blasphemies, they are ready to swear that they did not swear. And as by much
labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor; so much
swearing causes such a brawnie skin of senselesnes, to ouerspread the heart,
memory, and conscience, that the swearer oftentimes swears at unawares, and
having sworn has no remembrance of his oath, and much less repentance for
his sin.

To conclude this point; Sect. 11. The great variety of oaths which are
commonly used.
as there is great plenty, so is there also great variety of oaths: for men
swearing more in pride and bravery, then for necessity, it is come to pass,
that as they take pride in change of suites and strange kinds of apparel, so
also in variety of new-fashioned oaths. And as there are some who tire their
wits in the invention of strange tires, and new habits: so are there in our
sinful times some limbs of Satan, who devise unheard of oaths, that by this
variety they may take away all satietie of swearing, and keep themselves and
others, from being glutted with the common use of the same oaths. Some swear
by the creatures, some by the Saints, Mass and Rhoode, some by the dreadful
name of God; but most of all blaspheme our Savior Christ himself, pulling his
soul from his body, and tearing peecemeale his precious members one from
another, diuersisying their oaths according to the diverse parts of his sacred
body. But let all such know, that as they wantonize in their sin, and
impiously invent new kinds of blasphemies, to the great dishonor of almighty
God, so the Lord will be as acute and ingenious in inuenting new and unheard
of plagues, for the punishment of their impiety; and will glorify that name
which they have dishonored, by inflicting on them deserved vengeance. And if a
whole volume will not contain the multitude of their oaths, then the Lord
has in store for them, a whole volume of his plagues, and that in the largest
folio, Zach. 5.2.3.
as appears, Zach. 5.2.3. So that those who hearing their blasphemies, have
been moved to doubt of the divine justice, power and providence, because such
hellish impiety is not presently punished; in the end seeing the fearfulness
of their plagues, shall conclude with the Prophet David: Doubtless there is a
God that judges the earth. Psalm. 58.11.


CHAP. V. Motives to persuade all men to leave vain swearing.
WHich judgments and punishments if we would escape,. Sect. 1.
let us hate and flee from this odious sin of profane swearing; and that we
may the rather be moved hereunto, let these reasons persuade us: First, 1.
Because the Lord has forbidden and condemned it.
because the Lord in his law has forbidden and condemned it, yea and that
after a special manner; for whereas he has given us ten Commandments, he
has added a commination or threatening but unto two of them, the first
forbidding idolatry and false worship, the other taking his name in vain; to
note unto us that idolatry and profanation of his holy name, are such odious
sins in his sight, that of all other he will not let them go unpunished.
And in the new Testament our Savior Christ likewise has revived and ratified
this law by his repetition and explanation: Matthew. 5.34. Swear not at all,
Mat. 5.34 35. Dico vobis, ne omnino iuretis ne sci'icet iurando ad facilitatem
iurandi veniatur, and ex facilitate ad consuetudinem. atque ita ex consuetudine
in periurium decidatur. Aug. ad Consentium de Mendac. cap. 15. Chromat. in Mat.
cap. 5.
neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God: 35. Nor yet by the earth, for
it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great
King. 36. Neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black. But let your communication be yea yea, nay nay: for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. In which words (as Austine
observes) our Savior inioyneth us not to swear at all, to wit, in our
ordinary communication, lest swearing beget facility of swearing, facility
custom, and custom perjury. And, as another says, for this cause our Lord
forbids, not only to forswear, but also to swear, lest we should then
only seem to speak the truth when we confirm it by an oath; or lest those
who ought to utter nothing but truth in all their speeches, should imagine
lying without an oath lawful. And that we may the rather be moved to yield
obedience to this commandment, he adioyneth a strong reason; namely, that
whatsoever is more in our ordinary communication, then yea yea, or nay nay,
comes of evil. For either it is evil in him that swears, as when he
swears voluntarily, vainly, and without cause; or when having made shipwreck
of his credit by his customable lying, he cannot gain belief to his speeches
without an oath. Or else it is evil in him who compels another to an oath,
when as causlesly he suspecteth his truth, and will not give credit to his
assertions or promises, though his word be of approved credit, and his whole
course of life upright and just. The Apostle James also following in the steps
of his Lord and Master, inforceth this commandment with no small vehemency:
Iam 5.12.
Iam. 5.12. Before all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor
by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay,
lest you fall into condemnation. So that it is not a commandment of least
regard, or a matter of small moment to abstain from vain swearing, seeing the
Apostle charge us above al things to forbear from these unnecessary oaths,
in our ordinary communication, and to content our selves with a simple
affirmation of the truth, and negation of that which is otherwise.

Secondly,. Sect. 2. 2. Because all kind of vain swearing is a grievous sin.
we are to avoid this profane practice of vain swearing, because it is an
heinous sin, what manner of oaths soever we use: for if we swear by any
thing which is not God, we hereby deifie it, by ascribing unto it Gods
incommunicable attributes of omniscience, omnipresence, omnipotence, as has
been showed, and so spoil the Lord of his glory by attributing it to the
creatures; and likewise an oath being a kind of invocation, and consequently a
part of Gods worship, we commit an high degree of idolatry, when as we
communicate it unto any creature.

If we usually swear by Gods holy name, we by making it common do pollute and
profane it, contrary to the express commandment of almighty God. Leu.
22.32. Ye shall not pollute my holy name, Leuit. 21.32.
but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel. For that is said in the
Scriptures to be polluted and made unclean, which being in it self good and
holy, is profaned by common use; whereof it is that these phrases of speech,
to be made common and to be polluted, are promiscuously taken in the same
signification, Act. 10.14.
as appears Act. 10.14. And secondly, this profane swearing exceedingly
derogateth from Gods glorious majesty: for if every ordinary man holds
himself mocked and abused, when he is often called upon by his name, the
party who calls him having nothing to say unto him; and if the meanest
Prince upon the earth would account it a foul disgrace and great disparagement
to his estate, if his mean subjects should appeal unto him as their Judge in
every trifling business, and produce him as a witness in every slight cause,
which either needs no proof, as being a matter of no importance, or may
easily be proved, either by manifest reasons, or more inferior testimonies;
then what dishonor and disgrace do we offer to this supreme Majesty, the
most glorious King of heaven and earth, when in our ordinary speeches and
businesses we do in an idle and senseless manner name him, having no occasion
at all to speak unto him, or invoke him by our oaths as a witness or
Judge, in every trifling and needless business, which either deserves no
proof, or may easily be proved by other means; seeing he is the chief
sovereign and supreme Judge of heaven and earth, unto whom we are only to
appeal in matters of highest nature and greatest necessity.

Lastly,. Sect. 3. That it is a great sin to swear by the several parts of
Christ.
if according to the common practice of the sons of Belial, we blasphemously
swear by the several parts of Jesus Christ, as his flesh, blood, heart and
such like; what do we else but as much as in us lies in most despitefull
manner crucify him afresh, and make a mock of his incarnation and sufferings?
What do we but most ungratefully dishonor him, who took upon him our frail
flesh, endured a miserable life, and suffered a cursed death that so he might
work the work of our redemption, make us of the heirs of perdition and
firebrands of hell, the children of God, and inheritours of the eternal joys
of Gods kingdom? In a word, what do we else hereby but causlesly aggrauate
the heinousness of our sins, and plunge our bodies and souls into a fearful
degree of condemnation? Judas is a condemned wretch in hell, because he
betrayed his master unto the high Priests to be crucified, for thirty pieces
of silver; what a fearful sentence then are they to expect, who themselves
crucify and tear in pieces his most precious body, having no inducement of
pleasure, profit, or credit, to draw them unto it, but through mere vanity or
maliciousness, whereby they are ready to gratify the devil, by despiting
God himself? The soldiers are justly taxed and reproved for parting but the
garments of Jesus Christ; and therefore how much more are they worthy of
rebuke and punishment who divide and tear in pieces his glorious and
indivisible person, his manhood from his Godhead, his soul from his body, and
all his blessed members one from another? The Jews grievously sinned (as all
confess) in crucifying the Lord of life; but these blasphemers sin in diverse
respects much more grievously: for they sinned of ignorance, because they did
not know him to be the promised Messiah; these of knowledge, after they have
confessed and professed that he is the Savior of mankind: they called upon
Pilate to have him crucified, these crucify him themselves, and in stead of
cross and nails, they rend him in pieces between their own teeth: they
committed this sin but once, these innumerable times, every day in the
year, every hour in the day, speaking no oftener then they do blaspheme: they
sinned against him in the state of humiliation when he was but in the form of
a servant; these after he is exalted to glory and majesty, sitting at the
right hand of God, as the sovereign Lord and Judge of heaven and earth. Many
of them were pricked in conscience, and repented of their sin at the hearing of
one sermon; Act. 3.17.
these have no sight, sense nor remorse of their sins, though their
consciences have been often convinced in the ministry of the word; and though
the Lord has for many years together granted them the means of their
conversion, yet they continue in their sin, and in their hardness of heart.
As therefore they surpass them in sin, so surely they shall exceed them in
punishment; and as it shall be easier for Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah at
the day of judgment, then for the people of the Jews; so shall it be easier
for the Jews at that day, then for these blasphemers.

Thirdly, we are to abhor this vain and profane swearing,. Sect. 4. 3.
Because vain swearing does smother the chief graces of Gods spirit.
because it does smother and choke in us the chief graces of Gods spirit. As
for example, invocation and prayer; for with what face can we presume in the
time of want and affliction, to call upon that name for help, which we have
so often abused by profane swearing? So also faith in Christ's merits; for how
can we believe that Christ's body was crucified for us, which we so often and
despitefully crucify unto our selves afresh, or that his blood shall wash away
our sins, which by impious and profane swearing we have so often trampled
under our feet as an unholy thing, making but a mock of it? It overthrows
also our affiance in Christ, both in this life, and at the day of judgment;
for how can we trust in him as our Savior, whom we daily despite as though
he were our enemy? how can we when we are cited before the tribunal of
Christ, hold up our heads with any assurance of favor, when as our
consciences shall tell us, that we have seldom remembered him, but to blaspheme
him, and have more often named him in our oaths, then in our prayers?

Fourthly, this vain swearing is to be avoided,. Sect. 5. 4. Because this vice
ill beseems a Christian. 2. Col. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29.
because it is a vice which ill beseems those who make profession of
Christianity; for a Christians speech should be poudred with salt, and not
with oaths; it should not be unsavory, and much less stinking and noysom:
it should minister grace to the hearers, and not like a contagious leprosy
infect the weak, nor like thorns and swords, vex and grieve the strong. For
howsoever evil men can easily pass it over, when they hear Gods name
dishonored, as being a thing which does not at all concern them; yet if those
who truly fear the Lord and be zealous of his glory, hear these
blasphemies, their heart quaketh, their joints tremble, and their hair
stands up an end, as it is, Eccl. 27.14.

Moreover it is an undoubted badge, and infallible note of a profane person
who makes conscience of no sin, but would (if he might with as little danger
or discredit do it) commit any manner of wickedness. And hence it is, that as
Solomon makes it a true note of a faithful man, to have a reverent respect of
an oath; so he pinneth it as a badge upon the wicked man's sleeue, Eccle. 9.2.
that he makes no conscience of customable swearing. For as he parallelleth
and opposes the wicked to the just, the pure to the polluted, the sinner to
the good man: so likewise, the usual swearer to him that fears an oath. The
reason is manifest, for if neither Gods love, mercy, goodness, nor the
innumerable benefits which he has multiplied on them, can restrain them from
this vain and unprofitable sin, wherein there is no respect, so much as of
any worldly good; then we may undoubtedly conclude, that were it not for fear
of humane laws, they would if their lusts moved them, as easily and readily
commit adultery, theft, or any other capital sin, which have the worldly
baits of pleasure, profit, or preferment to allure them; for he that will not
stick to offend God, gratis, and for no benefit, will much more do it, when
he is hired with pleasure or profit.

Fifthly,. Sect. 6. 5. Because vain swearing is an horrible abuse of our
tongues.
because it is an horrible abuse of our tongue, when as the Lord having given
this excellent member, for the setting forth of his glory, we abuse it to his
dishonor, by blaspheming our Creator, and make that which should be the
trumpet of Gods praise, the trumpet of Satan, to proclaim war against heaven,
and an open defiance against God and all goodness. Whereby we justly deserve
(seeing we thus abuse this excellent faculty of speech, which the Lord has
privileged us with, above all the rest of his creatures, to the dishonor of
the giver; and whereas the heavens declare the glory of God and the earth
shows his handie work, and all the rest of the creatures in their several
kinds do with their dumb eloquence magnify and praise their Creator, we
contrariwise disgrace him with hellish blasphemies and impious oaths:) we
deserve, I say, that the Lord should strike us with present dumbnes, and cast
us out as he did Nebucadnezer, from the society of men, amongst the brute and
savage beasts, till with him we have learned to speak to Gods glory, and to
magnify the mercy of our Creator.

Sixthly, we are to avoid vain swearing,. Sect. 7. 6. Because it is a cause and
forerunner of perjury.
as being a notable cause and necessary forerunner of that damnable sin of
perjury; nam qui deierat, peierat, he that often swears, often forsweareth.
To which purpose one says: Cave facilitatem turandi; cum de facilitate
nascatur consuetudo ex consuetudine periurium, ex periurio blasphemia; beware
of inclinablenes to swear in ordinary communication; for of inclinablenes
arises custom, of custom, perjury, and of perjury, horrible blasphemy.
And this comes to pass, both because custom of swearing takes away all
reverent regard of an oath, upon which follows forgetfulness of that which
is sworn, and so utter neglect of performance; and also, because men's tongues
being inured thereunto, do as familiarly use it, as a simple affirmation and
negation, and consequently they do no oftener affirm an untruth, then they
are ready to confirm it with the deepest oaths. An example whereof we have
in Saul, who being the greatest swearer that we read of in the Scriptures, and
making no conscience of an oath, made as little account of damnable perjury,
1. Sam 19.6.15
as appears, 1. Sam. 19.6.15.

Seventhly,. Sect. 8. 7. Because vain swearers have a fearful account to
make at the day of judgment.
let us flee this profane vice of common swearing, always remembering that
swearers have a fearful account to make at the day of judgment. For if an
account must be given of every idle word, then how much more of every vain
and bloody oath? if they shall not escape punishment, who have spoken idly and
vainly, how fearful shall their condemnation be, who in their ordinary
talk have spoken impiously and blasphemouslic?

Eighthly,. Sect. 9. 8. Gods manifold mercies should restrain us from vain
swearing.
let us call to mind the number numberless of Gods infinite mercies, both in
our creation, preservation, and redemption, and think with our selves what a
foul shame it is for us, thus to offend against this majesty, which we have
found so merciful and gracious, especially by this sin, which as it is unto
him most odious, in yt it robs him of his glory, which is most dear unto
him; so it brings no appearance of good unto us; for whereas other sins
have their several baits to allure us, some the bait of profit, some of
honor, some of pleasure; this sin of vain swearing is destitute of them
all, for vain oaths are in vain, and bring no profit but loss, even the
loss of Gods favor, of a good conscience, the assurance of salvation, and of
our credit and reputation amongst the faithful, nor any pleasure and delight,
unless a man should (like the devil himself) take a hellish pleasure in acting
sin and despighting God; but contrariwise horror of mind, and the torments of
an evil conscience, nor any credit and esteem, but rather brand the swearer
with the black mark of a profane person. Seeing then if God had required a
great matter at our hands, we should have been ready in regard of his
boundless and endless mercies to have done it: how much more should we for
his sake, forsake and detest this sin of vain swearing, which has in it not
so much as any respect of the least worldly benefit? He has bestowed upon us
whatsoever good things we enjoy, and will we not at his request part with this
sin, which is not only unprofitable, but hurtful? He is so bounteous that
he has not spared to give unto us his only begotten and dearly beloved son,
in whom he was delighted and well pleased, and that to the death even the
bitter and cursed death of the cross: and shall we be so wickedly ungrateful,
that we will not at his suit, part with a sin, which has in it no respect of
good, pleasure, profit, or credit, and contrariwise is hurtful and pernicious
both to our bodies and souls? If Gods infinite love, mercy, and innumerable
benefits should so work upon our hearts and consciences, that the strongest
inducements, and most alluring baits should not move and entice to commit any
sin willingly and against our knowledge, then shame, confusion, and utter
destruction justly attend those who either through wantonness, or
maliciousness, fall into this sin, having no reason in respect of pleasure,
profit, or credit to persuade them thereunto: according to the prayer of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 25.3.
Psalm, 25.3. Let them be confounded that transgress without a cause.

But if Gods mercies will not mollify our flintie hearts, Sect. 10.
yet let his judgments denounced against profane swearers, 9. Gods judgments
should restrain us from this sin of vain swearing.
bruise and batter them in pieces. For in this life the Lord has threatened
against wicked swearers a whole volume of his curses, Zach. 5.3. Which are said
to be registered in a book, to show unto us, that seeing they are kept upon
record, they shall surely be remembered; Zach. 5.3.
in a large volume of twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, to note the
multitude of Gods plagues which shall be inflicted upon the swearer; and in a
flying book, to show the swiftness of Gods vengeance against this sin, and ye
quick dispatch he will make in destroying of them, though they be scattered
far and wide upon the face of the earth. So he threatens, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Deuteronomy.
28.
that those who will not fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord our
God, shall be punished with wonderful plagues, both in themselves and in their
posterity, great in quantity, grievous and sore in quality, and in respect
of time, of long continuance. To the same purpose the son of Syrach says,
that a man which uses much swearing shall be filled with wickedness, and the
plague shall never go from his house, Eccles. 23.11.
Ecclesi. 23.11. But well were it with blasphemers, if they had their whole
portion of punishment in this life, and that they might die like beasts without
any future sense of weal or woe, but they shall find it far otherwise; for
they who in their ordinary communication, in stead of yea yea, nay nay, use
vain swearing and bloody oaths, Iam. 5.12.
shall fall (as the Apostle tells us) into eternal condemnation, and as they
have blasphemed God in earth, so they shall continue their wicked blasphemies
in hell torments with the damned spirits; as they have dishonored God, by
abusing and profaning his holy name in their accursed oaths, so the Lord will
glorify it again in their fearful and eternal punishments.

And these are the reasons which may move us to hate and avoid this sin in
our selves;. Sect. 11. We must not only reform our selves, but those who are
under our government.
the which may be also effectual to make all men careful in reforming this
vice in those that belong unto them, and are under their government, especially
Magistrates in the common wealth, and householders in the family. And the
rather, let all in authority be persuaded hereunto; first, because where one
is tainted with this leprosy, if separation be not made, he will likewise
infect those that are about him. As therefore Magistrates and householders in
the time of common sickness are very careful to stay the infection, by
keeping the sick from the whole: so the like or much greater care must be had
in keeping these who are infected with this contagious sin of vain swearing,
from those who are not yet tainted, either till they be reformed and cured, or
if they be incurable, by banishing them out of the common wealth, and excluding
them out of the family; or at least by inflicting upon the offenders such
severe punishments as may utterly discountenance this sin, and discourage and
deter others from following their leaud example.

Secondly, Sect. 12. The impunitie of one sinner brings Gods judgments upon
the whole family.
because where any one enormous sin reigns in any member of a society, which
is not suppressed and reformed, or at least corrected and sharply punished,
that sin will bring Gods vengeance and fearful judgments, not only upon the
offender, but also upon the whole body of that society. For in respect of
that near communion which is between the diverse members of the same body
politic; it comes to pass oftentimes that both their prosperity, and
adversity, benefits, and punishments are communicated. So that as for the
sakes of some few godly men, the whole society fares the better; so for the
sins of some few, which are either defended, wincked at, or not punished;
Gods temporary judgments are inflicted upon the whole body, whether it be a
private family, or the whole common wealth. Of the former we have an example
in Elies house, ruined and subverted through the uncorrected finnes of Hophni
and Phinees; 1. Sam. 3.13.
of the latter, in the Beniamites, whose whole tribe was near rooted out for
not punishing the abominable filthiness of the inhabitants of Gibeah: Iud. 19.
and 20. Ios. 7.
and in the Israelites, who for the sin of Achan, fell before their enemies.
If then we would not have Gods curse light upon the whole common wealth, or
family, let the blasphemous swearer be reformed, or banished, or at least by
some other means severely punished; for he that having power and authority
given him of God to punish a sin, does wincke at it, becomes an accessarie
in the fault, and shall be a partner in the punishment.

CHAP. VI. Excuses alleged for vain swearing taken away.
ANd thus have I set down such reasons and arguments, as may persuade those
who have any spark of grace, to leave this vain sin, and those also who are
in authority to punish severely such as are graceless and incorrigible. Now
in the next place I will take away those excuses no less vain then common,
which are objected either in the defense or excuse of this sin.. Sect. 1. Their
reasons who defend their swearing. answered.
For some there are who by long custom being hardened in this sin, are
grown to that height of impudency, that they dare not only excuse their vain
swearing as venial, but also defend it as commendable; and to that high degree
of impiety, that they audaciously presume to turn the point of Gods own
weapon against himself, and to use the sword of the Spirit the word of God, as
their instrument to wound Gods glorious name, and as it were to stab our
Savior Christ, by making way for their hellish blasphemies. Does not (say
they) the Lord himself inioyne swearing as a part of his worship and service?
Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and does not the Psalmist tell us, Psalm. 63.11.
that all who swear by the Lord shall rejoice before him? the more therefore
we swear, the better service we do unto God, and the greater cause of true
rejoicing we procure unto our selves. To this I answer, that if they would
examine themselves aright, their own consciences would tell them, that in
their vain swearing they do not propound unto themselves, as their ends, Gods
glory, and their spiritual rejoicing, but rather swear to despite God in
their rage, when they cannot have their will; or in a bravery to grace
themselves with this hellish ornament. And therefore when by these ends they
defend their swearing, they do but play the graceless hypocrites, covering
their foul sin under this fair vizard. But though we leave the ransacking of
their hearts unto the Lord who is the only searcher of them, and take their
reasons as they propound them, yet will they make little for their vain
swearing, but rather much against it. For as when the Lord inioyneth his true
worship, he does not thereby approve of all manner of worship which is done
unto him, but only that which himself prescribes; yea rather thereby
forbids and condemns all humane inventions, will worship, and
superstitious means of his service, and restrains us both for the matter and
manner unto his revealed will: so when the Lord commands and commends unto
us a lawful oath, that hereby his name may be glorified, the truth cleared and
defended, and we discerned from Heathens, Pagans, and all manner of idolaters;
he does not approve of vain swearing, for in his law he has absolutely
condemned this taking of his name in vain, but that we swear in that manner
which he has prescribed, in truth, righteousness, and judgment: that is, for
confirming of a necessary truth, which ca^ by no other lawful means be
cleared, and not upon every vain and trifling occasion; with fear and
reverence of Gods Majesty, as being in his presence, and not in a swaggering
humor, impiously and irreligiously aiming in our oaths neither at Gods glory,
nor ye good of men.

Others there are who are not come to that audacious impudency, to defend
their vain swearing as lawful,. Sect. 2. The excuse of vain swearing by
custom taken away.
and yet nevertheless if they be taxed and reproved for it, will not stick
to pretend many excuses, why either they cannot or will not leave it. Some
allege for their excuse, that they have been inured to such a naughty custom
of swearing, that howsoever they disallow it in themselves, yet they fall into
it at unawares, and can by no means give it over. But did they ever indeed
condemn it as a sin, and themselves for falling into it? Were they ever
seriously and soundly grieved at their hearts, because thereby they have
displeased and dishonored God? Do they loathe and hate this wicked custom, and
earnestly labor to weane themselves from it? Alas their consciences tell them
that they do nothing less; but either that they carelessly neglect to set a
watch before their lips that they may not thus offend, or that what show soever
they make to the contrary, they like and love their sin, and take a pride in
using of it. Whereof it must needs follow, that howsoever these men please
themselves, as though all were well, and have put their secure consciences to
silence by this vain excuse, yet in truth their estate is most wretched,
seeing they are content to live in a known sin without repentance, which, if it
be final, will enter them into the certain possession of eternal death. Yea
but many of them will say, that they repent of their sin, for after they have
vainly sworn they smite themselves on the breast, and ask God forgiveness. O
blindness to be pitied if it were not wilfully affected! Is this the mends
which thou make, in hypocritical manner to smite thy breast, for piercing of
thy Savior? Is this a prayer acceptable unto God, or like to return with
fruit into thy bosom, when thou ask forgiveness with a purpose still to
offend, and desire his pardon, as a privilege, by virtue whereof thou may
securely go forward in thy sin? Is this the repentance which God requires
to smite the breast, and to ask forgiveness with fained lips? when as in the
mean time the heart is not smitten at all with bitter grief, nor earnestly
resolved in a true hatred to leave this sin so vain, and so unprofitable? If
for every oath these swearers should sustain the least worldly loss, or
endure the least bodily punishment, even the loss of a groat, or the smart of
a phillip, it would soon reclaim them from their evil custom; and yet so
basely do they esteem the salvation of their souls, so little do they fear
the hellish torments, so slenderly do they regard the Lords commandment, and
so mean a respect they have of his Majesty either to love, or fear him, that
they cannot find in their hearts to weane themselves from this wicked custom
of vain swearing, which brings unto them no benefit, no not so much as any
worldly profit or advantage. Say therefore no more that it is an irresistable
custom, but rather thy carnal prophanenes, and utter contempt of God, which
continues thee in this sin. Neither allege any longer this vain excuse,
which does but proclaim thy folly and aggrauate thy fault; making it
questionable whether thy sottishnes or impiety exceed one the other. For, may
not any other sinner after the same manner plead possession of their sin as
well as thou? may not the murderer say, I cannot leave murdering of my
neighbor, because I have bin so often fleshed by killing and slaying? may not
the adulterer with as good reason and more necessity, excuse his adulteries,
because by long custom he has gotten such an habit of whoredom, that he
cannot leave it? may not a thief when he is arraigned before a Judge as well
excuse his theft, by alleging that he has so long continued in his rapine
and robbery, that he has no power to reclaim himself from stealing? Now if
in these cases every one would condemn such excuses as ridiculous, and the
excusers as outragiously impious; because customable living in sin
exceedingly aggrauateth the wickedness of the sinner; then why should we not
condemn this excuse of swearers of like folly and impiety, when as being
reproved for swearing at some times, they plead for themselves, that it is
their ordinary custom, and therefore they cannot leave it. For if it be a sin
to swear once or twice, then is it out of measure sinful, to make an
ordinary practice of it, and so to bring upon our selves an habit of swearing.

Others excuse themselves,. Sect. 3. Their excuse taken away which say they
think no harm
that though they swear, yet they think no harm, and therefore they hope God
will have them excused. To these I answer with our Savior, that out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and therefore if the words be
profane, we may safely conclude, that the heart also is polluted. Mat.
12.34.35.
If the heart were a good treasury, they would, as Christ says, bring out of
it good things, even such pure golden speeches as would endure the touch and
trial of Gods word; and not vent forth nothing else but dross and filth. If
piety and the true fear of God were rooted in their hearts, they would not
from these good trees bring forth such evil fruits; Mat 7.16.20. Iam.
3.10.11.
if they were pure fountains seasoned with Gods grace, they would never send
forth such bitter and polluted streams, neither would they blaspheme God with
their mouth, if they blessed him in their hearts. In a word, if they had any
dram of true religion seated in the heart, it would bridle the tongue, and
restrain it from vain swearing: for what sin will a man leave for Gods
sake, if he will not leave this which is every way unprofitable, and many
ways hurtful? And therefore we may conclude, with the Apostle, that if any man
amongst us seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, he deceives his
own heart, and his religion is vain. Iam. 1.26. Iam. 1.26.
Neither let them think that howsoever they excuse themselves, God will have
them excused; seeing he has plainly told them, that they shall give an
account for every idle word, and therefore much more for vain and impious
oaths; and that when he comes to judge, he will pass the sentence, not
according to our secret thoughts, but according to our words and works. Matthew.
Matt. 12.37.
12.37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. Neither let them suppose that this excuse which would seem
frivolous and foolish to a mortal man, will go for current before the most
wise and just Judge of heaven and earth. Now what Prince, hearing himself
abused to his face by the reproachful words of his base subject, would admit of
such an excuse, that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no
ill in heart; and will not, think we, the Lord be as jealous of his glory,
which is most dear unto him, as an earthly King? or will he in his justice
acquit such offenders upon such frivolous and vain pretenses?

Others shroude their sin under the example of the multitude,. Sect. 4. Their
excuse answered who pretend the example of the multitude.
alleging that it is the common custom of all, some few only excepted, who
are but too scrupulous about every trifle. But let such know, that after this
manner they may excuse and countenance any manner of wickedness, seeing no
custom is more common then to live in sin. Let them remember that God has
forbidden us to follow the example of a multitude in that which is evil; Exodus
23.2.
or to fashion our selves according to the world, whereof we are but pilgrims,
if at least we be inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem; that Christ has
chosen us out of the world, not that we should still embrace the impious
practices of wicked worldlings, but that becoming his Disciples, we should
follow his word and holy example, as our only guides. Let them consider, that
common use of committing sin does not excuse, but much aggrauate it in Gods
sight, and that it does more inflame his wrath, and increase the punishment,
when as men combine themselves to work wickedness. Finally, let them call to
mind, that it is the narrow path and strait gate leading to eternal life,
Matthew. 7.13.14.
which is least frequented, so that the Christian may go in it without
crouding, though it be not large and spacious, in respect of the small number
which travail this way: and contrariwise, that there is no way more commonly
haunted then the broad way, which leads to destruction; and consequently,
that we can have small comfort in having a numerous multitude to accompany us
into hell.

Others allege in their excuse,. Sect. 5. Their excuse taken away, who allege
that they swear nothing but the truth.
that they swear nothing but the truth, which may lawfully be confirmed with
an oath. But as I have showed, Gods name is profaned and abused, not only
(although most grieuouslie) when we swear that which is false, but also, when
it is used upon every trifling occasion, to confirm an unnecessary truth,
which either is not worth proouing, or may be demonstrated by other arguments;
or without that reverend and religious respect of his glorious Majesty which
he requires.

Yea,. Sect. 6. Their excuse answered, who pretend that they swear by small
oaths.
but will some say, I avoid this danger, seeing my custom is not to swear by
God, but by slight and small oaths, as by my faith, troth, by our Lady, the
mass, and such like: and therefore I am to be excused, because I do not take
the name of God in vain. To this I have already answered, whereas I proved
that the Lord requires that we should swear by his name only: to which I may
add, that our Savior has directly forbidden such kind of oaths, and has
enjoined us in our ordinary communication, Matthew. 5.34.
to use only, yea yea, nay nay; telling us that whatsoever is more, comes of
evil. Though therefore it be not so heinous a sin, as that horrible abusing of
Gods holy name, yet it is a sin, seeing Christ himself has forbidden and
condemned it; and therefore not to be entertained, and much less excused or
defended by any Christian. For we should think no sin so small that we may
willingly commit it, seeing the least sin meriteth the wages of eternal
death, and can no otherwise be expiated and done away, but by the inestimable
price of Christ's precious blood; or if we do, let us assure our selves it
shall not be small unto us; for the least sin in it own nature is heinous
and unpardonable, so long as it is willingly committed, and excused or defended.

Lastly,. Sect. 7. Their excuse answered, who allege others incredulity.
they excuse themselves by alleging the incredulity and suspicion of others,
which is such, that unless they swear they cannot be credited and believed.
But unto this I answer, that the best way to have our words credited, is not
to confirm every thing we speak with an oath, for so our oaths becoming
common and ordinary, will be as little respected as a simple affirmation; nay
in truth they will deserve less credit: for it is to be thought that he who
makes no conscience of transgressing one commandment, will not make much more
conscience of transgressing another; he that sticks not to use deieration and
vain swearing, will not stick at perjury and forswearing; or if he do, it
is not because he wants an heart to do it, but rather some strong inducement
to persuade him. But the best way to have our speeches credited, is to
accustom our tongues to speak the truth, and to be of an upright, just, and
unblameable life and conversation; and so shall our word be more regarded than
another oath; for it is not the oath that gives credit and authority to a
man, but a man to his oath; and if in our whole course and carriage we clearly
show, that we make more conscience of lying, than another of perjury, his oath
will not be so much credited, as our bare promise or assertion. Whereby it
appears that ordinary swearing is either needless or bootelesse. For if a
man be of an holy and religious conversation, there will be no use of it,
unless it be in weighty causes, wherein an oath is lawful; because his word
will carry with it sufficient credit: and contrariwise, if he be known to
have accustomed himself to lying, dissembling, and false dealing, his swearing
will not profit him, seeing his unconscionable falsehood, does take away all
credit and authority from his oath.

But let it be supposed, that though we are just and faithful,. Sect. 8.
we cannot be credited, unless we swear; yet this gives us no dispensation
for oaths in light or needless occasions, seeing we are rather to obey our
Savior Jesus Christ's commandment, who has forbidden us to swear in our
ordinary communication, then by vain swearing to gain credit to our
speeches, or to satisfy such suspicious and incredulous persons, who will not
believe us without an oath. For hereby we shall approve our obedience to God,
by making conscience of transgressing his law; whereas they by suspecting our
word without cause, do hereby but proclaim their own practice of lying and
falsehood; for who is more ready to suspect unknown evil in another, then he
who is guilty to himself of his own naughtiness?

CHAP. VII. Of the means to weane us from vain and customable swearing.
ANd so much for answer unto such excuses as are usually alleged for
customable swearing. Now to the end that all those who are moved with that
which has been said, to a holy resolution of forsaking this wicked practice,
may the better be enabled to attain unto their desire, I will breefly for a
conclusion set down the means, by the careful use whereof we may break off
this wicked custom of vain swearing. And first, as in the curing of bodily
diseases, the best course is to take away the causes thereof; so if we would
have our souls cured of this sinful sickness of vain swearing,. Sect. 1. 1.
We must shun impatiencie and furious anger.
we must endeavor to remove the causes from which it chiefly arises. And
these are principally four; the first is impatiencie and furious anger, which
being a short madness, makes us to forget for ye time, not only al humanity
toward men, but all duty and respect which we owe unto God, and in barbarous
and despitefull manner, to load his holy name with blasphemies, as though he
were the only cause of our coffeehouse, either by inflicting or not
auerting the evils which vex and grieve us. For the purging away of which
frantic humors, I refer the reader to the perusing and use of those
spiritual receipts which I have prescribed for these impatient patients, in my
treatise of Anger.

The second cause of vain swearing to be removed,. Sect. 2. The second cause
of vain swearing to be removed, is pride and vain glory.
is pride, and vain glory, which makes men to undervalue their oaths, lest
they themselves should be undervalued, for therefore they swear in their
ordinary communication, either he cause they would appear gallants, full of
spirit and valor, and gain the reputation of Gentlemen and men of worth; or
because they would have every word which comes out of their mouth respected,
and believed as an oracle of infallible truth.

The third cause of vain swearing, is greedy covetousness;. Sect. 3. The third
cause, greedy covetousness.
for when as men have resolved with themselves, that they will be rich, they
dare not depend upon God in the use of lawful means, but take all indirect
courses for the increasing of their wealth, as lying and dissembling, bribing
and oppression, all manner of fraud and deceit: and among the rest, swearing,
and forswearing, in their ordinary trading, buying and selling, that thereby
gaining credit unto themselves, they may either buy, or put off their wares at
a better rate. Those therefore who would avoid vain swearing, they must first
remove this special cause thereof, greedy avarice, and learn to rest and
depend upon the providence of God, whose blessing alone makes rich; and gives
unto men being enriched the comfortable fruition of that which they do
possess.

The fourth cause of vain swearing is external, namely,. Sect. 4. The fourth
cause of vain swearing, others incredulity.
the suspicion and incredulity of others, who will not believe a bare
assertion or promise, unless it be confirmed with an oath: for the removing
whereof we are to observe the Apostles practice, indeuouring to have always a
clear conscience, not only toward Gods but also toward men. Act. 24.16.
For if we walk unblameably in our lives and conversation, if we so highly
value truth that we will sell it at no rate, if we keep touch and observe
our promises, not only when they are aduantageable, but also when they be to
our own hindrance, our word even in weighty businesses will be credited, and
need no superior testimony or confirmation.

The second means to avoid vain swearing,. Sect. 5. The second means to
avoid vain swearing, is to keep a vvatch before our lips.
is with David to set a narrow watch before our lips, yt we may not thus offend
with our tongues; and to bridle and curb in this unruly evil with the bit of
Gods fear, that it burst not out into vain oaths; which otherwise will run
at random and fall into this vice even before we be aware. And if long
custom has so confirmed it in us that we have no hope to break it off at
once, Psalm 39.1. Iam. 1.26. We must break off custom with custom.
let us labor at least to bring it into a consumption, and by an antidote of a
contrary custom, to disinure our tongues from the use thereof. Let us resolve
whatsoever occasion be offered, to keep such a straight watch over our
tongue, that we will not swear for the space of a whole day; and when we have
thus far prevailed over our selves, let us take a longer time; and so taking
as it were a truce with Gods glorious name from time to time, binding our
selves in the mean while that we will not offer against it any abuse or
violence, it will in a small space grow unto a firm and inviolable peace; and
vain oaths which were as familiar as our ordinary speech, will stick in our
teeth like an unknown language, and become of near acquaintance, which would
usually rush in without bidding, mere strangers which will not come within the
door of our lips, unless upon extraordinary occasion they be invited.

The third means to avoid vain swearing, Sect. 6. The 3. means is to be
sparing in the use of asseuerations.
is to be sparing in the use of earnest asseuerations and protestations; for
these are as it were the outward and next adjoining fences, the use whereof is
to preserve Gods glorious name from being profaned and trampled upon by common
use; and therefore so long as we sparingly and reverently approach unto them,
we will be much more respective in using the name of God by an oath; whereas
if we usually leap over the fence, and by profane and common use tread it
down and trample it under foot, then the fence being taken away, the holy
name of God himself lies open to be profaned by vain swearing.
Asseuerations are as it were the bank and brinke of the water, and vain
swearing like a deep mischievous pit fit to swallow and drown us if we fall
into it. So long therefore as we walk aloof, and do not approach the bank
but upon weighty occasion, and with great care and circumspection, we keep
our selves out of all danger; but if we be still leaping upon the banck, and
carelessly dancing upon the very brinck, it is a thousand to one we shall slip
in and perish, unless we rise again and recover our selves by true repentance.
Again, if it be observed that we are sparing in the use of these asseuerations,
unless it be in weighty affairs and with great reverence and respect, then
will it gain unto them such authority, that we shall never be urged by
swearing to confirm our speeches; every one being ready more to esteem and
credit our honest protestation, then the deep oaths of those who accustom
their tongues to vain swearing.

The fourth means to avoid this sin of vain swearing, Sect. 7. The fourth
means is to avoid the company of vain svvearers.
is to shun the company of such as much use it; because our corrupt nature is
easily infected, if we do but breathe in the contagious air of sin. And as
civil men living amongst a barbarous people, quickly lose the purity of their
own language, and have their speech corrupted with the barbarismes that are
daily sounding in their ears; so if being religious we haunt the company of
these cursed Edomites, who inure their tongues to blasphemous swearing, we shall
soon forget to speak the pure language of holy Chanaan, and corrupt our speech
with vain and wicked oaths. And therefore let no man presume upon his own
strength, and flatter himself with a vain conceit, that he so abhors this
customable swearing, that he is in no danger of being corrupted with it, though
he frequent such lewd company. For there is little hope we shall long firmly
stand in such slippery places: first, because it is just with God to withdraw
his assisting grace from those, who tempt him with their presumption, and that
they who so love tentations that they wilfully run into them, should also
fall and be overcome in the day of trial. Secondly, because by reason of our
corruption, we are prone to fall into any sin; for the seeds of all evil
remaining in us, will, when they seem dead and rotten, revive and sprout up
again, when as they are, as it were watered and cherished, with the wicked
examples and encouragements of profane companions. And the tindar of our
corruption is easily set on fire with the touch of the least spark of an evil
president, if it be not extinguished by Gods Spirit. And lastly, because such
company will even compel us, with a kind of urgent necessity, to follow
their own practice, by denying to give credit unto our words, unless an oath
be added for confirmation; for they who accustom their tongues to vain
swearing, will hardly believe another man without an oath.

The fifth means to make us leave this sin of vain swearing,. Sect. 8. The
fifth means is to meditate on those judgments which are inflicted on vain
swearers.
is often to meditate upon those fearful judgments, and punishments, which
are by the Lord threatened and inflicted upon impious swearers and blasphemers,
both in this life and the life to come. For generally they lie open to all Gods
heavy curses and maledictions, the fire of Gods wrath shall consume their
houses, Zach. 5.3.
and the Lord will punish them not with ordinary punishments, but will make
their plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
not only in themselves, but also in their posterity. Manifold experience
whereof we have in the examples both of former times, and of our own days, if
we would but observe the execution of these heavy judgments, upon these
impious blasphemers; some dying with outrageous burning in their mouths, as
though the flames of hell were there already kindled; others with swollen
tongues, distorted mouths, and hellish blackness, God showing the foulness
of their sin by the ugly deformity of their punishment. Others who had
inured their tongues to swear by the blood and wounds of Christ, at their
death in fearful manner have had vnstanchable issues of blood over all their
bodies. Others have died uttering horrible blasphemies with their last breath,
and so have been apprehended by the Judge, as it were, with their theft about
them, and sommoned before his judgment seat, whilst they were executing the
very act of treason against Gods glorious Majesty. And for conclusion, at the
day of judgment, when as they shall be arraigned before his tribunal seat,
and there indicted for their manifold abusing of his glorious name; the Lord
has said that he will not hold them guiltless, but they shall for ever bear
their fearful condemnation. What folly therefore is it, yea what more then
frantic madness, for a man to hazard his body and soul, which are of more
worth unto him, then ten thousand worlds, to the suffering of all these
fearful punishments, both in this life and in the life to come, for a vain
and unprofitable sin, which brings good to neither soul nor body, as
before I have showed?

The last and most effectual means which we can use to preserve us from
falling into this sin,. Sect. 9. The last means is fervent prayer.
is fervent and effectual prayer, wherein we are with the Prophet David
instantly to desire ye Lord, that seeing our negligence and carelessness is
exceeding great, Psalm. 141.3.
it would please him to keep a strait watch over us, and so to rule and
ouerrule us with the good motions and effectual operation of his holy Spirit,
that we may make precious account of his holy name, and carefully avoid the
profanation thereof by vain swearing. And so our suit tending to the
advancement of Gods glory, and to the furthering of our own spiritual good,
Ioh. 16.23. 1. Ioh. 3.22. Luke 11.13.
we shall be sure to obtain our desire, if we ask in faith, and show our
earnestness to obtain that we pray for, by our constant and conscionable use
of those means, of which I have already spoken.

CHAP. VIII. Of the sin of Perjury.
ANd thus much concerning the abuse of an oath by vain swearing. Sect. 1.
What perjury is.
Now we are to speak of the abuse thereof by false swearing, commonly called
perjury; where first I will show what perjury is, that we may know it; and
then the greatness and heinousness of this sin, that we may avoid it. For
the first; Perjury is nothing else but false swearing. Or more fully, It is a
known or imagined untruth, confirmed by oath, joined with deceit, which was
either purposed and intended before the oath was made, or resolved on
afterward. Whereby it appears that two things do always concur in
perjury: first the general matter thereof, which is an untruth: and secondly,
the form which gives being unto it, namely, a false oath, made with purposed
and affected deceit, or resolved on afterward. Now, untruth is either logical
or moral. Logical, when as we do not speak as the thing is, or when as our
speech agrees not with the thing. Moral untruth is, when as we do not
speak as we think, or when as our speech agrees not with our mind. Of the
former we do not here speak; neither does it make perjury, but only when
it is joined with the second; whereas the moral untruth confirmed with an oath
is perjury, although it be a logical truth. More plainly, if I swear an
untruth, being persuaded that it is true, it may be my oath may justly deserve
the censure of rashness or prophanenes; but yet I am not perjured, because my
speech agrees with my mind, though not with the thing: neither do I swear
falsely, although that which I swear be false, in that I do not swear with a
mind to deceive, but being my self deceived: whereas contrariwise if I swear
an untruth, knowing it to be so, yea if I swear as the truth is, being
persuaded in the mean time, that it is false and untrue, Ream linguam facit
men's rea. Plato.
I fall into the sin of perjury, because my speech and oath agree not with
my mind and persuasion, though it agrees with the thing; and the end of my
oath is not to confirm the truth, but to deceive those unto whom I swear. And
this kind of perjury whereby a man deceitfully swears that which he
thinks false to be true, is an heinous sin in Gods sight, though afterward
it fall out to be indeed the truth, and as well excludes him out of Gods
kingdom, as when a man swears that which he knows certainly is false,
Psalm. 24.4.
to be true, as appears Psalm. 24.4. For if it be a grievous sin and an
evident sign of an impious man, Psalm. 12.1.2.
to speak deceitfully and with a double heart unto his neighbor; then how
much more abominable is it, when as this deceit is graced and countenanced with
an oath?

Yea,. Sect. 2. How our oath is to be understood, being ambiguous.
but seeing our speech is often ambiguous, admitting of a double signification,
whereof it comes to pass, that I swearing in one sense am understood in
another; how is such an oath to be expounded and performed, as that I may be
cleared from deceit and perjury? Some answer, that our oath must be
understood in his sense and meaning unto whom it is made. But this is too
strict and hard, for so a man might be perjured swearing, both according to the
truth, and according to his own mind and persuasion, because he is
misunderstood through the default perhaps of the other, who wants capacity
and apprehension. What then, must it be understood in his sense and meaning
that swears? If this should be granted, it would be as ouer-partiall on the
other side, for so might men speak doubtfully with a purpose to mislead
another, and by equivocation may swear that which is true in his own meaning
and intention, which is nevertheless directly false, according to his
construction unto whom the oath is made: and therefore the most equal course
that can be taken for the avoiding of both extremes is, that our speech which
we confirm with an oath be understood most simply and plainly, according to
the usual and common custom, as the most part do, and ought to understand such
speeches. And if yet any doubt remain, the surest rule is, that the speech
confirmed by oath, be understood according to the sense and meaning of him
unto whom the oath is made, if the swearer did swear deceitfully; or if
simply, plainly, and with an honest meaning, then is it to be interpreted in
his own sense who took the oath.

Where by the way we may observe,. Sect. 3. Equivocations, and mental
reseruations, confuted.
that the doctrine and practice of the Priests and Jesuits, in this, well
sorteth with the rest of their wicked and abominable conceits and courses; who
are not content to use, but also do approve and defend in their oaths,
Equivocations, and mental reseruations, of purpose used to blind and mislead
him unto whom they swear, that he may not come to the knowledge of the truth;
and that in such gross manner, that oftentimes there is a flat contrariety
between their mind and their words, being understood according to common
custom, and as they themselves desire, that the party who takes their oath
should conceive of them. But whatsoever flowrishes they make to hide their
impiety, yet this their doctrine and practice is wicked and abominable, and
their oaths no better then perjury, and that in the most impious kind, in
Gods sight; seeing unto their perjury, is joined devilish deceit, which even
in the judgment and practife of the Heathens was condemned and abhorred; for
their usual form of swearing was, Ex animi mei sententia iuro, I swear
according to the true meaning of my heart; and they detested as impious and
atheistical that speech, Cic. de Legib.
iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam gero; I have sworn with my tongue, but not
with my mind. And yet the admired Jesuits, who could find no name fit to
express the holiness of their order, but the sacred name of Jesus, being in
this, as in many other things, much more wicked then the Heathens, commonly
use, and stiflie defend this periurious practice of false and deceitful
swearing.

But let all who profess the name of Christ,. Sect. 4. The evils which
accompany equivocations.
and desire to approve their profession by their practice, hate and abhor
this gross impiety, and hellish monster, compounded of perjury, deceit, and
treachery, which together with those filthy locusts, Apoc. 9.3.
the Priests, and Jesuits, has ascended out of the bottomless pit, to annoy
and hurt the inhabitants of the earth. And to this end let them know; first,
that these equivocations, and mental reseruations, being admitted in oaths,
do overthrow all truth, when as every man may coin a meaning of his oath
unto himself, according to the stamp of his profit or conueniencie, and not
according to the simple truth. Secondly, they frustrate and take away the end
of an oath, Heb. 6.16.
which (as the Apostle says) is to be for confirmation, the end of strife; for
who would rest satisfied in another oath, if he knew that it were to be
construed according to his secret meaning, of which he is always ignorant, and
often times has just cause to surmise his false meaning, and to have him in
jealousy and suspicion of deceit and double dealing? Lastly, they show
themselves to be no heirs of Gods Kingdom, nor to have any title or interest
in the joys of heaven; for if they only shall dwell in Gods holy mountain,
Psalm. 15.2.
who speak the truth from their heart, then what shall become of them who not
only speak deceitfully and with a double heart, but also confirm such
deceitful speeches with an oath, yea and which is more (not like Peter who
fell into this sin of perjury and repented of it, but) like it, and live in
it, approve and defend it.

CHAP. IX. Of the diverse kinds of Perjury.
ANd thus much generally concerning Perjury.. Sect. 1.
In the next place we are to speak of the kinds thereof, the which may be
distinguished according to the several kinds of a lawful oath; for as a true
and lawful oath is either assertorie, which is the affirmation and
confirmation of the truth, concerning that which is past, or present, by an
oath; or else promissorie, whereby we bind our selves by oath to perform our
promise concerning things to come: so likewise, perjury is either assertorie,
or promissorie.

Assertorie perjury is, whereby we swear that to be true, Of assertorie
perjury.
which we either know or think to be false; or contrariwise, that to be false,
which we either know or think to be true. So that there are two special kinds
of this perjury; the first, when as we confirm by oath that which we know
certainly to be false; the other, when as we swear that to be true, which we
think is false, though afterward it may fall out to be true. For though the
thing be true, yet he who takes the oath swears falsely, because his speech
agrees not with his mind, and his scope is to deceive him to whom he swears,
and consequently it is no better then plain perjury, and all one in Gods
sight as if the thing were false: for as the maine end of a lawful and
religious oath is the confirmation of truth; so the end of perjury is falsehood
and deceit.

Promissorie perjury is, whereby we either plainly or cunningly promise that
by oath, which we intend not to perform;. Sect. 2. Promissorie perjury,
what it is.
or having at the time of the taking our oath, purposed after a lawful manner
to perform it, yet through inconstancy, change our minds, and will not do it
when as we may, the thing promised being both lawful and possible. Whereby it
appears, that there are two sorts of this perjury also; first, when as we
intend at the making of our oath, not to perform it, which is a horrible and
high degree of wickedness, when as we call upon God by oath, not only to be
a witness and Judge of that we swear; but also our surety that we will keep
our promise, in the mean time intending nothing less then to perform our
oath. The other is, when having at the taking of our oath simply, and sincerely
promised that which we purposed to perform, we afterward inconstantly break
our promise, because we either think, or find it inconvenient, howsoever the
thing promised be both lawful and possible. And both these are done two ways;
first plainly, when as our promises are manifest and void of al ambiguitie; the
other cunningly, when as of set purpose to deceive, we frame our words so
ambiguously and doubtfully, that propounding them in one sense unto him who
takes our oath, we may understand them in another; and so perform our oaths
not according to the outward appearance of the words, and as the other
conceived of them, but according to that meaning which we have secretly framed
unto our selves: as if a Captain in war having taken many prisoners, should
bind himself by oath to the enemy to deliver half the Captives, upon such a
sum delivered for their ransom, and having received the price according to
covenant, should in stead of half the number, as the other understood him,
send half the bodies of the whole number, as in his oath he guilfullie
intended: or like Cleomenes, Plutarch in Lacon.
having made peace with a City for certain days, should assault and sack it
in the night. But this cunning does not lessen and extenuate the perjury in
Gods sight, but rather does much aggrauate it, seeing thereunto is added fraud
and deceit.

CHAP. X. Questions about perjury resolved.
ANd thus have I showed what perjury is, Sect. 1. 1. VVkether all oaths are
to be performed
and the diverse kinds thereof. In the next place I will propound, and resolve
certain questions about the performance of our oath; which being explaned and
understood, will make us better discern what we are to esteem perjury, that
we may avoid it. And first, it may be demanded, whether we are bound in
conscience to perform all our oaths, and if we do not, 2. What oaths bind
the conscience.
whether we commit this sin of perjury. I answer, that our oath always
binds us to performance, if the things which we swear be absolutely, and in
respect of us who take the oath, lawful, so that with a good conscience,
enlightened by Gods word, we may do them; and withal, if that they be
possible, and in our power, so that we can do them; and if we do not
perform such an oath we are perjured, Ier. 4.2.
and fearfully transgress the commandment of God. For as the Lord requires
that we swear when occasion serves in truth, justice, and judgment; Number.
30.3.
so also that having sworn, we perform our oath. So Number. 30.3. Whosoever
swears an oath to bind himself by a bond, he shall not break his promise,
Mat. 23.23.
but shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. And our
Savior Christ reckons this fidelity in performing our oaths, among the
weighty matters of the law, yea even the Scribes and Pharisees, though
otherwise very corrupt in their doctrine, yet taught this truth out of Gods
law: Thou shall not forswear thy self, Matthew. 5.33
but shall perform thy oaths unto the Lord, Matthew. 5.33. And this is made a
true sign of one who is a sound member of the militant Church, and an assured
heir of the Kingdom of glory, when as he abhorres deceitful swearing, Psalm.
15 4.
and performs those oaths which are made to his own hinderance. Psalm. 15.4.

But if the things which by oath we promise, be unlawful or impossible, then
such oaths do not bind the conscience, but are presently void, as soon as
the unlawfulness or impossibility appears. Jsidorus.
For an oath ought not to be the bond of iniquity; and those oaths are
laudably broken, which are unlawfully made; neither can they tie us unto
impossibilities, because the things so promised are out of our power to
perform them. But that we may speak of them more distinctly, an oath is
unlawful, first, when as we swear to perform such things, as are repugnant
and contrary to the law and revealed will of God; and therefore is not to be
observed: first, because by such an oath we make the Lord to confirm our
testimony against himself, and to be our surety for the performance of
that, which is wicked and odious in his sight. Secondly, because these oaths
made unto men, infringe and disanull our oath which we have formerly made unto
God in baptism, whereby we have bound our selves to yield absolute obedience
unto Gods revealed will. Now this ought not to be, both because our first oath
must stand, as having already bound our conscience to performance, and
therefore may not be frustrated and made void with a latter; and also because
an oath made unto God, must be preferred before an oath made unto men; in that
he is our supreme Judge, and sovereign Lord, unto whom we owe our selves, our
obedience and fealty, and all that belongs unto us. Even as an after oath
made to a rebel, enemy, or stranger, cannot disanull our former oath, whereby
we have obliged our selves to yield obedience to our lawful Prince.

Now an oath is unlawful and wicked in this regard,. Sect. 3. Valavvsulnes of
an oath is either apparent, or discerned by the event.
either in present appearance when it is made, or in the proof and event. Of
the former we have an example in Iesabel, swearing the death of innocent Elias;
and in the Jews, who bound themselves by oath to slay Paul. And such is the
oath of our Popish fugitives, 1. King. 19.2. Act. 23.
who thereby bind themselves to be the vassals of Antichrist, denying their
due allegiance and obedience to their lawful Soucraigne; which is expressly
contrary to the word of God, Romans 13.1.2.3 Matthew 22.21. Tir. 3, 1. 1. Pet.
2.13.
as appears Romans 13.1.2.3. All which kind of oaths are hainously wicked when
they are first made. For if knowing them at the time of their taking of them to
be wicked and unlawful, they do not at all intend to observe them, they sin
grievously against God by swearing falsely; their speech not agreeing with
their mind, and by profaning his holy name in calling him as a witness to
confirm their untruth, and as a patron of their falsehood. They sin against
their neighbor in abusing him with a deceit of highest nature, namely, under
the religious show of an oath. And finally, they sin most fearfully against
their own souls, by their desperate tempting of God, provoking Gods justice,
truth, power, and terrible vengeance against themselves, for their known
wickedness, and perfidious treachery and perjury. On the other side, if
knowing their oath to be wicked, they have a purpose to perform it, then also
they sin against God, in making him not only a Judge and witness, but also a
surety that they will perform wicked actions, which he abhors; and
against their own souls likewife, in that they bind themselves unto evil
with an oath, and as though they were not prone enough of their own accord to
fall into wickedness, they bring upon them a necessity of sinning, and
confirm themselves in evil with the strong obligation of an oath.

Secondly, an oath is unlawful and wicked in the proof and event, when as
there lies lurking in it some concealed wickedness, which he that swears
does not discern. And this is of two kinds: first, when as the evil of the
oath is really contained in the thing promised, which is not discovered at the
taking of the oath, but afterward appears in the event. Secondly, when as
the thing which we by oath promise, is in it own nature good or indifferent,
but afterward degenerateth and becomes evil by accident. Of the former we
have an example in Herod, Mar. 6.
who by his rash oath swore, though unwittingly, the death of John the Baptist;
and in those who in our own time swear themselves unto Monkish cloisters in
their superstitious devotion and blind zeal: of the other, in those who by
oath vow virginity and single life, the which course of life might be lawful
or indifferent at the time when they took their oath, they having present
continency; but afterward becomes wicked and unlawful, when as burning in
lust they bind themselves to lead a single life still, and disauow marriage
which is the ordinance of God, and the means ordained by him to keep and
preserve their vessels in purity and holiness.

And this is the first kind of unlawful oaths,. Sect. 4. How an oath is
unlawful in respect of the party who swears.
which containing wickedness in themselves bind not to performance. The second
is, when as the oath is unlawful in respect of the party, who takes it. As
for example, when he that swears wants discretion, and the use of natural
reason, as children, fools or mad men: or when those who being under tuition
and government, bind themselves by oath to do a thing against the will and
liking of their superiors and governors. As when a child swears to match
himself in marriage against his parents will, whilst he is under their
government; or swears himself into a Monkish cloister, they disavowing his
course. For if vows and religious oaths made unto God, for the performance of
some external duties, do not bind the conscience, but may be lawfully
disanulled by superiors and governors, Numb. 30.4.6.30.
as appears Number. 30.4.6. then much more may such oaths as are made unto men
be lawfully broken, when as they are unlawfully made.

And these are the oaths which being unlawful do not bind the conscience,.
Sect. 5. Unlawful oaths are to be broken.
but may lawfully be broken, either presently when as they contain in them
apparent evil at the first view, or as soon as the unlawfulness of them is
discovered, which for a time has been hidden from us. Yea we not only may, as
being permitted, but ought, as being required, break all such oaths, as bind
us to that which is wicked and unlawful. According to that: Jsidorus.
In malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum: In evil
promises keep not fidelity; in a dishonest vow change thy purpose: for such
oaths as are unlawful are laudably broken, but damnably observed. And the
reason is apparent, because by keeping them we shall but add sin unto sin;
unto wicked swearing more wicked performance. Let us therefore carefully take
heed, that we do not by oath promise any thing which is evil; for if the
evil be known and apparent, it is horrible wickedness to draw God into the
association of our impiety, by calling him to be our witness and surety; if
it be not apparent, it is profane rashness; for before we swear, we ought
to be assured of the lawfulness of our oath. But if through infirmity or
corruption, we have fallen into this sin, let us heartily repent for that
which is past, and not continue in it by adding unto unlawful swearing,
unlawful performance; following herein the example of David, 1. Sam. 25.
who reuersed his sinful oath when by Abigaile he was convinced of the
unlawfulness thereof.

And thus have I showed that unlawful oaths do not bind the conscience..
Sect. 6. Oaths containing impossibilities do not bind the conscience.
The like may be said of those oaths which contain in them an impossibility
of performance, as when we promise that which we have no possible means to do
and perform, it being far above our ability and power. Yea but will some
say, we promise in baptism by oath, Of our oath in Baptism.
that we will perform obedience unto Gods law, the which is impossible for us
to perform; and therefore, either that oath is vain, and needless, or else
we may lawfully swear unto impossibilities. I answer, that in baptism, which
is the Sacrament of the new covenant of grace, we do not promise exact
performance of the Law, but Evangelical obedience, that we will heartily
desire, and earnestly endeavor with all our power, to yield that obedience
which the law requires; and that in vprightnes of our hearts, we will strive
and labor to walk in the way of Gods commandments; the which vow and promise
every Christian performs, according to that measure of grace which he has
received. And howsoever it is not at all in our power to yield this
Evangelical obedience, yet this impossibility makes not our oath unlawful,
seeing the Lord himself requires this oath of us, when we make the new
covenant of grace, containing a mutual stipulation between God and us; wherein
we promise faith, and obedience, and the Lord promises his grace and holy
spirit, whereby we are enabled to obey his will in some measure; and also the
pardon of our sins, and manifold imperfections, whereby we come far short of
that exact obedience which his law requires, if we laboring under the heavy
burden of our sins, do strive to shake them off by true repentance, and
faith in Christ. In which gracious promise of God we resting and trusting, do
promise, not rashly and unadvisedly, but in the assurance of faith, that which
being impossible unto us, is made possible by Gods promised grace, and the
assistance of his holy spirit: and therefore our oath in Baptism makes
nothing for the defense of those, who not required by God, nor having any
promise of his assistance to enable them to perform, do rashly and upon their
own accord, promise impossibilities, in which number are they, who vow single
life.

Now this oath whereby we swear unto impossibilities, Sect. 7. Of that oath
whereby we swear to perform known impossibilities.
is taken two ways; first, when as at the making of the oath the
impossibility of performance appeared unto us, we having no show of any
possible means to make good our promise; which who so do, commit a fearful
sin against God, by forswearing themselves, wittingly, and willingly; by
making his glorious name become a cloak for their falsehood; by tempting his
truth and power, and daring his justice to execute his vengeance; so likewise,
they sin against their neighbor, by abusing and deceiving him, in that they
promise that which they have no possible means to perform, and against
themselves by provoking Gods wrath, drawing down upon their guilty heads his
fearful vengeance, and by desperate leaping into the fire of hell.

Secondly,. Sect. 8. Of impossibilities appearing in the event.
this oath is taken when the impossibility appears not, and that either
because we do not advisedly consider of our means to perform our promise; by
reason whereof we do not discern our want of power, to make good our word; or
having sufficient power and means to perform our oath at the taking thereof,
are afterward disabled by some unexpected accident. As if by oath we should
promise to pay at a certain time a sum of money, having so much in our own
custody; and before the appointed day came, should be utterly disabled by
fire, thieves, or some other casualtie, so as we have no possible means to
perform our promise. The former cannot be excused, as being a sin of
rashness and unadvisedness (although it is much less heinous then when we
swear to known impossibilities) in that before we swear, we should be
assured, not only of our will, but also of our power to perform our promise.
The other is much more excuseable, because such oaths seem reuersed by God
himself, who has taken away from us all means of performance. Howbeit, if in
such cases we would be wholly acquit from all imputation of fault, we are not
to swear absolutely, that we will perform our promise, seeing we have no
absolute and unlimited power, but to join these conditions, If God will, if it
please the Lord, if he will suffer or enable me, and such like. For if these
conditions are to be expressed or understood in our ordinary promises, as the
Apostle teaches us; then much more in such promises; Iam. 4.13.15.
as are of greatest importance, being confirmed with a religious oath.

And thus have I showed that unlawful and impossible oaths bind not the
conscience.. Sect. 9. Where oaths made to our great loss and hindrance are to
be performed.
Now in the third place it may be demanded, whether we are in conscience bound
to perform such oaths, the performance whereof is accompanied with great
loss and hindrance. The which question shall not need any large answer,
seeing the holy Ghost himself makes it a mark of the child of God, and
inheritour of heaven, when as he performs his oath unto his neighbor and
changes not, for any loss or hindrance, Psalm. 15.4.
which does accompany it. Though therefore we sustain never so much worldly
loss and damage thereby, yet we are to perform our oaths, seeing by our
perjury the glory of God would be impeached, the advancement whereof we are
to prefer before all the world.

Fourthly,. Sect. 10. Whether extorted oaths are to be observed.
it is demanded whether oaths extorted from us by force and violence do bind
the conscience. As for example, if falling into the hands of thieves, we be
compelled upon the peril of our lives to swear unto them, that we will bring
them such a sum of money, and use secrecy, not discovering them unto any, by
any means. I answer, that such an oath containing nothing in it which is
absolutely evil does bind the conscience; and therefore is to be performed.
Yea but this oath may seem to be unlawful, first, because we do not take it
willingly, but compelled. Secondly, because the giving of money unto a thief,
and keeping secrecy, does make us accessaries to his theft, in that we help
to maintain him in his ill courses, and thereby hurt the Common wealth by not
discovering such a pernicious member, that he may be cut off; and also hazard
other of our neighbors to fall into the like danger; and therefore the peril
of our lives should not make us take such an unlawful oath; or if through
infirmity we have taken it, we are not to perform it, because it does not
bind the conscience. To the former I answer, that howsoever we do not with
absolute consent of will, take such an oath, yet we cannot be said to have
sworn unwillingly, or against our wills; seeing we will it though not
absolutely and simply, yet accidentally, and conditionally, for the safeguard of
our lives, and for the avoiding of a greater evil. Even as the Merchant does
willingly cast his goods into the sea in the stormy tempest, not simply, but
conditionally, to preserve the ship from a wrack, and himself from drowning.
To the other I answer, that by giving his goods to a thief he does not
maintain him in his theft, nay rather being now furnished with some money to
relieve his present necessity, he may the better leave his stealing, and
betake himself to live by his honest labor. Or if the thief be hereby
encouraged to continue in his theft, yet he that gives him the money is not
accessarie to his fault, because he does not join consent of will nor approve
his theeuish courses, neither yet does intend any such thing in his gift, but
only the safeguard of his life. And therefore this continuance in theeuing
comes to pass, not simply through the gift of the true man, but accidentally
by reason of the thieves corruption and maliciousness, who abuses it unto
sin. And whereas it is further objected, that by swearing secrecy we sin,
because we hereby indamage the Common wealth, and endanger our neighbors; to
this I answer, that this comes to pass not simply, through our secrecy, for
he might surcease his robbing being concealed, and become a profitable member
of the Common wealth; but if at all it happen, it is accidentally quite beside
our scope and intention, through his own corruption and maliciousness who
will not give over his robbing. Again, though it be a sin simply to indamage
the Commonwealth, and to expose our neighbors unto danger; yet it is no
sin, when in a lesser damage is contained a greater benefit. Now by sweaing
secrecy we preserve our lives, who are profitable members of the
Commonwealth; and it is a greater benefit to the body to preserve a sound and
good member, then to cut off such a member as is unsound and rotten. If indeed
the question were of treason against our Prince and country, then the
objection were of force, for as much as the safeguard of the Prince and State is
much more highly to be valued then the preserving of our own lives, who are
but particular members and private persons; and therefore such an oath being
pernicious to our country, is not to be made to escape the danger of death; or
if through infirmity we should yield unto it, we ought not to perform it,
seeing it being unlawful does not bind the conscience. But to return to our
former question of concealing fellons, I add further that by refusing secrecy
to save our lives we shall not at all benefit the Commonwealth, seeing their
discovery hereby is rather hindered then furthered: for whilst we live it
only stands upon the certainty of our oath and resolution, but being killed
by them, it becomes in respect of our revealing plainly impossible. And we
after a sort bring upon the malefactor a kind of wilful necessity of running
into a more horrible sin then he intends: for where as if we swear
secrecy, he only falls into the sin of theft; by denying to keep his
counsel, we urge him upon the peril of his own life to commit the fearful
sin of murder, and to defile himself with our innocent blood. Neither do
we expose our neighbor unto the like peril, seeing by this secrecy we
intend not the danger of his life but the safeguard of our own; of which if for
denying secrecy we suffer our selves to be deprived, he is never the more
privileged from danger, yea rather he is in greater peril, seeing the thief
who before only robbed, is now also fleshed in blood. Finally, though it should
be granted, that through our secrecy our neighbor by accident should be
endangered, yet this does not make our oath unlawful seeing we are to prefer
the avoiding of our own certain death, before the securing of our neighbor
from uncertain peril.

The fifth question is like unto the former,. Sect. 11. Whether oaths made
through error do bind the conscience.
and therefore needs no long answer, namely, whether oaths made through
error, and wrested from us by deceit and fraud, do bind the conscience unto
performance. I answer briefly, that they do bind us, if the things we promise
by such oaths be lawful and in our power. A plain example whereof we have
in the oath which Joshua and the Princes of Israel made unto the Gibeonites, Ios
9.9.15.18.
to the making whereof they were drawn by their subtlety, quite against their
purpose and meaning: which oath, for the reverence of Gods glorious name,
Joshua, and the Princes performed, and afterward being violated by Saul, 2.
Sam. 21.1.8.
it was severely punished by God with a grievous famine, and the destruction of
seven of Saul's posterity.

The sixth question is,. Sect. 12. Whether an oath made by the creatures or
Idols bind the conscience.
whether an oath made by the creatures, or by Idols and false gods binds the
conscience. To this I answer, that such oaths bind the swearer to
performance. Concerning oaths, by the creatures it is apparent, seeing it is
the question which was between Christ and the Pharisees; for they held that
such oaths did not bind to performance, but our Savior affirms the
contrary, and yields this reason; because they who swear by the creatures,
swear indirectly by God himself, Matthew. 5.34.35. and 23.21. Qei super lapidem
salsum jurat periurus est, etc. Non te audit lapis loquentem, sed punit Deus te
fallentem. Tom. 10. sermon. 28.
there remaining in them some resemblances of his power and Majesty. Heaven is
his throne, the earth his footstool, Jerusalem his city, the Temple his
house. To the same purpose Austine says, that he who swears falsely by a
stone is perjured; and that howsoever that is not holy by which he swears,
yet the Lord is holy before whom he swears; and therefore though the stone
hears him not speak, yet God will punish him if he do deceive. To conclude,
our simple promise would bind us to performance, and therefore much more being
confirmed by an oath

The like may be said of oaths made by Idols,. Sect. 13. Of oaths made by
Idols and salse gods.
and false gods; for howsoever it is unlawful to swear by them, yet whosoever
has sworn by them, as by true gods, he is bound to perform his promise: not
for the Idols sake, but for Gods sake before whom he swears; not because they
are true gods indeed, but in that they are so in the swearers opinion; and
therefore the Turk swearing by Mahomet, is perjured, if he do not perform
his oath; and so likewise the Papists, swearing by the Idol of the Mass.

The seventh question is, whether oaths made in societies and companies, to
maintain their statutes and orders,. Sect. 14. Of oaths made in societies;
and how far forth they bind the conscience.
do bind the conscience; and whether those who swear to such orders, are
perjured if they do not observe them? To which I answer, that amongst these
statutes there are some absolute, requiring simple obedience; some penal and
conditional, requiring either performance, or submission to undergo the mulct
and punishment; some substantial, and essential, which are the fundamental
laws and orders, upon the performance whereof the good continuance and being
of the corporation is grounded: which being obeyed, the society is preserved,
but being broken and violated, it is overthrown and destroyed. Others are
ceremonial, tending only to order, and decency, and rather for ornament,
then for necessity. Now as the lawgiuers require simple and absolute obedience
unto the former kind, namely, such as are fundamental, and essential, and for
the better performance of such statutes, require an oath of the whole society;
so according unto their intention, the particular members of the corporation
taking their oath, are bound to yield simple and absolute obedience unto such
statutes, being not contrary to the word of God, and if they do not, they are
perjured. But as the lawgiuers require not simple obedience unto such statutes
as tend only to order and comelines, but conditional, that they must obey or
undergo the mulct; so they swearing according to the lawgiuers intention, do
perform their oath in some manner, when they bear the penalty for their
nonperformance: although not as they ought, seeing the true end of laws, is
obedience, and not punishment; nevertheless, they are hereby acquitted of
perjury, and in some cases wholly excused, as when some necessary and
important cause moves them to omit a ceremonial duty.

The eighth question is how oaths are to be made and performed,. Sect. 15.
Oaths must be plainly made and simply performed.
that we may be clear from perjury? Unto which I answer, that we must both
make and perform them simply and plainly without any manner of fraud and
deceit, and in that sense and meaning in which we would have him understand us
unto whom we swear, without either popish equivocation, or mental
reservation. For this were to abuse the Majesty of God, if we make him a
witness and surety of our deceit, and to delude our neighbor under the show
of a religious oath. But of the two it is more wicked and pernicious when this
fraud and deceit is used in the making of an oath, then in the performance; for
that most commonly proceeds from maliciousness and prepensed falsehood,
whereas the other may be committed through frailty and infirmity; suddenly
and unadvisedly.

Ninthly,. Sect. 16. We must perform our oaths made to all men.
it may be demanded, if all lawful oaths made to all manner of persons do
bind the conscience, and therefore are to be performed? The Papists affirm
and maintain we are not to keep faith with heretics; and therefore oaths
made to them are of no force to bind the conscience. But if this opinion were
received, Council. Constan.
it would overthrow all contracts and intercourse of dealing between nation
and nation, and make void and frustrate all covenants, and conclusions of
truce or peace. It would also give public scandal, and cause those who are
without to abhor our religion, as maintaining fraud and perfidious treachery;
and finally, Gods name should be abused and dishonored, which is called upon
to countenance falsehood and breach of promise. We therefore maintain and hold
that all lawful oaths do bind the conscience, unto whomsoever they are made
without respect of persons, either friend or enemy, true professor or
heretic, Christian or Turk, Protestant or Papist. Having herein for our
examples the holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who swore and
performed their oaths made to idolatrous Infidels, Abimilech, Phicol and
Laban. And consequently that they who break such promises confirmed by oath,
are perjured persons.

In the tenth place it may be demanded,. Sect. 17.
whether any man has just authority to dispense with a lawful oath? I answer,
Whether any man has authority to dispense with a lawful oath.
that howsoever ye man of sin, the Antichrist of Rome herein matching himself
as equal with God, arrogateth this authority to dispense with lawful oaths,
and to free subjects from their sworn allegiance unto their lawful
Soueraigns; yet the truth is, that no mortal man has this power to dispense
with an oath being lawful, because the Lord has by his law bound us unto
performance; for he has charged us not to take his name in vain, and that we
should not forswear our selves, and by our perjury pollute his holy name;
Leuit. 19.12.
and who can countermand that which the Lord has commanded? and he has
conjoined our lawful promises with the performance of them by the religious
bond of an oath; who therefore can loose that which God has bound? who can
separate and put asunder those things which by his word he has joined
together? Whereof it plainly follows, that our Jesuits, Priests and other
Papists, who having formerly taken the oath of allegiance, and sworn to the
supremacy of their lawful Sovereign, and afterward reconcile themselves to
the Pope, maintain his supremacy, deny their allegiance to their King, and
so violate their former oath, trusting to the Popes dispensation; are no better
then perjured persous in the sight of God and of all his faithful servants.
Yea, but if a promise be confirmed with an oath between man and man, may not
he unto whom the promise is made, and whom it only concerns, release the
other of his promise, and so free him from his oath? I answer, that no man has
this authority; for in every lawful promissorie oath, the swearer obliges
himself in a double bond, the one is from man to man, the other from man to
God; now howsoever he to whom the promise is made, may free the swearer from
all claim and challenge of the promise made unto him, so far forth as it
lies in his own power; yet he has no authority to free him from his oath,
because that is not only made unto him, but also unto God himself, and
therefore he only can dispense with it. And hence it is that an oath made
between man and man is called notwithstanding the oath of the Lord, Exodus
22.11. 2. Sam. 21.7.
because thereby the swearer has immediately bound himself unto God for the
performance of his promise; and when he does perform it, he is said to
perform his oath, not so much unto men, as unto God himself, as appears
Matthew. 5.33. Matthew. 5.13.
And herein consists a plain difference between a single promise, and a
promise confirmed by an oath. A single promise being only made unto man, may be
lawfully released by his consent unto whom it is made: but a promise confirmed
by oath cannot be reuersed, because it is not made to man alone, but to God
also; who only has authority to dispense with such oaths as are made unto
him.

In the last place it may be demanded,. Sect. 18. Whether it be lawful to
impose an oath upon such an one as we think vvil forswear himself.
whether it be lawful to impose an oath to be taken by such an one, as, we
think making no conscience of it, will not stick to forswear himself, if he
be put to it? I answer by distinction, that it is altogether unlawful for a
private man to impose upon such a man an oath, for his own gain or private
respect; because we are bound to prefer the glory of God, which by such an
oath is impeached, and the salvation of our neighbors soul, which hereby is
endangered, before any worldly gain and advantage. And consequently we ought
rather to lose any worldly benefit, then that by such an oath we should suffer
God to be dishonored, and our neighbor to lose himself. To this purpose
Augustine speaks: Whosoever (says he) provoke another to swear, Qui
hominem prouocat ad iurationem and scit eum falsum iuraturu^ vincit homicida^,
etc. Aug. de decoll. Joan. Bapt. ser. 11. Tom 10. Scrm. de Periurijs. Jlle enim
se suo periurio interimit, sed isie manum inter ficientis pressit and impressit.
knowing that he will swear falsely, he is worse then a murderer; because a
murderer kills but the body, this the soul, yea two souls at once; his
whom he provoke to swear, and his own. Do thou know that to be truth
which thou affirmest, and that false which he avouches, and yet vrgest him to
swear? Behold he swears, forsweareth, and perishes. And what have thou
found hereby? yea thou have lost thy self, who would be no otherwise
satisfied but by his destruction. And in another place: He that inforceth one
to swear, whom he knows will swear falsely, is a murderer; for he kills
himself with his perjury, but the other thrusts and helps forward the hand
of the self murderer.

But yet a Magistrate may lawfully put such an one to his oath, if the
execution of law and course of justice do so require. For better it is that a
private man should perish, Fiat institia and ruat coelum.
then that the public administration of law and justice should be stayed and
hindered: nevertheless, the Magistrate ought in this case to forbear the
imposition of an oath, if the truth may by any other possible means be cleared
and justice executed; and if not, yet he is gravely and religiously to
admonish the party of the waightines of an oath, the heinousness of the sin
of perjury, and fearefulnes of the punishment which does attend it: and so
having done his best to prevent it, he is to leave the party to himself, and
the event to God.

CHAP. XI. Reasons to dissuade from the sin of perjury.
ANd so much concerning the former part of this treatise, wherein I have showed
what perjury is, and the kinds thereof, and withal have cleared diverse
questions, whereby we may the better discern the nature of this sin, and
when it is committed. Now in the second part, I will briefly set down some
reasons to dissuade all men from this sin, which is so dishonorable to God, and
so pernicious unto mankind; all which I will reduce to these two heads; the
first whereof is the hainousnes of the sin; the second is the grieuousnes of
the punishment, which does accompany it.

The hainousnes will appear both in it own nature,. Sect. 1. 1. Because
perjury is odious unto God.
and also in the evil effects and fruits thereof. That in it own nature it is
a grievous sin, may hereby be made manifest; first, because it is odious and
abominable, both in the sight of God and men. That the Lord abhors this
sin of perjury, it plainly appears, Zach. 8.17. Zach. 8.17.
Let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love
no false oath: for all these are the things that I hate, says the Lord. And
hence it is that the Lord in his law has so straightly forbidden this sin.
Leuit. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely; Leu. 19.12.
neither shall thou defile the name of thy God. For the transgression of which
law, Ier. 7.9.
the Jews are sharply reproved and condemned. Ier. 7.9. Will you steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal?
etc. Wherewe may observe, that howsoever the sons of Belial so lightly
esteem of this sin, that they will not stick to sell a false oath at the
least price, yet the Lord counts it an heinous sin, and therefore he
rangeth it in this place amongst those capital crimes, of theft, murder,
adultery, and idolatry.

So also this is odious unto men;. Sect. 2. 2. Perjury is odious unto men.
and that not only faithful Christians, amongst whom a perjured person loses
the reputation of religion, and the true fear of God, yea even of civility
and common honesty; and is for ever branded with the black mark of a
profane person, who never after is to be credited in his words and deeds; but
also unto the Heathens, Turks, and Pagans: for howsoever these men are but
dim sighted in the moral duties of honesty between man and man, having
only the obscure light of corrupted nature to be their guide, and even almost
stark blind in the duties of piety toward God; yet have they abhorred this
sin of perjury, and counted it worthy of the seuerest punishment. One
says, Agesilaus. Apud. Aelian. lib. 14. de var. histor. Pericles. Plutarch in
apotheg.
that men by no means more provoke the wrath of the divine Majesty, then by
rash violating of an holy oath. Another being importuned by a respected friend,
to afford him a false oath; answered, that he could be his friend, no surther
then vsque ad aras, unto the altar; meaning, that no friendship should make him
swear a false oath at the altar, in the presence of their gods. A third being
set at liberty, rather than he would break his oath, Regulus. Cic. lib. 3. de
offic
returned again unto his mortal enemies, expecting nothing else but exquisite
torments.

Secondly,. Sect. 3. The manifold evils contained in perjury. 1. Lying.
the outrageous wickedness of this sin appears by the manifold evils which
it contains; for it is a hellish monster, compounded of many heinous sins,
the least whereof is by it self damnable. As first the grossest kind of
lying, which is not only avouched, but also impudently outfaced with an oath;
and this alone, as it excludes those who use it out of the joys of heaven,
Apoc. 21.15. and 21.8.
For without shall be whosoever loves or makes lies; so also it purchases
them a part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, as appears,
Apoc. 22.15. and 21.8.

Secondly, it contains in it guile and deceit,. Sect. 4. 2. Guile and deceit.
and that in the highest kind, and most pernicious; for when deceit and
falsehood come masked and disguised under a religious oath, which is the rich
robe and precious ornament of truth and justice; men not only do lie open
unto it to be deceived and abused by it, after an ordinary and voluntary
manner; but also are entangled therewith, by a kind of vnauoideable
necessity; it being altogether unlawful, without most apparent cause, to call
the deceivers assertions and promises into question, when as they are confirmed
with a witness above exception, and ratified with the authority of God
himself. As therefore the Lord is the auenger of all kind of fraud, as it is,
1. These. 4.6. 1. These. 4.6.
so especially of this whereby himself is so much dishonored; and as all
manner of deceit is abominable unto him, Psalm. 5.6. so principally this, Psalm
5.6.
which the sons of Belial countenance with his authority.

Thirdly,. Sect. 5. 3 Gods name is polluted by perjury.
it contains the most horrible pollution of Gods holy name, which can be
imagined; as the Lord himself witnesses, Leuit. 19.12. making that which in
it own nature, and right use, is the shield of verity, Leuit. 19.12.
to become the defense of falsehood; and of a strong tower of truth, whereunto
the righteous run, for the ending of all contentions and controversies, Prou.
18.11.
to become a sanctuary to shroude liars and deceitful persons.

Fourthly, it is a shameful abuse of Gods Majesty,. Sect. 6. 4 Gods Majesty
is abused.
when as he who is truth it self is produced as a witness to confirm a
known lie, and as a surety for the doing of that which they intend never to
perform. It is a shameful tempting and scornful contempt of Gods all-seeing
knowledge, justice, power, anger, threatenings, and fearful vengeance
denounced against this sin, when as knowing a thing to be false, they dare
avouch it, calling upon God as a just Judge and auenger of falsehood, to inflict
upon them the deserved punishment of their sin, if they do not speak the
truth. For what is this but desperately to make trial whether God can or will
according to his word punish their sin? What is it but like fierce bandogs to
fly in Gods face, and to dare him to do his worst in the execution of his
vengeance?

And these are the evils which are contained in this sin of perjury. Sect.
7. The evil fruits of perturie. 1. They draw God into their sin as much as
in them lies.
Now the fruits and effects thereof are as bad, both in respect of God, our
neighbor, and our selves. For first, the perjured person exceedingly
dishonors Gods glorious Majesty, by drawing him, as much as in him lies,
into the communication of his sin, and offers against him a kind of
violence in forcing him to that which is quite contrary to his own nature: for
where as he is most true, yea truth it self, they bring him as a patron of
their untruth and falsehood, and make him to the uttermost of their power, like
unto Satan who is the father of lies. And where as he is most just, both in his
word and works, they bring him as their surety to countenance their fraud and
deceit. Whereby as in their impious maliciousness they do, as much as in them
lies, destroy and ouerturne Gods nature and essence, and make him like unto
Satan; so do they in deed, and in truth, make themselves in this respect worse
then the devil; for howsoever he is not only a liar, but also the father of
lies, even from the beginning; yet we never read nor heard that ever he came
to that desperate audaciousnesse, that he durst presume to confirm his lies by
an oath, or to abuse Gods glorious name for the patronizing and countenancing
his untruths.

Secondly,. Sect. 8. False swearing overthrows truth and justice.
by his false swearing he overthrows truth and justice, the one being the
Lords great Seal, the other the Scepter of his kingdom whereby he rules
amongst men; the which he does after a most odious and treacherous manner: for
he uses Gods forces against himself; he strengthens himself with the help
of Gods holy name, to destroy those heavenly virtues, truth and justice, in
which his soul delights; and for the upholding and maintaining of those
hellish vices of falsehood and injustice, which he so much abhors. And in
the mean time most audaciouslie calls God to be a witness of his dealing,
and a Judge and auenger of these wicked actions.

And thus the perjured person directly sins against the Majesty of God.
Sect. 9. How the perjured person sins against his neighbor.
Now against his neighbor also he grievously offends many ways by his
false swearing, for hereby he subuerteth justice, which is the pillar of the
Commonwealth, and the bond of humane society; which being taken away, no
State can stand but must needs fall to ruin. He ouerethroweth truth, which
is the chief preserver of al commerce, trading and intercourse of dealing
between nation and nation, man and man; and in stead thereof erecteth untruth
and falsehood, which is the bane of humane society. He destroys the use and
end of lawful oaths, which is to determine controversies, and to put an end
unto all strife; and consequently takes away the chief bond of peace; and
preserves suspicions, iealousies, discord and contention, which weaken and
dissipate the best settled and most firmly established government; he hereby
peruerteth judgment, causing the Iuries to give a false verdict, and the Judge
an unjust sentence, whereby innocence is suppressed, the honest dealer spoiled
of his right and brought unto all extremities, falsehood maintained, the
oppressor strengthened in his malicious courses; and in a word, the whole
course and administration of justice perverted and utterly overthrown.

So likewise hereby he most perniciously sins against himself;. Sect. 10.
The perjured person sins against himself.
for this sin of perjury makes such a deep wound in the conscience, that it
is hardly recured, unless with Peter we bewail it with bitter tears, Romans
1.28.30.
and power into it the preclous balm of Christ's blood by a true faith; and he
that falls into it, is commonly either given up to a reprobate sense, to
run headlong into all manner of sin and wickedness; or else is continually
haunted with this sin, as with a hellish fury; which tormenteth his soul
and conscience with restless fears, and affrighting terrors.

CHAP. XII. The punishment of perjury.
ANd so much for those reasons which are taken from the greatness of this
sin. The second sort may be drawn from the grieuousnesse of their
punishment; the which the Lord inflicteth either mediatly by the ministry of
men, or immediately by himself.

Amongst men as it has in all ages,. Sect. 1. 1. Perjury is punished with
shameful infamy.
and in all places been accounted an heinous sin and capital crime; so has
it been punished with no light or small punishments. For first, whereas a good
name is better then either silver, gold, or great riches, Prou. 22.1.
and as highly valued amongst virtuous men as life it self; this sin of
periurie-hath ever so stained the perjured person with such a deep ingrained
die of infamy and reproach, that the blemish could never be taken away unto
the end of life. And howsoever the offender having washed and bathed his
cheeks with tears of unfeigned repentance, and his soul with the blood of
Christ, applied by a lively faith, has the polluted stains of this defiling
sin washed away out of Gods sight; yet seldom is he so purged and cleansed
in the judgment of men, but that some blots and blemishes do still remain
even to the end of life. To this purpose Cicero says, Lib. 2. de legib.
Periurij poena diuina, exitium; humana, dedecus: Divine punishment inflicted
upon perjured persons for their false swearing is destruction; humane, is shame
and discredit. And this is that punishment which both the Civil and Canon law
imposed upon such; namely, that if they were taken with this fault, they should
for ever be so disabled in their credit and reputation, that they might not be
admitted to be witnesses, and to give testimony, either in their own or other
men's causes, in any judicial proceedings. The which punishment was in Gods
righteous judgment inflicted in some proportion according to the quality of
their sin: for whereas they to grace themselves in their untruths, care not
(as much as in them lies) to dishonor God, by deriuing the imputation of
fraud and deceit upon him whom they invoke as a witness of their lies: God
justly meets with them, and returns the infamy and reproach upon their own
heads.

Besides which punishment of infamy, Sect. 2. Other punishments of perjury.
the same laws impose others upon him that commits this sin, as that he shall
be deprived of all Ecclesiastical preferments, and dignities, if he possess
them, and not be admitted, either into the Ministry or government of the
Church. That likewise he shall be dispoiled of all civil advancement, so as he
shall not be admitted unto any such preferment, nor reentred after he is
displaced. Besides which punishments in name and state, they determine that he
should be punished as a common cosener, and be either beaten with cudgels and
staves, or exiled and banished; or if it were in capital matters, and
concerned the life of his neighbor, he should be punished with death it self,
according to the law of God in that case provided: Deuteronomy. 19.19. The which
punishment of death was inflicted upon all among the Egyptians, Patric. lib. 5.
tit. 5.
who were convicted of wilful perjury, upon any cause whatsoever, as Patricius
records.

But because these humane punishments are not always inflicted upon the
offenders,. Sect. 3. How the Lord himself punishes perjury.
either because their sin being cunningly, or closely acted, is not
discovered; or through their negligence, and want of zeal for Gods glory, who
have the sole authority to see the laws executed; therefore the Lord himself
oftentimes takes his own cause into his own hand: and howsoever men wincke
at and acquit them, yet he holds them not guiltless, who thus by their
perjury profane and pollute his holy name. And because his glory which is by
this sin impeached, is most dear unto him: therefore the Lord does severely
punish those who thus offend, both with temporary, and eternal punishments;
in themselves; and also in their posterity, as the Poet well observed:

In prolemdilata ruunt periuria patris,
Et poenam merito filius ore luit. Claudianus in Curctium.

And as this sin of perjury is in an extraordinary sort abominable in Gods
sight; so does he punish it with extraordinary plagues, and besides those
usual punishments, which are common to all offenders; he has inflicted upon
perjured persons such fearful judgments from time to time, which have been
so fit and proportionable to the sin, that one might read their offense
written in their punishment, as it were in great text letters set over their
heads. And thus did the Lord punish the breach of the covenant made with the
Gibeonites, and confirmed by oath, with three years famine, and with the death
of seven of Saul's posterity, who had violated this oath; 2. Sam. 21.
and that not in a secret manner, but openly declaring what was the sin for
which he inflicted these punishments. So because Zedechia broke the oath of
the Lord, which he had made unto Nebucadnezer, he had his sons slain
before his face, and that he might never behold cause of comfort after this
sad spectacle, his eyes were presently put out, and he being bound with chains
was led captive unto Babylon, where he slauishly lived, and died wretchedly:
all which punishments were inflicted upon him principally for his perjury,
Ezech. 17.15.
as appears, Ezech. 17.15.16.18.19.

Besides which temporal punishments, the Lord inflicteth upon such as thus
offend,. Sect. 4. God punishes perjury with spiritual punishments and
eternal death.
those which are spiritual and eternal; for he has denounced against them
his fearful curse, which shall light so heavy upon the perjured person, that
it shall not only destroy him and his posterity, but shall even consume his
house with the timber and stones thereof, as appears, Zach. 5.4.
Zach. 5.4. And after this life, if the flame of Gods wrath in the mean while
be not quenched with the tears of unfeigned repentance, it shall burn hot
against him, kindling and preparing for him the fire of hell, in which he shall
be eternally tormented; for if the liar has his portion in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Apoc. 21.8.
as it is Apoc. 21.8, then much more the perjured person (who confirms his
lies by an oath, calling God himself to be, not only a witness and surety
but also a Judge to avenge his falsehood) shall with the intolerable weight of
this outrageous sin, be suncke into the deepest bottom of this hellish
condemnation.

And thus have I showed the lawful use of an oath,. Sect. 5. The conclusion of
this treatise.
and also how it is abused both by vain swearing and impious forswearing: and
withal have propounded many reasons and arguments, which may serve as wholesome
preservatives to keep those who have any fear of God from falling into these
sins; or as profitable medicines to cure them of these dangerous diseases of
the soul, if already they have seized on them. Now as I heartily pray unto
God that all who shall read this treatise, and all other who profess the name
of Christ, may by these and such like reasons made effectual by his grace, and
powerful working of his holy Spirit, be brought both to a forsaking and also
to an utter hatred and detestation of these sins; so with all humble
earnestness I entreat our Magistrates and Governors, who are as Gods
deputies and Lieutenants set amongst us, to execute his righteous judgments;
that they will in fervent zeal to Gods glory, whose person they do sustain,
as being petty gods upon earth; not only carefully reform themselves of
these vices, whereby Gods holy name is polluted, both in their own
particular, and as they are examples unto others; but also that they would
wisely enact and diligently execute such wholesome laws, as may restrain, or
severely punish these gross abuses, of vain swearing, and impious
forswearing, which in these times so commonly reign amongst us. That hereby
they may show and approne themselves truly religious, in that they are
careful, not only to suppress such abuses and sins as tend to the hurt of
their country and Commonwealth, or to the damage and hindrance of particular
subjects (for so should they go no further the^ they have civil policy for
their guide, and Heathen Magistrates for their examples, and consequently bring
upon their religion the imputation of a mere policy, as being both enlarged
and bounded with the same liberty and limits:) but also by showing the like
care and zeal in suppressing and punishing those sins of impiety against
the first table, which are directly committed against the Majesty of God
himself, of which nature is idolatry and superstition, vain swearing,
cursing, and perjury, profanation of Gods Sabbaths and such like. And so
shall they move the Lord in mercy to look upon us, to put up his sword of
vengeance which has been long drawn against us, and to pull back his
punishing hand which a great while has lien heavy upon our land, by unusual
sickness, pestilence and famine: and contrariwise to stretch forth his hand
of mercy and goodness; whereby his blessings and bountiful benefits shall be
not only continued, but also enlarged and increased both unto us and our
posterity. So also shall they gather unto themselves certain assurance, 1.
Sam. 2.30.
that thus seeking the advancement of Gods glory, the Lord will also honor
them, and make their name glorious in the sight of the people unto all
posterity; and also that ruling for God in this life, they shall reign with
him in everlasting glory in the life to come. The which mercy the Lord our
God vouchsafe for his Son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the
holy Spirit, three persons and one God, infinite in all perfection, be ascribed
all honor and glory both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A DISSWASION FROM THE SIN OF DRVNKENNES.
CHAP. I. The occasion of this Treatise.
AMong many other the excellent gifts,. Sect. 1. Godly discretion necessary in
a good Minister.
which are required in Gods Ministers, to make them complete and fit for the
work of their Ministry, I have always thought that spiritual judgment and
discretion deserves to be placed in the foremost rank, as being an ornament
of rare excellency to beautify all the rest; and as it were Lord high
Marshall in the field of virtue, which marshalleth and rangeth all other
virtues and graces in their fit places; so as they may be most serviceable
unto the great Commander the Lord of hosts; and most profitable for the Church.
Hereby the man of God being enabled by other gifts and graces, as learning,
zeal, piety and the rest, for the work of the Ministry, is fitted to use
these his abilities to his best advantage, which otherwise would be
unprofitable, and often times rather hinder then further the end of his
labors. For the Minister of God is the Lords spiritual watchman, and
therefore it is not enough for him to sit in the watchtower, and to descrie
all comers, but he must have spiritual discretion, to discern friends from
enemies, and of enemies, which are to be contemned as weak and impotent, and
which to be incountred, as being dangerous and pernicious. He is the spiritual
Physician of the Church, and therefore he must not only have skill to make
good medicines, but also spiritual wisdom to fit these medicines according
to the nature and quality of his patients diseases. He is the Steward of the
family, and therefore he must not only have a liberal hand, to give food to
all his fellow servants, but he must also discreetly distribute unto every one
their portion in fit time and season. He is the Lords Gardener; and therefore
he must not only have knowledge to discern between flowers and weeds, but
also discretion to distinguish of times and seasons, when it is fit to pull up
the weeds or to let them grow; otherwise he shall either pull up the flowers
with the weeds, or leaving the root behind spend his labor in vain. In a
word, he is Gods Orator and Ambassador unto his people, and therefore he
must not only be furnished with wise instructions, but also he must have
spiritual wisdom and discretion, to deliver his message in season, and to
have respect unto circumstances, of time, occasion, persons and place. And this
is that speech which the Wise man so much commends, Prou. 25.11. Prou. 25.11.
A word spoken in his place, or fitly and in season, is like apples of gold and
pictures of silver: that is, precious and delightful, sweet and profitable.
It is not therefore sufficient for the well discharging of the work of the
Ministry, that we are able to speak a word of comfort; unless we have
discretion to utter it in time of need, for the raising up of those who are
cast down; and for the refreshing of the faint and weary: for this were
nothing else but to give a potion to a healthie man, and to lay a sovereign
plaster upon the whole skin. It is not enough that we are Bonarges, the
sons of Thunder, to bruise and batter stony hearts, and beat down sin by
denouncing Gods fearful judgments; if we do not apply our speech to persons
and times, and inueigh against those sins with which the people unto who^ we
speak are most tainted and corrupted. The sins of the times ought to be
reproved.
For if speaking to the people we declaime against ye sins of the Magistrates,
or preaching to Englishmen, we inueigh against the peculiar sins of the Turks
or Indians; or reprehend prodigality among the covetous, or pride among the
sordidous, or superstition among the profane and irreligious; this is not to
reprove, but to backbite sin; to fight valiantly in the absence of the
enemy, and with a strong arm to beat the air, and to contend against a
shadow; which may spraine a joint, and for reward move scornful laughter,
rather then admiration of any true valor; yea in truth this is nothing else but
to nourish vice with the milk of virtue, by religious reproves to strengthen
men in their sins, and to make them flatter themselves with a conceit that they
are sufficiently virtuous, when they are not alike vicious to other men; and to
lie securely wallowing in those sins which are extreme and contrary to those
which are reproved. The consideration whereof, made me, who am bound in
conscience of my calling to speak and write against sin and wickedness, to
ponder with my self what sins were most fit to be spoken against, as needing
in our times and country most reproof: and after some deliberation, I
resolved to inueigh against that beastly sin of reasonable creatures, the
sin of drunkenness, that as much as in me lies I may dissuade all men from
this vice, which darkeneth the light, both of nature and grace, brings upon
the eye of the understanding, a temporary blindness, and so yields men over
unto Satan to be led as it were blindfold into all manner of sin and
wickedness.

In which argument I hope I shall not spend my time unprofitably, Sect. 2.
Drunkenness abounds in our land.
seeing in our days this vice more reigns then ever it did in former ages;
as may appear in that our wise Statesmen thought it necessary in Parliament,
to inact a law for the suppressing of this sin; for, Ex malis moribus bonae
nascuntur leges; evil manners occasion good laws. And indeed not without good
cause, is the sword of the Magistrate joined with the sword of the spirit,
seeing now this vice is grown to such strength, that it is to be feared it
will not in haste, by both be repressed. For who sees not that many of our
people of late, are so immeasurable addicted to this vice, that they seem to
contend with ye Germans themselves, spending ye greatest part of their time in
carousing, as though they did not drink to live, but lived to drink: or as if
from men they were transformed into flies which live wholly by sucking.
Neither is it possible that ever the appetite of these leaches should be
satisfied, seeing they have an hundred devices to make it still insatiable;
they drink not only for thirst and delight, but also for company and good
fellowship, one drawing on another when his appetite fails; they drink in
bravery, thinking it no small credit to him, who can get the victory in this
drunken conflict. In this hellish contention, they use, as I have heard, for I
thank God he has kept my eyes from beholding this wickedness; they use, I
say, glasses without feet, that so they may go about in a continual motion;
they carrouse by the bell, by the dye, the dozen, the yard, and so by measure,
drink out of measure. They draw one another to excessive quaffing, by making
challenges, who can express most love to their absent friends by largest
drinking, not caring to bring themselves, through their intemperancie into
grievous diseases, by drinking healthes to other men. And because nature is
content with a little, and soon cloyed and oppressed with excess, they use
all their art and skill to strengthen it for these wicked exploites, as though
their natural corruptions would not press them deep enough into hell,
unless they also loaded themselves with artificial wickedness. To this
purpose they use all sorts of salt meats to whet their appetite, many whereof
were found out by wantonness, and not necessity; to this end they use
tobacco, that by drunkenness they may expel drunkenness, and being glutted
with wine, they drink smoke, that by this variety it may not grow tedious.

And therefore it is more then time,. Sect. 3. That Magistrates and Ministers
ought to beat down the sin of drunkenness.
that Magistrates and Ministers should join together, and not only labor by
the sword of the word, but also by the sword of Justice, to suppress this vice
which heretofore durst not in this land show it face for shame, and lurked in
secret corners, but is now grown to impudent boldness, so as it dare stagger
abroad at noone days in the open streets, the multitude and quality of the
offenders countenancing the sin. To which purpose I thought good to encounter
this vice with the sword of the spirit, and to lay open the nakedness, and
ugly filthiness thereof, that all may avoid it: but first that we may not
reject the good with the evil, the wheat with the chafe, nor in speaking
against licentiousness restrain from lawful liberty; I will show the
warrantable use, and then the unlawful abuse of wine and strong drink.

For the first,. Sect. 4. The lawful use of wine and strong drink.
we are to know that in themselves they are the good creatures of God, which to
the pure are pure, if they be received with thanksgiving, and sanctified by the
word and prayer; and may be diversely used without sin, according to the
diverse ends, Tit. 1.15.
for which the Lord has bestowed them upon us: 1. Tim. 4.4.5.
and these uses and ends are either ordinary or extraordinary; ordinary,
which is the natural and common use of these creatures, for the nourishing of
the body, and for the preserving of health and strength; unto which is
required, moderation, temperance, and sobriety, that so we may be nourished
and not glutted; strengthened, and not disabled; confirmed in health, and not
cast into sickness. In which respect one says, that Primacratera ad sitim
pertinet, secunda ad hilaritatem, tertiae ad voluptatem, Lu. Apul. Floridor.
lib. 3.
quarta ad insaniam: The first cup is for the quenching of thirst; the second
for delight to make a cheerful heart; the third for voluptuousness, and the
fourth for madness.

The extraordinary use of these creatures,. Sect. 5. The lawful use of these
creatures which is extraordinary. 1. For the strengthening of the body.
is either physical, or for delight; the physical use is either for the
strengthening and comforting of the body, or for the cheering and refreshing
of the mind. If the body be weak, it is lawful for the cherishing thereof
to use wine, and nourishing drinks: for to this end has God given them unto
us. So Paul wills Timothy to use wine for his stomachs sake, and for his
often infirmities, 1. Tim. 5.23. 1. Tim. 5.23.
and the wise man commands that strong drink be given unto him that is
ready to perish, Prou. 31 6. Pro. 31.6.
But here also moderation and temperance is to be used; for as one says, Vinum
moderate potatum est medicamentum, plus iusto sumptum, venenum: August. ad
sacr. virg.
Wine drunk sparingly is a good medicine, but being intemperately used, it
becomes a hurtful poison: and therefore the Apostle giving liberty to
Timothy to drink wine, adds a restraint, that it must be but a little, lest
liberty should be abused to licentiousness. 2. For the chearing of the mind.
So also the use of wine is lawful for the cheering and refreshing of the
mind which is dejected with heaviness, and oppressed with grief and sorrow;
and this the wise man allows, Pro. 31.6.7.
Prou. 31.6. Give wine unto them that have grief of heart. 7. Let him drink
that he may forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. And this is
one special use why the Lord has given it unto us, because it makes glad the
heart of man, Psalm. 104.15.
as it is Psalm. 104.15. But here excess also is to be avoided, lest in stead
of refreshing the spirits, we do oppress them; for it is but a bad change, if
we turn our sorrow into sin; dull melancholy, into merry madness, and
grief of heart, into grief of conscience.

But it is not only lawful to use these creatures for necessity,. Sect. 6.
Wine and strong drink may be lawfully used for honest delight.
but also for honest delight, and that not only in Christian and religious
feasting, when for some public benefit we offer unto God public thanks and
praise, but also in love feasts and civil meetings, for the maintenance and
increase of amity and friendship amongst neighbors. Of the former, 1. King.
8.63. Nehem. 8.10.
we have an example in the dedication of the Temple, 1. King. 8.63. and at the
restoring of the law, Nehem. 8.10. And of the latter, in that marriage feast
which Christ graced with his presence, when he forbad not the liberal use of
wine, but contrariwise, himself miraculously turned water into wine, that the
feast might be furnished with sufficient plenty: Ioh. 2.7.
John 2.7. But here also every man is to measure and stint his appetite, and
so to observe friendship and amity as that he do not neglect Christian
sobriety and temperance; and because particular rules for direction cannot be
set down in this behalf, in regard that one man's stomach and health
requires a larger allowance, and another man's is satisfied and contented with
less, therefore we are to keep us to the general rules, that is, that we do
not abuse these creatures unto surfeiting and drunkenness, nor yet so glutte
and ouercharge our selves that thereby we be disabled from performing any
action of piety and Christianity, as hearing the word, prayer, holy
conference, or else the duties which we ought to perform in our particular
callings.

CHAP. II. That drunkenness is a vice condemned by God and man.
ANd thus much for the lawful use of these creatures:. Sect. 1. Of drunkenness,
and what it is.
whereby it appears that howsoever the abuse is hateful, yet their lawful
use is not to be rejected; neither are we to approve Lycurgus practice, who
because the people were addicted to drunkenness, caused all the vines in the
country to be cut down and spoiled: for he should have done better (as
Plutarch says) if he had dug a well near unto every vineyard, Plutarch.
de audiend. Poetis.
that the hot fury of Bacchus might be tempered and corrected with the mild
coolness of the watrie Nymphs. Now contrariwise they are abused when as they
are spent in drunkenness, intemperancie and excess. For men sin in the
abuse of these creatures two ways: first by drunkenness, when by immoderate
swilling and tippling they are deprived of the use of their reason,
understanding, and memory; so as for the time, they become like unto beasts.
Secondly by excess, when as they addict themselves to much drinking, and make
it their usual practice to sit at the wine or strong drink; neither are they
alone to be esteemed as drunkards who deprive themselves of the use of reason,
and become brutish; but those who take their chief pleasure in drinking and
carousing, though their brain will bear it without any great alteration; as
afterward shall appear.

And thus you see what drunkenness is.. Sect. 2. Drunkenness condemned as a
great sin, 1. by God himself.
Which that we may avoid and abhor, we are to know that it is condemned as
a great evil, and heinous transgression both in the high court of heaven, and
in the inferior courts of men's consciences. The Lord chief Justice of heaven
and earth has pronounced his sentence of eternal woe and malediction, against
those who are found guilty of this crime, as appears, Esa. 5.11. Esa. 5.11.
Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and unto them that
continue until night, till the wine do inflame them, Esa. 28.1.
etc. So Esa. 28.1. Woe to the crown of pride the drunkards of Ephraim, etc.
Which fearful woe that it might not be inflicted upon his subjects, he has
admonished them to avoid the sin, that so they may escape the punishment.
Luke 21.34.21.
So Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life; and lest
that day come upon you at unawares. And Ephesians. 5.18. Ephesians. 5.18.
Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess.

And thus you see what favor this vice finds at the bar of Gods
judgment.. Sect. 3. 2 It is condemned by me^: 1. by Christians.
Neither has it any more countenance or allowance in the court of men's
consciences: for all men both Christian and Heathen by the clear shining light
of grace, and the twilight of nature, have condemned drunkenness as an odious
vice. Adsacras virg.
Augustine says, that ebrietas est flagitiorum omnium matter, culparumque
materia, etc. Drunkenness is the mother of outrages, the matter of faults, the
root of crimes, the fountain of vice, the intoxicater of the head, the
quelling of the senses, the tempest of the tongue, the storm of the body, the
shipwreck of chastity, loss of time, the voluntary madness, the
ignominious languor, the filthiness of manners, the disgrace of life, the
shame of honesty, the corruption of the soul. And again, Ebrietas est blandus
demon, dulce venenum, suaue peccatum, quam qui habet seipsum non habet, quam
qui facit, peccatum non facit, sed totus est peccatum. Drunkenness is an
alluring devil, a pleasing poison, a sweet sin, which who so keeps, loses
himself; and which who so does, may be said not so much to sin, as to be
turned into sin. Lib. de Poenit.
And in another place: Ebriosus cum absorbet vinum, absorbetur a vino,
abominatur a Deo, despicitur ab angelis, decidetur ab hominibus, destituitur a
virtutibus, confunditur a daemonibus, conculcatur ab hominibus: When the
drunkard deuoureth wine, he is devoured of wine, he is abominable to God,
despised of the angels, scorned of men, abandoned of virtue, confounded by the
devils, trampled under men's feet. Chrysostom asks this question: Tom. 5.
col. 14.
Quid ebrietate miserabilius, etc. What is more miserable then the sin of
drunkenness, seeing the living creature by drunkenness becomes as it were
dead. It is a voluntary devil, a disease without pardon, a crime without
excuse, the common opprobrie of nature, etc. It were over long to recite all
which is spoken by holy men to this purpose: but this shall serve for a taste.

But it is no marvel that Christians have clearly discerned the ugliness of
this vice,. Sect. 4. 2 By Heathens and Pagans.
being illuminated by the light of Gods word, seeing the Heathens themselves
have discovered the foulness of it, by the light of nature. Pittacus made a
law, Laert. lib. 1. c. 5.
that whosoever committed any crime in the time of his drunkenness should
receive double punishment. Solon enacted, that if the Prince were found
drunken, Patric. de regn. lib. 6.
he should be punished with death. It was ordained as a law amongst the
Indians, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 11.
that if any woman would venture to kill that King who was given to
drunkenness, should for her reward marry his successor. Seneca calls
drunkenness, Epist. 83.
a voluntary madness; affirming it (...) be a sottish folly, not to know
the measure of a man's own stomach. Plutarch says, that every modest and
honest man will avoid drunkenness, Plutarch. moral. tom. 2. de Garrul.
because as anger is cosen germane to madness, so drunkenness is a
cohabitant; and as much as it is better then madness, because it is of shorter
continuance, so much it is worse, in regard that it is voluntary: for whereas
madness thrusts in by violence, this is willingly entertained.

CHAP. III. That the drunkard sins hainously against God.
ANd well does the vice of drunkenness deserve to be thus condemned both of
God and men,. Sect. 1. The hainousnes of this sin of drunkenness, and the
manifold evils which it contains.
seeing it has in it all respects of evil, both the evil of sin, and also
the evil of punishment. The evil of sin, both as it is in it self sinful,
and also as it is the cause of other sins. It is in it self sinful, as may
appear by a threefold relation which it has to diverse objects: for the
drunkard grievously sins, 1. against God, 2. against his neighbor, 3.
against himself. And of these I will speak severally; in handling whereof, it
is not to be expected that I should observe a distinct propriety, in referring
particulars to their general heads, for as much as many of them are
coincident one with another, and in a diverse relation may diversely be referred;
only I thought good to propound this division, that we may proceed in some
order.

First then the drunkard grieuouslie sins against God, and that in diverse
respects.. Sect. 2. 1. The drunkard grievously sins against God. Phil. 3.19.
First by committing against him one of the worst kinds of Idolatry, in that
he makes his belly his god, as it is Phil. 3.19. Whereof it is that gluttons
and drunkards are usually called bellie-gods, because they better love it, and
more diligently serve it, and more carefully please it, then God himself.

Secondly,. Sect. 3. Drunkenness makes men unfit for Gods service.
thereby they do so oppress the heart, load the stomach, and dull the
spirits, that they are altogether unfit to perform unto God any part of his
worship and service; for if the Lord will be worshipped in spirit and truth,
how far are they from worshipping God aright, who have not so much as the use
of their reason and understanding? If more then accustomed sobriety, yea
sometimes fasting and total abstinence, be required when we power forth our
souls unto God in prayer, that we may be the better fitted for this holy
action; how ill are they disposed for this exercise, whose stomachs are
surcharged, and brains distempered, with wine and strong drink? If such be
our weakness and infirmity, that when we come fasting to the hearing of the
word, we are often overtaken with drowsy dullness; what can be expected of
those whose heads are intoxicated with fumes and drunken vapors, but blockish
deadness, and more then brutish drowsinesse? The consideration whereof should
make all Christians abhor this vice: for if it be esteemed an odious thing
that a subject, being to confer with his Prince about important affairs,
should come unto him in his drunkenness; how abominable is his practice, who
being to come into Gods presence, either to speak unto him by prayer, or to
hear the Lord speaking unto him in the Ministry of the word, is so oppressed
with drink, that he is more fit to sleep then to hear, or speak, and to
disgorge his stomach, then to power forth his soul before God? Now these
actions are not seldom to be performed, 1. These. 5.17.
but they must be the Christians continual exercise; and therefore that he
may the better perform them, he must observe continual temperance and
sobriety.

Thirdly,. Sect. 4. 3. They gresly abuse Gods creatures.
they sin against God in the ungrateful abuse of his creatures; for whereas
the Lord has allowed unto them a large portion, and bestowed upon them his
gifts, with a bountiful hand, to the end that hereby he may move them to love,
serve, and praise him, with greater cheerfulness; they contrariwise abuse
these benefits to surfeiting and drunkenness, whereby they dishonor God,
destroy their bodies and souls, wholly disable themselves for Gods service,
and are altogether fitted for the service of sin and Satan. And thus
drunkards sin directly against the Majesty of God himself. The which their
sin is fearefullie aggrauated by the circumstance of time, if they then
continue in drunkenness and voluptuous excess, when the Lord by his
judgments and afflictions, either threatened or inflicted upon themselves, or
their neighbors, or the whole Church and common wealth, does call them to
fasting, mourning, and humiliation. And this the Lord condemns in the people
of Israel, Esa. 22.12.13. Esa. 22.12.13.
And in that day the Lord God of hosts did call unto weeping and mourning, and
to baldnes, and girding with sackecloth. And behold joy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, eating and drinking,
for to morrow we shall die. So Amos 6.6. Amos. 6.6.
They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments;
but no man is serie for the affliction of Joseph.

CHAP. IIII. That the drunkard sins grievously against his neighbors, and
that both publicly and privately.
But as the drunkard sins against God; Sect. 1. How the drunkard sins
against his neighbors, and against the Commonwealth.
so also against his neighbors; and that both generally against the whole
Church and common wealth, and particularly against private persons. He that is
given to this sin of drunkenness, sins against the commonwealth, in that
he so disableth himself that he cannot perform any good service to his
country: for a drunkard can neither be good Magistrate, nor good subject,
seeing he cannot rule others that cannot rule himself, nor yet manage well
the sword of justice, seeing oftentimes he is so besotted, and deprived of the
use of reason, that he can put no difference between the sword and the
scabberd, between the innocent and offenders. And therefore not unfitly did
the poor woman who had received an unjust sentence from Philip King of Macedon
in the time of his drunkenness, make her appeal, and being demanded to whom
she appealed, seeing he was supreme Judge; I appeal, said she, from thee
unto King Philip when he is sober. And as he cannot rule, so he cannot obey;
for when the drunkard is scated upon the ale bench, and has got himself
between the cup and the wall, he presently becomes a reproouer of
Magistrates, a controller of the State, a murmurer and repiner against the best
established government: and such an insolent pride and ouerweening conceit of
his wisdom do the spirits of wine and strong drink infuse into him, that
he thinks a whole Court of Parliament may more easily err in their long
deliberated decrees, then he in his present and rash verdict. Plutarch. Apotheg.
To this accords Plutarchs story of certain young men, who having bitterly
inueighed against King Pyrrhus, when they were amongst their cups, were for
this offense brought before him; and when they could make no apology for
themselves, seeing they could neither deny the fault, nor defend it; one of
them stepped forth and confessed the truth in this manner: It is true, said
he, O King, that we spoke all this against thee, and much more bitterly
should we have exclaimed, had not our wine failed us. Again, he offends
against the whole commonwealth, as he is a disordered person, a disturber of
the peace, a common corrupter of manners; and lastly, as he is a gluttonous
deuourer of the fat of the land, in which respect he is more pernicious to a
State, and more fit to bring a common dearth, then either canker-worme or
caterpiller; for they destroy the fruit of the earth when it is in the fields,
but these when it is safely brought into the garners, and privileged from the
danger of other vermin, insatiably devour it.

And as they thus offend against the whole State,. Sect. 2. How the drunkard
sins against strangers.
so against particular and private persons; and that both strangers, and
ordinary acquaintance, and those also of their own family. Against
strangers: for the drunkard in his cups is proud, insolent, disdainful,
furious, apt to offer all manner of injuries and outrages; he is ready to
quarrel with every one he meets, to defloure maids and defile wives, as
afterward shall appear. He is a corrupter of all that keep him company, by
his example alluring them to the like excess and riot; for this privilege he
has above many other sinners, that he seldom goes to hell alone, for even
when he is unable to stand, he pulls down others with him into the pit of
destruction.

But as the drunkard is many ways injurious to his neighbors,. Sect. 3.
Drunkenness usually accompanied with backbiting and slandering.
so especially by backbiting, slandring, and revealing of all secrets. For as
drinking looseneth the sinews, so also it sets the tongue at liberty, so
that it blurteth out all the hidden secrets of the heart. If he have long
smothered deep conceived malice against any man, then he discovers it in
his drunkenness, by his disgraceful and opprobrious speeches; if he have any
secret committed unto him, though it imports the State, yea the life of his
neighbor, he is then ready to publish it. According to that of the Poet:
Arcanum demens detegit ebrietas. Virgil. de vin. and ven.
For as his excessive drinking will not suffer him to keep his meat in his
stomach, so neither will it suffer him to keep a secret in his mind. Neither
is it any great wonder that he is thus injurious to others, seeing he offreth
as great wrong to himself, being not able amongst his cups to keep his own
counsel, in matters which most nearly concern him: for as it is well said,
Plutarch. mor. vol. 2. de Garr.
That which is in the heart of a sober man, is in the tongue of a drunkard. In
regard whereof another truly says, that vinum est animi speculum: Wine makes
the heart transparent, so as the standers by may easily discern it: and
therefore it is needless to bring the drunkard to the rack, seeing he will be
as quickly drawn to vnbowell his chiefest secrets, if he be brought to the
Tavern.

And thus the drunkard sins against all men; The drunkard sins against
the poor.
but more specially he sins against the poor, in that by his great expense
in excessive drinking, he has not wherewith to relieve them, and so robs
them of their due allowance: for his superfluity was not given him of God that
he should consume it in riotous tippling, but that he should give drink to the
poor thirsty, and bread to the hungry.

But as he that is addicted to drunkenness is bad abroad,. Sect. 4. The
drunkard principally sins against his own family.
so at home he is worst of all; and as he is ready to offer wrong to all
men, so he is most injurious to his own family, wife, children, and servants.
For when he is abroad he makes hauock of al, he consumes that allowance which
belongs to the whole household, he swalloweth down his wives portion, and
childrens patrimonies, yea whilst he pampereth himself he defraudeth their
bellies, and out of their penury and want he maintains his own superfluous
excess. And yet better it were he should stay still abroad, then by coming
home trouble the whole famile: for if he be able to speak, he spends his
time in scolding and railing, or offensive ribauldrie; if he be able to move,
he either fights and brauleth with those who are about him; or if he be
possessed with a more gamesome fury, he uses such apish gestures, and
ridiculous behavior, as that sometimes he extorteth from his best friends a
woeful smile, and provoke laughter from heavy hearts. So that as the
drunkard when he is abroad plaieth the thief, in robbing all of their due who
belong unto him, so at his coming home he shows himself, either a lion or an
ape, a tyrant or a fool; that I may say nothing of his sluttish filthiness,
whereby he makes himself loathsome to his nearest and dearest friends; of
which the Prophet plainly speaks, Esa. 28.8.
Esa. 28.8.

CHAP. V. That the drunkard sins most grievously against himself.
ANd thus you see how grievously the drunkard sins against his neighbors..
Sect. 1. The drunkard most grievously sins against himself.
But as he is bad to all others, so he is worst unto himself: for he that is
addicted to this vice, draws upon him innumerable evils, and these are either
temporal or spiritual. The temporal evils respect the whole person, or more
specially either the soul or the body. The evils which concern the whole
person are diverse. First, hereby he so disableth himself, 1. He is made unfit
for his calling.
that he is altogether unfit to perform the duties of his calling; for the
most of his time he spends in idleness, and (as they call it) good
fellowship; and that which remains cannot profitably be employed for any good
use, seeing neque men's, neque pes officium faciet, all his parts are so
disordered and disabled, that neither his mind nor any member of the body can
do their duty. And therefore as he spends the after noones and the greatest
part of the night in drinking, so he is feign to spend the morning in sleeping;
in regard whereof the proverb is verified: Ebrius non vidit solemn orientem:
The drunkard seldom sees the Sun rising. Yea he does by his excessive
drinking, not only bring upon himself a drowsy sleepiness, but also a
senseless deadness, unto any good action. And as his belly is an insatiable
grave to bury his drink, so his drink is as it were a grave wherein he is
buried; in regard whereof one truly says, August. lib. de Poenit.
that ebriosus quum absorbet vinum, absorbetur a vino: Whilst the drunkard
deuoureth wine, he is devoured of wine, seeing nothing remains of a man but a
senseless trunck and filthy carcass. Unto which also the Prophet Esaias
alludeth, chap. 28.7. Esa. 28.7.
for setting down the sin of the priests and false prophets, and their utter
neglect of all good duties, he says, that they erred through strong drink,
and were swallowed up of wine. Yea even the Heathen man discerned this by the
light of nature, where speaking of the Grecians surprising Troy in the time of
the Troianes drunkenness, Virg. Aeneid. 2. l. 265.
he says, Inuadunt vrbem somno vinoque sepultam: They assaulted the City
which was buried in sleep and wine. So that they who give themselves to this
vice, are no more able to perform any good duties of their callings, then
those who are dead and buried be able to do the works of the living. And
hence it is that as the Lord restrains all men from this sin: so especially
Magistrates and Ministers, Luke 21.34.
because their callings are of greaest use and importance, and therefore their
neglect of them most pernicious, both to Church and Commonwealth. To this
purpose is that, Pro. 31.4.
Pro. 31.4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine,
nor for Princes strong drink, 5. Lest he drink and forget the decree, and
change the judgment of the children of affliction. So the Priests and Leuits
were prohibited the use of wine and strong drink upon the penalty of death,
when they were to come into the Tabernacle of the congregation, to execute the
office of the Priesthood, Leu. 10.9.
Leuit. 10.9. And the Nazarites also who had dedicated themselves to Gods
service, Number. 6.3.
as appears, Number. 6.3. which commandment when the priests neglected, they
shamefully erred out of the way of truth, failed in vision, and stumbled in
judgment, as we may see, Esa. 28.7.
Esa. 28.7. The like care the Lord has showed in restraining the Ministers of
the Gospel from this vice; for where he describes what manner of men he would
have chosen into the Ministry, he still requires that they be sober,
temperate, 1. Tim. 3.3.8. Tit. 1.7.
and not given to excess and drunkenness. 1. Tim. 3.3.8. Tit. 1.7.

Secondly,. Sect. 2. 2. The drunkard disgraceth his profession and exposes
himself to contempt.
the drunkard disgraceth himself and his profession, and exposes his name and
person to the just contempt and reproach of all: for whereas he professes that
he is a Christian, who has his part in Christ and his merits, in this his
practice he clearly proves that he is nothing less; for a true Christian is
a child of the light, and walks in the light: 1. These. 5.5.7.
1. These. 5.5. But the drunkard is the child of darkness, and the works which
he works are works, not of the day but of the night, verse. 7. A true
Christian is religious and full of piety, but the drunkard is so far from
this, that he has not so much as common honesty; for they who walk honestly,
as in the day, they do not walk in gluttony and drunkenness, Romans Romans
13.13.
13.13. The true Christian has forsaken and mortified the lusts of the
Gentiles, for Christianity and Paganism can never agree together; but the
drunkard still walloweth in them, for the lusts of the Gentiles wherein they
walked, were wantonness, uncleanness, drunkenness, gluttony, drinkings, and in
abominable idolatries. As it is, 1. Pet. 4.3. 1. Pet. 4.3.
Those unto whom the grace of God has appeared, are taught thereby to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12.
and to live soberly and righteouslie and godly in this present world; and
therefore they who spend their time in intemperance, surfeiting, and
drunkenness, have not had so much as a glimpse of this grace which brings
salvation shining unto them. Whosoever then professes Christianity, and yet
lives in drunkenness, he proves himself a plain dissembler, in making show
of that he is not, and his profession does not grace him, but he disgraceth his
profession; for whatsoever show he may seem to make of piety and honesty,
when he is in his deuouter kind of drunkenness, yet no wise man esteems his
words of any credit, seeing he is an inordinate person in his whole carriage,
who has no rule over himself, and is ready to bless and curse, to pray and
blaspheme, to utter holy speeches, and filthy ribauldrie with the same breath.

Thirdly, Sect. 3. The drunkard makes himself a slave to his vice.
the drunkard by his much tippling makes himself a slave to his vice, and by
long custom brings superfluity into urgent necessity: for as it is in
other sins so in this; before it is admitted, it creeps and croucheth,
flattereth and allureth, like a lowly vassal; but being entertained, it
straight shows it self, not only a master, but also a Lordly tyrant, which
reigns and rules with great insolence. First sin is committed, then
practiced, and often practice brings custom, and custom becomes a second
nature, and has in it the force of a law which must be obeyed, not in
courtesy, but upon necessity. And as this is true of all sins in general; so
especially it is verified in this sin of drunkenness; for first men drink
for thirst, then for delight, then for wantonness, and so by much bibbing they
bring themselves to such an insatiable thirst, that they cannot sit without the
cup at their elbow.

Fourthly,. Sect. 4. The drunkard makes himself worse then a beast.
where as man by creation is the most excellent of all the creatures, being
created according to Gods own image, by this vice he makes himself equal
with the beasts, for he is deprived thereby, not only of piety, but of
humanity, even of his understanding and reason, wherein he differs from a
beast far more then in his outward shape; yea in truth in diverse respects he
makes himself inferior to the brutish creatures, for he much more
degenerateth from the excellency of his creation; he depriueth himself, not
only of the use of his reason, but also of his senses, not of his
understanding alone, but of his standing and motion also; for when he stands,
he is ready to fall, and when he moves, he reeleth and staggereth. Lastly,
he is far more intemperate then almost any beast; for when they have eaten
sufficient, they will eat no more, and when they have drunk to quench their
thirst, and to satisfy nature, they cannot be forced by any violence to
drink again; whereas these tiplers drink double and treble more then they
need, and not only satisfy nature, but also glut and oppress it with
superfluity.

Lastly,. Sect. 5. Drunkenness brings poverty.
this sin brings men to poverty and want, for they consume their wealth at
the wine, and swallow down their whole estate, and so it comes to pass,
that having spent all in superfluities, in the end they want necessaries, and
because in their youth they will drink nothing but wine, they are oftentimes
constrained in their old age to drink water. So it is said, Prou. 21.17. He
that loves pastime shall be but a poor man, and he that loves wine and oil
shall not be rich. And Pro. 23.21. Pro. 21.17.23.21.
The drunkard and the glutton shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed
with rags.

And these,. Sect. 6. The drunkard sins against his several parts, and
first against his soul.
with many more evils, this vice brings to the whole man. Besides which
common mischiefs it is also pernicious to his several parts: for first it
infatuateth the understanding, peruerteth the will, and corrupts all the
affections. To this purpose one says: Vbi regnat ebrietas ratio exulat,
intellectus obtunditur, consilia deuiant, iudicia subuertuntur: Where
drunkenness reigns as King, there reason is banished as an exile, the
understanding is dulled, counsel wandreth, and judgment is overthrown. With
this accords Seneca his definition of drunkenness: Nihil aliud est ebrietas
quam voluntaria insania: Drunkenness is nothing else but a voluntary
madness: Extend in plures dies illum ebrium habitum, nunquid de furore
dubitabis? If this drunken habit be continued for many days together, who
would make any doubt but that the party were out of his wits? Nunc quoque non
est minor, sed breuior: But take it as it is, and it is no less madness then
frenzy, but only shorter. Although then drunkenness be not direct madness,
yet to speak the best, it is a temporary forfeiture of the wits; and in this
it must needs be confessed to be worse then frenzy, in that this is violent,
that voluntary; this the evil of punishment, but that the evil of sin. Yea
this vice does not only rob men of reason, but also of common sense, so as they
can neither prevent future danger, nor feel present smart. And this the Wise
man in lively manner expresses, Prou. 23.24. where he says, Prou. 23.34.35
that the drunkard shall be as one that sleeps in the midst of the sea, and
as he that sleeps in the top of the mast. 35. They have stricken me, shall he
say, but I was not sick; they have beaten me, but I knew not when I awoke:
therefore I will seek it yet still. A notable example hereof we have in Lot,
who was so besotted with drink, and deprived of sense and reason, that
unwittingly he committed incest with his own daughters, Genesis 19.35.
neither knowing when they lay down, nor when they rose up. So that whilst
drunkenness lasts it has the same operation with deadly poison; for it
intoxicateth the brain, benummeth the senses, infeebleth the ioints and
sinews, and brings a man into a temporary lethargy. Hence it is that Cyrus
in his childhood being asked by his grandfather Astiages, Xenoph. in padia
Cyri. lib. 1.
why at the feast he did not drink wine; returned this answer full of witty
simplicity; Because (said he) I took it to be poison: for at the last feast
I observed that those who drunk of it, were soon after deprived of their
understanding and senses. Whereby appears the odiousness of this sin: for
if it be a hateful thing for a man to wound his own flesh, and wilfully to
maime the members of his body; how abominable is it to wound the mind it
self, and to offer violence against our reason and understanding? If it be a
crime to offer violence against the subjects, then surely to lay violent hands
upon the King himself, and to pull him out of his regal throne, must needs
be condemned as outrageous wickedness.

And thus the drunkard sins against his own soul.. Sect. 7. How the
drunkard sins against his body: 1. by deforming it. Propert. lib. 2. eleg.
vlt.
Neither is he a better friend or less injurious to his body: for first he
deformeth it and defaceth that goodly feature, in which it was created;
according to that, Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas: By wine beauty
perishes, and the vigor of age is disabled. Neither is there almost any part
of the body which is not disordered and deformed with this vice of
drunkenness; their eyes become red, their face is inflamed, their breath
noisome, their speech stammering, their bodies staggering, their gestures
apish, and all their actions foolish. And hence it was that the Lacedaemonians
used to show unto their children their Helots and slaves in the time of their
drunkenness, thinking that their ugly deformity both in body and mind would
be an effectual argument to make them loathe this vice, which even at the first
view showed so odious.

Secondly,. Sect. 8. 2. It disableth and weakneth the body.
as it deformeth the body; so also it disableth it, turning strength into
weakness, and health into sickness. For as the earth it self with too much
moisture is turned into bogges and quagmires; so also is the body thereby
wholly corrupted, and (through the redundance of humors, the natural heat
being extinguished) is brought unto grievous diseases, as dropsies, gouts,
palsies, apoplexy, and such like. So that even in this respect the drunkard
buyeth his beastly pleasure at a high rate: Senec. epist. 59.
for, as one says, Ebrietas vnius horae hilaram insaniam, longi temporis
taedio pensat: Drunkenness requiteth one hours merry madness, with a long
and tedious time of sorrow and repentance. As therefore sobriety and
temperance is the best nurse to preserve health and continue strength; so
drunkenness, excess and surfeiting are the speediest means to overthrow
the^, and the readiest way which a man can take to come with posting haste to
immature age and unnatural weakness.

Lastly, it shortneth the life and brings untimely death.. Sect. 9.
Drunkenness shorteneth the life and brings untimely death.
For to say nothing of those dangers unto which they expose themselves, by
quarelling and brauling in the time of their drunkenness, in which many have
perished, and to pass them over who having lost the stern of reason,
wherewith they should guide themselves, have as it were dashed against unhappy
accidents, and so made shipwreck of their lives; some on the land, some in the
water, some in the streets, and some in the ditches; how many are there who
have drunk themselves dead, and have presently died, with the weapon as it
were in their belly? so that there needed not any Jury to go upon them, to
find out the cause of their death, it being no more sudden, then the cause
apparent. Whose deaths charity it self must needs judge most miserable,
seeing they die in their sins, and are taken away in Gods just wrath, even
whilst they are sacrificing their souls unto Satan. But yet small is the
number of those who perish in this apoplexy of drunkenness, in comparison of
those multitudes whom it linggringly consumes; for it does by little and
little quench the natural heat, and drown the vital spirits, and so leads
men though not by so direct a passage, yet but a little way about to their
graves, as certainly though not so speedily. For it brings cruditie to the
stomach, and ach to the head, rheumes, impostumes, gouts, consumptions,
apoplexies, whereof men perish: and so howsoever drunkenness is not the
mother, yet it is the grandmother of their death, though men are ashamed (like
vpstarts in our times) that it should derive it pedigree so far, for so base
a kindred, and therefore entitle it after the name of the next parent. Neither in
truth can there be any cause alleged yt makes this our age so weak, diseased,
and short lived, which bears greater sway in producing these miserable
effects, then drunkenness and intemperance. It is true indeed that the world
now waxing old, and as it were horeheaded, cannot generate children of such
strength and vigor, as it did in the time of youth, and full strength; and
therefore we must needs decline, as the world declineth. It is true also that
the mother earth is infeebled with much bearing, and has her strength much
abated with so innumerable child-birthes, and being now come to her cold
melancholy age, cannot bring forth her fruits so full of virtue and strength,
and so fit for the nourishment of our bodies, as she did in former times; but
that there should be such a change so sudden and so extraordinary, and that
there should be such great difference in health, and strength, and long life,
between this our age, and that which went next before; it can be imputed unto
nothing more then this, that now drunkenness and intemperance is after an
extraordinary manner increased, whereby the natural and vital heat of men
is drowned and extinguished, before it be near spent, like a candle cast into
the water, before it be half burned. If then we think it a fearful sin
for a man to murder himself, and by laying violent hands on his own person
to shorten his life; then let us not esteem drunkenness as a small offense,
seeing it produces the same effects, though by other means and instruments,
and brings our bodies to the same untimely death, although it be by a diverse
way.

And these are the temporal evils which the drunkard brings upon himself,.
Sect. 10. The spiritual evils which drunkenness brings.
which though they be manifold and grievous, yet are they not to be compared
with those spiritual evils, into which through a wilful necessity he is
plunged, even whilst he continues in this life. For first by this sin he
excludes himself out of the number of those children who are borne unto God
by regeneration and new birth, and is separated from Jesus Christ, so as he
has no communion with him nor part in his benefits; for those who are
regenerate are begotten unto God by his spirit dwelling in them, and where the
spirit of God dwells, there it shows it self, both by mortifying the old
man, and subduing the lusts of the flesh, and by quickening the new man, and
bringing forth the fruits of the spirit. Now gluttony and drunkenness are
the works of the old man, and special fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.21. and 23.
as appears, Gal. 5.21. from the which Gods spirit does purge and cleanse us,
as soon as he makes choice of our bodies to be his temples, and contrariwise
does adorn us with sobriety and temperance, as it is verse. 23. so that they
who live in drunkenness, are dead in their sins, they live not to God as
being his children, seeing they are destitute of his spirit; but they live to
Satan, Romans 8.14.
the world, and the lusts of their own flesh, and remain their vassals unto
whom they do faithful service. Romans 6.16.


Neither are they in Jesus Christ, seeing they walk not after the spirit, but
after the flesh; they have not as yet put on Christ, seeing they have not put
off drunkenness, for he will not be our garment wherein being clothed, we may
appear glorious and righteons in Gods sight, before we cast away from us the
filthy rags of the flesh; and therefore the Apostle teaches us, first to
give a final farewell to gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness,
strife and envying, casting them from us as polluted rags, which are not
worth our wearing, and then to take unto us Jesus Christ, and put him on as our
wedding garment with the hand of faith. Romans 13.13 14. Romans 13.13.14.


Secondly, as this drunkenness quenches the spirit,. Sect. 11. Drunkenness
quenches the gifts of the spirit.
so it choaketh the gifts thereof; and therefore the Apostle teaches us, that
there must be an emptiness of wine, before there can be a fulness of the
spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine wherein there is excess, but be
fulfilled with the spirit. Ephesians. 5.18.
For the holy Ghost scorneth to be an inmate, where drunkenness is the
inhabitant, and if we make our bodies with much drinking to become wine caskes,
the Lord will never think them fit vessels to receive his spirit, which is the
water of life, neither will this wine of the flesh, Ioh. 7.38.39. Basil mag.
Sermon. 2. de ieiunio.
and water of the spirit be ever mingled. To this purpose one says: Ebrietas
dominum non recipit, spiritum Sanctum expellit, vt fumus apes abigit, sic
spirituales gratias crapula reijcit: Drunke^nes neither receives the Lord, nor
retains his spirit, but as smoke drives away Bees, so it expels
spiritual gifts. Another makes this similitude. Our bodies (says he) are
earthie; now as by too much rain the earth is resolved into dirt and made
unfit for tillage; so our bodies being over moistened with excessive drinking,
August. de vitan. ebriet. Sermon. 231.
are altogether unfitted for the spiritual tillage, and so can bring forth no
good fruits of holiness and righteousness. Yea rather being turned into
boggs and marshes, they are fit to breed nothing in them but ugly serpents,
froggs, and vermin: that is, all manner of abominable sins and loathsome
wickedness.

Thirdly,. Sect. 12. Drunkenness strengthens the flesh and the lusts thereof.
as drunkenness weakeneth the spirit and the gifts thereof; so it
strengthens the flesh and the lusts thereof. Now we know that the flesh, and
fleshly lusts are our mortal enemies, which continually fight against our
souls, as it is 1. Pet. 2.11. so that the victory of the flesh is the
Christians overthrow, 1. Pet. 2.11.
and the welfare thereof his destruction. What folly therefore it it to arm
our enemy against our selves, and to put in his hand a sword which will pearce
our own hearts? What madness is it when the enemy is ready to give a sharp
assault, to pull down the walls of our own city, and to lay open large
breaches whereat he may make a free entrance? And yet this folly do these men
commit, who pamper the belly and addict themselves to this sensual
voluptuousness, as the wise man plainly shows, Prou. 25.28. Pro. 25.28.
A man that refraineth not his appetite, is like a City which is broken down
and without walls. Yea even the Heathen man Crates, discerned this by the
light of nature: for seeing a young man grown fat and pursie, with pampering
his belly, he cried out unto him, O miser, aesine aduersus teipsum carcerem
munire: O wretch, leave off to strengthen thy prison against thy self. But
this folly will appear to be so much greater, if we further consider our
own weakness, and the strength of our enemy; for if he be so mighty that
we hardly obtain the victory when we are armed at all points with the
Christian armor, and have done our best endeavor to weaken him by withdrawing
his food, and munition, by fasting and watchfulness; what can we expect but a
shameful overthrow, when we have not only disarmed our selves of the
spiritual armor, and so are left naked, but also have hartned our enemy with
store of food, and armed him at all points against our selves? A notable
example hereof we have in Lot, who though he stoutly fought the Lords battles
against the wicked worldlings, and received not so much as a foil; yet when he
had pampered his own flesh with drunkenness, and so strengthened his enemy
against himself, he received a shameful overthrow. And this Origin observed:
Ebrietas decipit quem sodoma non decepit: Orig. Hom. 5. in Genes.
Drunkenness (says he) deceived him whom all Sodom could not deceive.

The last spiritual evil which the drunkard brings upon himself, is final
impenitencie;. Sect. 13. Drunkenness is usually accompanied with final
impenitencie.
for they who addict themselves to this vice, do find it so sweet and
pleasing to the flesh, that they are loath to part with it, and by long custom
they turn delight into necessity, and bring upon themselves such an
insatiable thirst, that they will as willingly leave to live, as leave their
excessive drinking; and howsoever the manifold mischiefs into which they
plunge themselves, serve as so many forcible arguments to dissuade them from
this vice, yet against all rules of reason, they hold fast their conclusion,
that come what come may, they will not leave their drunkenness. And this comes
to pass, partly because they are so bewitched with their sin, and so lulled
asleep with their sensual pleasures, that they neither regard Gods word, nor
yet his works, whereby he calls them to repentance. So the Prophet Esaias
says of the drunkards of Israel, that they continued in drinking from morning
to night, and they had the harp and the viole, the timbrill and the pipe, and
wine in their feasts; but they regarded not the work of the Lord, neither
considered the works of his hands, Esa. 5.11.12. Esa. 5.11.12.
And partly because they are desperately resolved to continue in their course,
notwithstanding they plainly discern the innumerable evils which they bring
upon themselves. And this the wise man, in most lively manner expresses, Prou.
23.35. Pro. 23.35.
They have stricken me, will the drunkard say, but I was not sick; they hane
beaten me, but I knew it not when I awoke, therefore I will seek it yet still.
So the drunkards encourage one another in their drunkenness. Esa. 56.12. Esa.
56.12.
Come I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. By all which it plainly
appears, August. de vitan. ebriet.
that the drunkard of all other sins is most hardly reclaimed from his vice;
in regard whereof Austine compares drunkenness to the pit of hell, into which
when a man is once fallen, there is no redemption. The consideration whereof
should make all Christians to abhor and flee from this vice, seeing final
impenitencie most commonly accompanies it, which is the greatest evil that is
incident to man in this life, in that it is a certain forerunner of eternal
condemnation.

CHAP. VI. That drunkenness is the cause of many other sins.
ANd thus have I showed that drunkenness is in all respects sinful.. Sect. 1.
Drunkenness is the cause of other sins.
But as it is a sin in it self, so also it is the cause of other sins: for
when Satan by the help of drunkenness has stolen away the heart, deprived
men of the use of reason, and put out the eyes of their understanding, then can
he lead them as it were blindfold into all manner of sin, and make them his
ready vassals to act and perpetrate any wickedness.

But that we may descend from generals we will insist in some particular
sins, 1. It is the cause of vain babbling.
unto which drunkenness makes men most prone. As first the sins of the
tongue: for as it is true of all evil tongues, which S. James speaks, so it
is most truly verified of the tongue of drunkards; namely, that it is a fire,
yea a world of wickedness, which defiles the whole body, and sets on fire
the course of nature, Iam. 3.6.7.8.9.
and is set on fire of hell, an unruly evil which cannot be tamed, full of
deadly poison; wherewith they bless God and curse men at the same time, etc.
Iam. 3.6.7.8.9. For they who are addicted to this vice, they abound not only
in vain and idle talk, but also in foolish and ridiculous babbling, whereby
they some out their own shame, and plainly prove unto all the hearers, that
the hidden fountain of their hearts is full of deadly poison and stinking
corruption, by those loathsome streams which issue from their mouths. Neither
are they sparing in these speeches, but excessiuely frequent, and irksomely
clamorous; the wine being to their tongues as a strong gale of wind to the
windmill sail, which whirleth it about in a continual motion. And hence it is
the idol Bacchus was called Liber pater, Plutarch. symb. prob. lib. 1. prob. 1.
because he sets the tongue at liberty to run at random without
intermission, until excessive abundance put it to silence. So that it is a
most difficult thing to be prodigal in drinking, and niggardly in speaking:
and therefore Bias thought it a sufficient argument to approve his wisdom,
Plutarch. de Garrul. tom. 2.
in that he could join these two together which are in nature so dissonant:
for being at a banquet taxed of folly, by a vain babbler, because he said
nothing whilst others talked; answered, that even this reason was sufficient
to acquit him of the imputation of folly; for what fool, I pray you (said
he) can be silent in the midst of his cups? So diverse Philosophers meeting
with the Kings Ambassadors at a feast in Athens, every one to commend his
wisdom uttered some memorable sentences which might be related to the King,
only Zeno continued silent; the which when the Ambassadors observed, they
demanded of him what they should report from him unto the King. Nothing
(answered Zeno) but this, that there is an old man at Athens who in the
abundance of wine can keep silence.

So that it is a difficult thing to observe any moderation in vain talking,
where there is immoderate drinking: The reason why drunkards are commonly vain
bablers.
of which this reason is rendered; that the drunkard loves to hear himself
speak, because then above all other times he has an ouerweening conceit of
his own wisdom; neither is a man so apt to abuse his own judgment about
any other self excellency, namely, to think that he is more noble, rich, or
beautiful, then the truth is, as in this opinion, that he excels all in
wisdom. Plato apud Plutarch. Sympos. lib. 7.
And hence it is that some think wine was called (...), quasi(...); because it
makes those that drink it to think themselves wise. Unto which may be
adjoined another reason, namely, that they are plentiful in discoursing, to
the end they may show, that howsoever they have drunk largely, yet they are
not overtaken with drink, seeing they have still the use of their
understanding, memory, and speech, and so often times whilst they labor to
hide their drunkenness, they plainly discover it by their much babbling.

But as drunkenness is the cause of much idle and vain talking,. Sect. 2. 2.
It is the cause of wicked talking.
so also of much leaud and wicked talking: for as the drunkards heart is
inflamed with wine, so is his tongue set on fire by hell, flaming out as it
were the stinking sulphur of wicked and ungracious speeches. If he be wantonly
disposed, then he utters nothing but ribauldrie and obscene filthiness,
which will make chaste ears to glow as much with heat, as his face with wine:
for when by much drinking the heart is inflamed with lust, it can no more be
hid then fire in the bosom, but smoketh out in ribauld speeches and filthy
communication. But if choler have the predominance in this drunken subject,
then does it show it self in raging, railing, and reuiling speeches, so as
there is no man's credit which they are not ready to impeach; no sex, state or
condition whom they do not load with their opprobries; no sanctuary so safe
which can privilege a man's name from the violent fury of their slanderous
tongues. Yea, and as though it were not impiety enough to be at defiance with
the whole earth, they do make war also against heaven, and belch out
blasphemies against their Creator, swearing and forswearing themselves upon
every vain occasion, and renting peecemeale the sacred person of our Savior,
as though this were the fittest means to show their furious choler against
men, by despiting God himself.

Neither is this vice of drunkenness only fruitful in foolish and wicked
words, Sect. 3. Drunkenness discovers other sins.
but also in actions suitable to their speeches: for then they show themselves
most odiouslie wicked, both because they discover that nakedness of vice,
which at other times they hide, and also run into new outrages which are the
usual companions of this sin. For there is almost no vice which drunkenness
does not both intend and increase, and also lay open and manifest; for where as
shamefastness, at other times makes men refrain from their beloved vices,
Sen. epist. 83.
or at least to hide and disguise them, drunkenness banishing all shame and
modesty, does lay vice open to the public view, so that then especially the
proud man is most insolent and arrogant; the lascivious man most wanton and
filthy; the choleric man most furious and outrageous, having no respect of
person, nor regard of any presence.

And as it does discover old vices, Sect. 4. Drunkenness causes men to fall
into other sins. Hier. epist. ad Ocean.
so it causes men to fall into new sins; for not only it makes them
ridiculous in all their behavior, and exposes them to the scorn and derision
of all the beholders; but also more then barbarously uncivil, and heathenishly
wicked. Whilst Noah was overtaken with this vice, he showed his nakedness,
and laid himself open to be derided of his own wicked son, discovering
those secrets of nature, in one hours drunkenness, which six hundred years
soberness had kept covered and hid; and this which was once done by Noah in
his first and last drunkenness, is common and usual with those who accustom
themselves to this vice; for that which a modest man shameth to do in a secret
chamber, they impudently act in the open streets. In which respect it is truly
verified of those who first fall into this vice, Epist. 83.
which Seneca generally speaks of all drunkards: Multa ebrij faciunt quibus
sobrij erubescunt: Drunkards (says he) do many things in the time of their
drunkenness, of which they are ashamed when they are sober, howsoever long
custom hardens the face, and makes men void of all shame. Pythagoras apud
Plutarch. lib. contra Stoicos.
So that if there were no other reason to withdraw any ingenuous nature from
this vice, this were sufficient, if when he is sober he would call to mind
what he has said and done in the time of his drunkenness.

But as this vice of drunkenness does cast a man headlong into dishonest
actions, and barbarous inciuilitie;. Sect. 5. Drunkenness, the cause of
murder.
so into all manner of horrible sins and outrageous wickedness, and
especially into those two heinous crimes of murder and adultery. For when the
heart boileth with unnatural heat, and the head is deprived of the use of
natural reason and understanding, then choler supplying the place of wisdom,
men are apt to entertain discord and contention, and when they have skirmished
a while with words, all parties being as ready to offer injuries as impatient
to bear any requital of wrongs, they come at length to down right blows,
every thing which comes next to hand serving as instruments of their wrath;
their cups which whilst they were sober, carried from one to another pledges
of their love, in their drunken rage are dashed against one another faces;
their weapons which in their sober mood were used to defend themselves from
their enemies, are now thrust into the breast of their dearest friends; and
whilst this fit lasts, they labor to murder those whom at other times they
would defend from wrong with the hazard of their own lives. A notable example
whereof we have in Alexander, who in his drunkenness murdered his dear
friend Clytus, the which horrible fact he so much detested when he was sober,
that in revenge thereof he would have murdered himself. This fruit of
drunkenness Solomon sets down, Prou. 20.1. Wine is a mocker, Pro. 20.1.
and 23.29.
and strong drink is raging. And Pro. 23.29. To whom is woe? to whom is
sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is babbling? to whom are wounds without
cause? etc. Even to the^ that tarry long at the wine, to them that go and
seek mixed wine? that is, who drink more for wantonness then for thirst. To
this purpose one says, that the wine yields three grapes, one for delight,
another for drunkenness, and the third for outrage. For when delight has
brought a man to drunkenness, drunkenness makes way for outrageous injuries, and
barbarous cruelty. The consideration whereof, should make us to abhor this
vice of drunkenness, seeing excessive drinking of wine, brings an insatiable
thirst after blood, and that not the blood of a man's enemies, but of his
companions and nearest friends.

But as drunkenness is the cause of bloodshed and murder,. Sect. 6.
Drunkenness is the cause of whoredom and all uncleanness. Pro. 23.33. Ovid.
lib. 1 de art. aman.
so also of whoredom and all uncleanness; for when the belly is filled with
drink, then is the heart also inflamed with lust, and the eyes full of
adultery gaze upon strange women, as the wise man teaches us, Prou. 23.33. To
this accords Hieroms judgment; Nunquam (inquit) ebrium putabo castum; I can
never be persuaded (says he) to think that a drunkard can be chaste. And he
that had the greatest insight into the art of lust, says, that Vina parant
animos veneri; Wine makes an open passage into the heart for lust to enter. An
example whereof we have in the Sodomites, who abounding in drunkenness and
bellie-cheere, fell into all manner of unlawful lusts, both natural, and
against nature, and so being heated with the fire of concupiscence, they became
fit fuel for the fire of Gods wrath and fearful vengeance. And of this Lots
daughters having experience, by reason of their wicked neighborhood,
remembered their sin, but forgot their punishment; and desiring to raise unto
themselves an incestuous posterity, not having any hope, Genesis 19.32.
in regard of their fathers godliness to accomplish their desire, they make
him drunk, not doubting but that lust would follow, if drunkenness did go
before. The like experiment David made upon Vriah, although without like
success, 2. Sam. 11.13.
the Lord crossing his designs with his ouerruling providence; for when he
desired that Vriah should lie with his wife, and so father his bastardly issue;
he caused his servants to make him drunk, supposing that drunkenness and
continency, would hardly have harbored in the same subject.

CHAP. VII. That drunkenness is the cause of many fearful punishments.
ANd thus have I showed that drunkenness is not only sinful in it self,.
Sect. 1. Drunkenness is the cause of punishment.
but also that it is the cause of many other heinous transgressions. Now that
it may appear, that it is every way evil: we are in the last place to
prove, that it is not only the cause of sin, but also the cause of
punishment; in which point I purpose to be more brief, because by necessary
inference it is already sufficiently proved. For all those evils which this
vice brings upon a man, as in respect of the party who brings them upon
himself, they may be called evils of sin, so in respect of God who has also a
just hand in inflicting of these evils, they may be called evils of punishment.

But to come to the purpose, the punishments which are inflicted for the sin
of drunkenness, Drunkenness makes a man liable to a fearful woe, and heavy
curse.
are many, and grievous, and that both in this life, and also the life to come;
in this life it subiecteth a man to bear the intolerable weight of Gods wrath
and fearful vengeance, and makes him liable to Gods curse, Esa. 5.11.
and heavy woe denounced, Esa. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early to
follow drunkenness, etc. More especially the Lord punishes the drunkard, God
punishes drunkenness by infamy and reproach.
both in his nature, state, and person. His name is branded with infamy and
reproach, and his glory is turned into shame, for the Lord lays open his
filthiness, and discovers his ugly nakedness, to be scorned and derided, not
only of enemies and strangers, but also of his familiar acquaintance, of his
own servants, yea sometimes of the children of his own body, and of his wife
who lies in his bosom. So when Noah fell into this sin he discovered his
nakedness, and was derided by his own son: the which as it was a fearful
sin in Cham against his father, and in Noah against himself, so was it a just
judgment of God upon his drunkenness. Thus Abigail, 1. Sam. 25.
though at other times a good and dutiful wife, yet becaufe in the time of his
drunkenness her husband gave a foolish and churlish answer unto David's
messengers, she falls to descant upon his name, Nabal is his name, and folly
is with him; as though she should have said, his name and nature are well
fitted in an evil sutablenesse; for a fool he is called, and a fool he
shows himself in all actions. And yet this was spoken by a good wife, when
her purpose was to make for him the best apology she could to mitigate his
offense; what therefore would a bad wife have spoken in the like case, desiring
to unburden her spleen, and to aggrauate his fault? If folly were the best
ornament to cover his faults; what could be expected to be under this cover but
beastly filthiness and ugly wickedness? This heavy judgment the Lord
denounced against the drunkards of Judah, Habac. 2.16. Habac. 2.15.
Thou art filled with shame for glory; drink thou also and be made naked, or
discover thy filthiness, the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto
thee, and shameful spuing shall be for thy glory.

Secondly,. Sect. 3.
the Lord punishes the drunkard in his state; for this curse lies upon this
sin, 2 The drunkard is punished in his state.
that he who is addicted thereunto, shall not be rich, Prou. 21.17. Yea the
Lord punishes drunkards, not only with poverty, but also with penury and
extreme want; Pro. 21.17.
for because in the time of plenty they take too much, and so abuse his
creatures, he brings upon them in the time of dearth and famine, a
proportionable punishment, that they shall not have enough, and so depriueth
them of the use of his creatures: and like a wise Physician after they have
surfetted with fullness, he prescribes a long fast, that so they may recover
their stomachs, and for the time to come learn more temperance, because their
fuperfluitie brings want, and their too much, is punished with too little.
And this judgment is threatened against the drunkards of Judah, Joel. 1.5. Joel,
1.5.
Awake ye drunkards and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine, because of
the new wine, for it shall be pulled from your mouth, etc.

Thirdly, the drunkard is punished in his person,. Sect. 4. The drunkard is
punished in his body with sickness.
and that both body and soul; upon his body the Lord inflicteth, first,
dangerous sicknesses and desperate diseases, as has been showed; for as the
Lord sends such a blessing upon these creatures, when they are temperately
used with thanksgiving, that they become notable means for the strengthening
of the body, and preserving health; so when they are immoderately used, and
ungratefully abused to the dishonor of Gods name, he lays his heavy curse
upon them, and so they infeeble the body, and bring innumerable sorts of
sicknesses and diseases.

Yea the Lord punishes this sin, not only with sickness,. Sect. 5.
Drunkenness is punished with death.
but also with death it self, and not such deaths alone which wait upon
drunkenness, as being necessary effects of this cause, of which I have
already spoken, but also such as are more violent and unnatural. Thus the
Lord caused Ela to perish in his drunkenness, by the hands of his own
servants, 1. Kin. 16.9. 1. King. 16.9.
And thus the Lord threatens the Babylonians that he would give them over to
the sin of drunkenness, whereby they should fall into a perpetual sleep,
even the sleep of death, out of which they should never awake, Ier. 51.39.
Ier. 51.39.
The which punishment was accordingly inflicted both upon the Prince and
people: for whilst Belshazzar was feasting and drinking amongst his thousand
Princes, the Lord by a hand writing upon the wall passed the sentence of death
and destruction against him, the which was executed the same night by Darius
and the Medes and Persians, who came upon them in the time of their feasting
and drunkenness, killing the King, and surprising the city, and with it the
whole Monarchy, Dan. 5.2.30.
as appears Daniel 5.2.30.

But as the drunkard is punished in his body,. Sect. 6. The drunkard is
punished in his soul. 1. By losing the use of reason.
so also in his soul: for first the Lord does infatuate them, and depriueth
them of the use of reason, and understanding, and that most justly: for when
they will not be ruled by reason, which the Lord has appointed as their
sovereign, and as viceroy next under himself in the little common wealth of
man's body, he takes away from them their natural and lawful King, and
subiecteth them to the tyrannical government of their filthy and unruly
lusts. For what should they do with reason who will not use it? and why should
they have the understanding of men, who demean themselves worse then the
brutish creatures?

Secondly, Sect. 7. 2. With hardness heart of and final impenitencie.
the Lord gives the drunkards over to hardness of heart, security, and final
impenitencie, as has been showed: for as excessive drinking brings a dead
sleep upon the body, so also a spiritual lethargy upon the soul, which so
stops the ears, and takes away the understanding, that they can neither
hear the still melodious sound of Gods mercies, nor yet the thundering noise of
Gods fearful threatenings and heavy judgments calling them to repentance: but
as they are not allured by the one, so they are no whit terrified with the
other, but continue still in this dead sleep of sin, till they are awakened
by the voice of the Archangell, and summoned to judgment. So that their wine
to them is no better then bewitching and deadly potions, whereby the great
Magician Satan keeps them in a perpetual sleep of sin, and their
drunkenness serves as a swift chariot, which with headlong speed carries them
into hell.. Sect. 8.


And these are the punishments which are inflicted upon drunkards in this life;
Drunkenness is punished in the life to come with the loss of heaven and with
the torments of hell.
the which howsoever they are fearful and terrible, yet are they far more
light and easy, then those which are reserved for them in the life to come;
for they shall be cast out of Gods presence, and excluded out of his kingdom,
where is fulness of joy for evermore; as the word of God plainly tells us, 1.
Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21. And yet this is but one half of their misery: 1. Cor.
6.10. Gal. 5.21.
for being summoned to appear before Gods judgment seat, and not being able
to answer one word for their mispending of Gods talents, and the abusing of
his creatures, nor for their fearful dishonouring of his holy name, not only
by their drunkenness, but also by their horrible blasphemies, cursings,
railings, ribauldrie, and all other their heinous sins, before spoken of,
they shall be cast into utter darkness, and have their portion in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone. The serious consideration whereof may
serve in stead of ten thousand forcible arguments to restrain all men from
this sin. For what then will their passed pleasures profit them, when as they
are to be punished with eternal torments? What joy shall they have in
remembering their former good fellowship and merry company, when as now they
shall have no other company, but the wicked fiends and damned spirits? What
will it avail them to have pleased their taste and delighted their appetite,
with their delicious drinks and choicest wines, when being in torment in hell
fire, there shall not be granted unto them so much as a drop of cold water to
cool their heat? Luke 16.
What will then their cups of pleasure profit them, when as they must drink
the cup of Gods fierce wrath, and sup up the dregs thereof even to the very
bottom?

CHAP. VIII. The causes why drunkards continue in their sin.
ANd yet such is the folly of voluptuous men,. Sect. 1. The sottish folly of
drunkards.
that howsoever all these evils do accompany this vice of drunkenness both
temporal and eternal, yet they will not be reclaimed from it; the which
folly is so much the greater, in that they wilfully incur all these
mischiefs, for the nourishing of a sin, that has not in it so much as any
respect of worldly good; for it is not accompanied with honor and credit, but
with shame and reproach; it does not bring with it profit and riches, but loss
and poverty; neither can there be any pleasure in the vice it self: for what
more delight can a man take to drink when he does not thirst, then to eat
when he is not hungry? to continue still carousing when already he has
drunk too much, then presently after a great feast to fall to eating again
upon a surfetted and full stomach? but only that by long custom they have
brought themselves to an habit, and turned superfluity into necessity: so
that as those who load themselves with clothes, are apt to take cold if they
leave off any one garment, though the one half were sufficient to preserve
their bodies in natural heat and strength, if they were so accustomed; so
these drunkards by long use have brought upon themselves such a necessity of
drinking, that their dropsy desire is never satisfied, nor their insatiable
thirst quenched, unless they be continually bibbing.

So that a man might well wonder not only that any Christian,. Sect. 2. The
causes why men continue in this beastly vice.
but that a mere worldling should be allured to continue in this vice, there
being no respect of worldly good to entice him. But the cause hereof is, that
either men against reason and nature are drawn into this vice, through the
irresistable violence of bad company, or through their own wanton
voluptuousnes, which makes them slaves to their filthy lusts; and then
howsoever there was no reason why they should wilfully subject themselves to
this bondage, when they were at liberty, yet when they are once inthralled,
there are causes enough to keep them in subjection: neither is it a hard matter
to keep him in safe custody, who is already bound in strong chains.

Now these causes are principally three:. Sect. 3. 1. Sottishnes the cause of
drunkenness.
first, because those who are addicted to this vice are so infatuated and
besotted, that they never enter into any consideration of their estate; but as
they are senseless in feeling present miseries, so they are securely careless
in foreseeing or avoiding future evils; like filthy swine feeding greedily on
such things as please the appetite, never considering that they do but fat
themselves for the shambles and slaughter.

Secondly, because such is their infidelity,. Sect. 4. The second cause is
infidelity.
that though they hear these things, yet they believe the^ not, and being
co^uicted, they are not persuaded: otherwise it is impossible that reasonable
creatures should be subject to such brutish folly, as to nourish a needless
and fruitless vice, which is accompanied with so innumerable mischiefs. If but
a common friend do warn us not to drink in such a cup, because it is mixed
with deadly poison; though the cup were of gold, and the drink most delicious,
yet who would taste it? If a faithful Physician should forbid us to feed on
such or such a dish, assuring us upon his approved knowledge and certain
experience, that if we eat of it we shall either lose our wits, or fall into
grievous diseases, or endanger life it self; what man is so sensual in his
appetite, that would be persuaded for company sake, or to please his pallet,
to feed upon it? But the Lord who is a friend of friends, and a Physician of
skill and faithfulness without compare, has forewarned us to avoid excessive
drinking, because it will bring upon us innumerable evils, both in our bodies
and souls, temporal and spiritual, in this life and the life to come; and
has plainly told us, that howsoever these are sweet potions in the going
down, yet we shall find them to be deadly poisons in operation; and
notwithstanding all this, few are reclaimed from this vice, and that because
howsoever they give him the hearing, yet in truth they believe him not.

Lastly,. Sect. 5. The third cause is their vain excuses.
they continue in this vice because they have some figge-leaues of vain
excuses, whereby they endeavor to hide the ugly filthiness of their sin;
partly defending it as being tolerable, and partly extenuating and excusing
it, as being light and venial. The 1. excuse, because they are not overcome
with drink though they drink much.
First they think themselves sufficiently cleared from the sin of
drunkenness, and acquitted of the punishment, because howsoever they drink
abundantly, yet such is the strength of their brain, that they are able to
bear it without any great distemperature, and retain still the use of their
reason, memory, and all their other faculties as at other times. But such are
to know, that not only drinking unto drunkenness, is condemned by Gods word;
but also excessive and immoderate drinking, when as men sit much at the wine,
and take their chief delight in tippling, yea it is a sin more heinous before
God, then moderate drunkenness, when as men drinking sparingly, are yet
overtaken at unawares, through the weakness and infirmity of their brain;
for they sin sometimes unadvisedly, and in some sort against their will, but
the other continue in their vice upon a deliberate purpose, voluntarily and
wilfully; they through weakness of nature, these for want of grace. And
therefore the Lord rangeth them with common drunkards, Esa. 5.22.
and denounces against them the like fearful woe. Esa. 5.22. Woe unto them
that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strange to power in strong
drink. So the Apostle Peter reckoning up the lusts of the Gentiles, numbreth
amongst them, not only drunkenness, but also excessive drinkings, 1. Pet. 4.3.
1 Pet. 4.3. And those Princes are condemned, who drink not for thirst,
Propter compotationem. Eccl. 10.17.
or for strength and nourishment, but for drinks sake; that is, because they
take pleasure and delight in immoderate drinking. Eccles. 10.17.

But howsoever the spirit of God thus condemns it,. Sect. 6. VVorldly men
glory in their much drinking.
yet worldly men who would be accounted Christians, are so far from censuring
it as a vice, that they think it an excellent property, and a singular
ornament, whereby they grace themselves, when as they can drink more then two
or three, and yet bear it away, and being on the bench of good fellowship are
able to get the victory in quaffing, and drink the rest of their company
under the table: but what excellency is in this quality, Plutarch in Demosth.
2. Aristip. apud Laert. lib. 2. cap. 8.
to suck in much drink, which (as Demosthenes said of King Philip) is common
to them with a sponge? what great exploit do they in drinking more then
others, seeing a horse, or mule can drink more then they? what matter of
boasting have they, that their stomachs will bear and hold more wine then the
rest of the company, seeing (as Seneca says) in this the wine caske far
excels them? Epist. 83.
what great conquest have they got, when in excessive drinking they have
overcome all their companions; seeing in conquering they are overcome, and are
shamefully foiled and overthrown by Satan their chief enemy, whilst they
triumph in a drunken victory over their friends? And therefore let not these
men for want of virtue boast of their vices, wherein they shall but foam out
their own shame, and discover their naked filthiness; for whilst they thus
brag of their natural strength, they plainly show their spiritual
weakness; and whilst they vaunt of these drunken conquests, they clearly
prove that they are no better but the devils captives.

Secondly, they justify their wickedness, Sect. 7. The second excuse, that
wine is given for the use of man.
by alleging for themselves, that God has given the grape and wine for the
use of man: and that not only for his necessity, but also for delight, that
by more liberal drinking he may have a merry heart. To which I answer, that
howsoever this proves the lawful use of wine joined with sobriety and
moderation, yet it serves nothing to approve the abuse in excess and
drunkenness, nay rather the contrary from hence may be concluded; for it was
given to make the pensive merry, and the sorrowful glad, and not to make
those who are already merry, mad and frantic. It was given to cheer the
heart, and not to oppress it; to comfort the stomach, and not to load and
glut it; to work in us such a spiritual joy, as should entice us to praise
Gods name in the fruition of his gifts, of which our Prophet Hosea speaks,
Cap. 2.15. and not such a worldly and carnal joy, as shows it self in
filthy ribauldrie, and impious blasphemies. In a word, the Lord does bestow
upon us, not only the competent wages of sufficie^cie, but also the
extraordinary vailes of plenty and abundance, that thereby we may be
encouraged to perform unto him more faithful and cheerful service, and not
that through our abusing them to excess, we should disable our selves for all
good duties, and be well fitted for the service of the devil.

Lastly, they allege for the defense of their drunkenness,. Sect. 8. The 3.
excuse, that they use drunkenness for Physic.
that they use it not for any delight which they take in drinking, but as the
best remedy prescribed by the learned Physician for the curing of some
dangerous diseases, to which they are subject. To which I answer, that if it
be accounted a sottish folly to staunch the bleeding of the finger, by
wounding of the heart, then much more to cure the body by destroying of the
soul; for if drunkenness be a sin (as all men confess) and if the wages of
sin be death eternal, of soul and body, Romans 6.23.
as the Apostle teaches us, Romans 6.23. If finally it make all men who commit
it, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
liable to Gods fearful curse denounced in his law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. then what
madness is it, wilfully and presumptuously to rush into sin, which is
accompanied with eternal destruction of body and soul, for the recovery of
our bodily health; to hazard the fee-simple of our everlasting patrimony, for
the reparing of our earthly tabernacles, yea the prison of our souls, and to
venture the loss of eternal happiness in Gods kingdom, for the prolonging of
our miserable pilgrimage in this wretched world. Besides, the Lord has
ordained many sovereign means and remedies of lawful Physic, upon the use
whereof we may much more assuredly expect Gods blessing, for our recovery,
then upon this evil and sinful means, which he has branded with his curse.
And therefore when the Physicians receipt is contrary to the prescript of Gods
word, let us reject it as sent from hell; and as one says, Cum turpis est
medicma sanari pudeat: Let us rather die of an honest disease, then preserve
life by a dishonest medicine.

Others there are,. Sect. 9. The fourth excuse, that they are drawn into this
sin by bad company.
who not being so impudent as to defend their drunkenness as lawful, do yet
extenuate and excuse it as light and venial. And first they say, that for
themselves they have no liking of this vice, but only are drawn into it
sometimes by reason of their company. To which I answer, that that is a bad
fellowship which brings us into a league with vice, and makes us to set virtue
at utter defiance; that is a wicked knot of friendship which ties us both to
the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment, and it will prove but a
sottish dotage in the end, if rather then we will part with wicked companions,
we will in foolish kindness accompany them into hell. If therefore our
companions delight in sin, let not us delight in them, but flee their society
as being the devils advocates to solicit us unto wickedness; and let us take
heed lest whilst we labor to maintain friendship with men, we do not
proclaim enmity against God. They are but bad servants who will keep
company with their masters enemies, and join with them in their leaud
courses, especially after he has seriously warned them to forsake it; but we
profess our selves the servants of God, and he has straightly charged us to
leave the fellowship of wicked worldlings, and especially of such as live in
drunkenness, because their fellowship will corrupt us and allure us by their
example and inticements, to the committing of the same sins. Thus the wise
Solomon charge us from God, that we should not keep company with drunkards
and gluttons, Prou. 23.20. Pro. 23.20.
So the Apostle inioyneth us that we should not have any fellowship, nor so
much as eat with a drunkard, 1. Cor. 5.11: 1. Cor. 5.11.
and that we should have no fellowship with these unfruitful works of
darkness; or if unwittingly and unwillingly we be thrust into any such
society, we must not imitate but reprove them. Ephesians. 5.11. Ephesians. 5.11.


Secondly, they allege for their excuse,. Sect. 10. The fifth excuse, that it
is the custom of the country.
that this excessive drinking is the usual custom of the country, and the
common practice of the people where they dwell; and therefore they are the
rather to be excused, if they behave themselves like other men, seeing
singularity would make them odious, and bring them to contempt. To which I
answer, that custom, not grounded upon either reason or religion, is the
worst kind of barbarous tyranny, that a common fashion dissonant from Gods
word is no better then a common sin, which brings upon whole nations
universal judgments; and therefore we must not join with them in their
sins, if we would be disioyned from them in their punishments. That as
community commends that which is good, so it aggrauateth that which is
evil; that Christians must not live by profane examples, but by Gods holy
precepts; that we are expressly charged by God not to follow a multitude to do
evil, Exodus 23.2. Exodus 23.2.
That we must not fashion our selves like unto the world, but labor to find
out Gods will, that we may conform our lives thereunto, Romans 12.2. Romans 12.2.
That if we will needs live by example, we must propound for our imitation
those who are most godly and religious, and not those who are most in number.
For it is better being with Noah alone in the Arc, then to be in the
flourishing assemblies of wicked worldlings; to join with righteous Lot, then
with all Sodom; to be in the small number of Christ's little flock which are
to be saved, then in the numerous herds of goats, which are destinated to
destruction.

Lastly,. Sect. 11.6. Excuse taken from the example of holy men.
they extenuate their vice of drunkenness, as not deserving the censure of an
heinous sin, seeing the holy Patriarchs Noah and Lot fell into it. But by
the same reason they might as well conclude, that murder and adultery are but
small and venial sins, because holy David committed them, and that it is
but a light offense to deny and forswear Christ our Savior, because Peter
the Apostle was overtaken with it. Yea in truth they may thus excuse idolatry,
blasphemy, pride, covetousness, and al other heinous wickedness, seeing the
dearest children of God are not privileged from them, nor any other pardonable
sin: but only from the continuing and living in them. Again, these faithful
servants of God, did not often fall into this sin of drunkenness, for Noah fell
into it but once, and that as it seems upon ignorance, because he did not
know the property and operation of wine, the use whereof himself invented;
whereby he was also the more easily overtaken, as being ouerioyed when he
tasted such excellent fruits of his own labors. And Lot was but twice
overtaken, and that by the allurement of his own daughters, to which he was
more apt to give ear, because their hearts being oppressed with grief for the
destruction of Sodom, the loss of his goods, and sudden death of his wife,
he took more liberty in the use of these creatures for their comfort and
refreshing. So that howsoever these holy men were overtaken once or twice with
drunkenness, yet they were no drunkards; for we must put a difference between
those who fall into this sin through infirmity, and those who make it their
usual practice; and consequently, these examples serve no better for their
excuse who live and continue in this vice, then Peter's once denying of his
master excuses them, who make a total and final apostasy from Christ and
his true religion.

Again,. Sect. 12. Drunkards abuse the Scriptures.
let these men know that they horribly abuse the Scriptures, when as they
harten themselves in their sins by the example of the faithful, who have
fallen into the like; for the spirit of God has purposely recorded their
slips, to show human frailty, that we may not rest upon our own strength,
and Gods infinite mercies in pardoning these gross offenses of his servants,
that those, who through infirmity fall into the like sins, may not despair
of his goodness: but receive some refreshing for their fainting souls. And
finally, that we may be stirred up with more care to watch over our own
hearts, and seeing their falls who have gone before us may turn aside from
these slipperie places, or more warily look to our own footing, lest we also
slipping come to the like downe-falls. There is no Pilot in his right wits,
when he sees sea-markes purposely set to give warning of rocks, sands, and
shelues, whereupon others have made shipwreck, will take occasion thereby to
run his ship upon them, but rather will employ all his care and skill that by
avoiding them he may escape the same danger; let us therefore follow the like
practice, and seeing these examples are recorded for our learning, that he who
thinks he does stand, may take heed lest he fall; 1. Cor. 10.12.
let them not make us more securely to go forward in our sins, but rather
move us to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, as the Apostle
exhorts, Phil. 2.12. Phil. 2.12.


CHAP. IX. The greatness of their sin who purposely make others drunk.
ANd thus have I not only showed the hainousnes of this sin of
drunkenness,. Sect. 1. The greatness of this sin who make others drunk on
set purpose.
but also have pulled away from it such couerings of excuses, under which men
labor to hide it, and so have laid open the filthy nakedness of this vice to
the public view, that those who are not addicted thereunto may the more detest
it, and that those who have been overtaken with it, may be moved seriously to
repent for that which is past, and for the time to come constantly resolve to
leave and forsake it, as being to God odious, hurtful and injurious to their
neighbors, and to their own bodies and souls most pernicious. Now for
conclusion of this treatise we are briefly to show, that as it is a great sin
to live in this vice ones self, so it is no less grievous in the sight of God
to be guilty of another drunkenness. In which respect many in our days
fearfully offend, Some delight in others drunkenness.
and that in a diverse manner; for some take delight to see others drunken, and
make a sport and may game of their neighbors sin; as though it were fit
matter to move laughter, to see God dishonored, his name blasphemed, his
creatures abused; and to behold our neighbors nakedness, and as it were from
a man transformed into a beast; yea in truth in a far worse condition, both
in respect of his present state, and future danger, in that he takes a ready
course to run headlong into hell. It would be accounted barbarous
inhumanitie, for a man to laugh and delight himself when he beholds another
running upon his swords point, or casting himself down from a high rock, or
fallen into the fire; what therefore is it but horrible impiety to solace a
man's self in another sin, whereby he is laid open to Gods fearful
judgments, and endangered to suffer eternal torments in the fire of hell?

Others there are who do not only take pleasure in seeing the drunkenness of
their neighbor, Sect. 2. Some use all means to help forward others in
drunkenness.
but also help him forward in this wicked course, and that both by alluring
inticements, and also forcible constraint. They allure them by giving them bad
example, by drinking unto them in show of kindness, requiring of them that by
imitation they will return a pledge of the like love, by chalenging them to
express their love, and honorable respect to their absent friends, by
drinking carouses to their health: and lastly, by liberal spending they care
not how much, for the procuring store of the choicest wines, and most enticing
drinks: for unto such a height of wickedness are men come in these our times,
that though the woeful tears and pitiful complaints of their poor brethren,
cannot wring from them one penie, for the relief of their extreme want, or so
much as a piece of bread to satisfy their hunger and sustain their lives; yet
are they open handed and prodigally liberal, in spending their money to make
their neighbors drunk, that so they may make themselves merry in beholding
their nakedness. But this will make a fearful reckoning at the day of
judgment, when God and their own consciences shall accuse them of their
graceless mispending ye Lords talents, by pinching the hungry to pamper the
full; by withholding drink from the thirsty, to make others drunk with too
great abundance; by denying a penie to the poor needy, unless it be squized
out of them by authority; whereas they are willing prodigally to spend
shillings and pounds in these wicked abuses, which tend to Gods dishonor, and
the destruction of their neighbor.

But howsoever this is a high degree of sin,. Sect. 3. Some compel others to
drunkenness.
yet there are others in these wretched times, who climb a step higher on this
ladder of wickedness. For taking pleasure to see others drunk, they do not
only allure them to take more then they should, but also force and constrain
them to drink more then they would, urging it as a matter of egregious wrong
and singular disgrace, which they will by no means let pass unrevenged, if
they will not answer them in their carouses. So that in these sinful days it
is counted an injury worthy not only ill words, but also wounds and stabs, if
a man will not for company grievously sin against God, destroy his own
body and soul, and wilfully leap into hell fire. But let such ruffians know,
The grieuousnes of this sin.
that this their behavior is in reason most absurd, outragiously injurious to
their neighbors, desperate wickedness against God, and most damnable to their
own bodies and souls. For first it is as absurdly foolish to compel another
to drink as much as themselves, who has neither the like appetite to receive
it, nor strength to bear it, as to force them to eat as much as themselves,
they having weaker stomachs and worse disgestion; or to reach as high, they
being of lower stature; or to bear as much, when as they are not comparable in
strength, seeing nature has not dealt alike with all in the one more then in
the other, but has given to every one his own proportion.

Again,. Sect. 4.
what greater injury can they offer to their neighbor, then coming into
their company as a friend, to use him as an enemy, thrusting him with
violence into these wicked actions, which will weaken his strength, impair his
health, shorten his life, and (that which is worst of all) wound his conscience
with sin, and destroy his soul? Neither in truth is this their good
fellowship better then the Spanish cruelty to the poor Indians, who labored
to commend their skill by striving who could shoot nearest unto their hearts,
and to approve their strength by contending who could give the deepest would
in their naked bodies: so these men to extol their wicked strength, and
drunken valor, strike deep wounds not only into the name, state and body, but
also into the very souls of their neighbors, and that not of strangers and
enemies, but of their most familiar acquaintance and nearest friends. So also
they sin against Gods Majesty in most desperate and despitefull manner,
being not content themselves to commit all that outrageous wickedness before
spoken of, but draw others also into the like impiety; like wicked traitors
who do not only themselves rebel against their Sovereign, but also force
others to rise and take up arms against him.

Lastly,. Sect. 5. Such sin against their own souls.
they most damnably sin against their own souls, not only in sinking them
into hell by the weight of their own sins which are intolerable, but also in
pressing them down into the deepest condemnation and lowest bottom of hell,
by adding unto them the unsupportable burden of their neighbors sins, unto
which they are not only accessarie, but the principal causes and chief
authors. Against this wickedness the Lord sharply inueigheth and denounces a
fearful woe which shall ouerwhelme those who fall into it: Hab. 2.15. Habac.
2.15.16
Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: thou ioynest thine heat and
make him drunken also, that thou may see his priuities. 16. Thou art
filled with shame for glory: drink thou also and be made naked: the cup of
the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spuing shall be
for thy glory.

CHAP. X. Of the means whereby we may be preserved or freed from this sin of
drunkenness.
ANd thus have I showed the greatness of their sin, who either themselves
live in drunkenness,. Sect. 10. The means to preserve or free us from this
sin of drunkenness.
or draw others into this sin, the which being sufficient and effectual to
persuade all who have but the least spark of grace to a detestation of this
vice, and to a full resolution to leave and forsake it: It only now remains
that we set down briefly some means whereby they may be enabled to master
and subdue this sin, which is so wicked and abominable; and these are either
general, or more proper and particular. The general means, is prayer,
whereby we invoke the assistance of Gods spirit, to strengthen us in our
resolution of leaving this sin; the diligent hearing of Gods word, The
general means.
which is the sword of the spirit that kills our corruptions, and that
irresistable cannon shot which battereth and beats down the strong holds of
sin. The frequent use of the Lords Supper wherein we daily renew our covenant
with God, that we will forsake the devil, and all these his works of of
darkness. Diligent meditation on Gods inestimable love toward us, who has
not spared to give his son to death for us, and the innumerable benefits
which together with him he has plentifully bestowed upon us, both in temporal
and spiritual things. All which if we be not too too ungrateful may
restrain and weane us from all those sins which are most dear, pleasant,
and profitable unto us; and much more from this sin of drunkenness, which is
in no degree good and beneficial, and in many respects hurtful and pernicious
both unto our souls and bodies. Furthermore, let us meditate upon the death
and sufferings of Christ, whereby he has shed his dearest blood to redeem us
from these sins, both in respect of their guilt and punishment; and so shall
we not, if we have any spark of grace, prefer perishing wine before his
precious blood, nor trample it under our filthy feet by wallowing in this
beastly sin. Let us meditate on that union which is between Christ and us,
whereby we become members of his glorious body; and so shall we stand upon our
spiritual reputation, and be ashamed to dishonor our head, by drawing him as
much as in us lies, into the communication of this swinish sin. Let us also
consider, that our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, the which we
shall exceedingly dishonor, if by drinking and swilling we make them to become
like unto wine-vessels. But if Gods manifold blessings, and great privileges
which he has vouchsafed unto us, will not move us, yet there are other
arguments which may constrain us. As first, if we do consider that the Lord
beholds us, when as in a brutish manner we lie wallowing in this sin; that
he is a just Judge, who will not let such gross vices go unpunished, that
his fierce wrath is kindled with this sin, and that it will blaze out in his
fearful judgments, unless we prevent it by speedy repentance. Lastly, let
us always have in mind the last and terrible day of judgment, when we shall
be called to a reckoning, not only for the shameful abuse of Gods creatures,
but also for all those vain and leaud words and those wicked and profane
actions, which we have committed in the time of drunkenness.

More especially that we may be brought into a true hatred and detestation of
this sin,. Sect. 2. The special means to preserve us from the sin of
drunkenness.
let us set before us in a general view the hainousnes thereof, and the
manifold evils and mischiefs which do accompany it, of which I have already
spoken; as that it is a vice condemned by God and men, Christians and Infidels;
that thereby we grieuouslie offend God, by making our bellies our god, by
unfitting and disabling our selves for his service, by abusing his good
creatures, which with a plentiful hand he has bestowed upon us, the
necessary use whereof, many better then we want; that thereby we sin in a
high degree against our neighbors, generally, and particularly, against the
whole Church and commonwealth, strangers, and familiar acquaintance, and most
of all against their own family; that we hereby most grievously sin against
our selves, by making us unfit for our callings, and for the performance of all
good duties, by disgracing our profession, and bringing our selves into
contempt, by making our selves the voluntary slaves of this vice, by
impouerishing our state, and bringing upon us want and beggerie; by infatuating
our understandings, and corrupting our wills and affections; by deforming,
disabling, weakening, and destroying our bodies, and bringing our selves to
untimely death; by excluding our selves out of the number of Christ's members,
and of those who are regenerate; by quenching the gifts of the spirit, and
strengthening the flesh and the lusts thereof; by causing our souls to be
possessed with final impenitencie, which is inseparably accompanied with
eternal damnation. Let us also remember, that as in it self it is most
sinful, so also it is a cause of other sins, and a fruitful mother of all
wickedness: as of the manifold and horrible abuses of the tongue, of many
wicked and outrageous actions, and particularly of those fearful sins of
murder and adultery. Let us also call to mind, that as it is the cause of
sin, so also of many heavy and grievous punishments; for it makes a man
liable to a fearful woe, and Gods heavy curse; it subiecteth his name to
infamy and reproach, his state to beggerie, his body to diseases and immature
death, his soul to senseless sottishness, and depriving the whole man of the
joys of heaven, enters him into the possession of eternal hellish torments.
All which being duly considered, may move any, who has not only any dram
of religion, but even any natural reason, or but common sense, to hate and
abhor, leave and forsake this brutish sin, which being odiously wicked in
it self, is also the cause of so innumerable mischiefs. For if those who
being diseased with the dropsy, will, when they are advised by the wise and
faithful Physician, restrain their appetite, and refrain from much drinking,
though by reason of their disease they are continually tormented with an
insatiable thirst, and that only to recover bodily health, and to preserve
for a while their temporary life, in the mean time having no assurance of
attaining unto their end with all this pains: then how much more should those
who have been formerly addicted to this sin of drunkenness bridle their
appetite, and abstain from excessive drinking, although through their
accustomable carousing they have brought upon themselves such a necessity of
drinking, that it is a torment to forbear: seeing so innumerable evils do
necessarily accompany it, both in this life, and in the life to come, which
are much more earnestly to be avoided then many deaths.

Lastly, Sect. 3. The last means is to avoid the company of drunkards.
they who would willingly reclaim themselves from this vice of excessive
drinking, must carefully avoid the company of drunkards. And unto this the
wise man persuades us, Prou. 23.20. Keep not company with drunkards, nor
with gluttons. Prou. 23.20.
And the Apostle charge us, that if one who is a brother be charged to be a
drunkard, we should not so much as eat with him, 1. Cor. 5.11.
1. Cor. 5.11. For if they still haunt this wicked society, after they are
recovered of this disease; they will easily through this co^tagious fellowship
be again tainted, and fall into a fearful relapse of their sin; for they
will not only allure them by their example, but also draw them with the
pretended bond of good fellowship; yea, urge and provoke them with challenges,
to answer them in their carouses; and sometimes with unkindness taken, and
threats of revenge if they do refuse: and if all this will not move them to
reenter into their old course, they will not stick after an impudent and
impious manner to gibe and scoff at their new reformation, and to lay upon
them the imputation of too austere preciseness, in that they will not follow
the practice of their old companions. The which motive, although it be of no
true force in it self, yet is there no small strength ministered unto it by our
corruptions, for the foiling and overthrowing of new conuerts; for howsoever
the wicked are bold in sin, and care not in what company almost they act
their impiety, if it be not within danger of law; yet those who have not
received a great measure of grace, are bashful and loath to be seen in any
unaccustomed goodness; and as if it were some blemish unto them, they are
ready to blush if more then ordinary piety be laid to their charge, or if
wicked men do accuse them of being too religious.

And thus much I thought good to speak of the sin of drunkenness,. Sect. 4.
The conclusion of this treatise.
both to persuade all men to abhor this vice who are not overtaken therewith,
and to dissuade those who have defiled themselves by wallowing in this filthy
puddle, from persisting in this brutish course. The Lord make that which has
been said effectual to these ends; that we may not only perform the duties
of piety toward him, and the duties of righteousness toward our neighbors,
but also the duties of temperance and sobriety toward our selves; that so by
our Christian lives and conversation God may be glorified, our brethren
edified, and we more and more assured of our inheritance amongst Gods Saints in
heaven, when as we live as it becomes his children and servants here on
earth. The which grace the God of grace and goodness vouchsafe unto us for his
Christ's sake, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be al praise and
glory now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A TREATISE AGAINST FORNICATION AND ADVLTERIE: WHEREIN IS SHOWED THE hainousnes
of these sins, the grieuousnes of their punishments, and the means whereby we
may be preserved from them.
CHAP. I. The sins of the people endanger the Commonwealth.
AS when the great body of the Commonwealth is thoroughly purged from the
noisome dregs of sin,. Sect. 1. The sins of the people cause the land to
vomit out her inhabitants.
wherewith it is oppressed and surcharged, it sucketh plentifully, and as it
were with a good appetite, Gods liberal gifts and blessings like wholesome
food, the which it distributeth to all the particular members thereof, for
their nourishment and preservation: so contrariwise when these gross humors
of iniquity and corruption do superabound, and are not purged either by the
repentance of the offenders, or the due execution of judgment, and inflicting
of deserved punishment upon those who stubbornly persist in their wickedness;
it has no power or faculty to receive Gods benefits, or to communicate them
unto the people for their sustenance and relief. Yea rather it waxing every
day more sick, partly with the intolerable weight of sin, and partly being
deprived of the comfortable beams of Gods love and favor; like a sick body
ouerburthened with crude and corrupted humors it seeks to ease it self; and
because the people will by no means be cleansed from their sin, the country
labors to cleanse it self, both of it and them, and spueth out all his
inhabitants, that together with them it may be disburthened of their
corruptions.

Now amongst all other sins wherewith the land is defiled,. Sect. 2.
Magistrates and Ministers must join their forces in suppressing whoredom.
and the stomach of the commonwealth so surcharged, that it can no otherwise
ease it self, but by vomiting out all the inhabitants, the sins of
uncleanness do hold the chief place. And therefore as it behooves the
Magistrates in zeal for Gods glory, and in love to their country, Leuit.
18.25.27.28.
to draw out the sword of justice for the punishment of these sins, that
hereby they may prevent the sword of Gods vengeance, which otherwise will
punish the whole land; and to purge the country, either by reforming the
faulty, or inflicting on them deserved punishment; so also it becomes Gods
faithful Ministers to assist the sword of the Magistrate with the sword of the
spirit; and as he restrains them from these sins for fear of temporal
punishment, so they are to labor that they may abstain from them for
conscience sake, even then when as in respect of their close acting of their
uncleanness they are secured from all danger of the law.

In consideration whereof,. Sect. 3. That our land is exceedingly defiled with
whoredom.
I thought it my duty (being called to this function, and appointed by the
Lord to be a watchman to tell the people of their sins) to speak and write
against these filthy vices of whoredom and uncleanness; and that the rather,
because sins of this kind, in these latter times are exceedingly increased in
this our country. And howsoever the grand sinckes and filthy sewers of the
land, the common steues, which heretofore were to the shame of religion either
licensed or tolerated, are now by the laudable care of our Magistrates taken
away, so as our country is not so noisome through the confluence of the common
filth, nor the uncleanness so great an eyesore, because it does not as in
former times lie open to public view; yet the filthiness of our people is not
clean purged with the clear streams of true repentance; but rather the
common sincke is divided into many filthy channels which run securely into
private houses, and make every corner noysom and infectious, especially in the
outparts and suburbs of our greatest cities. And though the common pest be
eased and emptied of these persons infected with ye contagious plague of
uncleanness, yet the danger is never the less, seeing they are not cured of
their diseases, but only removed and scattered in the garden houses; where
they lie hid from those only which should reform or punish them, and not from
those who may be infected or corrupted by them: yea in truth the peril is
hereby accidentally increased, because the contagion is dispersed into many
places; into which many of our people unwittingly resorting are infected at
unawares, and fall into the secret ambushments of these filthy harlots when
they least suspect any danger: and those who are ill disposed have no less
free access to these places, then they formerly had to the common stews, and
with less fear of shame, or note of infamy, because their haunt is now more
secret and unsuspected. So that these unsavory sinckes are only stirred in,
but not cleansed; and these corrupt humors in the body of our State, are
only a little moved, but not removed and purged away.

And this comes to pass,. Sect. 4. The causes why whoredom so abounds.
not only because we being in our own natures too too corrupt, have this
corruption much increased by the example of foreign countries, into which our
youth traveling, learn their vices sooner then their language, and leaving
the fragrant flowers of their virtues untouched, do beetle-like suck in the
dung of their corruptions; but also because the minds of our people continue
still somewhat sowred with the leaven of the popish doctrine and practice,
which pass over these sins of uncleanness as being slips of youth, and but
venial faults of slight regard, which may be cleansed and done away by
auricular confession, and the undergoing of some small penance at the priests
appointment, who is oftentimes more faulty and filthy then themselves. And to
these we may add the too great mildnes of our laws, which impose over light
punishments upon these heinous sins; as the standing in a white sheet, or at
most a few stripes with a whip, which notwithstanding is oftentimes not
inflicted, partly through the carelesnes or conniuencie of Magistrates, and
partly through the negligence or corruption of under officers; or else at least
is turned from a personal punishment, which should be for the example of
others, into a penal or purse mulct, which for the most part is converted to
their own use who do impose it.

And yet I will not deny that though we have many corruptions in this kind,
both amongst the offenders,. Sect. 5. The popish crew most culpable of this sin.
and also the punishers; our State nevertheless is much better then it is in
other places under the government of the whore of Babylon, the Antichrist of
Rome; where stews are publicly erected and tolerated: for much better and
more pardonable for the land it is, when sin lurketh in secret corners, then
when it dare show it self in the open streets, without fear or shame; when
through carelesnes it is not seen, then when it is tolerated and impiouslie
maintained, when it is not punished through negligence or corruption of some
few, then when the whole State does countenance it, and makes it secure by
giving unto it a patent of impunitie.

On the other side,. Sect. 6. We are not to be excused though we be not so bad
as the Papists.
we must needs grant that our state is not yet sound, though we be not so
desperately diseased; and that we are not in good case, when as we be not
drenched and diued into the lowest bottom of sin and condemnation: for in
respect of the means which God has long plentifully affoorded us, we ought
to have brought forth far better fruits then those that want them; and
having long inioyed the bright sunshine of the Gospel which has cleerelie
discovered the works of darkness, we should walk like children of light,
and not still remain in the shadow of death with those unto whom this light
never shined, unless we will make our condemnation more fearful then theirs,
when as our knowledge does serve for no other use but to aggrauate our sin.

And therefore let us strive to go as far before others in a godly life, as
we are advanced above them in Gods spiritual privileges, labor to keep our
bodies much more pure and undefiled, as from all other sins, so especially from
these polluting sins of whoredom and uncleanness, that we may present them
holy and unblameable at the great day of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall
come in glory and power to judge both quick and dead.

CHAP. II. What fornication is, and of the small account which worldlings make
of it.
THe which that we may the rather do,. Sect. 1. The maine scope of this
treatise.
I thought good to entreat of these sins of uncleanness, and to show both the
hainousnes of them, together with the manifold evils which they bring upon
those who are defiled with them, to the end that hereby I may move all men in a
just detestation of this wickedness, either to abstain from, or to leave and
forsake it: and the means also whereby those who have so good a purpose, may
be furthered and helped in this their holy and Christian resolution.

Now howsoever this sin of uncleanness is a monster which has many heads,
and an evil tree which spreads forth it self into many particular branches
of wickedness, yet my purpose is but to speak of two of the chief, which are
the universal poisons of the laud, and most common corruptions of the times,
the sin of fornication, which is committed between single persons, and the
sin of adultery, between married folks, at least on the one party.

Concerning the former:. Sect. 2. What we understand by whoredom in this
treatise.
Fornication is that act of uncleanness which is committed between a single man
with a single woman. Where I do not take fornication in his strict and proper
signification, in which it signifies only whoredom, or that uncleanness which
is committed with a strumpet or common harlot; but in this discourse I
understand it largely and generally for all kind of filthiness which is
committed between single or unmarried persons; whether it be the deflouring of
virgins which is called stuprum, or the ordinary abuse of the same concubine,
which is termed concubinatus, or the defiling of the body with a harlot,
either maid or widow, which being once or seldom acted, is called fornication;
or being commonly practiced, is called scortation, or whore-hunting.

All which sins of uncleanness have been from time to time amongst many either
defended as lawful,. Sect. 3. Fornication excused as light and venial. Mitio
a pud Terentium in Adelph.
or excused as light and venial. The Heathens held it as a thing indifferent,
or if at all, yet but a slight fault: Non est flagitium, mihi creed,
adolescentulum scortaeri, neque potare: It is not, believe me (says one) any
great fault in a young man to whore and drink, etc. And hence it is that the
Apostles writing to the Heathen conuerts forbid them fornication amongst things
indifferent, Act. 15.20
not because it was so in it self, but in their account and estimation. And
the Apostle Paul writing to the Corinthians, who had formerly been exceedingly
addicted to this vice, thought it necessary to use many weighty arguments, 1.
Cor. 6.
to prove the hainousnes of this sin, not only to dissuade them from their
former filthy practice, but also to confute and convince them of their old
error, which even after their conversion was not utterly rooted out of their
minds, namely, that fornication was a thing lawful and indifferent. And in
this gross error were also the whole sect of the Nicolaitans, whom Christ
himself confuteth in his epistle to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus,
Apoc. 2.14.15. Apoc. 2.14.15. Sect. 4. Papists the greatest favorers of
fornication.


Neither do the Papists in our own times come far behind them; for as they
are chief patrons and maintainers of the grossest kinds of spiritual
whoredom and idolatry, so are they special favorers and vpholders of
corporal fornication, excusing it as venial in their doctrine, and approving
it as lawful in their practice, in that they maintain the common stews
amongst them, and do not punish those at all who do frequent them. Yea and
not only their grossest Divines, but their refined schoolmen; yea even their
holy Thomas herein shows himself profane and unsound: Thom. Aquin. Sum.
2.2. quaest. 164. art. 2.4. Sentent. distinct. 32. quaest. 2. Ancillam.
for howsoever in some places he condemns fornication as a mortal sin,
yet elsewhere he says, that, Fornicatio non est multum aggerenda, propter
maius malum vitandum: Fornication must not be much aggrauated, for the
avoiding of a greater evil. And their caution which in latter times is given
to their holy shauelings: Si non cast, tamen caute: If ye cannot live chastely,
yet commit your whoredom warily, is so stale and common, that it stinketh and
annoieth all Christendom.

And this is that cup of carnal fornications,. Sect. 5. The extenuating and
tollerating of fornication amongst the Papists much increases the Popes
kingdom.
wherewith the great whore of Babylon allureth the Kings and inhabitants of the
earth to drink also of the cup of her spiritual whoredom, and as it were the
great drag-net, whereby she catches and captiueth more in her idolatries and
superstitions, then by almost any other means whatsoever. For every carnal
man is ready and willing to embrace that religion which favors his sin,
and tolerateth his wickedness, suffering him quietly to rest in it without
trouble of mind or perplexity of conscience. And therefore when graceless
men being given over to their unclean lusts, do resolve to live in their
filthy whoredoms; and whilst they profess our religion cannot so do, with
any peace of conscience or quiet of mind, because we teach according to Gods
truth, that this sin of whoredom is heinous in Gods sight, that he who
lives in sin is the servant of sin and child of death; that only he who
leaves and forsakes his sin finds mercy; and that there can be no true
repentance, and consequently no pardon but where there is an unfeigned hatred of
sin, a subduing and mortifying of the corruption, and a rising again to
newnes of life: hence it is that they give over the profession of our religion,
as giving unto them no comfort whilst they continue in their wickedness; and
being resolved to run on in their course of uncleanness, they adioyne
themselves to the Church of Rome, where this sin of whoredom finds favor
and countenance both by their doctrine and practice; and themselves some
security and comfort even whilst they live in their wickedness. For there no
more is required of them in their repentance, but that they confess their
filthiness to a more filthy priest, and show for the present some contrition
whilst they are in the habit of penitents, and make some slight satisfaction
at their ghostly fathers appointment, whom selfe-guiltines will not suffer to be
over severe toward others; as either to fast from flesh certain days, or to
go on pilgrimage to the shrine of some Saint, or to whip their bodies so much
as their devotion moves them: or if they will take a more compendious course,
they may buy some indulgence or pardon from their holy father the Pope, whereby
they may have plenarie remission of all their sins; and so having paid all
their old score of wickedness, they may now again begin a new reckoning, and
with a quiet conscience go from the Church to the stews, from their ghostly
father to their harlot; having the same means for their discharge when as
again they are run in debt. Wherein they in lively manner resemble the holy
harlot described in the Proverbs, Pro. 7.14.
who by her devotions makes unto her self a clear passage unto her
fornications, and having offered her peace oblations, and paid her vows, takes
occasion again to renew her whoredoms, and makes her devotion an exordium
unto her inciting oration whereby she persuades unto lust: or the adulterous
woman, who having eaten her fill, and satisfied her appetite with the pleasures
of sin, wipeth her mouth, and says, I have not committed iniquity. Pro.
30.20.


And as this is the case of the popish crew;. Sect. 6. Fornication too lightly
punished among us.
so we may say for our selves, that this sin of fornication and uncleanness is
not so discountenanced and suppressed as it ought: for howsoever the doctrine
of our Church is pure and sound, showing the hainousnes of this sin, 1. Cor.
6.9.10.
and proouing out of the word of God, that they who live in it can never enter
into the kingdom of heaven; yet too too many are polluted with this wickedness,
and our laws are too mild and remiss in punishing so heinous sins, and the
execution of these laws too much neglected, personal punishments being turned
into purse penalties, whereby these sins which are accounted venial amongst
the Papists, are become venall amongst us.

And therefore seeing the sword of justice, is not unsheathed by the
magistrates as it ought, for the suppressing of this sin, nor the offenders
who should thereby either be reformed or cut off, scarce beaten with the
scabberd: it behooneth Gods Ministers with so much the greater care and
diligence, to draw out the sword of the spirit, and therewith to give these
sins of uncleanness a mortal wound in the consciences of men; that so at
least they may be reclaimed from this wickedness by a just hatred of their
sin, who are not restrained for fear of punishment; and may be moved to
preserve their bodies in purity and chastity, when as they behold the vglines
of this vice, even whilst they find themselves most privileged from the
danger of humane laws.

CHAP. III. General reasons to dissuade all men from fornication.
TO which purpose let us in the next place propound some effectual reasons,.
Sect. 1. The first argument taken from Gods commandment.
which may move all to an unfeigned hatred of this sin, who have not utterly
cast off all fear of God, and love of their own happiness. The first
argument may be taken from Gods express commandment, whereby he has
straightly prohibited these sins of uncleanness both in the old and new
testament. Generally they are all forbidden in the seventh commandment, Thou
shall not commit adultery. So Deuteronomy. 23.17. Deuteronomy. 23.17. 1. Cor. 6.18. Heb.
12.16.
There shall be no whores of the daughters of Israel; neither shall there be a
whorekeeper of the sons of Israel. 1. Cor. 6.18. Flee fornication, etc. Heb.
12.16. Let there be no fornicator, or profane person, as Esau. Yea so far
off would the Lord have all that profess Christianity from acting of this
sin, that he would not have it once named amongst them. Ephesians. 5.3.
Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not
be once named among you as it becomes Saints. And therefore if we would
approve our selves to be Gods servants, we must rather yield obedience unto
his will then to our own lusts; and prefer his commandment, unto whom we
are obliged in the manifold bonds of our creation, preservation, and
redemption, before our sinful pleasures.

Secondly,. Sect. 2. The second, because it is a sign of such a man as God
hates.
we are to abhor and flee from this sin of uncleanness, as being an
infallible sign and a plain badge of such a man as God hates. So it is said,
Pro. 22.14. The mouth of strange women is as a deep pit, he whom the Lord
hates shall fall therein. And contrariwise it is a sign of a good man whom God
loves, Pro. 22.14.
to be preserved out of the harlots nets and snares, as the wise man also
tells us, Eccles. 7.28. Eccl. 7.28.
I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and snares,
and her hands as bands; he that is good before God shall be delivered from
her: but the sinner shall be taken by her. If therefore Courtiers and all
loyal subjects do carefully avoid the doing of those things in their Princes
sight, which they are assured will provoke his wrath, Pro. 19.12. and 20.2.
and make them odious unto him, because the Kings displeasure is as the the
roaring of a Lion; and he that provoke him unto anger sins against his own
soul; and on the other side, use all means which may give them assurance of
his love, because his favor is as the dew upon the grass, which preserves
him from the scorching heat of all enraged enemies, and causes him to grow and
flourish in all worldly happiness: then how much more should we carefully avoid
the committing of al sins which make the Lord wrathfully displeased with us,
whose anger and fierce displeasure is present death of body and soul, in this
world and in the world to come? How studiously should we embrace those holy
virtues, which will assure us of his love, seeing his favor is life, yea, the
life of our life, our chief comfort whilst we live on earth, and the
principal part of our eternal happiness in the heavens.

Thirdly,. Sect. 3. Thirdly, we must avoid whoredom, as being a fruit of the
flesh.
these sins of uncleanness are to be avoided as being the fruits of the
flesh, and the most sinful works and effects of corrupted nature; and
therefore the Apostle reckoning up the works of the flesh, rangeth them in the
first rank, as being most ready to assault and encounter the spirit, and the
fruits thereof. Gal. 5.19. Gal. 5.19.
The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness. The which corruptions we are especially commanded to
mortify and subdue, Col. 3.5. Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon earth, fornication, uncleanness,
the inordinate affection, and evil concupiscence. 1. Pet. 2.11.
And not without great cause are we to employ our chief strength in mortifying
and subduing these filthy lusts of the flesh; seeing, as the Apostle tells
us, they fight against our souls; and therefore if we do not encounter them,
they will assault us; if we do not master and overcome them, they will surely
give us a shameful overthrow: they are fruits of the flesh, and notable
signs of unregeneration, which stops the entrance into Gods kingdom, for
except we be borne again, we shall not enter into the kingdom of God, Ioh.
3.3.
Ioh. 3.3. And as they dispossess us of our heavenly patrimony, so they enter
us into the certain possession of the hellish inheritance; for they who walk
after the flesh in fulfilling the lusts thereof, they are not in Christ, Romans
8.1.13.
and consequently have not escaped condemnation; yea, whosoever live after the
flesh they shall die, even the spiritual death of body and soul. If
therefore we would not march in the rank of the unregenerate, and fight
under the conduct of the flesh, whose victory is our utter overthrow and
destruction; if we love eternal life, or fear everlasting death and
condemnation in the hellish torments; let us not nourish these filthy lusts,
but use our best means, and employ our strongest forces, and most earnest
endeavors to mortify and subdue them.

CHAP. IIII. That the fornicatour sins many ways: and first in respect of
God.
THe fourth reason to restrain all men from the sins of fornication and
uncleanness,. Sect. 7. That the sins of uncleanness are hainously evil.
is because they are hainously evil, there being no respect or relation of
evil to be named, which is not coincident and inseparably joined with these
vices. For whereas all kind of evil may be reduced to two heads, as being
either the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment; this sin of
fornication compriseth them both, like an evil, yet fruitful tree, bearing
both the summer fruit of sin, and the autumn and after fruit of
punishment. First, that it is out of measure sinful, it may hereby appear, in
that it is not only in it self a grievous sin, but also like a wicked mother
only fruitful in wicked and monstrous births, it brings forth many other
kinds of wickedness, which resemble the parent in their malignant nature and
quality, so as they may be easily known to be of her offspring and progeny.
The grieuousnes of this sin being simply considered in it self is hereby
manifest, in that whereas there is but a threefold relation of sin, either as
it is committed against God, our neighbor or our selves, this sin alone
comprehends them all, and that in many and almost innumerable respects.

First, the fornicatour grievously sins against God,. Sect. 2. The
fornicator sins against God by dishonoring him.
directly and immediately, when as professing himself a Christian, and
consequently one of Gods family, he by polluting and defiling his body,
dishonours his Lord and father: for if mortal men who stand upon their credit,
do count it a great injury and disgrace, to themselves, when as a servant of
their family is defiled, and much more when their own daughters are polluted
with filthy whoredom; then how much more does the Lord detest this
uncleanness, which redoundeth to the dishonor of his holy name, when as it is
committed not only by a common subject under his dominion, but by a special
servant of his family, yea by such as would be reputed in the number of his
children? And this was a principal argument which aggrauated the filthiness
of Sichem and Ammon, Genesis 34.7. 2. Sam. 13.12.13.
because they committed this villainy or folly in Israel, that is, in the
Church and family of God, which in a peculiar manner he had chosen and
sanctified unto himself: and this also made David's grievous sin much more
heinous, because being committed by him who had professed and approved himself
to be the servant and son of God, it greatly tended to Gods dishonor, in
that it caused the enemies of his truth to blaspheme, as appears 2. Sam.
12.14. 2. Sam. 11.14.


Secondly,. Sect. 3. Secondly, the fornicator offends God by resisting his
will.
the fornicatour sins grievously against God by resisting his revealed and
known will; for the Lords will is, that being sanctified we should abstain
from fornication, and that every one should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles
which know not God: 1. These. 4 3.
as appears, 1. These. 4.3.4.5. It is the will of God that we should be
prepared as pure brides for his son Christ, Ephesians. 5.27.
not having any spot or wrinckle, holy and without blame. Yea, so far off
should we be from defiling of our bodies, Ephesians. 5.3.
by committing these sins of uncleanness, that he would not have us so much
as to defile our tongues by once naming of them, with the least approbation or
delight. Whosoever therefore perpetrate and commit these works of darkness,
they contumaciouslie resist the will of God; the which their rebellion is so
much the more intolerable, because they disobey the Lord to obey their own
filthy lusts, and rebel against their supreme Sovereign, to pleasure and
gratify their slavish, base and brutish affections.

Thirdly,. Sect. 4. 3. Fornicators sin against God by subuerting marriage
which is his own ordinance.
whoremongers sin hainouslie against God, by subuerting and destroying
marriage, which is Gods holy ordinance, instituted by the Lord himself in
Paradise, that it might be the only lawful means of propagating his Church and
people, and to preserve them from being defiled with filthy lusts and
inordinate concupiscence. For they who spend their strength upon harlots, Genesis
2 24. Mal. 2.15. 1. Cor. 7.2.
disable themselves for lawful marriage, they who love the stews, loathe the
marriage bed; and if the heart be inueigled with the enticing allurements of
filthy strumpets, they will never desire a lawful wife; but the marriage yoke
unto such, is an intolerable burden, Qui amant agree sibi serunt vxorem dari,
inquit Comicus.
and they seem to themselves to endure a miserable thraldom, and to be
deprived wholly of their liberty, when as being inseparably joined with a
yokefellow, they are restrained from running into lawless licentiousness. And
because they are in love with their spiritual diseases of uncleanness,
therefore they hate the cure, and abhor marriage, the remedy of their
sin.. Sect. 5. Fornicators sin against every person in the Deity, and first
against God the father.


But as fornicators sin against the whole Godhead; so more distinctly against
every person in the Deity in a peculiar manner. As first they sin against God
the father by robbing him of the end and honor of their creation. For the Lord
created our bodies, as the Apostle teaches us, not for fornication, 1. Cor.
6.13.
but for himself; not that we should spend our strength in unclean lusts,
which is the service of sin and Satan; but that we should both in soul and
body do faithful service unto him our Lord and Creator, and with all our
power and might glorify his name, who is the author of our being. Seeing
therefore fornicators rob God of his right, spoil him of his glory, and as
much as in them lies frustrate him of his end in their creation, and in stead
of serving him serve his enemies, sin, Satan, and their own lusts; it is no
marvel if the Lord honor himself in their deserved punishment, and glorify
his name by destroying his own workmanship, which is so much degenerate from
it first creation.

Secondly,. Sect. 6. 2. The fornicator sins against God the son: First, by
robbing him of the right of our redemption.
the fornicator sins against God the son our Savior and Redeemer; first,
by robbing him of the right of our redemption; for he has given the
inestimable price of his most precious blood to redeem us out of the miserable
bondage of sin and Satan, to the end that being delivered we should serve him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life; he has bought us
with a most precious price, to the end that becoming his, and ceasing to be
our own, Luke 1.77.
we should not any longer fulfill our own filthy lusts, but deuote our selves
wholly to the service of our gracious Redeemer, 1. Cor. 6.20.
and glorify him by our holy obedience, both in our bodies and in our souls.
Now what greater injury can we offer unto our Savior, then being by such an
inestimable ransom set at liberty, we should again return into our
miserable thraldom, and withdrawing our selves from under the gracious
government of our Lord and master, yield obedience unto his arch enemy the
devil for the fulfilling and satisfying of our filthy lusts? What greater
disgrace can we offer unto him, then to sell our bodies and souls unto Satan,
for the base price of a momentanie and beastly pleasure, which he has
redeemed with the precious price of himself? For what is this but to make a
mock of his sufferings, and to tread under foot his most holy blood, as an
unholy thing of no value?

Again, the fornicator who professes Christianity,. Sect. 7.
sins against our Savior Christ, both as he is our husband and as he is
our head; Secondly, the fornicator sins against Christ as he is our husband
and bead.
as he is our husband, we exceedingly disgrace and dishonor him, by defiling
our bodies with whoremongers, and preferring their love before the love of
Christ. The which if it be a foul and abominable fact in a wife toward an
earthly husband, then how much more wicked and intolerable toward our Lord
and husband Jesus Christ, who is most lovely, being infinite in all perfection,
and has most dearly loved us, who are most unworthy of the least glimpse of
that favor which he causes to shine upon us with full rays? So also they most
shamefully dishonor and despite our Savior Jesus Christ, whilst professing
him to be their head and themselves members of his body, they join their
bodies in fornication with filthy harlots; whereby either they draw as much as
in them lies, our Savior, who is most holy, pure and undefiled, into the
communion of their sin; or else rent themselves from his blessed body,
whereof they were professed members, and make their bodies members of the
harlot, with which they are conjoined; for as they who are joined in lawful
marriage by virtue of this conjunction become one flesh; so they who are
unlawfully joined in fornication, become one with the harlot, as the Apostle
teaches us, 1. Cor. 6.15.
1. Cor. 6.15. Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God
forbid. 16. Do ye not know, that he which coupleth himself with an harlot is
one body? for two, says he shall be one flesh.

Thirdly,. Sect. 8. The fornicator sins against God the holy Ghost.
they sin against God the holy Ghost, either by resisting his calling
whereby they are called, not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. These. 4.7: or being called and washed with the blood of Christ,
and with the water of the spirit from their filthiness, 1. These 4.7.
they frustrate his holy work, by defiling themselves again, like the hog,
2. Pet. 2.22.
which being washed returns to wallow in the filthy puddle. Again, they
commit against him fearful sacrilege, in that they make their bodies, which
are by right his temples, to become habitations for unclean spirits, and turn
the holy house of God into a filthy brothell or common stews; whereby they
vex and grieve the holy spirit, and make him to forsake this unclean lodging
to their own destruction. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that your body is
the temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you? And in another place, 1. Cor.
6.19. and chap. 3.16.17.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells
in you? If any man destroy the temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the
temple of God is holy, which ye are.

CHAP. V. That the fornicator grieuouslie sins against his neighbors.
ANd thus have I showed that the fornicator grieuouslie sins against God..
Sect. 1. The fornicator sins grievously against the person whom be defiles.
In the next place I will show, that he also hainouslie offends against men,
and that both his neighbor and himself. Against his neighbor he offends,
whether we respect particular persons, or whole societies. He sins against
particular persons; as first against the party with whom the folly or
filthiness is committed, by drawing her together with himself, into the same
sin and condemnation; for this pernicious mischief accompanies this sin, as
being almost peculiar unto it, that whereas other sins, as Idolatry,
blasphemy, profanation of the Sabbath, murder, theft, false witness bearing,
evil concupiscence, and such like, may be committed alone; this sin of
whoredom does always draw in a couple into the same wickedness, the
fornicator and his harlot, for two at once are defiled, two killed as it were
with one blow, and two fall together into the same sin and condemnation; so
that almost no sin more inricheth the dominions of the Prince of darkness
with a numerous multitude of hellish subjects, then this of whoredom, in that
they who live in this sin do, not go single, but by couples into hell..
Sect. 2. Fornicaion in some respects more heinous then either thest or murder.


Whereby it appears, that howsoever this sin is but lightly esteemed, and
turned into a jest amongst wicked men, yet in this and some other respects, it
is worse and more pernicious to our neighbor, then either theft or murder,
and oftentimes more uncomfortable to our own consciences: it exceeds these
even in theft; for the thief only strippeth the body, but the fornicator
spoileth the soul of his chief ornaments, purity, and chastity; the thief
takes away momentanie riches, which oftentimes do the owner little good, and
sometimes much hurt, when as they through abuse become the mammon of iniquity,
and furtherances in sin; but the fornicator robs his neighbor of Gods
graces, a good conscience, cleannes of heart, purity of body and soul, and
finally of the assurance of his salvation. And so also he exceeds the
murderer, even in the act of murdering; for the murderer inflicteth deep
wounds in the body, the which sometimes may be cured and healed by earthly
means; but the fornicator grieuouslie wounds both his own soul, and the
soul of his neighbor, which no worldly thing can cure, but only the
sovereign balm of Christ Jesus his precious blood: the murderer when he has
done his worst, does only kill the body, and in the mean time he who is killed
being a faithful Christian, is never the worse, because this temporary death
is but a passage into life eternal; but the fornicator destroys the body
and soul of his neighbor eternally, by drawing him into sin, the wages
whereof is everlasting death, unless it be prevented by hearty and unfeigned
repentance; Romans 6.23.
yea and which is more horrible and unnatural, he with the same blow also
murthereth himself. The murderer inflicteth only the evil of punishment,
the which poison the Lord so tempereth with his gifts and graces, that it
becomes a wholesome medicine to cure his servants of their spiritual
diseases; but the fornicator inflicteth the evil of sin, which without
repentance is accompanied with eternal condemnation.

And in this respect also this sin of whoredom is most uncomfortable,. Sect.
3. The sin of whoredom most uncomfortable.
and destitute of all peace of conscience; for whereas they who commit other
sins, sinning alone may also repent alone, and upon the assurance of their
true conversion, may recover their former peace of conscience being by Gods
gracious promises ascertained of his favor; the fornicator even after himself
has repented of his sin, can not but be exceedingly troubled and turmoiled
in his mind, when as his conscience shall tell him, that by his lust and
uncleanness he has brought others through his wicked fellowship into the same
sin and condemnation, in which state they still remain without repentance;
or at least he their companion in wickedness is not assured that they also
accompany him in his true conversion.

But as the fornicatour sins against his copartner in uncleanness, Sect. 4.
The fornicator sins against the parents and friends of the party defiled.
so also against others; as namely against his own and his companions parents
and near friends, first, because this filthiness causes a tainter in the
blood, and with the stain thereof brings some blemish upon their name,
though they be innocent of the fault. The which so much incensed Jacobs sons
for the deflouring of their sister, because the shame thereof redounded not
only to her self, but to her father and friends; for so it is said, that they
were grieved and very angry, because this villainy was committed in Israel,
Genesis 34.7.
and because Sichem had lien with Jacobs daughter. And this was the cause why
the high Priests daughter playing the harlot, was by the law of God to be burnt
with fire, because by her whoredom she had polluted her father: as it is
Leuit. 21.9. Leuit. 21.9.
And secondly, in that hereby robbing their children or friends of grace,
virtue, and that chief ornament of chastity, they also deprive their hearts
of all true joy and sound comfort, which they otherwise might have had of them,
when as being privy to their sin they cannot look upon them without shame
and blushing; nor acknowledge them for their own unto others, lest they may
seem to have some interest in their faults.

So also they sin grievously against their own children begotten in
fornication, and that before they are borne, Sect. 5. The fornicator sins
against his own children begotten in fornication.
and afterward: for they ingraine them in the deep die of their sin, which
will never be washed out, although it may be covered with their virtues, and
brand them with the infamous mark of bastardie, before they breathe the air.
They make the poor infant bear the punishment of their sin, even whilst it
self is borne in the mothers belly, and before it has any name given it,
they entitle it to the infamous surname of a base bastard. They also rob it of
their own love, not for any faultines in the child, but for the guilt of
their own sin; in which respect whilst it is in the womb, the mother
wishes that it may be a false conception and abortiue; and the father, that
it may never live to see the Sun. When it is borne, they are ready to
think, that when it cries it proclaims their sin, and when it begins
to speak they blush for shame, when they hear themselves called upon by the
sweet names of father and mother, because thereby their sin is called to
remembrance. And as they do communicate to their poor children the shame and
punishment of their faults, so also their sins and corruptions themselves;
for they poison them in the bud, and the fountain of generation being defiled
with filthy. lust and uncleanness, polluteth also the streams which issue from
it: so that it is no rare thing to see such children resemble their parents in
their unchaste manners, more then in their face and countenance. All which
injuries they recompense, by showing themselves more injurious; for as they
hated them in the birth, so they neglect them commonly in their growth; and
make amends for their sinful generation, with giving unto them loose and
profane education; whereby they grow in their corruptions, faster then in the
stature of their body. And yet this is not half the mischief which they do
unto them; for besides all this, as much as in them lies they exclude them out
of the covenant of grace, and blot them out of the number of Gods people and
family, the which the Lord will have procreated and increased with a holy
seed, Matthew. 2.15.
whereas they remain polluted being the children of fornication, and unclean
seed of unclean parents. 1. Cor. 7.14.
And if at all they be admitted into the outward covenant, and receive the
seals thereof, it is not for their parents sake, if they continue in their
sin; but because they are borne and brought up in the bosom of their
spiritual mother the Church, which imparteth unto them some title and interest
unto her holiness. A notable place we have to this purpose in the book of
Wisdom, Wisd. 3 16.17.
where many of these evils are expressed: Chap. 3.16. The children of
whoremongers shall not be partakers of holy things, and the seed of the wicked
bed shall be rooted out. 17. And though they live long, yet shall they be
nothing regarded, and their last age shall be without honor. 18. If they die
hastily, they have no hope, nor comfort in the day of trial. 19. For horrible
is the end of the wicked generation. To conclude, they utterly disable them to
the uttermost of their power, from all preferment both in the Church and common
wealth; for by the law of God it was enacted that a bastard should not enter
into the congregation of the Lord to bear any office therein, unto the tenth
generation; Deuteronomy. 23.2.
and both divine and humane laws esteem and repute them as abiects in the
family, who may not divide the inheritance among their brethren, because they
are not known children of their father, but are accounted the children of the
country. And these are the manifold evils which unclean whoremongers bring
upon their children, in which they continue till the filthiness of generation
be cleansed in the new lauer of regeneration, until the beauty of grace has
covered the deformity of nature, and the glorious title of the children of God
has taken away the blemish of the children of fornication, and given them
assured interest unto all Gods benefits, and to the heavenly inheritance of the
holy Saints: the which howsoever it is somewhat rare, yet sometimes it comes
to pass when the Lord will magnify the greatness of his mercy, power and
goodness, by the unworthiness and miserable condition of the person whom he
aduanceth.

CHAP. VI. That the fornicator grieuouslie sins against whole societies.
ANd thus the fornicatour sins against particular persons.. Sect. 1. The
fornicator poysoneth the fountain of humane societies.
But he also offends against whole societies; for whereas the Lord has given
unto man a natural virtue and faculty of generation, whereby his kind might
be propagated and multiplied, and has ordained marriage as an honorable means
to preserve it honest, pure and holy; the fornicator perverting Gods ordinance,
does corrupt and pollute this generatiue faculty, with his filthy lusts and
impure affections: and so poisoneth the issue and streams of humane societies
even in the very fountain, and ouerturneth common honesty, a chief ornament
of mankind, in the root.

But that I may speak more distinctlie,. Sect. 2. The fornicator sins
against private families.
the fornicator sins against all societies, both private and public; as
first against particular families, both his own, and his neighbors, for he
defiles them with his filthy uncleanness, and makes them liable to Gods
heavy judgments. And whereas they should be so many little Churches wherein
God is worshipped and served, he turns them into secret stews and polluted
brothels; and so having heat and fired them with the fire of his filthy lust,
he hereby also inflameth the fierce wrath of God, which shall burn and
consume them to their destruction. Job 31.9.
As appears, Job 31.9. If my heart has been deceived by a woman, or if I
have laid wait at the door of my neighbor. etc. This is a wickedness to be
condemned; yea this is a fire which shall devour to destruction, and which
shall root out all mine increase. For although they multiply their
whoredoms, their seed shall not be multiplied, both because Gods curse
pursues these unclean conjunctions, according to that Hos. 4.10. Hos. 4.10.
They shall commit adultery, and shall not increase. With which agrees the
saying of the son of Syrach, chap. 23.25. Eccles. 23.25.
The children of the harlot shall not take root, and her branches shall bring
forth no fruit: And also because by their often whordoms, they disable
themselves for lawful generation: for having lauishly sown their corn in
strange fields, they have nothing remaining but chafe for their own soil. Or
if their family be increased by such unclean whoredoms, they commonly prove
firebrarnds in the house, and like Abimelech become wicked instruments, Judge.
9.5.
which bring the whole posterity to ruin and destruction.

Secondly,. Sect. 3. Fornicators sin against the Church.
they sin against public societies, and that both the Church and
Commonwealth. They sin against the Church, by hindering as much as in them
lies the propagation thereof; for whereas the Lord has ordained that the
Church should be increased by an holy seed, borne in lawful matrimony, as
appears, Mal. 2.15. Mal. 2.15.
their posterity is a basterdly brood, polluted with uncleanness, even in
their generation, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
which by the law of God might not come into the congregation; and answerablie
are excluded out of the number of the invisible Church, unless the Lord
extraordinarily, to show the riches of his power and goodness, do with his
word and spirit sanctify and cleanse them from the impurity of their
conception, and so admit them into the number of his holy people. The which as
it cannot be denied, but that it is in some measure the state and condition of
all the posterity of Adam; so must it also be granted, that it is verified in
the children of fornication, in an extraordinary and peculiar manner.

So also they sin against the country and commonwealth,. Sect. 4. Fornicators
sin against the country and commonwealth.
first, by polluting it, and by robbing it of good and honest citizens. For
families being defiled, the commonwealth cannot be clean, seeing they are the
root from which it springs; the private Seminaries whereby the large orchard
of the State is stored and furnished, and as it were the particular members of
this great body. If therefore the bud and blossom be blasted and corrupted
in the family, they will hardly ever bring forth good fruit in the
commonwealth; if the root be poisoned, the tree cannot flourish, and if the
particular members be rotten and full of corruption, the body cannot be whole
and sound. Besides, as they defile the commonwealth with sin, so they make it
groan under ye heavy weight of Gods judgments: for as the Prophet speaks,
because of the fornications of the people the land mourns, Ier. 23.10.
neither tasting of any of Gods gracious benefits, whereby it might be
nourished, nor clothing it self with her beautiful fruits, as it were with
her kingly coat of diverse colors, but sits in the dark, desolate and
forsaken, being deprived of the comfortable beams of Gods favor, which should
ripen all her hopes. Yea and as it makes the country liable to privative
judgments: so also to positive plagues and punishments, as we may see by
many examples. When Sodom and Gomorah were heated with lust like a bakers
oven, as the Prophet speaks, they inflamed Gods wrath, Hos. 7.4.
and were destroyed with fire and brimstone, which rained down from heaven.
The filthiness of the Canaanites caused the land to spue out her inhabitants,
Leuit. 18.25.28.
and to become a pray to their conquering enemies. And when the Israelites
could not be warned by their example for the same sin, the whole tribe of
Benjamin was utterly destroyed. Iud. 20.


CHAP. VII. That the fornicator sins most grieuouslie against himself.
ANd thus have I showed that the fornicator in many respects sins against
his neighbor.. Sect. 1. The fornicator sins against his own body, and that
diversely.
But as he sins against others, so most hainouslie against himself, and
that both against his several parts, and also against his whole person. He
sins against his several parts, both his body, and his soul; first
against his own body; for whereas every other sin that a man does is
without the body, 1. Cor. 6.18.
he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. As the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 6.18. that is, other sins for the prepetrating of their
wickedness, do abuse some outward object as their instrument; but the
fornicator abuses his own body to this purpose.

And thus the fornicator sins against his own body diversely: first, by
dishonouring of it, for he makes it being the member of Christ, to become the
member of an harlot, and turns the honorable Temple of the holy Ghost, Pro.
5.8.9.
into a filthy brothell and unclean stews. Secondly, by defiling of it;
Mat. 15.19.20. Romans 1.24.
for as all other sins do pollute a man, so especially the sin of
whoredom, for it defiles not only the person who commits it, but he being
defiled like a filthy leper, infecteth the air with his breath, and polluteth
the whole land where he dwells, as appears, Leuit. 18.25.27. And hence it
is, that howsoever all other sins defile and pollute us, yet these sins of
fornication and whoredom are by a certain kind of eminency called the sins
of uncleanness and filthiness, because they defile in a peculiar and
extraordinary manner; and are also particularly opposed to sanctification and
holiness, as being the sins whereby they are most stained and destroyed. So 1.
These. 4.3. 1. These. 4.3.
This is the will of God, even your sanctification, and that ye should abstain
from fornication. 4. That every one of you should know how to possess his
vessel in holiness and honor, 5. and not in the lust of concupiscence. Where
the Apostle shows, that sanctification and fornication; holiness and honor,
and the lusts of concupiscence, cannot possibly dwell together, as being
contraries without mean, and enemies which are utterly irreconcilable.
Thirdly it disableth and weakeneth the body, turning health into sickness, and
many loathsome and pernicious diseases, and strength into impotencie and
languishing faintness; for the flame of lust deuoureth and spends the vital
moisture, and the unnatural fire of burning concupiscence, consumes and
extinguisheth the natural heat, which is the nurse of strength, and fountain
of life. So the wise man who was most besotted with this folly, says, that he
who is addicted to this sin of uncleanness gives his strength unto women,
Prou. 31.3, Pro. 31.3. Pro. 5.11.
and that hereby he consumes his flesh and his body, Prou. 5.11. And in this
respect our countriman Beda calls it, Dulce venenum, importuna lues,
perniciosa potio, quae humanum corpus debilitat, and virilis animi robur
eneruat: A sweet poison, an unseasonable consumption, a pernicious potion,
which disableth man's body, and weakeneth the strength of a manly courage.

So also he sins grieuouslie against his own soul;. Sect. 2. The
fornicator sins against his soul.
for first he subiecteth these faculties of the soul, the reason and
understanding, unto the base and inferior faculties, the filthy lusts and
unclean affections; he utterly infatuateth the understanding, and besotteth
the judgment, so that they altogether fail, not only in spiritual wisdom,
but also in the use of natural reason and common sense. So the Prophet Hosea
says, Hos. 4 11.
that whoredom and drunkenness steal away the heart: Hos. 4.11. And the wise
man affirms, that he that commits whoredom with a woman, is destitute of
understanding, Pro. 6.32. and 7.7.
or as the words signify, without an heart. Prou. 6.32. and 7.7. For they who
have suffered their minds to be blindfolded with the love of harlots, for the
satisfying of their filthy lusts, run desperately, and as it were headlong
into innumerable evils, having neither understanding to foresee them, nor will
to prevent them: they consume their wealth in maintaining their harlots, and
bring upon themselves unpitied poverty, and extreme want; they brand their
name with the black mark of infamy and reproach, and lose their credit and
reputation among all the virtuous and religious; they are deaf unto all
admonition, and so blinded that they cannot discern the shameless behavior,
and impudent filthiness of their strumpets, but being besotted in their love,
they are ready to judge their vices virtues, and to give unto them the
pre-eminence of all excellency before all other. They become shameless in all
their courses, thinking nothing so filthy which they may not utter, nothing so
beastly which they may not act; they spend their strength, infect their bodies
with odious diseases, shorten the natural course of life, and damn their own
souls. All which mischievous evils they undergo to satisfy their unclean
lusts, and to glut themselves with a momentanie and beastly pleasure. And this
was the cause why Venus, the Idol of lust, was among the Heathen called (...),
a stealer of hearts; and Cupid was said to be blind, because they who are
possessed with this filthy lust, lose the light of their understanding, and
the use of reason. Hence also it is, that the sin of whoredom is in the
Scriptures by a certain kind of eminency called folly, and the fornicators
fools. So Sichem when he defloured Jacobs daughter, is said to have committed
folly in Israel; Genesis 34.7.
and Thamar dissuading Ammon from a rape, says, that thereby he should become
as one of the fools in Israel. So the wise man rangeth the young fornicator in
the rank of fools, 2. Sam. 13.13.
Prou. 7.7. I saw among the fools a young man. etc. and lest the title of
folly should not sufficiently express his sottishnes, he compares him to an
ox led to the slaughter, verse. 22.
thereby implying that he was not only a fool, but even brutish in his folly.

And as the fornicator sins against his own soul, by besotting and
infatuating his understanding; so also by destroying it; for as the wise man
says, he that commits whoredom with a woman, he is destitute of
understanding: he that does it, destroys his own soul. Pro. 6.32. Pro.
6.32.


But as the fornicator sins against his several parts;. Sect. 3. The
fornicator staineth his name with reproach and infamy. Pro. 6.33.
so also against his whole person, and that both in respect of this life, and
also the life to come. In respect of this life he sins against himself, by
staining his good name with reproach and infamy: for he that commits these
sins of uncleanness, shall find a wound and dishonor, and his reproach shall
never be put away, as the wise man has told us, who approved it for true, not
only by his doctrine, but also by his own example; for the excellence of his
wisdom has not to this day taken away the blemish of this folly, in his
excessive multiplying his wives and concubines. The which also is continually
verified in the experience of other men, who have defiled themselves with this
vice; for howsoever the wound may be curable if they truly repent, and power
into it the precious balm of Christ's blood; yet a scarre will ever remain in
their name and reputation; though God in his infinite mercy, after true
conversion, casts their sins behind his back and will not remember them, yet
are they seldom forgotten amongst men.

Secondly,. Sect. 4. Fornicators transform themselves into beasts.
whereas the Lord in their creation has made them in his own image, they by
this sin transform themselves into the similitude of beasts; for of all
other sins, the sin of uncleanness is most sensual and brutish; in which
respect the fornicator in the Scriptures is compared to the brute creatures.
Pro. 7.22.
So the wise man likeneth the foolish young man misled by the harlot, unto an
ox led to the slaughter, and to a bird hasting to the snare. Ier. 5.8.
The Prophet Jeremy compares them to pampred horses, neying after their
neighbors wife. Deuteronomy. 23.18.
And in the law the whore and the dog are coupled together, as fitly
resembling one another in their qualities and conditions. Yea in truth they are
far more filthy in this kind then the beasts themselves; for they have no
other law to contain them, but their own nature and sensual appetite; and
therefore they do but their kind, and that for the most part moderately, in
their due times and seasons; whereas the fornicator having the law of God to
restrain him, does nevertheless not only satisfy, but also glut nature, and
wholly imployeth his wit and reason to strengthen him in his filthiness by art,
when the power and abilities of nature fail him.

In respect of the life to come the fornicator sins against himself;. Sect.
5. Whoredom makes a man inexcusable.
first, because of all other sins, the sin of whoredom makes him most
inexcusable, when in the great day of the Lord he shall be called to a
reckoning: for where as other sins may have some color of excuse, drawn
either from unavoidable necessity, or want of convenient means to shun them;
the fornicator can have no such pretense, because the Lord has offered unto him
a remedy to prevent this sin, namely, lawful marriage, whereby he may be
preserved from it; 1. Cor. 7.2.
according to that, 1. Cor. 7.2. To avoid fornication let every man have his
wife, and let every woman have her own husband. In which respect he is like
unto a thief which lives by the common spoil, not for want, but when as he
may have sufficient maintenance at his own command by lawful means; not for
any urgent necessity, but for vain and foolish curiosity: Prou. 9.17.
because stolen waters are sweet, and the bread which is gotten guilefully
has a pleasant taste. Neither let any man here object his poverty and want of
means to maintain a wife, and such a charge as usually accompanies marriage;
for seeing we cannot live nor move, but by Gods blessing, we may more
hopefully expect it, when we live according to his holy ordinance, then when
we continue in sin, and provoke his wrath by the common breach of his
commandments. But though hereby we should be brought into penury; yet better
it is to want wealth then a good conscience, and to live in a poor estate in
this life which is short and momentarie, Luke 16.
having the assurance of Gods favor, and hope of future glory, then to have
the rich gluttons plenty here, to bestow upon our carnal lusts, and
afterward to be tortured in the everlasting torments of hell fire.

Secondly,. Sect. 6. The fornicator excludes himself out of the ioies of
heaven; and casts himself into hell.
the fornicator living in his sin without repentance, excludes himself out of
the joys of heaven, and plungeth body and soul headlong into hellish
torments. Concerning the former it is said, that no Apoc. 22.27. and
unclean thing shall ever enter into the joys of the new Jerusalem, and much
less these who are defiled with the most polluting sins of fornication and
uncleanness; that 22.15.
whoremongers shall be excluded out of these eternal joys, and have no part in
this heavenly 1. Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.19.21. Ephesians. 5 5.
inheritance prepared for the Saints, as appears by manifold testimonies of
holy Scripture. And for the other, the Scriptures plainly testify that
whoremongers hold the direct course which leads into hell and everlasting
condemnation; Prou. 2.18. and 7.27. and 9.18.
so the wise man says that the harlots house tends to death, and that her
guests are in the depth of hell. And the holy Ghost plainly tells us, that
amongst many other heinous sinners, the whoremonger shall have his part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: Apoc.
21.8.
Apoc. 21.8. Now what desperate folly is this for a brutish pleasure which is
vain and momentany, to hazard the loss of the eternal joys of Gods
kingdom? And for the quenching of their burning and beastly lust, to kindle
not only the flame of Gods wrath, but also the dreadful fire of hell, wherein
they shall eternally be tormented both in soul and body?

CHAP. VIII. That fornication is the cause of many other grievous sins.
ANd thus have I showed that the fornicatour sins hainously, both in respect
of God, his neighbor,. Sect. 1. That fornication is the cause of adultery and
all abominable uncleanness.
and himself. Now I am further to prove, that as this sin of whoredom is in
it self exceeding sinful, so also it is the cause of diverse other grievous
sins: for when the conscience is defiled with this polluting sin, it is
made fit to admit and intertaine the foulest vices, and most enormous crimes,
and such a large breach being made therein, it is easily ouerflowed and drowned
with a flood of wickedness. More especially, fornication is the cause of
greater sins of the same kind, as for example of adultery; for it is
usually seen by common experience, that a young fornicatour makes an old
adulterer, and he who in the prime of his age makes no conscience of defiling
his neighbors child, ripening in wickedness as he ripeneth in years, when
he comes to maturitie will make no conscience of defiling his neighbors
wife. So also it prepares the way and makes an easy entrance for incest,
Sodomie, buggerie, and all manner of abominable filthiness, which even corrupted
nature is ashamed to own, Ephesians. 5 3.
and are not so much as to be named among Christians, but with hatred and
detestation. And this comes to pass partly through the just judgment of
God, who for their former filthiness, gives them up to a reprobate sense,
Romans 1.
and to the slavery of their own filthy affections and unnatural lusts, to
run on in their sin with greediness to their utter perdition; and partly
through the nature of sin which is in continual growth, and if it be not
nipped in the bud or sprig, becomes in short time a tree of huge largenes; if
it be not crushed and killed in the shell, it will like the Cockatrice grow to
such a poisonous nature, that it will kill with the very look. The which as it
is verified of all other, so especially of these sins of uncleanness. For
after they are conceived by natural concupiscence, and borne with delight, and
nursed with wantonness, at last being fed with curiosity as it were with their
complete nourishment, they grow unto unnatural shapes, and in the end become
hidious monsters most ugly and abominable in the sight of God and men. And
lastly, this comes to pass through the cunning malice of our old enemy the
devil, who when he cannot at the first thrust into the door of our hearts and
consciences the greatest sins, does make way and entrance for them by those
which are less. Like unto those, who not being able by any possible means to
thrust the fruit into a glass with a narrow mouth in his full ripenes, do
put it in when it is young and new knit, and so let it grow, being still
nourished with the root, unto his natural bigness, till it have filled the
glass; whereby they make that easy by art which is impossible in nature. Or
like unto mischievous thieves, who intending to rob a house, and being unable
any otherwise to enter, do thrust into the window the least of their company,
who being entered, opens and gives an easy ingresse and passage unto those
who are of the largest stature. So this malicious gardener Satan, being not
able to thrust into our hearts and consciences the evil fruit of sin in his
full ripeness, does put it into them as it were in the bud, knowing that being
nourished with the malicious sap, which is derived from the root of our
natural corruption, it will quickly grow to his full bigness. And this
arch-theefe the devil intending to rob us of the riches of Gods graces, and
not being able to enter with his most enormous crimes, as it were his
associates of the greatest size; does first thrust into our souls and
consciences his smaller sins, the which being entered, open a large door, and
give entrance unto all manner outrageous wickedness.

Secondly, whoredom is oftentimes the cause of murder,. Sect. 2. Whoredom
is oftentimes the cause of murder.
and much bloodshed, and that first in respect of the fornicatour himself, who
makes a clear passage unto his wickedness with the death and destruction of
all those who hinder or oppose against it; sometimes by poison and secret
treachery; sometimes by force and open violence. For the fire of lust so
inflameth men's hearts with deadly fury against those who stand in the way and
hinder the satisfying of their beastly desires, that it will no otherwise be
quenched but with their blood. Of this we have an example in Herodias, who was
so incensed against John the Baptist for speaking against her filthiness, Mar.
6.
that in mortal revenge she preferred the cutting off his head before the
half of Herod's kingdom. 2. Sam. 11.
Yea even holy David himself after his heart was defiled with unclean lust,
made way for the satisfying thereof, and the saluing of his credit, by the
death of his innocent subject; and he whose conscience was so tender that he
would not drink of the water of the well which was procured with the hazard
and peril of his three Worthies lives, though he were ready to faint with
thirst; had For the story which is 2. Sam 23.16. is to be referred to that
which is 2. Sam. 5.17.18.
afterward his heart so hardened with unclean lusts, that he thirsted after
the blood of his faithful servant, and chose rather to defile his soul and
conscience with this abominable murder, then he would have his filthy
affections unsatisfied. Secondly, it is a common cause of quarelling, brauling,
fighting, and consequently of bloodshed and murder, amongst those who are
corriuals in love, or rather in beastly lust; for the harlot like unto the salt
bitch intertaineth many lovers, which like dogs are ready to snarle and tear
one another in pieces, when the one has the pre-eminence in her love above the
other, who scorneth to be his equal. And lastly, it incenseth the parties
kindred and friends who is abused unto wrath, which usually becomes so
unreconcilable, because the disgrace redoundeth also unto themselves that
nothing can appease it, but the death of the party who has done this
villainy. An example whereof we have in Ammon murdered by Absalom for
deflouring his sister, 2. Sam. 13.
and in Sichem, who together with his father and the whole city, were put to
the sword by Jacobs sons, Genesis 34.
for abusing Dina: and in the Beniamites whose tribe was almost rooted out, in
revenge of that villainy which was offered to the Levites concubine. Judge 19.
and 20.


Lastly,. Sect. 3. Whoredom the cause of idolatry. Romans 1. Hos. 4.14.
carnal whoredom is oftentimes a cause of spiritual fornication and
idolatry, as it is sometimes also the fruit and effect thereof, for these two
are seldom severed, but as mutual causes do reciprocally produce one
another. And this comes to pass, partly because the Lord gives those up,
who are polluted with vile affections, to blindness of mind, whereby they are so
infatuated, that they are ready in their superstitious devotion to believe
lies, and to be abused with strong delusions; and partly because idolatry
commonly favors, or at least tollerateth fornication, and therefore the
whoremonger favors and approoueth idolatry, which gives him liberty to
continue in his sin with security of conscience, as before I have showed in
the example of the Papists. 1. King. ^.
The like experience we have in Solomon, who when he was by the allurements of
strange women drawn to be a whoremonger, was soon after persuaded to become
an idolater also; and having lost his bodily chastity, he within a while
lost the chastity and cleanness of soul, and after he had broken the
covenant of marriage, he violated also his covenant which he had made with God.

CHAP. IX. That whoredom is the punishment of other sins.
But as whoredom is in it self a grievous sin,. Sect. 1. That whoredom is
in it self the punishment of other sins.
and the cause of much other wickedness; so likewise it is accompanied with
many grievous punishments, and that both as it is in it self a punishment of
other sins, or as it is punished by God with many fearful judgments. In it
self it is the punishment of other wickedness; for the harlot (as the Wise
man says) is like a deep pit of destruction; he with whom the Lord is
angry, (namely, for their other sins) shall fall therein: as it is Prou.
22.14. and 23.27. So Eccles. 7.28. Pro. 22.14. and 23.27. Eccl. 7.28.
I find more bitter then death, the woman, whose heart is as nets and snares,
and her hands as bands; he that is good before God, shall be delivered from
her, but the sinner shall be taken by her. By which places is implied, that
whoredom is like a deep pit or dungeon, into which sinners fall in Gods just
displeasure; and the harlot like a strong and merciless iaylour which holds
men in thraldom (with whom God is angry,) in the chains of lust; out of
which they cannot, nor desire not to escape. Yea in truth the fornicator is in
far worse case then such a miserable captive: for the dungeon takes away the
comfortable light of the Sun, and so depriueth him of the use of bodily sight;
but fornication blinds the understanding which is the eye of the soul, and
takes away the light of reason, as has been showed. In the dungeon he is
stripped of his goods, and lives in penury; but by this sin the fornicator
strippeth himself, and like an unnatural thief, robs and spoileth his own
state to bestow it upon harlots, til he be brought unto extreme poverty. Out
of the dungeon the captive cannot escape, though he much desire his liberty;
out of this loathsome pit he will not escape, but remains a voluntary slave
to an odious strumpet, and his own filthy lusts, till by death he is brought
forth to the bar of Gods judgment, to receive the sentence of eternal
condemnation.

More especially whoredom is the punishment of idolatry,. Sect. 2.
Whoredom is the punishment of idolatry.
as it plainly appears Romans 1.23.24. For because the idolatrous Gentiles
turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the image of
a corruptible man, and of birds and four footed beasts, and of creeping
things: therefore also God gave them up to their hearts lusts, Romans 1.23.24.
unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves, etc. So
because the Israelites went a whoring after idols; therefore ye Lord gave over
their daughters and spouses to their own filthy lusts, to become harlots and
whores, and would not restrain them from their whordomes by his fatherly
chastisements. Hos. 4.12.13. The like experience we have at this day in ye
Papists, Hos. 4.12.13
who because they are the most shameful idolaters of the whole world,
therefore being given up of God to their own uncleanness, they do also
exceed in fornication, whoredom and filthy Sodomie; as the histories of all
times do plainly testify, and as common fame at this day sounds their
infamy in this behalf in every man's ears.

Secondly,. Sect. 3. Whoredom is the punishment of the contempt of Gods word.
whoredom is inflicted as a punishment upon those who are contemners of Gods
word, and oppose themselves against the Preachers thereof; for because men will
not suffer themselves to be guided with the light of Gods truth, therefore the
Lord gives over both them and theirs, to be blinded with their own filthy
lusts, and to be ouerruled and mislead by their unclean passions, till they
fall vnrecouerablie into the sin of whoredom; and because they dishonor the
Lord by despising his word, he will cause their wives and daughters to
dishonor them with their fornications and adultery. Of the former we have an
example in the Israelites, who when they most contemned Gods word and despised
his Prophets, did also most exceed in filthy whoredom; and in the haters and
persecutors of Gods true religion and faithful servants at this day, as
namely, the Turks, Papists and Familists, who as they above all others contemn
the pure and undefiled word of God, so also are they of all other men most
stained and defiled with whoredom, and all manner of uncleanness, as not
only Turkey with the large dominions thereof, but also Spain and Italy do
sufficiently testify and prove. Of the other we have an example in Amaziah
the Priest, who because he despised Gods word, and opposed against the Prophet
Amos, had this heavy punishment denounced against him: Amos 7.16. Thou say,
Amos 7.16.
Prophecy not against Israel, and speak nothing against the house of Ishak.
17. Therefore thus says the Lord, thy wife shall be an harlot in the city,
etc.

And thus it appears that whoredom is the punishment of other sins, and
that no small punishment,. Sect. 4. That whoredom is a fearful punishment.
seeing thereby such great sins, as idolatry and contempt of religion are
punished by the Lord who holds some proportion between the punishment and
the sin. And as it is great in it self, so in this respect it is more
grievous, in that the whoremonger rather esteems it his chief delight then
his punishment, and so securely continues under the bondage of it and his
other sins, without sense of smart, and consequently without remorse of
conscience; for when the pain of the punishment exceeds not the pleasure of
the sin; the pleasure does more delight the malefactors, then the punishment
does terrify them; whereof it comes to pass that having a prosperous gale
in their opinion to blow them on forwards in their evil courses, they are given
over to a reprobate mind, and continue in their sin without grief or
weariness.

CHAP. X. That whoredom is the cause of many grievous punishments.
But as whoredom is the punishment of other sins;. Sect. 1. That God
himself punishes whoredom when men wink at it.
so also it self as a grievous sin is punished with Gods heavy judgments.
And because men who are Gods deputies do oftentimes wink at it, and
carelessely pass over the due execution of justice in the punishment of this
sin; therefore the Lord oftentimes takes the cause into his own hands, and
proceeds against these filthy persons, not only as a Judge and witness
against them, but as the executioner of that just sentence which himself has
pronounced. So he says that he would come near unto the Israelites to
judgment, and be a swift witness against the whoremongers. Mal. 3.5. Heb 13.4.
Mal. 3.5. and Heb. 13.4, it is said that whoremongers and adulterers, God
himself will judge. Yea, so odious is this sin in the sight of this upright
Judge, that though he be infinite in mercy, yet he professes that he could
not in his justice let this sin go unpunished: Ier. 5.7.
Ier. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children have for saken me,
etc. And though I fed them to the full, yet they committed whoredom, and
assembled themselves by companies in harlots houses, etc. A notable example of
this severe execution of justice for this sin, we have Numb. 25. Numb. 25.
where by Gods express commandment 24000. were slaughtered for committing
whoredom with the daughters of Moab; and so the burning heat of their filthy
lusts was quenched with a large stream of their own blood.

But that we may descend to more particulars,. Sect. 2. That God punishes
fornicators with ponertie and beggerie.
the sin of fornication is punished by God both in this life, and in the life
to come. In this life the Lord inflicteth on it both private and public
punishments. The punishments which are imposed upon private men are either
temporal or spiritual: The fornicatour is punished with temporal punishments
both in his state, person and posterity; in his state he is punished with
poverty and extreme beggerie; for this burning lust is as a consuming fire,
which deuoureth all the substance, and brings men of great wealth to such
extreme penury, Prou 6.26.
that they are (as the Wife man says) glad to beg a piece of bread. And this
comes to pass first and principally, because the curse of God is upon his
state and labors for this sin, Job 14.18.
so that nothing he has does prosper, nothing he does well succeeds under
his hand: Psalm. 127.1.2
and partly because his mind is so besotted with his filthy lusts, that he
neglects his state not caring which end goes forward, so he may enjoy his
beastly pleasure, and partly by reason that this sin is exceeding costly, and
though it be most base and brutish, yet is compassed and bought at the highest
prices. For much is spent upon filthy bawdes and pandors, which are their
instruments and factors which they use for the compassing of their desires;
much is consumed upon their harlots in gifts and rewards, as money, apparel,
jewels, ornaments, in music, dancing, reuelling, feasting and banqueting,
all which is bestowed to please their strumpets, and to inflame their own
lusts, which naturally would soon languish and faint, if they were not
revived, and anew reinforced by these incitements and prouocations, which are
the fuel of lust whereby it is kindled and nourished. In all which respects
the harlot is like unto a bottomless gulf, into which men being carried with
the tempestuous storms of their own lusts and passions, do make shipwreck of
their whole estate, they in the mean time being never the richer upon whom it
is bestowed. And this the Wise man observed in his time: Prou. 29.3. He that
feeds harlots, wastes his substance. Prou. 29.3.
Neither is a wife, many children, and a great family so chargeable as one
harlot, nor so soon bring a man to want and misery. For he that with the
prodigal son does banquet and revel it among harlots, will within a while
be glad to be a fellow commoner with swine, Luke 15.
and to make a hogstie his dining parlour.

Secondly, the fornicatour is punished in his person,. Sect. 3. God punishes
fornicators with infamy and discredit.
and that diversely, as first in his name; for as he does dishonor God many
ways by his sin, so does the Lord cause him to be disgraced amongst men, and
inflicteth upon his name and credit such a deep and incurable wound of
dishonor, Prou. 6.33.
that his reproach shall never be put away. With this accords the saying of
the son of Syrach, chap. 9.9. Eccles. 9.9.
Every woman that is an harlot shall be trodden under foot as dung, of every
one that goes by the way. The which although it may seem a small punishment
to those who having set their credit to sale, are become shameless and
impudent; yet it is far otherwise with those who are of an ingenuous and
honest disposition, who as they prefer their life before riches, so they make
more precious account of their good name then of their lives, choosing much
rather to die, then to outliue their credit and reputation.

Again, Sect. 4. The fornicator is made a slave to his own lusts.
the Lord punishes the fornicatour, by making him a wretched slave, not only
unto his own unclean lusts, but also to filthy harlots. For whereas the Lord
has appointed reason as the chief viceroy in the little world of man, whereby
all his parts and members are to be ruled and governed, as it were obedient
subjects; the fornicatour joining with his basest parts, even his unclean
lusts, rebelleth against his lawful Sovereign, and thrusting reason out of
his throne, subiecteth himself to be governed by his unruly passions and
filthy affections. In which usurped tyranny will only stands for a law, and
tumultuous lusts rule and manage all things according to their own appetite.
Whereof it comes to pass that there is nothing so abominable which is not
thought tolerable, nothing so shameful which will cause blushing, nothing so
dishonest and outrageous which they are not ready to act for the pleasing and
satisfying of their lusts. For howsoever things were unto them free and
arbitrarie, before they had yielded themselves as slaves to their vile
affections, yet when they are once inthronized in their hearts, they
tyrannically impose upon them an irresistable necessity of obedience. To which
purpose Augustine says fitly, that, Ex voluntate peruersa facta est libido,
and dum seruitur libidini facta est consuetudo, Lib. Confess.
and dum consuetudini non resistitur facta est necessitas: Perverse will
turns unto unbridled lust, and while lust is obeyed there grows custom,
and custom being not resisted becomes necessity.

And this slavery unto their own lusts yields them over as vassals and
bondslaues unto another as base a bondage, Sect. 5. The fornicator becomes a
slave to his harlots.
even the miserable thraldom of their filthy harlots, who whilst unclean
affections and passions bear any sway in their devoted vassals, hold them
after a tyrannical manner under the most slavish and base subjection. Her face
is to her filthy lover his chief heaven; her smiles the sunshine of all his
comfort; her frowns like black clouds threatening a storm, and the storm
shipwreck; her fair speeches like the Sirens songs ravish him with bewitching
delight; her threats like dreadful thunderclaps, or pearcing darts which wound
even to the very heart. Her command is his chief law, her displeasure his most
intolerable punishment. If she calls he must come; if she sends, her very
command adds wings to his haste; if she bids depart, he dare not abide
in her company, though a short absence seems unto him a tedious banishment;
if she bids stay, he remains under her arrest, and has no liberty to
depart. If she want, his purse must be at her commandment; if she malign,
his person must be exposed to all dangers in revenge of her quarrel. That I
may say nothing of his continual hopes, fears, despair, grief, ielousies,
quarrels, truces, wherewith he is no otherwise tormented, then if he were
daily upon a torturing rack, saving that himself chooses his tormentor, and
voluntarily indureth this hellish punishment. In which respect this sin of
uncleanness is by one compared to an infernal fire, Hierom. O ignis infernalis
luxuria! cuius materia gula, etc.
whose matter or nourishment is gluttony and drunkenness, the flame burning
lust, the sparkles corrupt speeches and filthy communication, the smoke
infamy and disgrace, the ashes unclean filthiness, and the end hell torments.

Neither are base and effeminate men only subject to this tyrannical slavery,
but even the most strong and valiant,. Sect. 6. That the most wise and valiant
become slaves to their harlots, being first conquered with their own lusts.
the wisest and best qualified are in no better case, when they have given
themselves over to be ruled with their filthy affections: for to say nothing
of the thrice valiant Hercules, who having vanquished many monsters, was
afterward made through the violence of his lusts a base slave to Omphale, and
changed his club and lions skin into a spindle and distaffe, receiving his
work by task among her maids; nor of Sardanapalus the great king of Assyria,
who was so basely inthralled with his lusts, that he used to wear women's
apparel and to spinne amongst his harlots; the Scriptures themselves do
offer unto us two notable examples, the one of the strongest, the other of the
wisest amongst mere men, who being first made slaves to their own lusts, were
afterward subjected in the basest thraldom unto their concubines and harlots.
The strong Sampson who with the iaw bone of an ass slew a 1000. men, was so
basely devoted to the harlot Dalilah, that when he was bewitched with her
allurements, he could not conceal from her his chief secret, which imported
him no less then his life, though he had often experience of her treachery
and falsehood. And Solomon so much admired for his wisdom, was so besotted
upon his wives and concubines, that they withdrew his heart from God, who had
enriched him above all other with his gracious benefits, and enticed him to
join with them in their gross idolatry. So that no strength is able to
encounter the violence of these fleshly lusts; no wisdom can privilege men
from being deluded and abused with the cunning wiles of these filthy harlots.

Thirdly,. Sect. 7. God punishes the fornicators body with loathsome
diseases.
God punishes the fornicator in his body with grievous sicknesses and
loathsome diseases; for so wisely has he ordered it by his wisdom and
providence, that they who who will taste the honey of this sin, shall also
feel the sting of punishment; for it spends the vital spirits, consumes
and extinguisheth the natural heat and moisture, which are the only
preseruers of health, strength and life; whereof follows the corruption of
the blood, dissolution of the sinews, rottennes of the marrow, aches in the
joints, cruditie in stomach, pain in the head, lamenesse in the limnes,
gouts, palsies, and innumerable diseases. Besides all which natural and
ordinary sicknesses and infirmities, the Lord has of late punished this sin
with that most loathsome and desperate disease, which is so odious even to
carnal men, that all nations are ashamed to own it; whereof it is, that it is
diversely called by diverse people, as the Neapolitan, Indian and French
disease, which was never heard of in the days of our ancestors, till men in
an vnusal manner multiplying their filthy lusts, the Lord not much above an
hundred yeeres-since, brought upon them this unusual punishment, which is now
grown almost as common as the sin. The consideration whereof should move
all-men, whose lives are more dear unto them then their lusts, and whose
health and strength is more valued then a short and brutish pleasure to leave
this sin, and loath these harlots; who in this respect may not unfitly be
compared to sweet, but poisonous potions, which delight in the taste, but kill
in the disgestion; or unto bandogs, saving that these hurt by fighting, they by
fauning; these wound with biting, they with kissing and wanton dalliance. Or
like the Iuie, which whilst it seems lovingly to embrace the tree adjoining,
sucketh from it the natural sap and moisture, and so causes it to rot and
perish.

Lastly,. Sect. 8. God punishes fornicators in their posterity.
as the Lord punishes this sin in the fornicators themselves in regard of
their own person, so also in respect of their posterity. As sometimes he
punishes them with barrenness, whereby their offpring is utterly cut off, and
as it were, dried in the spring, according to the saying of the Prophet, Hos.
4.10. They shall commit whoredom, and not increase. Hos. 4.10.
Sometimes he visits the sins of these fornicators, in their unclean
issue, and pulls them up as soon as they begin to take root, because such
pernicious weeds are not fit to cumber his Church or commonwealth. In which
respect Job calls whoredom, a sire which deuoureth to destruction, Job 31.12.
and wholly rooteth out a man's increase. With which accords the saying of the
son of Syrach; namely, that the harlots children shall not take root, nor
her branches bring footh fruit. Eccles. 23.25.
And if they live and continue upon the earth, the Lord commonly gives them
over to patrizate, and follow the father in his sins, so as usually the
whorish issue may be no more easily known by resembling their parents in
their face and countenance, then in their leaud lives and unchaste conversation.

CHAP. XI. Of the spiritual punishments which God inflicteth upon fornicators.
ANd these are the temporal punishments which are inflicted upon fornicators,.
Sect. 1. God subiecteth fornicators to his fierce wrath.
besides which the Lord imposes upon them many spiritual judgments; as first
he subiecteth them to his wrath and heavy displeasure, as the Apostle
witnesses, Ephesians. 5.3.6. where he says, Ephesians. 5.3.6.
that for these sins of fornication, uncleanness, and such enormous crimes,
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience; and therefore it
behooves us to mortify these earthly lusts, Col. 3.5.6.
as he exhorts us, Col. 3.5.6, that we may not incur the heavy displeasure
of our dread Lord and Sovereign; for if we fear to provoke against us the
just wrath of an earthly prince, because in the light of his countenance is
life, Prou. 16.14.15. and 20.2.
and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rame; whereas contrariwise the
fear of a king is like the roaring of a lion, and his wrath is as the
messengers of death: then how much more should we avoid those sins, which
provoke the heavy wrath of the king of kings, whose voice is like the
dreadful thunder, and whose wrath causes death eternal of soul and body?
If we are loath to displease mortal men, from whom we receive worldly
benefits, then how much more the everliving God, in whom we live, move, and
have our being; Act. 17.28.
and from whom we expect all our good, both here in this life, and the life to
come? and if we fear to offend them who have only power to kill the body,
and can go no further, Matthew. 10.28.
then how should we tremble and quake to commit these sins of uncleanness,
whereby he is wrathfully incensed, who is able to destroy both body and soul
in the fire of hell?

Secondly,. Sect. 2. God punishes fornication with impenitency and hardness
of heart.
the Lord usually punishes these sins of uncleanness with blindness of mind,
hardness of heart, carnal security, and final impenitencie, whereby it comes
to pass that fornicators are hardly reclaimed from this vice, but being given
up to their own vile lusts and affections, and unto a reprobate mind they
continue in these sins not only in their youth, Romans 1.26.28.
but also in old age, and even when their bodies are impotent and disabled,
their minds are still unclean, and their tongues are exercised in ribald and
filthy speeches; so hard a thing it is to get out of the bondage of these
fleshly lusts when once we are inchained with them. To this purpose the wise
man says, that the harlots house tends to death, and her paths unto the
dead. All they that go unto her return not again, neither take they hold of
the ways of life. Prou. 2.18.19. And of this there may be rendered diverse
causes; as first, because these sins of uncleanness do bring upon him who is
defiled with them such a blockish stupiditie and senseless sottishnes, Pro.
2.18.19. The causes why fornication is accompanied with impenitencie. 1.
Because whoredom makes men sottish.
that he never thinks of the foulnes of his sin, nor of the manifold
mischiefs which do accompany it; neither yet is capable of any admonition or
instruction from others, whereby he might be reclaimed; for when he is once
bewitched with the Siren tunes of these enticing harlots, and has received
these poisonous potions of beastly pleasures, he presently loses the use of
his reason and understanding, and though he retains still his outward shape,
yet in his heart, affections, and inward faculties, he is transformed into a
brutish, or rather blockish creature, so that a man may as well with persuasion
move a senseless stock, or with reason dissuade a dog from following his salt
bitches, as he can by any weight of argument withdraw this walking block, and
this talking beast from accompanying his wicked strumpets; for either the
hidious noise of his tumultuous lusts do make him deaf to all admonition, or
these poisonous cups of filthy pleasure do intoxicate his mind that he
understands not what he hears, or finally the force of lust so violently
transporteth his affections, and the harlots chains of alluring inticements do
so surely inthrall him, that if he hears and understands profitable
admonitions and instructions, yet he regards them not, but cannot, or will
not, or therefore cannot because he will not, leave his sin, to which as a
voluntary slave he is subjected.

A second cause of their impenitencie is,. Sect. 3. The second cause of the
fornicators impenitencie; because his fin is committed in secret.
because their sin is committed in secret, having no other witness of their
fact but God, their own conscience, and Satan who has drawn them to this
sin. For as Job says; The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, and
says, none eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face: Job. 24.15: and having
committed wickedness, he wipeth his mouth and says, I have not committed
iniquity: as it is, Prou. 30.20. Whereof it comes to pass, Pro. 30.20.
that they securely go forward in their sin, because they want the ordinary
means which should bring them to amendment; for when as men know not their
wickedness, they cannot admonish or reprove them for it, nor cure the wounds
which were never discovered, till they fester and rot in their corruptions;
they are exempted from shame, the usual companion of sin, and cause of
sorrow, which oftentimes brings that repentance which is never to be
repented of. They are also hereby privileged from punishments inflicted by
humane laws, which are the cords of men that draw sinners unto God, and such
admonishers as will make the senses conceive them, when the understanding is
besotted. But let such men know, that their secret acting of these works of
darkness will little avail them; for what will it profit these offenders
that other men are ignorant of their faults, when as they are known unto their
own consciences, who will bear witness against them, unto God their Judge,
who will condemn them, Psalm. 1 39.11.12. Pro. 5.20.
and unto Satan their accuser and executioner, who will torment them? What will
it advantage them to shun the shame of men, when as, at the great day of the
Lord, their filthiness being discovered, they shall be disgraced before God
and the blessed Saints and Angels? What will it benefit them to have escaped
humane punishments, which might have reformed them, and brought them to
repentance, when as they shall eternally be tormented in hell fire without hope
of deliverance?

The last cause of this impenite^cie is the sweetness of the sin unto a carnal
appetite,. Sect. 4. The third cause of the fornicators impenitencie, is the
sweetness of this sin to his carnal appetites.
and the great delight which worldly men take in perpetrating this wickedness,
which will hardly suffer them to be weaned from it, either with the bitterness
of present evils, or with the apprehension of future punishments. For such
near correspondence and intimate friendship there is between the flesh, and
these fleshly lusts, that the carnal man is ready to venture through fire and
water, and to hazard health and wealth, life and lim, for the satisfying of his
filthy pleasure: neither will he easily lose that which he has so dearly
bought, but will rather endure all extremities, then he will part with his
sin which is more dear and sweet unto him then life it self. By all which
it may plainly appear, that these sins of uncleanness are most pernicious
unto our bodies and souls, in that they continue us in impenitencie which is
the certain forerunner of eternal damnation; for howsoever the mercies of God
are most large and infinite, yet are they never enlarged to those who continue
in their sins; though the blood of Christ be of an inestimable value, yet it
never procures pardon for those who are still in love with their wickedness;
and howsoever the promises of the Gospel are most general and indefinite, yet
are they always limited and restrained with the condition of true repentance.

Lastly,. Sect. 5. The fornicator is continually tormented with vexation and
cause of grief.
howsoever the fornicator is seldom troubled with any true sorrow for his
sin; yet does he never want vexation and grief in respect of the punishment
which does accompany it. Before he commits his sin, he is set upon the
rack of his own inordinate lusts, which violently draw him to a resolution of
perpetrating his filthiness; after he is resolved, he is tormented with a
multitude of unruly passions and affections, which drawing contrary ways,
diversely distract him, and even pull him asunder. One while he is vexed with
uncertain hopes, and another while with doubtful fears; sometimes he is
tormented with care how he may compass his desires, and sometimes with
ielousies and suspicions of manifold mischiefs which may accompany the
fruition of his carnal joys. Now he doubts of his harlots love, and
wishes a clear passage in his suite, and soon after he fears his wish, in
respect of the shame or punishment which may follow the atchieuing of his
desires, if by any means his filthy fact be discovered and revealed. Neither
is he in better case after his lusts are satisfied, but rather as his sin
which was but only resolved on, is now aggrauated by the execution and fact,
so also are his punishments in his soul and eonscience intended and increased.
For now the smoke which did arise from the flame of his lusts and darkened the
eye of his understanding being somewhat vanished, upon the quenching of this
fire, he begins more clearly to discern the foulness of his fact, and
his own sottish folly, who for the inioying of a short and beastly pleasure,
has robbed his conscience of peace, and his heart of joy, and cast himself
into an inextricable labyrinth of manifold mischiefs; now his guilty
conscience makes him to be in continual fear lest his fact being discovered,
his name should be exposed to infamy and reproach, and his person to the danger
of the law; and this makes him suspicious of his friends, and fearful of his
enemies, if there be but the least jealousy of any means, whereby his works
of darkness may be brought to light. And this Job notably describes, Chap.
24.16. Job 24.16.
The whoremongers dig through houses in the dark, which they marked for
themselves in the day, they know not the light. 17. But the morning is unto
them as the shadow of death: If one know them, they are in the terrors of the
shadow of death. Yea though they have so secretly acted their wickedness, that
they are in this respect secure, being assured that they shall never be
discovered, yet if they be not men of scared consciences, they are contiuually
haunted with terrors and troubles of mind, as it were with hellish furies, when
as being guilty of these foul sins, they consider that their Judge is also
a witness of their hidden actions, and that one day they shall be called to a
reckoning, when as they can have but little hope that it will go well with
them, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Apoc. 21.8.
seeing the sentence of eternal death and condemnation is already passed upon
them in his word which is his infallible truth, yt admits of no change or
alteration. Who therefore would for a brutish and momentanie delight pierce his
conscience with such deep wounds which are so long in healing, and bring such
continual grief and bitter torments before they can be cured? Who would at
such high rates (as the loss of Gods favor, and the peace of their own
conscience) buy either (at the best) continually cause of repentance, or
otherwise the restless fears, and torturing terrors of a guilty soul, even
to the end of life, especially considering, that these present terrors of
conscience, are but the beginnings of the eternal hellish torments?

CHAP. XII. Of the public punishments which the Lord inflicteth upon the
commonwealth for the sin of whoredom.
ANd these are the punishments which for the sin of whoredom are inflicted
upon private persons.. Sect. 1. That the commonwealth is diversely punished for
the sin of whoredom.
Besides which the Lord imposes many heavy judgments upon the public
state, and upon the whole commonwealth: for where whoredom abounds, there
the whole land mourns, and being spoiled of her fruits, Ier. 23.10.
wherewith she should nourish her inhabitants, she sits sorrowful hanging
down the head, like a miserable mother, who being importuned for food by her
starued children, has not any thing to give them to satisfy their hunger, and
preserve them from famishing. Sometimes the country is so grieuouslie sick
through the noisome humors and burthenous corruptions of uncleanness, that it
has no other means to ease it self, but by vomiting out all the inhabitants,
as appears in the example of the Cananits, Leuit. 18.25.28. Leu. 18.25.28.
sometimes when men neglect the punishment of these sins of uncleanness,
their cry ascends up into heaven importuning the Lord to take extraordinary
vengeance, when ordinary justice is not executed; as we may see in the example
of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.
which were destroyed with fire and brimstone that came down from heaven. And
sometime the heat of this filthy lust so inflameth the just wrath of God,
that nothing will appease and quench it, but a large stream of the offenders
blood; as appears in the example of the Israelites, who for their spiritual
and carnal whoredom with the Moabites were destroyed to the number of 24000.
at one time; as appears Numb. 25.9. Number. 25.9.
And in the Beniamites who were almost all put to the sword for committing and
defending these sins of uncleanness. And also in the Sichemites, Iud. 20
who for the filthiness of their Lords son, in deflouring Dinah, Jacobs daughter
were utterly destroyed. Genesis 34.
The which as it was a bloody sin in Jacobs sons, so no doubt it was a
fearful judgment of God upon that city, the which he has left as an
example unto after ages, to show how odious and abominable the sins of
whoredom and uncleanness are in his sight.

The consideration whereof should both restrain private men from defiling
themselves with the carnal filthiness of their unclean lusts,. Sect. 2. That
love to our country should make private men abhor, and Magistrates punish
this sin of whoredom.
seeing thereby they not only bring so manifold mischiefs upon their own
heads, but also make their dear country which has given unto them their
first breath, and continual maintenance, education and defense, liable unto
Gods fearful plagues, which they should more tender and preciouslie esteem,
then either goods, lands, or life it self. As also it ought to move
Magistrates, who are appointed by God as his deputies on earth, yt in zeal for
Gods glory, and love to their country, they both make wholesome laws, for the
punishing and suppressing of these vices, and also see them duly executed, but
inflicting just and deserved punishments upon the offenders; for where sin is
punished with ordinary punishments, there the Lord seldom inflicteth his
extraordinary plagues; neither does our Sovereign Lord and supreme Judge,
take the execution of justice into his own hands, but when it is neglected by
his inferior and earthly officers. Whereas contrariwise when Magistrates
sleep and wincke at enormous crimes, then the Lord especially watches and
beholds them; when as their sword of justice most rusteth in the scabberd,
then is the Lord most ready to draw out the terrible sword of his fearce
vengeance, whereby he destroys both the wicked people and the negligent
Magistrates.

CHAP. XIII. Of the eternal punishments which God inflicteth upon fornicators.
ANd these are the temporal punishments which the Lord inflicteth both upon
private persons,. Sect. 1. 1 God depriueth them for this sin of the joys of
heaven.
and whole commonwealths, for this sin of whoredom; the which although
they are many and grievous, yet are they nothing in comparison of those
eternal punishments which he has prepared for those who are guilty of this
crime in the life to come. For first, whereas our chief happiness shall then
principally consist in the fruition of God, because he is infinite in all
goodness and perfection, and in an unspeakable and unmeasurable degree,
comprehends in himself alone all that virtue, excellence, delight, comfort,
and whatsoever good thing may be desired, either for the inflaming of our love,
or the perfecting of our joy; with which if we compare all the goodness and
excellence of the creatures which either have been, are, or shall be, they
are altogether incomparably less, then the least drop in respect of the maine
ocean, and then the smallest grain of sand in comparison of the whole globe of
the earth: this sin of whordome does exclude us for ever out of his presence in
which is fulness of joy, and casts us into an everlasting banishment out of
his heavenly kingdom. So the Apostle tells us: That neither fornicators, 1.
Cor. 6.9.
nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, etc. shall inherit
the kingdom of God. And that dogs, inchanters, whoremongers, Apoc. 22.15.
murderers and such outrageous sinners, shall be shut out of the gates of the
new Jerusalem. If therefore banishment out of our earthly country be
accounted such a heavy punishment, that every one carefully auoideth such
faults as may deserve it, the which in truth in comparison, is but a temporary
changing of the place of our exile, the whole world being but a place of
banishment from our heavenly country; how much more carefully should we avoid
these sins of uncleanness, which will cause us to be eternally banished out of
our heavenly country, which contains in it such joys, that in respect
thereof the most pleasant princely palace on earth, is but an irksome prison
and most uncomfortable dungeon, and the greatest worldly joys that can be
thought on, but like tedious griefs and bitter torments? If it be such a
grievous punishment to be exiled out of our native soil into a foreign
country, where perhaps we shall have not much less joy and comfort, nor much
more cause of grief and sorrow, and where we shall spend (when it is at the
longest) a momentarie, and (when it is at the best) a wretched and miserable
life, and afterward have as ready and short a passage into our heavenly
country, where all joy and happiness attend us, as if we still remained at
our native home: then how much more grievous is it, to be banished out of our
new Jerusalem, where there is all comfort without mixture of discontent, and
all blessedness without the least grief or misery, and that not for a
momentanie life, but for ever and ever?

And yet this is but the one half of their misery which they shall then
endure.. Sect. 2. Fornicators shall be cast into hell fire.
For well were it with them, if they might become like the beasts which perish,
and that having lead a brutish life, they might also die a beastly death,
feeling neither weal nor woe after their departure; but their condition shall
be much more miserable; for as they shall lose the comfort of Gods presence, so
they shall find the horror of the cursed fellowship with the devils and
damned spirits; as they shall be dispossessed and deprived of the joys of
heaven, and of all that blessedness which is prepared for the Saints, who have
kept their vessels in purity and holiness; so shall they have their portion
in the hellish torments, in utter darkness prepared for the devil and his
angels. For among many other wicked sinners, whoremongers shall have their
portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death, as the holy Ghost tells us, Apoc. 21.8. Apoc. 21.8.
And therefore as one nail drives out another, so should the remembrance of
the fire of hell extinguish the flames of lusts kindled in men's hearts; and the
consideration of these intolerable and everlasting torments, should restrain
men from those short vain and sensual pleasures, which are the causes and
forerunners of them. August. de honest. mulier. Cap 3. Tom. 9.
For as Augustine says; Cito praeterit quod delectat, and permanet sine fine
quod eruciat: The pleasure of lust which for the time delights does soon
vanish, but the pains of hell into which they plunge us, do continue for
evermore.

CHAP. XIIII. The objection of fornicatours answered, who excuse their sin
under the pretense of marriage.
ANd thus have I showed the manifold and grievous punishments, which the Lord
inflicteth upon whoremongers and unclean persons, both in this life and the
life to come. Now in the last place it remains that I answer briefly an
objection or excuse, which is commonly made by fornicatours of the better sort,
whereby they think themselves acquitted from the guilt of sin, and
privileged from all danger of punishment; namely, that they are purposed
before they commit this folly, to marry the party whom they have defiled,
and so to make amends for the fault committed. To which I answer, that
howsoever this is the best course which they can take after they have fallen
into this sin, if it be joined with serious and sound repentance; yet it is
no argument to encourage any to commit this wickedness under this color and
pretense. For howsoever they be resolved to marry the party, yet in the mean
while they grievously sin against God, themselves, the party defiled, and
the fruit of their own body. They sin against God not only by committing
fornication, but also by making whoredom their passage and entrance into his
holy ordinance of marriage, and so having offered their first fruits and the
prime of their strength unto Satan, and their own filthy lusts, they reserve
for God the remainder, and as it were their leauings. They abuse themselves by
imagining that they can by marriage satisfy for their sin, and so securely
pass it over without repentance; whereas in truth there is no other means to
wash their defiled bodies and souls from the pollution of their sin, but the
precious blood of the immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ. They deprive themselves of
all assurance and comfort of Gods blessing upon their marriage into which they
make such a wicked entrance; for how can they hope for a good proceeding, where
the beginning is so wicked and unlawful? how can they expect that God will
build that house whose very foundation is laid in sin? that he will make
them a happy couple who were first joined in fornication? or cause her to
become a virtuous wife unto him, who has already abused her as his strumpet?
Again, what greater injury can he offer unto her whom he pretends chiefly
to love, seeing he exposes her to the danger of perpetual infamy and
reproach? For who has assured him that he shall live to solemnize the promised
marriage, especially seeing the Lord might in his justice presently inflict
death of body and soul for his sin? and if he do not, what does he but
die a fornicatour, and leave her to live a reputed harlot, by her own desert
and others estimation? But though it should be granted that he had procured
from heaven a lease of his life, yet what wrong in the mean time does he
offer her to whom he pretends marriage, seeing he makes her his harlot before
he makes her his wife? and spoiling her of her honesty and virginity, makes
her fit to enter into the stews, before he admits her into the honorable
bed of marriage? What injury is this to blemish her good name which he should
most honor? For howsoever he has by marriage cured the wound which he has
made in her reputation, so as it is not mortal to her credit, yet there ever
remains as it were a running issue of rumor, and infamy, or at least a
foul scarre (if ever it come to light) in others estimation, or (if it remain
secret) in their own consciences, which will ever after make them more jealous
the one of the other. Finally, he sins against the fruit of his own body,
in that he begets it of the seed of fornication, imbasing it in his
conception, and marking it with the stamp of his sin, before it enjoys the
light of the Sun.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the sin of Adultery, and the hamousnesse thereof.
ANd thus have I entreated of the sin of fornication,. Sect. 1. Of Adultery,
and the kinds thereof.
which is that sin of uncleanness that is committed between single or
unmarried persons, and have showed the heinousness of it, and the
grieuousnesse of the punishment which does accompany it. In the next place I
am to speak of the sin of adultery, which is that uncleanness that is
committed by those that are either married or betrothed; for the law of God as
deeply condemns, and as severely punishes the latter as the former, as
appears, Deuteronomy. 22.22.24. Deuteronomy. 22.22.24.
In which argument I will observe the same order which I did in the former,
showing first what it is, and the kinds thereof, the heinousness of the sin,
and the grieuousnesse of the punishment. Adultery is the defiling of another
bed with the act of uncleanness; as the name it self also signifies; For it
is called, Adulterium, quasi ad alterius thorum accessio. The which sin is of
two kinds: for either it is single, or double adultery. Single adultery is
that uncleanness which is committed, either between a married man, and a
single woman, or a married woman with a single man. Double, when as both the
parties are married, who defile themselves one with another.

Concerning the heinousness of which sins I shall not need to say much;.
Sect. 2. That adultery is an heinous sin.
for if the sin of simple fornication and whoredom be so wicked and
damnable, as before I have showed, then must it necessarily follow that the
sin of adultery (which is a finne of the same kind, Leuit. 18.20.29 Ier.
7.9 10. Ezech. 22.11.
but in a much higher degree of wickedness) is a notorious crime and an
horrible abomination, as the Scriptures also call it, which continually calls
and cries at the throne of Gods justice for fearful vengeance upon the
offenders. And therefore leaving that which has bin said, concerning the
greatness of the sin of fornication, and the grieuousnesse of the punishment
to be applied to this sin of adultery, but with a great ouermeasure, in as
much as it far exceeds in a higher degree of wickedness; I will content my
self briefly to add that which seems to be more peculiar to this crime,
both in respect of the sin, and the punishment due unto it.

First then,. Sect. 3. That the adulterer sins against God, by violating his
holy ordinance.
the adulterer sins in a peculiar manner against God, in that he does in the
highest degree violate his own ordinance of marriage, which is most ancient,
as being instituted of God in Paradise; most honorable, as challenging the
Lord for the first author and solemnizer thereof; and most holy and pure, as
being instituted and ordained in the state of innocence; and since the fall,
appointed as the ordinary means to preserve our bodies and souls in purity
and chastity, unspotted and undefiled. For whereas the Lord has ordained,
that by marriage there should be such a near communion between the parties
conjoined, that they should be no more two but one flesh, in regard whereof a man
ought to forsake father and mother, that he may cleave to his wife, loving and
cherishing her as being a part of himself; and that to these ends, that they
may be preserved from whoredom and all manner of unlawful lusts, procreate
an holy seed, and be mutual comforts one to another; the fornicator does
utterly violate this holy ordinance; for he disioyneth those whom God has
conjoined, and breaks the bond of holy marriage by joining himself with an
harlot, and becoming one flesh with her, he forsakes his dear spouse, for
whose sake he should forsake father and mother, and adhereth to a filthy
strumpet; he loatheth his wife, and loves his whore; he defiles his body and
soul, created according to Gods image in holiness and purity, with whoredom
and uncleanness; he begets an unholy seed and basterdly brood, and
becomes unto his wife, of a chief comforter, a most grievous tormentor,
filling her heart with grief and jealousy, and her face with shame, when she
sees her self rejected, and set at naught.

Secondly, the adulterer sins against God,. Sect. 4. 2. He offends God by
breaking his covenant of marriage.
by breaking the covenant of the Lord, which was made at the solemnizing of
their marriage. For then they do not only make a mutual contract one with
another, yt they will faithfully observe marriage fidelity and love between
themselves; but also they make a covenant with God in his presence, and in the
face of his holy assembly, that they will perform this vow and promise
between them made: and therefore when they violate this holy contract, they
do not only treacherously break their promise made one to another, but also
their covenant made with God. As appears plainly, Prou. 2.17. Prou. 2.17.
whereas he says, that the adultresse who forsakes the guide of her youth,
does therein forget the covenant of her God. Whereby they offer great injury
unto the Lord; seeing when a covenant is violated, the wrong redoundeth not
only to him whom it directly concerns, but also unto him, in whose name the
covenant is made and concluded.

CHAP. XV. That the adulterer sins grieuouslie against his neighbor.
ANd as they sin hainouslie against God,. Sect. 1. 1. He sins against him
whose wife he desileth: 1. By disgracing him.
so also against their neighbor; and first against the party whose yokefellow
they defile; for they brande his name with ignominy and reproach, because in
regard of that near union which is between married persons, the disgrace and
discredit which of right belongs to the wife, redoundeth also unto her
husband, who is as it were the better part of her self. Of which we have
common experience in our own country by those disgraceful nicknames which
are usually, though unworthily, given to the innocent party.

So also they commit against their neighbor the most devilish deceit and
notorious theft that can be imagined; for they,. Sect. 2. 2. He commits
against him devilish deceit, and notorious theft.
like Satan himself, sow in his choicest ground such cursed weeds, that they
are ashamed to reap, or own in the time of harvest; and graft into his best
valued stock wild and wicked imps, which he carefully nourishes as though
they were his own handy-worke, until their wicked and unnatural fruits
discover them to be none of his. They cuckow-like lay their filthy eggs in
another nest, making him to love, cherish, and nourish it, as if it were his
own issue, till being grown to some bigness, it unnaturally seeks to
destroy the nurse, Judge. 9.
and utterly ruinateth his whole posterity. In a word, they theeuishly thrust
their own bastardly brood into another man's possessions, causing him to
receive the portion of a child from him, who is not his father, and to share
the inheritance among them who are not his brethren. And that which is worst of
al, through this deceit they make the innocent party to carke and care, to
spend his sweat, and to spare from his own back and belly, that in the end
he may bestow the fruit of his labors, to maintain and provide for such an
one, as is not only a stranger, but the issue of his mortal enemy, who above
all men living has most disgraced and abused him. And yet this is not the
worst kind of theft which the adulterer uses; for he not only spoileth his
neighbor of his common and ordinary goods, the which loss he might
recompense with a proportionable satisfaction; but he also robs him of his
chief treasure, and most esteemed jewel, the heart, love and affection of his
wife, the which wrong he can never recompense though he should bestow upon
him his whole estate, nor mitigate his raging jealousy, breathing nothing but
revenge, if ever he come to the knowledge thereof, though he should enrich
him with his gifts. For (as the Wise man says) jealousy is the rage of a man,
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He cannot endure the sight
of any ransom, neither will he be appeased though thou augment the gifts.
Prou. 6.34.35.
Prou. 6.34. 35.

Finally,. Sect. 3. The adulterer oftentimes plaieth the murderer.
as the adulterer plaieth the thief against his neighbor, in robbing him of
his goods; so oftentimes he plaieth the tragical part of a bloody murderer,
in spoiling him of his life: for being inwardly tormented with the raging
flames of lust, at first he is thereby urged to thrust in as an unjust sharer
in another man's right; but being intruded he does not so content himself, but
scorning to have any copartner or corriuall in his love, he labors to have
the entire interest and to become the sole owner of his delights. And because
the husband of his harlot stands in his way and crosses his desires, he
seeks by all means to bring him to destruction, both by open violence, if
the law do not restrain him, and by secret treachery. As we may see in the
example of David, who, that he might enjoy his love, 2. Sam. 11.
and hide his shame, murdered Vriah his faithful servant.

Secondly,. Sect. 4. 2. The adulterer sins grieuouslie against his own
yoke fellow.
the adulterer or adulteress sin grievously against their own yoke fellow,
either wife; or husband; for first they break the covenant of marriage made
between them in the presence of God, and in the sight of his congregation: for
whereas they have obliged themselves one to the other, that they will observe
and keep marriage fidelity, and reserve their bodies chaste and undefiled for
one another peculiar use; they trecherously violate this their promise, and
defile their bodies with strange lusts, making them to become more fit guests
for a filthy brothell, then for the honorable bed of marriage. Whereas they
mutually promised marriage love, which far surpasses the love of parents
toward their children, both in excellency and in propriety, they fix their
love upon strangers, and loath their yoke-fellowes, as if they were their
mortal enemies. Neither is it possible that the adulterous wife should love
her husband, when she is besotted with the love of her filthy copes-mate, nor
for an adulterer to love his wife, when he is entangled in the harlots snares,
and carried away with her bewitching allurements. And this is that breach of
covenant which the Lord lays to the Israelites charge as a grievous sin:
Mal. 2.14. The Lord has been witness between thee, Mal. 2.14.
and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed,. Sect. 5.
Adulterers rob their yoke fellovv of their goods.
yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

Secondly, whereas by marriage there is also a communion of their goods and
persons, by virtue whereof they have just interest and propriety both in their
states and bodies, the adulterers do rob their yoke fellow of their right;
for first the adulterous husband spends his substance in maintaining his
harlot, and in nourishing and bringing up his adulterous brood; whereby he
impouerisheth his wife, and brings her unto want and misery, either because
of the insufficiency of his estate to maintain both his harlot, and his own
charge; or through the hardness of his heart, and want of love to his own
spouse; for it is the usual fruit of whoredom and adultery, to make a man
prodigal abroad, and niggardly at home, bountiful to his harlot, and all that
belong unto her; and miserably near, and sordidous, to his wife, and his
lawful begotten children. So also the adulterous wife robs her husband, not
only by catching and purloining all she may from him, to bestow upon her
lovers; but also in bringing into his family an adulterous issue, who devour
the fruit of his labors, and confusedly divide his substance and patrimony
amongst his own children. In which respect the adultery of the wife is more
pernicious then of the husband, because it is accompanied with more abominable
deceit, no man being able, who has an harlot to his wife, to know his own
children, from the children of a stranger, whereby he is compelled to nourish
his enemies, for fear of destroying his chiefest friends; and to give
inheritance to the children of fornication, lest otherwise through his
ignorance he may perchance disinherit the lawful fruit of his own body.

Lastly,. Sect. 6. Adulterers rob their yoke-fellovv of their heart and
affection.
the adulterer or adultresse rob their wife or husband of their most valued
right, namely, their heart, affection, and the use of their body, of which
there is by virtue of marriage a communion in respect of one another, and a
peculiar and incommunicable propriety, in respect of all other persons in the
world. 1. Cor. 7.4.
So the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 7.4. The wife has not the power of her own
body, but the husband: and likewise the husband has not the power of his own
body, but the wife. And therefore in adultery there is also included the
grossest, and most pernicious kind of theft, seeing married persons living in
this sin are not only thieves of goods, but man-stealers and thieves of the
body and person; which is of much greater value.

Thirdly and lastly,. Sect. 7. The adulterer sins against his own family.
the adulterer in a peculiar manner sins against his own family, both by
utter neglecting of it, all his thoughts, endeavors, and employments, being
wholly taken up by his harlot; so as he has neither leisure nor pleasure,
either to spend his time in the honest works of his calling, whereby he may
maintain his charge, or with any wise providence dispose of that which he
already has; whereby he runs into wilful beggerie, not caring which end
goes forward, and makes all his family to partake of the fruit of his sin,
and feel the like want and misery. And also by bringing Gods judgments and
heavy punishments upon the whole house, for his sin, whereby it is destroyed
and brought to naught. For this sin of whoredom is a fire that shall devour
unto destruction, and which shall root out all the adulterers increase, as Job
speaks, chap. 31.14. Job 31.14.


But as the adulterer sins against others,. Sect. 8. That adulterers sin
most grieuouslie against themselves.
so most grievously against himself, in that he not only defiles his body
and soul with this abominable filthiness, but also wounds his conscience with
a sin, which as it is in it self very heinous, so likewise of all other
sins most inexcusable; seeing the Lord has not only provided a remedy
against this sin, but also has in mercy granted unto him the use and fruition
of it, namely, lawful marriage. For why should he steal of his neighbor that
has plenty of water in his own cesterne? as the Wise man speaks. Prou.
5.15.19.
Why should he delight himself in unlawful lusts with a stranger, unto whom
God has given a wife in whom he may rejoice, as being near unto him, even as
a part of himself; and who may be unto him (if the fault be not his own
either in his choice, or use) as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe; Prou. 5.19.
whose breasts may satisfy him at all times, and in whose love he may delight
continually. Whereby it appears that the adulterer is a wilful thief, who
steals not upon necessity, but through curious wantonness, like a rich
miser who having plenty of gold at his own command, steals from his
neighbor brass or copper. And this is that argument which the holy Ghost
uses to aggrauate the sin of adultery, far above the sin of theft: Men
(says he) do not despise a thief when he steals to satisfy his soul,
because he is hungry, etc. But he that commits adultery with a woman he is
destitute of understanding: he that does it, Prou. 6.30.32
destroys his own soul. Prou. 6.30.32.

CHAP. XVI. Of the punishment of Adultery.
ANd thus have I showed that adultery is a grievous sin.. Sect. 1. That by
the law of God adultery was pun shed with death.
The consideration whereof should be an effectual argument to restrain all
men from falling into it; for if every ordinary sin deserves Gods anger and
eternal condemnation, then what fierce wrath and deep condemnation is due
unto them, who make no conscience of committing these sins, which are so
capital and heinous? But because many secure worldlings make light account of
the heauiest burden of sin, and care little for provoking Gods wrath, so
they may securely enjoy their carnal pleasures; therefore in the next place I
will also show how fearfully this sin is punished, and that both in this
life, and the life to come. In this life the punishment of adultery is either
ordinary, or extraordinary. The ordinary punishment which by the law of God
is to be inflicted, upon adulterers, Leuit. 20.10.
is death it self, as appears, Leuit. 20.10. The man that commits
adultery with another man's wife, because he has committed adultery with his
neighbors wife, the adulterer and adulteress shall die the death. Deuteronomy. 22.22.
So Deuteronomy. 22.22. If a man be found lying with a woman married to a man, then
they shall dye even both twain, to wit, the man that lay with the wife, and
the wife: so thou shall put away evil from Israel. The which law was executed
with the greatest severity among the people of God by his own express
appointment; for whereas other crimes were not punished with death, unless the
party were convicted by the direct testimony of two witnesses at the least,
the Lord permitted the jealous husband to make a special trial of his wives
chastity and honesty; and gave unto him an extraordinary, and most admirable
means for the conuincing her (if she were guilty) of her sin when no
witnesses could be produced; namely, that she should drink of the cursed
water, which should not hurt her being innocent, but rather should make her
fruitful; but if she were guilty, then upon the drinking thereof, her belly
should swell, and her thigh rot, and so the woman should be accursed among her
people, Number. 5.14.15.27.28. Numb. 5.14.27.
So that rather then the Lord would have this heinous sin of adultery go
unpunished, he would himself after this wonderful manner discover and punish
it.

Now this punishment of adultery by death,. Sect. 2. That the punishment of
adultery by death, is a law of common equity.
seems to be not a mere judicial law, which was proper and peculiar to the
commonwealth of Israel, but a law of common equity, which binds and holds
in subjection all nations unto it. First, because long before the judicial law
was given, the same punishment was inflicted upon adulterrers, as appears by
Judah his sentence against his daughter in law Thamar, Genesis 38.24.
namely, that because being espoused to his son, she had played the harlot,
she should be burnt to death. So when Abimilech being a king had no superior
to execute this law upon him, the Lord himself threatens death against him if
he abused Sara Abraham's wife. Genesis 20.3.7.
The same punishment also Abimilech threatens against any of his people
without exception that should touch Isaacs wife. Secondly, Genesis 26.11.
because the Heathens themselves who had not Moses law, by the light of nature
inflicted the punishment of death upon adulterers, whereby it appears that it
is not judicial, but moral and perpetual, seeing it was common to the Jews
and Gentiles. Ier. 29.22.23. Lucianus. Strab. geograph. lib. 16. Eusebius. de
praeparat. Euangel. lib. 6. cap. 8. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 1. Lib. 1.
bell. Ieth.
So Nebuchadnezzar caused those two adulterous Prophets, Zedechias and Achab,
to be burnt with fire, as the Prophet foretells, Ier. 29.22.23. So Saletus
Prince of Crotone a city of Greece, enacted a law, that adulterers should be
burnt to death. By Draco his law likewise the same punishment was inflicted
upon the like offenders. In like manner this sin was capital among the
Arabians, as Eusebius records. And so also among the Goths, as Procopius
writes. Finally, among the Romans adultery was punished with death, both by
the twelve tablei, and by their law called lex Iulia, which was made by
Augustustus Caesar.

Other nations which did not inflict death upon the adulterers, punished them
with tortures, as bitter as death. The Egyptians decreed that ye nose of the
adultresse should be cut off, Diodor. Sic. lib. 1. cap. 6.
and that the adulterer should be beaten with a 1000. stripes, almost unto
death. Zaleucus King of the Locrenses made a law that the adulterer should lose
both his eyes: which law when his own son transgressed, notwithstanding,
that the people being inclined to pity, would have had his fault remitted, he
would not condescend, but caused one of his own, Aelian. in varia hist. lib.
13.
and one of his sons eyes to be pulled out. Among the Germans, as Cornelius
Tacitus records, the adultres being stripped naked before her kindred and
friends, had first her hair cut off, and afterward was beaten with cudgels
through the town by her husband.

By all which it appears,. Sect. 3. An objection ansvvered.
that even by the light of nature, adultery in all ages has bin condemned and
punished as a capital crime, and consequently that this punishment among the
Jews was not merely judicial, but moral and of common equity. Neither is
that objection of any force, that our Savior Christ refused to condemn the
woman taken in adultery, seeing he came into the world not to execute the
office of an earthly Judge, but of a mediator who should from God procure the
pardon of our sins; he came not to condemn, but to save, and to give his
life a ransom for many; again whereas our Savior asks the woman if any
man had condemned her according to the law in that case provided, it seems
thereby that if the sentence of death had been lawfully passed against her, he
would not have repealed it; for he came not to violate the law, but to fulfill
it.. Sect. 4. That Magistrates ought to punish this sin of adultery with
all severity.


And therefore our Christian Magistrates are to be exhorted, that they would
not lightly account of this sin of whoredom, which the law of God and the
law of nations, has condemned as capital; but that they would enact severe
laws for the punishment of this sin, which is so abominable unto God, and so
pernicious unto humane society; otherwise the guilt thereof will lie heavy
upon the land, and provoke the Lord in his just displeasure, Deuteronomy. 22.22.
Ezech. 22.11.
not only to punish them and the whole country for their negligence and
remissness, but also to take vengeance of the offenders himself by his
extraordinary judgments, when ordinary punishments are not inflicted. For
when Magistrates neglect their duty in punishing this sin, then the Lord
will take the sword of justice into his own hand, according to that, Heb.
13.4. Heb. 13.4. Mal. 3.5.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. So he says, Mal. 3.5. that
himself would come near unto the people of Judah in judgment, and would be a
swife witness against the adulterers: and Ier. 5.7.8.9. Ier. 5.7.8.
he professes that in his instice he could not spare them who were guilty of
this sin of whoredom, but would visit them, and be avenged on them for this
and such other abominations. As therefore it is impossible for a man to take
fire into his bosom, or to walk upon the hot coals and not be burnt; so
impossible is it, that a man should defile his neighbors wife, and be
acquitted of the Lord as innocent, as the Wise man tells us: Prou. 6.27.29.
Prou. 6.27.29.


Now the punishments which the Lord usually inflicteth upon adulterers in this
life,. Sect. 5. God punishes adultery by the law of requital.
are not only the same which he inflicteth upon fornicators, of which I have
already spoken, as poverty, infamy, slavery to their lusts and harlots,
loathsome diseases, impenitencie and such like, the which the Lord increases
according to the rule of his justice in a due proportion to their sin, and
causes them to light much more heavily upon the adulterer then upon the
fornicator, in as much as he much more hainouslie offends; but also with
some peculiar punishments which are more proper to this sin. As first he
punishes adultery by the law of requital, and as they defile other men's
wives, so he suffers other men to abuse theirs with the like filthiness and
uncleanness. And this is that punishment which the Lord threatened against
David, 2. Sam. 12.11. and 16.22.
and afterward inflicted upon him for his adultery with Vriahs wife, 2. Sam.
12.11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of
thine own house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto
thine neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.
The which was accordingly executed, as appears, 2. Sam. 16.22. And this
judgment Job to approve his innocence in this behalf, imprecateth against
himself if he had at any time polluted himself and his neighbors wife with
this sin: Job 31.9.10. Job 31.9.10.
If mine heart has been deceived with a woman, or if I have laid wait at the
door of my neighbor; let my wife grind unto another man, and let other men
bow down upon her.

Secondly,. Sect. 6. God punishes adultery with his heavy curse. Gal. 3.10.
the Lord punishes this heinous sin, with his heavy curse and malediction,
for howsoever the curse of the law belongs generally to all transgressors,
yet in some special manner it is denounced against this sin of Adultery;
and therefore the Prophet foretells, that when they of the captivity of
Judah should take up a fearful curse against any, it should be in this
form, that the Lord would make them like unto Zedechiah and like Ahab, two
notable adulterers; as appears, Ier. 29.22.
Ier. 29.22. So the Lord says in his law, that when the adulteres had drunk
the cursed water, is should be turned into bitterness, and cause her belly to
swell, and her thighe to rot, and the woman should be accursed among her
people: as it is Numb. 5.27. Numb. 5.27.. Sect. 7. The punishment of adultery
in the life to come.


But showeuer the Lord, to show the riches of his mercy to all repentant
sinners, and to make the impenitent much more inexcusable, does sometimes
forbear to inflict these punishments upon adulterers in this life, yet will
he most surely, and most severely punish them in the life to come. For if
fornicators shall be deprived of the joys of heaven, and have their portion in
hell fire, even in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, as before I
have showed; then surely the adulterers, whose sin is much more inexcusable
and heinous, shall be plunged into a far deeper degree of condemnation, and
be much more exquisitely tormented in those hellish torments. And these are
those intolerable and eternal punishments, which are in so many places of the
holy Scriptures denounced against adulterers, some whereof I will annex, that
who so will may search and examine them. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Gal. 5.19.21. Ephesians.
5.5. Apoc. 21.8. and 22.15.

CHAP. XVII. Of the means whereby we may be preserved from whoredom.
ANd thus have I spoken of the sins of uncleanness,. Sect. 1. The first
means is to reclaim our wills from uncleanness by considering evils which
the do accompany it.
both of fornication, which is that filthiness that is committed between
single persons; and of adultery, which is committed between married folks;
and have proved that they are not only heinous sins, but also that they are
attented upon with innumerable mischiefs, and punished with fearful
punishments both in this life, and the life to come. Now in the last place I
will set down some means, whereby we may be the better enabled to preserve
our bodies in purity and chastity, and be either restrained or reclaimed
from whoredom and uncleanness. The which means are either common
preservatives from all manner of filthy lusts, or more proper remedies against
adultery. Concerning the former, if we would be preserved from whoredom and
all manner of filthiness, it behooves us first to reclaim our wills, and to
work in our hearts and affections an utter hatred and detestation of this sin,
so as we may desire nothing more then to be preserved from it, if we be yet
innocent; or at least, may be reclaimed, if we have offended. For as it is in
vain to prescribe good medicines to such a patient, as being in love with his
diseases, will not receive them; so it is in vain to think of means to
preserve us from sin, if we still have a liking of it, or of remedies to
cure our spiritual diseases, if we be not come to an earnest desire and hearty
resolution to part with them. To this purpose therefore let us in the first
place often meditate with our selves, of that which has been already spoken,
both concerning the hainousnes of the sin, and the greatness of the
punishment. As for example, yt it is in a high degree, a notorious breach of
Gods commandment, the transgression whereof is accompanied with a fearful
curse, that is is a badge of such an one as God hates, and a notable fruit of
the flesh in which whosoever live, shall die eternally. That he who commits
it, grieuouslie sins against God, his neighbor, and himself, and that in
many respects as has been showed: That it is a cause also of many other
sins, the least whereof deserves eternal death. That howsoever carnal men
make it their idol and chief delight, yet in truth it is a fearful
punishment of diverse other grievous sins. That it self also has many
fearful punishments attending upon it, for it ruineth a man's estate, it
exposes his name to infamy and reproach, it makes him a slave to his own
filthy lusts, and a vassal to an odious strumpet: it infatuateth the mind,
and bridgeth upon the body loathsome diseases, and untimely death: it
subiecteth a man to Gods fearce wrath, and causes impenitencie and hardness
of heart: it sets the offender upon a continual rack, and haunteth him
like a hellish fury: and in a word, it dispossesseth him of the joys of
heaven, and casts him headlong into the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone. And if having put into the one skole these manifold evils of sin
and punishment, we also put into the other the pleasure and profit of this
sin, and consider with our selves how that we undergo all these mischiefs
for the satisfying of our brutish lusts, and for the inioying of a vain, short
and beastly pleasure; it is not possible (if we be not altogether blockish and
void of common sense) but that we should hate and abhor this sin, and
earnestly labor in the use of all good means, whereby we may be preserved
and delivered from it.

Now these means which may be used for this purpose are manifold;. Sect. 2.
The second means is to purify our hearts from filthiness.
first, we must labor to purge and purify our hearts from unclean lusts, as
being the very fountains of all filthiness and pollution; and to withstand
to the uttermost of our power the first motions and inclinations which draw us
unto this sin. For as Christians ought to be so far off from committing
these works of darkness, that they should not so much as take their names into
their mouths, as the Apostle tells us; so also they should not give them the
least intertainement into their hearts; but as soon as the tentation or motion
unto uncleanness is cast into their mind, they are at the first to reject it as
abominable, and not to reuolue it in their thoughts, nor to fight with these
unclean lusts, as it were at handi-blowes, but rather by skillful shunning and
avoiding of them. For if we suffer them to rest any while in our hearts, they
will be able to make a strong party of our own corruptions, and the longer
they are retained, the more hardly they will be repelled. To this purpose
Ambrose speaks: Quum alijs vitijs potest exspectari conflictus, 1. Cor. 6.18.
hanc fugite, quia non potest aliter melius vinci: Whereas (says he) in some
other vices we may abide a conflict, we are to fly from these sins of
uncleanness, as being the best means to get the victory over them. In this
conflict therefore the Christian must imitate the Parthians fight, who never
fought better then when they did make the speediest flight, neither must he
endure the approach of these enemies, and much less intertaine any disputation
with them, for they who enter into a parlie, are not far from yielding, if
they like the conditions of the truce.

Secondly, let us consider,. Sect. 3. The third means is to set our selves
alvvaies in Gods presence. Job 42.2. Psalm. 139.2.11. Ier. 17.10. Heb. 4.13.
that when we have hid our selves in the most secret corners from the eyes of
men, even then the Lord beholds us; for he is present every where, and
beholds not only our most secret actions, but also our most concealed
thoughts and cogitations; and therefore let us be ashamed not only of this
impiety, but also folly, to commit these works of darkness in the presence
of God, which we would shame to do if a child beheld us. For what would it
avail us to hide our wickedness from the eyes of mortal men, who are
malefactors like unto our selves, when as God who is to be our Judge, our own
consciences which must be produced as witnesses against us, and Satan our
accuser, are privy to it? What will it benefit us, if by our secrecy we
escape worldly shame and disgrace, when as hereafter our filthiness shall be
discovered to our eternal reproach, and the utter confussion of our faces in
the presence of God, his Saints, and blessed Angels? what will it profit us to
be acquitted at the bar of the earthly Judge, and to be delivered from
temporary punishments which might bring us to repentance; if for our secret
wickedness, we must one day be arraigned before the supreme Judge of heaven
and earth, and be condemned and adjudged to suffer the eternal torments of hell
fire?

Thirdly,. Sect. 4. The fourth means is to consort our selves with chaste
company. Prou. 5.8.
if we would preserve our bodies in purity and chastity, and not defile them
with unclean lusts and filthy fornication, we must sort our selves in their
company who are chaste and honest, and flee the society of such as are wanton,
lascivious, and infamous, through their filthy conversation. And this is that
preservative which the wise man prescribes us, Prou. 5.8. Keep thy way far
from the harlot, and come not near the door of her house: Lest thou give
thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel. So the Apostle
advises the Corinthians, not to keep company with fornicators, nor so much
as to eat with them who were so reputed, 2. Cor. 5.6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.5.9.
because a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, and one man being infected
with this contagious disease of uncleanness, is fit to infect a whole
society, their touch and breath, their wanton behavior, and ribald speeches
being noisome and contagious. With this agrees the counsel of the son of
Sirach. Eccles 9.3 11.
Chap. 9.3. Meet not an harlot, lest thou fall into her snares. 4. Use not the
company of a woman that is a singer and a dancer, neither hear her, lest thou
be taken with her craftiness. and verse. 11. Sit not at all with another man's
wife, neither lie with her upon the bed, nor banquet with her, lest thine heart
incline unto her, and so through thy desire, fall into destruction. And this
was that preservative which Joseph used to keep him from the contagion of his
Mistresses lust, namely by fleeing speedily out of her company, when she
allured him unto sin. Neither let any man presuming upon his own strength,
desperately cast himself into tentation; for though he have a heart as firm
and hard as iron, yet the fire of lust will work upon it, and cause it to
become soft and effeminate; and though he be not overcome, yet by frequenting
such company, a man shall bring a blot and stain upon his good name; for as
the candle sticking upon the white wall, though it does not burn it, yet it
blacketh it with soote and smoke; so, howsoever this polluted society does not
inflame us with this fire of lust, yet it blemisheth a man's credit and
reputation.

The fourth means to preserve chastity,. Sect. 5. The fifth means is
temperance in our meats and drinks.
and to keep us from the pollution of unclean lusts, is temperance and
sobriety in our meats and drinks: unto which is required, first, in respect
of the quantity, that we eat and drink sparingly, to fatisfie, and not to
glut nature; yea, and if this be not sufficient, that we sometimes use total
abstinence for the keeping under and subduing of these fleshly lusts: and
secondly in respect of the quality, that we do not use pampering meats, and
inflaming drinks (like the Papists in the time of their fast) which are the
bellows wherewith the fire of lust is kindled and inflamed. Sine cerere and
libero friget venus.
For as temperance is the most faithful keeper of chastity; so intemperance
in eating and drinking is the usual harbinger of lust, the nurce of
uncleanness, and the oil and wood wherewith these flames of filthiness are
kindled in the heart. And hence it is that the Prophet Jeremy compares
whoremongers to pampered horses, who when they were well fed and filled,
neighed after their neighbors wives: Ier. 5.8. Ier. 5.8.
And therefore as his madness were to be derided, who when he were burnt with
overmuch heat of the fire, should still cast on more wood and oil, because he
should rather slack it by withdrawing the matter wherewith it is nourished; so
it is no less ridiculous if a man burning in lust, and desiring to have this
scorching heat allaied, should pamper himself with meat and drink, which
are the ordinary means more to inflame him; whereas he should rather use
fasting and abstinence, which is the water wherewith the fire of lust is slaked
and quenched. Sect. 6. The sixth means is to turn away our eyes from vvanton
objects. Job 31.1.


The fifth means is that we turn away our eyes from wanton and lascivious
objects; and that according to Jobs example we make a covenant with them, that
we will not in any lustful manner look upon a woman. For the eyes are the
ordinary windows, whereat these fleshly lusts, like thieves, enter to rob us
of our chastity, and he who has a wanton, wandering, and an adulterous eye,
will soon after also have an adulterous heart. And therefore as their folly
is to be laughed at, who keep their pelf and trash under lock and bolt, and
leave an open passage to their chief treasury, whereby every thief may easily
enter; so is their behavior much more ridiculous, who keep their earthly
riches, and transitory pelf under lock and key, and leave open the passages
of the heart unregarded, by which the arch-theefe Satan may cause his slavish
lusts to enter and spoil us of our chief jewels, the purity and chastity of
the heart and soul. Manifold examples of this folly we have recorded in the
Scriptures to make us more carefully to avoid it. Sichem looking upon Dinah
with lustful eyes was entangled in her love, Genesis 34.2. 2. Sam. 11.2.
and thereby moved to defile her. David idly gazing upon Bethshabe, Vriahs
wife, was caught with her beauty, and committed adultery with her. 2. Sam.
13.1.
So Amnon beholding the beauty of his sister Thamar, was thereby moved to an
incestuous rape. And therefore the son of Syrach gives good counsel for the
avoiding of this mischief, Eccles. 9.5.8.
chap. 9 5. Gaze not on a maid, that thon fall not by that which is precious
in her. Verse. 8. Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look not on
others beauty: for many have perished by the beauty of women, for through it
love is kindled as a fire. To the same purpose one says fitly: Gregory.
Non licet intueri, quod non licet concupisci, It is not lawful too earnestly
to behold that, which it is not lawful to covet, because the sight is the
ordinary means to inflame the concupisence.

But as those who desire to preserve their chastity ought not to be curious
beholders of the beauty of women, Lascivious pictures.
so also they must restrain their eyes from looking upon other wanton
spectacles; as for example, they may not behold lascivious pictures, which are
dumb orators that persuade unto lust, and lively presidents, out of which a
wanton mind will easily take out a pattern of uncleanness for his own
imitation. VVanton books.
They may not read lascivious books and wanton Poets, which effeminate the
mind, and make it tender to receive the impression of lust. Or if the laudable
love of wit, eloquence and learning make them to scrape for these pearls and
rich treasures in these filthy dunghils, they must watchfullie take heed that
be not defiled with any pollution of uncleanness; and whilst like good
Merchants they sail in these dangerous seas, to enrich themselves with
learning and knowledge, they are with all care and diligence to avoid these
rocks of ribauldrie, whereupon they may at unawares make shipwreck of their
chastity, and to stop their ears against these sirens songs, which will cause
them to drown themselves in the gulf of uncleanness. For otherwise we shall
find it to be a bad change, when to enrich our minds with knowledge, we
impouerish our hearts of sanctification, and for the gaining of learning to
make a wilful forfeiture of grace and virtue. But especially it behooves
those who have any care of preserving their chastity, that they turn away
their eyes from beholding stage plays, Stage plays.
which are usually fraughted with scurrilous jests, and ribauld filthiness, and
in this respect no less pernicious for ye inflaming of filthy lust, then
bauds and panders: in that these professedlie infuse their poison, but they
stealingly and at unawares; they corrupt but one at once, but these whole
multitudes at the same instant; they oftentimes deal by blunt persuasion,
having nothing to assist them, but the inward lust of the party whom they
allure, but these have all the help of art, wit, eloquence, masking shows,
sweet music, and wanton dalliance, to poison the mind with effeminate lust,
and to prepare the heart for unclean desires; in a word, they perform their
works of darkness in the dark, and in secret corners, as shaming that the
Sun should see them, but these in the clear light, at noone day act their
impieties with brazen foreheads, without shame or blushing.

The sixth means to preserve chastity,. Sect. 7. The sixth means is to
exercise our selves in painful labor.
and to keep our bodies undefiled, is painful labor in the works of our
honest callings; for when our minds are intentive unto our business with
serious diligence, they will have no leisure to wander about lascivious
objects; and when the body is wearied with laborious imploime^ts, it will not
so easily wantonize in fleshly lust. Whereas contrariwise idleness and sloth, is
the usual harbinger, which provides lust a lodging, and when our hearts are
clean swept from all honest imploiments, they become fit habitations for the
unclean spirits, to keep their revels in. Super Matheum.
To this purpose is that of Chrysostom: Vitium libidinis facile ex otio
nascitur, nam definitio amoris est, Animae vacantis passio: The vice of lust
(says he) easily springs from slothsome idleness, for this is the
definition of lustful love, Cato.
that it is, a passion of an idle mind. For as one says by doing nothing, we
learn to do that which is ill; and when we are idle in Gods service, the
devil takes us up, and imploieth us in the works of darkness.

Unto this we may add watchfulness, VVatchfulnes.
or moderate sleep; which is also a good preservative of chastity, and a
repeller of lust: whereas contrariwise, he that gives himself to excessive
sleeping can hardly be fared from lust and venerie. And this as it is found
true by common experience, so it agrees with natural reason; seeing the
excrement of nature, and fountain of lust, is as well supplied by excessive
sleep, as by immoderate diet. And this the holy Ghost implies in the
narration of David's whoredom, where as he says, that he rose from his bed
toward evening, and then lusted after Vriahs wife; 2. Sam. 11.2.
for they who spend the day in sleeping, by all likelihood will spend the night
in lusting.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the seventh means to preserve chastity, towit, Christian
modesty.
THe seventh means to preserve chastity, Sect. 1. Of modesty in the looks
and countenance. 1. Tim. 2.9.
is Christian modesty; which consists in a sober, decent, and grave carriage
and behavior in all things which appertain unto us. As first, when as we
show our selves modest, bashful, and shamefast in our looks and countenance;
for as this is a notable means to restrain the party from all wanton and
lascivious behavior, when as he cannot without blushing behold it in others;
so is it as a strong fort for the defense of chastity, whereby those who are
wantonlie disposed 'are discouraged from assaulting it. Seeing there is little
hope that they, who will not use a wanton look, will be drawn to use wanton
behavior; or that they who will not let lust have a resting place in the
suburbs, will ever suffer it to inhabit in the heart of the city. Whereas
contrariwise a glancing eye and wanton looks, an impudent face, and brazen
forehead, Ier. 3.3. Prou. 7.13.
as they show the inward uncleanness of the heart, so they embolden the party
to use all manner of wanton dalliance without blushing; and harten others who
are lascivious to give the assault unto their chastity, when they find it
unfenced and unguarded. Neither can they expect any forcible repulse, when the
countenance (as it were) standing at the door, inuiteth them to come in, or
that they are like to find any sharp encounter; when the very looks offer a
parley and promise a yielding before the assault.

Secondly,. Sect. 2. Of Modesty shevved in words and speech.
this modesty appears in the words and speech, and that in sober and
discreet silence, or else in still, peaceable and pure communication: whereas
contrariwise continual babbling, loud and clamarous speech, are made by the
wise man the ensigns and badges of an harlot, Prou. 7.11. She is still
babbling and loud, Prou. 7.11.
whose feet cannot abide in her house. And the Apostle describing the wanton
widows, says, that they are pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things that
are not comely. 1. Tim. 5.11.13. 1. Tim. 5.11.13.
But especially ribald and filthy communication is to be avoided of al those
who have a desire to preserve their chastity: for as the Apostle says, evil
words corrupt good manners; 1. Cor. 15.33.
and the wanton tongue, being set on fire by hell, as it inflameth a man's own
heart with lust, so with this rotten and contagious speech, it infecteth the
standers by, and corrupts their hearts with unclean desires. Hence it is that
these filthy speeches are in the Scriptures so straightly forbidden: Ephesians.
4.29. and 5.4.
Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but
that which is good to the use of edifying, ihat it may minister grace unto the
hearers. And 5.4. he requires that filthiness, Col. 3.8.
foolish talking, and jesting which are things not comely, should not be so
much as named among Christians. Nevertheless the Gallants of the world, who
take upon them the name of Christ, make this filthy communication, and these
scurrilous jests, the common exercise of their wit, and the music of their
mirth.

Thirdly,. Sect. 3. Of modesty in our gestures and behavior.
this modesty is also to be showed in our gestures and behavior, which ought
to be grave and sober, and not any way sauouring of vain lightness, and
lascivious wantonness. The which as they are the fruits of a polluted heart,
and the flames which issue from the hidden fire of lust, so also do they
nourish the root from which they spring, and redouble the heat of carnal
concupiscence kindled in the heart. Among these we may especially number
wanton dancing, and lascivious kissing and embracing. All which I distinguish
by their epithets, Dancing.
because I cannot see how any of them may simply be condemned: for seeing we
read of holy and honest dancing used by holy men and women, when they rejoiced
before God in the fruition of his benefits; as David before the Arc, 2. Sam.
616. Exodus 15.
Miriam and her companions, after the Egyptians were destroyed in the red sea;
the daughters of Shiloh at their yearly feast, Judge. 21.19.
which they kept unto the Lord; the women of Israel after the overthrow of the
army of the Philistims; 1. Sam. 18.7. Eccles. 34.
and seeing the holy Ghost himself tells us, that as there is a time to
mourn, so also there is a time to dance: I see no reason but that now upon the
like occasion, and with the same holy affection, it may lawfully be used to
express our rejoicing, cheer the mind, and exercise the body, as well as
music, or any other such like pastime and recreation. But as for that light,
wanton, and lascivious dancing between men and women, which is too too common
in these times, wherein they use one toward another, all manner of enticing
gestures, and sometimes wanton and obscene behavior, serving as the bellows
to inflame lust, the which in a wicked proportion they sit to as light and
lascivious music; it is no better the^ Venus revels, which effeminate and
corrupt the mind, making it fit for unclean desires, and for all manner of
unlawful lusts, and therefore carefully to be avoided of all those who have
any desire to preserve their chastity.

The like also may be said of kissing and embracing; Kissing and embracing.
Genesis 27.27. and 29.11. and 33.4. Exodus 18.7. 2. Sam. 19.39. Luke 7.38.45. Act.
20.37. Romans 16.16. Genesis 46 29. Eccles. 3.5.
which are not to be condemned, if they do not proceed from an heart polluted
with lust, but are used after a civil and honest manner to express our love
one to another, seeing they have been always in use amongst the faithful in
all ages, as testimonies of mutual love, which may be free from all
wantonness and lasciviousness, seeing in former times they have been used
between man and man, and in our own times by parents to their little
children. And therefore they are only to be avoided in wanton dalliance
between those who are light and lascivious, when as they are not used for
civil courtesy, or to express pure and undefiled love in due and seasonable
time; but rather to inflame the heart with lust, and to express the inward
uncleanness of the mind, in which case, this near approaching, and these
impure touches, Prou. 7.13.
and lascivious dalliance, are as like to inflame impure hearts with burning
concupiscence, as the spark of fire to inflame flax, or gunpowder, when they
are joined together.

Lastly, modesty is to be showed in apparel,. Sect. 4. Of modesty in
apparel and outward deeking. 1. Tim. 2.9.
and in the decking and adorning of the body, after a grave, sober, and
seemly manner, due respect being had to the persons, sex, degree, and calling,
as being a notable means to preserve chastity, and to subdue fleshly lusts.
And this the Apostle requires, 1. Tim. 2.9. I will also that the women away
themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastnes and modesty, not with
broidred hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel. 10. But (as it
becomes women that profess the fear of God) with good works. For as there
is a chaste heart, and a chaste eye, so also there is a chaste habit and attire,
which as it nourishes the inward purity of the mind; so it notable preserves
the person who uses it from the assaults of those who are lasciuiouslie
disposed; for they seldom offer to buie these lustful wares, but where the
sign of wantonness hangs out; neither dare these lascivious thieves offer
to rob that party of their chastity, whom these outwardly guarded with
modesty and sobriety. Whereas contrariwise a wanton heart delights in a
wanton habit, and they who have a whorish affection, will commonly proclaim it
by their whorish apparel, like the harlot in the Proverbs, Pro. 7.10.. Sect.
5. Apparel must be fitted to the sex.
chap. 7.10.

Now this modesty in apparel is showed, first, when as it is fitted to the
sex, men wearing that which belongs to men, and women, that which
appertains unto them; for as it is an abomination unto the Lord, when the
woman wears that which pertains unto the man, and when the man puts on
woman's raiment, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
as it is, Deuteronomy. 22.5, so also it inflameth their hearts with lust and
uncleanness, making the man effeminate and womannish, and the woman bold and
mannish. The which is an ordinary fault in these days, wherein many men and
women so disguise themselves, that it is hard to distinguish their sex by their
habit; like the effeminate youth, who having propounded a question to Diogenes,
was enjoined before he would return any answer, to put off his apparel,
Laert. lib. 6.
that he might know whether he were a man or a woman.

Secondly,. Sect. 6. Apparel must be fitted to our calling.
when as every one attire themselves according to their place and calling,
decently, and soberly, according to the example of those who are most grave,
virtuous, and religious in the country, where they dwell, respect being had to
their age, calling, and degree; whereas contrariwise it is both a sign and a
cause of immodesty and wantonness, when this rule is not observed; 1. Pet. 3.3.
as first when in respect of the matter it is gorgious and costly, unbeseeming
their particular calling and degree; or when in respect of the fashion it is
vain and garish, unbefitting the general calling of a Christian; for pride
and bravery causes wantonness, and wantonness makes an easy way for lust
and uncleanness. Neither do those who curiously and garishly deck their
bodies with costly and wanton attire, respect their own private use and
contentment, but rather as it may probably be thought, they adorn themselves
for the market, and set forth their beauty to the sale, betraying their
chastity to him who bids most or best pleases. To this purpose Cyprian
says fitly, Lib. de babit. virgin.
that Ornamentorum and vestium insignia, and lenocinia formarum, non nisi
prostitutis and impudicis foeminis congruunt; and nullarum fere preciosior
cultus quam quarum pudor vilis est: Gorgeous and garish attire, and adulterate
beauty become none but harlots, who set themselves forth to the sale; neither
do any put on more precious apparel, then they who most basely value their
chastity and honesty.

But as people offend in this kind diverse ways,. Sect. 7. Of immodestie
showed in painting the face, and laying out the naked breasts.
so especially those vain and wanton women, who not content with that natural
complexion which God has given them, paint their faces with adulterate
beauty, and lay open their naked breasts to public view: the which if they
be virgins, they should not in their maiden-like modesty so much as by chance
discover without blushing; if wives, they should reserve them for their
husbands peculiar delight, as the wise man speaks. Pro. 5.19.
Both which as by their immodestie and audacious impudency they corrupt their
own hearts with pride and wantonness, so also they inueagle others with
carnal love and fleshly lust, making them adore with their chief devotions, a
painted idol, and a living image. Whereby as they work their destruction
(without repentance) if they be caught in their nets, which they have spread
for them; so do they by this outward decking deforme and defile their own
souls, and bring upon themselves sin and condemnation, though others should
not be entangled in their snares. For as Hierom says, Si vir vel mulier se
ornauerit, and multus hominu^ ad se prouocarit, and si nullum inde sequetur
damnur, iudicium tamen patietur aeternum; quia venenum attulit, sifuisset qui
biberit: If any wantonly docke themselves, to provoke others in a wanton manner
to gaze upon them, though no hurt follow upon it, yet they shall be liable to
eternal judgment, because they prepared a poison, if there had been any who
would have tasted of it. Lib. deserm. Dom.
So Austine exclameth against the madness of those who transform their
natural shape into a base picture, affirming it to be a fault which in some
respects matcheth whoredom, for (says he) Ibipudicitia, hic natura
adulteratur: In that chastity, Foeminae manus deo inferunt, quando id quod
ille sormarit reformere and transfigurare contendunt, etc. Cyprian. de babitu.
virgin. Hos. chap. 2. verse. 2.
in this nature itself is adulterated. Another says, that women who paint
themselves, offer violence and wrong against God himself, when as they take
upon them to transform and mend that which he has formed; not knowing that
that which is borne is the work of God, but that which is changed and
transformed the work of the devil. But concerning this point, I have written
more largely in my lectures upon Hosea; and therefore I will here pass it
over, referring the reader unto that place.

And thus have I set down the means to preserve our chastity,. Sect. 8.
Those that by no means can contain, they are bound to marry.
and to keep our bodies and souls undefiled from all uncleanness and
unlawful lusts; the which means if we carefully use, earnestly desiring to
have them sanctified unto us by fervent and effectual prayer, and yet
nevertheless find in us still burning lusts inflaming our hearts, and
provoking us to satisfy them in the actions of uncleanness, then are we,
setting aside all worldly impediments and inconveniences, to use that lawful
remedy which God has sanctified for the preserving of our bodies and souls
in purity and chastity, even holy marriage; which estate is honorable, and
the bed undefiled, according to the Apostles counsel, 1. Cor. 7.2. Heb. 13.4.
1. Cor. 7.2.9.
For the avoiding of fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every
woman have her own husband. For as it is verse. 9. Better it is to marry then
to burn: better it is to lead a poor life in the fear of God, according to
his own ordinance which he has sanctified, then to defile our bodies and
souls with strange and promiscuous lusts, though in the mean time we should
have for our own use plenty and abundance.

And these are the means to preserve our bodies and souls chaste in single
life from fornication and uncleanness; Sect. 9. Of the means to preserues vf
from adultery.
besides which, there is another means peculiar unto married persons, to
preserve them in the estate of marriage from whordome and adultery, and that
is, that either party love their yokefellow above all others in the world: for
he that delights in the wife of his youth, and lets her be unto him as
the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe: he that is at all times satisfied with her
breasts, and delights in her love continually, he will never take any
pleasure in a strange woman, nor embrace the bosom of a stranger, as the wise
man shows, Prou. 5.18.19. Pro. 5.18.19.
Whereas contrariwise, he who takes no pleasure at home, takes the least
occasion to range abroad; he that can find no sweetness in his own field, is
ready to break the fence, and to stray into forbidden pastures; he that
begins to loath his wife, will soon after love a harlot, and seek delight
in unlawful lust. Now, that this love may be of sufficient force to restrain
all married persons from unlawful concupiscence, they must learn to ground it
not upon carnal respects, as upon beauty, personage, riches, friends; no, nor
yet upon their moral virtues, and other excellent parts, for then the causes
being taken away, their love also must needs cease; as we find by daily
experience in many who having married in the burning, and almost raging heat
of their love, have afterward come to as great a lothing one of another, when
either they find themselves disapointed, and unsatisfied in their hopes, or the
cause of their love quite taken away, or decayed: but they must ground their
love upon the love of God, and perform it one toward another, in obedience to
his commandment; as also upon the bond of marriage (which nothing can dissolve
but death or adultery) whereby there is such a near union between them, that
they are no more two but one flesh; so that though all other causes fail, yet
they are to continue their love toward them, because they are parts of
themselves, Ephesians. 5.28.29
and members of their own body. And therefore when they are faulty, wounded,
and diseased with infirmities and corruptions, they are not to cast them of,
and to seek for new, changing their true members, as it were for wooden
legs and arms, but there to use all good means, whereby they may be cured
and amended.

And thus have I showed what fornication and adultery is, the hainousnes of
the sins,. Sect. 10. The conclusion of this treatise.
and the grieuousnes of their punishments, together with the means whereby we
may be preserved from them; now it only remains, that I earnestly desire
the Lord, the fountain of all purity, chastity, and holiness, that he will
with his holy spirit bless that which I have delivered to public view, that
it may be effectual to those that read it, either to restrain them from
filthy lusts, if yet they be not defiled with them, or to reclaim them from
this filthiness, if already they have been defiled with it, that so they
together with all the Saints of God, being washed and cleansed with the living
waters of his word and spirit, may be presented unto him glorious and
undefiled, without either spot, or wrinckle, and so being sanctified, may be
admitted as citizens of that pure city the new Jerusalem: and as heirs of
that glorious kingdom with Christ, which his most precious bloodshed has
purchased for us. The which mercy the Lord vouchsafe unto us, even for the
same his most dear sons sake; to whom with the father and his holy spirit,
be ascribed al glory and praise, power, majesty, might and dominion, both now
and for evermore: Amen.

FINIS.
A TREATISE WHEREIN THE SIN OF BRIBERIE IS DISCOVERED and displayed, that it
may be abhorred and avoided.
CHAP. I. Of the occasion of this Treatise.
AS there is great friendship,. Sect. 1. That the sins of covetousness are most
hardly cured.
and an inseparable league between corrupted nature, and all manner of sin
whatsoever; so this inviolable amity does no where more manifestly appear,
then between it, and the sins of covetousness. Whereof it comes to pass,
that whereas other sins, either lurk in corners, as being ashamed to show
themselves, or hang down the head when they are discovered and reproved,
selfe-guiltinesse taking from them all apology and excuse; these sins of
covetousness are partly so covered, and hid out of the sight of the offender
with carnal love, and partly so gilded over with glorious pretenses, and as it
were fenced in on all sides with excuses, which partiality makes seem
impregnable; that they dare vaunt themselves in open view, stand in their own
defense, and with an audacious forehead encounter all opposers; yea such sure
possession do vices of this nature take of the hearts of men, and so strongly
are they backed with the multitude and quality of the offenders, More danger
in reproving sin, then in committing it.
who all with united forces stand up both by word and example in their defense;
that commonly the reproof is made more unpardonable then the sin; and
whilst the vice, though unmasked, stareth in men's faces without shame or
blushing, the reprehender is discountenanced, if not persecuted and punished,
and his reasons are not only rejected as weak, but also exploded as
ridiculous.

Of this we have an example in our Savior Christ himself;. Sect. 2. The
former point cleared by example.
for whereas when he sounded the sad tunes of the law against sin in general,
and sought to affect the people with this mournful music, he only
complains that they did not weep; Luke 7.32.
it is said when he went about to persuade them not to set their hearts upon
the earthly Mammon, the covetous Pharisees laughed him to scorn. Luke 16.14.
So when Ezechiel preached the word of God unto those whose hearts went after
covetousness, Ezec. 33.31.
they gave him the hearing, but when he had said what be could against their
sin, they mowed at him with their mouths, and derided him for his labor.
And so when Paul spoke against the Idol Diana, Demetrius and the craftsmen,
not so much in heat of their devotion, as for the loss of their gains which
they formerly enjoyed by making filuer shrines unto their goddess, A and.
19.24.
were, at the hearing of this doctrine, filled, not only with anger, but also
with outrageous fury, whereby they brought the whole City into an uproar, and
filled it with confusion, laying violent hands upon Paul's companions, when as
the Apostle himself was out of the way. Neither can Gods Ministers, entreating
of the like argument, expect better success in these worser times, and
corrupter age of the world, wherein men's goodness is measured according to their
wealth, and not their virtue; and every one esteemed according to the
quantity of his riches, without any respect of the means whereby he has
compassed them.

The which was some discouragement unto me,. Sect. 3. Impudency of sin a
discouragement to the reprouer.
intending to speak and write against one particular branch of covetousness,
the sin of briberie, because I feared lest when I had taken all the pains I
could in dissuading men from this vice, I might justly complain with the
Prophet, that I have spent my strength in vain, and that the word of the Lord
is made a reproach unto me, and in derision daily. Ier. 20.8.
For who sees not, that this sin of briberie is grown unto a common practice
and usual fashion, having both multitude of offenders to defend it, and the
greatness of the delinquents to grace and countenance it? In so much as now it
is made a note of a brave mind, to receive great gifts, and not to take baser
bribes, or to stoop unto every sordidous pray. Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum
respuit aurum?
Yea now it is counted a sign of inciuilitie, not to accept of all proffered
kindnesses, and a badge of folly and sottish stupiditie to be bashful in
exacting bribes, when the party is backward in tendering of them.

Howbeit, on the other side,. Sect. 4. Gods Ministers must reprove those
sins which they have small hope to reform.
considering with my self that Christ inueighed against the Mammon of
iniquity, though he were derided; that Ezechiel preached against the sins of
the people, though his sermons were but like the pleasant songs of a cunning
minstrell to make them merry; that Paul never ceased to reprove the idolatry
of the Ephesians, though he were persecuted for his pains; that being called
to be Gods Ambassadors, we must be ready for the delivery of of our
message, not only to accompany Esaias in the Kings court, but also Jeremy in
the stocks and dungeon; and that being appointed the Lords watchmen, Ezech.
33.8.
we ought to tell the people of their sins, unless we would have their blood
required at our hands; therefore remoouing out of sight all impediments, I
resolved to entreat of this argument, and to inueigh against this sin; the
love of my country, the respect of my calling, and the necessity of the times
so requiring it.

For who may not plainly perceive,. Sect. 5. That the sin of briberie has
corrupted most states and conditions of men.
that does not wilfully shut his eyes, that where this sin of bribing
reigns, Rulers are corrupted, Justice perverted, impunitie admitted, and
together with it all sin and wickedness, the whole state of government
disioynted and disordred? Neither has this contagion tainted one place alone,
but has infected and poisoned the most part, if not the whole state of
Christendom: and as it was truly said in the waining and declining estate of
the Roman Church and monarchy; Omnia venalia Romae; all things at Rome are
set to sale: so is it but too truly verified in these our days both of that
place, which is now the common market, not only of temporal, but also of
spiritual things, as dispensations and pardons for sins, yea even of the
joys of heaven, and likewise of the most parts of Christendom, which are
exceedingly ouerspread and corrupted with this vice. For is not that found
true in the common experience of these times, which the Wise man observed in
his days, Eccles. 10.19.
that money answers unto all, rules all, disposes all? and do not almost
all men make a clear passage unto themselves by gifts and rewards, for the
atchieuing of their desires, and with these golden rays ripen all their hopes?
Do but look into the particulars, and we shall find this no false imputation
laid upon the Christian State, but a lamentable truth to be bewailed with
deep groans, and mournful tears. For howsoever kingdoms themselves and
free monarchies be invaluable, and above the pitch of any price, yet what is
there in kingdoms which are not daily compassed by rewards? By this ladder
some mount up into the seat of eminency, purchasing by gifts titles, which
never came to them by, inheritance, or by desert; neither do they now as in
former times, ennoble and dignifie themselves, by venturing their life, and
spending their blood in the defense of their country; but have found a
speedier and more easy course for the satisfying their ambitious desires,
namely, by friends bought with gifts. So that now if ever the saying of the
Poet is verified: In pretio pretium est, dat census honores, census amicitias;
pauper vbique iacet: Rewards are only rewarded, gifts buy honors, and procure
friends; whereas those who are poor in purse, are contemptible in their
persons. So heretofore men were preferred unto offices for their service,
sufficiency and desert; but now the usual entrance into them is by large
gifts; which way is so common, by reason all the other passages are stopped up,
that men are not ashamed to pass through it at noone day; and without blushing
to justify their entrance. Now what wonder is it if these men who entered into
their places by bribing, do in the execution of them live by extorsion? or
that paying for them only for term of life, more then would purchase a fee
simple of like value, if they took no more but due and ordinary fees, they
should take unjust courses to help their bargain, and to keep themselves from
beggerie? Neither is this fault only now to be found among some cunning
courtiers, who have come to their skill by much study, and long experience; but
even amongst Magistrates in cities, who are grown more skilful in cunning
ha^dling of a bribing match, the^ in their own professions and trades, for
learning whereof they have served seven years apprentiship.

But as there are many forward proficients in this art of bribing, so none
goes before many lawyers of these times;. Sect. 5. None go before some
lawyers in the art of bribing.
who in respect of their skill and deep reach into these wicked mysteries, may
justly deserve to be esteemed not only Masters of this art, but even Doctors
and professors. For what matter is so foul and unjust, which many of them will
not countenance and defend for an extraordinary reward? what title so strong
and clear, which they are not ready to undermine and overthrow for the
gaining of an ample bribe? Neither are the lay estate and commonwealths alone
tainted with this corruption, but the infection of this vice has corrupted the
Church likewise. For if we look into the schools of the Prophets, the
seminaries of learning and religion, we shall find that the preferments which
by the founders of Colleges were destinated and appropriated to those who were
poorest in purse, most destitute of friends, and worthiest in gifts, both of
piety and learning; are now sometimes conferred upon such, as are able to make
most friends by gifts and rewards, though altogether unfit and unworthy of
them. So likewise the preferments of the Church are in these times by the same
means compassed in many places; for thieves and intruders enter the Church
door by the help of these golden picklockes. Neither is it now any great
furtherance to the obtaining of Church preferments, that a man by laborious
study has attained unto depth of learning and eminency of gifts; for though
his head be never so full fraught with knowledge, yet if his hands be empty of
bribes, he may have leave to stand without doors; and though he have the
tongue of the learned, yet he shall never persuade his greedy patron, unless
he can make golden verses, and move him to hearken with a silver sounding
voice. Yea in truth learning in these times is accidentally an hinderance to
the obtaining the rewards of learning: for if that money were saved which is
laid out upon books and candles, and bestowed in gifts and bribes; and if that
time were spent in laying cunning plots, for the procuring of preferments,
which is bestowed in making men worthy to be preferred; it would prove a
far readier and speedier course, to compass these perferments; though in the
mean while they should be barbarously ignorant, and thereby fitter to
destroy the Church then to build it, to betray it into the power of the
spiritual wolf, then to defend or deliver it. Whereby it appears, that
almost all states in all places, are exceedingly corrupted and disordered with
this vice of bribing, so as in these times we may make that bold and general
challenge:

Quid non argento? quid non corrumpitur auro?
Qui maiora dabit munera victor erit. Mich. Verin.

What is there which is not corrupted with silver and gold? And who in
competition and in all suites, has the pre-eminence and victory, but he who
can bring largest gifts? Neither are the preferments of honor only attained
unto by these bribing courses, but also the preferments of wealth and riches:
for as the cunning fisher baiteth his hook with a small fish to get a greater,
so the only course in these days to compass greater wealth, is to venture
that which we already have, to bring our state to a low ebb when we would
hopefullie expect a full sea, and to impouerish our selves with giving bribes,
when we desire to be advanced to the greatest riches.

CHAP. II. That bribing is forbidden and condemned as a great sin, both by
God and men.
But the more general this vice is,. Sect. 1. Briberie condemned, both by the
law of God, and light of nature.
the more danger there is of being infected with it, and consequently the
greater care and circumspection must be used, to keep our selves from the
common pollution of bribing, whether we respect giving or receiving. And to
this purpose that we may be more strongly armed against this sin, which
whilst it allureth and delights, pearceth the very heart and soul; I will
set forth the greatness and odiousness thereof, together with the miserable
fruits which it brings forth, both in respect of particular persons, and
whole commonwealths and countries. That it is a sin to bribe, appears
hereby, in that the Scriptures forbid and condemn it. Exodus 23.8. Exodus 23.8.
Thou shall take no gift; for the gift blinds the wise etc. The which is
repeated and by repetition confirmed, Deuteronomy. 16.19. Deuteronomy. 16.19.
wrest not thou the law, nor respect any person; neither take reward etc. Yea
not only is it condemned as a sin by the Scriptures, which is the exact rule
of justice; but also by the light of nature, though much decayed and corrupted.
For even Heathen men have abhorred bribing, as a corrupting sore, which eats
out the heart of all virtuous carriage, and as a fretting canker which deuoureth
whole societies and commonwealths. Ephialtes, although a poor man, Aelian.
lib. 11. de var. hist.
refused great gifts when they were offered, because, as he said, he should
thereby be moved to deal unjustly, if his benefactors importuned him; or be
condemned as ungrateful for not requiting their benefits. Alcumenes said, that
he could not receive gifts, Plutarch. Apotheg. Laco^.
and keep peace with the laws. Phocio^ receiving an hundred talents as a gift
from Alexander, demanded of the messenger wherefore it was sent to him, rather
then to any other of the Athenians; and upon this answer returned, Because he
knew him to be an honest and just man; he replied again: Why then I would
entreat your master, that he will suffer me to continue in my honesty and
justice: thereby implying, that he could not possibly be such an one, if he
suffered himself to be corrupted with rewards.

But the Scripture goes further,. Sect. 2. The Scripture condemns bribing as
an heinous sin. Amos. 5.12.
and condemns bribing, not only as a sin, but also as a mighty sin.
Amos 5.12. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: they
afflict the just, they take rewards, and they oppress the poor in the gate.
The which as it is true of all bribers, so especially of those who being in the
place of Magistracy and authority are corrupted with rewards and moved thereby
to pervert judgment; and also of all others who are allured by bribes, to
attempt any thing which is unlawful and wicked. For all such grieuouslie sin
against God, How the briber sins against God.
their neighbor, and themselves; against the Lord, not only by direct
breaking of his commandment, but also in dishonoring his name after an
exttaordinarie manner, namely, by drawing him as much as in them lies, into
the fellowship of their sin, or at least into the slander of it. For
Magistrates are Gods deputies and vicegerents here on earth, and the judgments
which they administer are not their own, but the judgments of the great king
of heaven and earth; as Iehosaphat tells his Judges, 2. Chron. 19.6.
2. Chron. 19.6. Take heed what you do; for you execute not the judgments of
man, but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause, and judgment. When
as therefore they being corrupted do pervert judgment, what do they else but
make the Lord to the uttermost of their power to pronounce a false or unjust
sentence? What do they but offer unto him a kind of violence, in forcing him
by his substitutes to do that which is contrary to his own nature? For the
Lord respects not persons, nor receives rewards, as it is, 2. Chron. 19.7.
2. Chron. 19.7. Job. 34.19. and 36.18.
He regards not the rich more then the poor. Job 34.19. Neither can a
multitude of gifts move him to acquit the sinner, chap. 36.18. Where as they
contrariwise usurping Gods name and place, by rewards are seduced to pervert
judgment, acquitting the guilty, and condemning the innocent; and so bring an
imputation of injustice upon God himself, and pollute his holy name with the
filthiness of their sins, as the Lord challenges them, Ezech. 13.19. Ezech.
13.16.
Will ye pollute me among my people, for handfuls of barley, and pieces of
bread, to slay the souls of them that should not die, and in giving life to
the souls that should not live, in lying to my people that hear your lies?

Secondly, they directly offend against the Lord, in that they are ready to
set to sale, justice and truth, which are invaluable and most precious in his
sight; even as if the subject to satisfy his greedy appetite, should not be
content to rob his Princes treasury, but also should make sale of his great
Seal, and the scepter of his kingdom.

But as the briber sins against God,. Sect. 3. How the briber sins
against his neighbor, and first against private men.
so also against his neighbor; and that both private men, and whole societies.
Against private men he offends diverse ways; first against those whom he
wrongeth by injustice, either when he depriueth them of their right, robbing
them of that wherewith God has endowed them, or by condemning the innocent whom
God justifies, or by oppressing the weak and friendlesse, whom God would have
especially favored and respected.

Secondly, he sins against the party for whose sake he does injustice, in
that he takes a reward to countenance him in his unjust courses, to harden him
in his sin; and by making the wrongs and injuries justifiable and lawful,
which he has offered to his neighbor, causes him securely to go on in his
wickedness without repentance.

Lastly, he offends against his instruments whom he uses in these unjust
employments; for if Iesabel will unjustly spill Naboths blood, and spoil him
of his vineyard, then also must she have false witnesses to accuse him, and
unjust Judges to condemn him; and if Felix will be a cunning taker of bribes,
he must not go bluntly to work, and himself make the match; but he must have
his wicked brokers to beat the bargain, who also if the truth come to light,
may bear the blame, and excuse their master. And so these wretches seldom go
to hell alone, but draw others with them into the like fearful condemnation.

CHAP. III. How the briber sins against particular and private societies.
ANd thus the briber sins against particular me^.. Sect. 1. Of the briberie
of Landlords.
Against whole societies he likewise offends, and that both private and
public. Against private societies, as namely against families, whether they
belong to others, or that whereof himself is governor. Other men's families
they wast and spoil, by exacting gifts and rewards from them, and like
greedy, but yet idle birds, they rob other men's nests to feather their own.
In which respect the greedy Landlord principally offends, who being to let a
lease to a poor tenant, does not only raise the rent and inhance the fine;
but in churlish cunning keeps aloof, looking sternely, and speaking bigly;
neither can he be persuaded to come unto any agreement, until his wife or
children be feed with bribes, to mediate in the behalf of the poor tenant,
and so make him more tractable and inclinable to entertain his motion. And
when the lease is taken at so high a rate, that by sweating almost unto blood,
he cannot maintain his poor family, yet if he regard his Landlords
displeasure, and would have him to look upon him with a cheerful countenance;
yea if he desire to be out of his lurch, and would not have him always ready
to watch him a mischief when the least occasion is offered; he must at every
good time present him with the fat of his labors, though he spare it out of
his own belly; and be always ready at his Landlords pleasure, to toil
himself and his cattle also, with gainelesse pains, and unrewarded labor.
Esa. 3.14. Amos 8.6.
And what is this but as the Prophet speaks, to beat the people in pieces,
and to grind the faces of the poor? What is it but to sell the poor for old
shoes, and basely to undervalue those as slaves and men of no worth, whom
Christ has redeemed with the inestimable price of his own most precious
blood? What is this, but not only to pluck off the clothes from their backs,
and their meat from between their jaws, but even to pull off the skin from
the flesh, and the flesh from the bones, and like cruel Canibals, to eat the
flesh of Gods people, having first flaied off their skins, broken their
bones, and chopped them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the
caldron, as the Lord complains of the Princes of Israel: Mich. 3.2.3.
Mich. 3.2.3.

The like may be said of many covetous lawyers;. Sect. 2. The manisold briberie
of diverse lawyers.
for I do not accuse all, nor any, whose consciences do not accuse them; and
I know that there are many of this honorable profession who do truly fear
God, love justice, hate the corruptions of the time, and make conscience of
their ways; but I only tax such, as being wholly possessed and corrupted with
greedy covetousness, stand accused and convinced before God by the testimony
of their own consciences of these griping courses, and of this unconscionable
bribing, whereby they spoil whole families, and lay wast dwelling houses as
desert places; for when men come unto them for help, to maintain their just
titles, and to enter or keep them in possession of their right, they of all
others most wrong them; and if at al they preserve their state, it is that
themselves may pray upon it; using herein their clients as the briers the
sheep, who when he comes amongst them for shelter against the storm, is so
inueigled, that before he can get out, he must leave his coat behind him.
Neither is this the case of the one client alone, but herein both adverse
parties do well agree; for oftentimes both he that does and receives the
wrong, he that has a just title unto that for which he sueth, as well as he
that deteineth other men's rights from the true owners, have through tedious
suits their estates brought into such deep consumptions, that they never
recover of it. So as it had bin much better oftentimes to have given away their
right, then to have sued for it; because they can have no end of their
chargeable suites, till having spent all, their poverty procures a privilege
of exemption. In which respect many Lawyers of our times may be truly said to
accord contentions, as in the fable the kite compounded the strife between the
mouse and the frog, namely, by making a pray of both parties. And those who sue
for their help, are like unto true men, who when they cannot agree about the
division of their goods, either party desiring the greater share, commit the
matter to be comprimitted and decided by thieves, who enrich themselves with
the spoil of them both: or like unto the blind and the lame, contending who
should have the oister which the one spied, and the other took up, and not
being willing to decide the matter between themselves, did choose an
arbitratour, who did eat the meat himself, and gave a shell to either party.

But because it is not enough to say that they are diseased,. Sect. 3. That
lawyers diversely offend in this sin of bribing: 1. When as they take gifts
to maintain an unjust cause.
unless we also point at the sore; or to accuse them of bribing, unless we
also show wherein their taking rewards is to be condemned; we are further to
know, that in this regard they principally offend, first, when they take gifts
for the defending of an unjust cause, themselves knowing before they take it in
hand, that it is of this nature and quality. A common practice amongst many
lawyers of these times, who care not how bad the cause be, so the fee be good,
nor how empty the courts be of justice, so that their chests hereby may be
filled with riches. But herein they grieuouslie sin against the Judge, whom
by their pernicious eloquence, colorable glosses, and false suggestions, they
labor to blind, that they may seduce and misleade him out of the path of
justice, into the by-waies of error and unrighteousness. They sin against the
adverse party, joining their helping hands with such thieves, as would rob
them of their right, and spoil them of their just possessions. They sin
against their own client, either by taking his money to do him no good, his
cause being apparently evil; or when it is more hidden and intricate, by
strengthening him in evil, countenancing him in his bad course, and by selling
unto him for his fees an unjust bargain, which he has no more right to buy,
then the other to sell, which one day will be a clogge to his mind, and a
corrasiue to his conscience. And lastly, they sin against their own souls,
both by scraping out the sign of one who is an inheritour of Gods kingdom,
and by taking upon them a mark of reprobation and damnation, namely, the
receiving of a reward against the innocent: as it is, Psalm. 15.5. Psalm. 15
and whilst they call good evil, and evil good, wrong right, and right
wrong, justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of
the righteous from him, they make themselves subject to a double woe denounced
against them: Esa. 5.20.23.
Esa 5.20.23.

Secondly, they are guilty of this sin of bribing,. Sect. 4. 2. By exacting
extraordinary fees for ordinary business.
who exact extraordinary fees for ordinary labor, and excessive rewards for
small pains to themselves, and as little profit to their clients. The which is
a common fault of these times, wherein some lawyers so much ouerualue their
labors above their worth, that scarce ten times so much as their ordinary fee
will bring them to the bar, or cause them to open their lips in the behalse
of their client, if they be men of any note. But we are to know that by the
rule of justice, there ought to be a proportion between the work and reward,
between the service and the wages, respect being had of the dignity and state
of the person who takes the pains; and whatsoever exceeds this just
proportion is no better then briberie, extorsion, and theft in Gods sight.
Neither must this proportion be measured according to their own conceit, which
is commonly unequal and partial, through ouerweening pride, and bewitching
self-love, but according to the laws of the land, and limitation of the
State, whereby all such things are to be ordered and determined. Besides, as
this taking of excessive fees is bad in it self, and full of injustice and
corruption, so is it of worse consequence; for if none of worth can be
entertained but at these high rates; then those who are of low condition and
mean estate, are through their necessity debarred of their help and counsel;
and only those who abound in wealth, and have full purses, have the benefit of
it; whereof it must needs follow, that through the great skill and persuading
eloquence which is used in the defense of their cause who are rich, and through
the weak and insufficient handling of the poor man's cause, though never so
just; powerful injustice will get ye upper hand oftentimes of weak right, and
truth having no patrons but her own naked simplicity to maintain her, against
the irresistable violence of bold eloquence, and cunning insinuations and
surmizes, does not seldom in these days take the foil.

But much more do they offend,. Sect. 5. 3. When having received their fees,
they will not speak in their clients cause.
who receiving their fees, sometimes double and treble, will not vouchsafe when
the cause of their clients is to be heard, to come unto the bar, or to open
their lips in defense of their right. Whereby they greatly iniure their
clients, in betraying their cause under color of patronage, withholding their
promised counsel and help, when the necessity of the cause most requires
it: whereof it must needs follow, that the adverse party will obtain an easy
victory, when being armed at all points for the encounter, he finds no
adversary in the lists to make resistance. And also hereby they make
themselves guilty of shameful theft, in that they take those fees, which of
right do not belong unto them: for the reward is not absolutely given unto
them, but upon the condition of their best assistance, the which condition
being not performed, they have no just title unto the gift; no more then ye
servant has right to his wages, who does no work, or spends his whole time
in following his own business. The causes of the former sin: 1. The
covetousness of the lawyer.
Now the cause hereof principally is their griping covetousness, which makes
them think all the water lost which runs besides their mill; and therefore
they greedily undertake as many businesses as are commended unto them by
assured hope of large gain, though it be impossible that they should carefully
prosecute one of three as the causes require. And so they not only empty
their clients purses of their money, but also their hearts of all comfort, when
they find their cause betrayed by those who should have defended it; and
perceive to their grief that these broken staves have failed them, when they
most relied on them. 2. The importunity of the client.
And secondarily, this comes to pass through the importunity of the client,
who looking more into the skill of his counselors, then into the goodness of
his cause, is in policy contented to give a large fee to one, of whom he has
conceived a great opinion, rather to hinder his adversary, then to help
himself. For having no hope of entertaining him to speak in his own cause,
he puts into his mouth this golden gagge, to restrain him from speaking
against him, in the behalf of the adverse party. Wherein they behave themselves
like the poor Indians, who offer sacrifice to the devils, not because they
look to obtain from them any good, but because they would restrain them from
doing them any hurt: so these not for hope of receiving any help, but to keep
them from hurting their cause, fee them with large gifts; whereby it comes to
pass, that they who in this corrupt rank are of greatest fame, are more
enriched by their silence, then others by their labored speeches; and have
more and greater fees to keep them sitting still and doing nothing, then others
for trudging to the courts, and taking all the pains.

Lastly, they offend by making tedious delays,. Sect. 6. 4. By making tedious
delays and protracting suites.
and protracting of suits, from term to term, and year to year, diuising a
thousand quirkes and shifts to keep the cause from coming to a just trial,
to the end, that together with the suite, their fees may be continued, and
become of extraordinary rewards annual rents, to be paid unto them quarterly
at every Term. So that in these days the execution of justice is far unlike
unto that it was in the time of Moses, Exodus 18.14.
for then Iethro complained that the peoples suites were too tediously delaied,
because they were feign to wait from morning to night to have their causes
heard and tried: whereas now a plain deed, well penned for matter and form,
and ratified by hand and seal, may depend in suite a year or two in despite
of the best means which the wronged plaintiff can make to right himself. And
if there be any great difficulty in the cause (as what may not be made
difficult which consists in words and phrases more then in equity and
justice?) then the corrupt lawyers of these times take a lease of their clients
for term of life, yea sometimes for three lives successively, the nephew
ending that suite which the grandfather began. Yea and oftentimes after all
this expense of time and money, the title is never the better cleared, but
only weariness and poverty put an end to these suites which stomach and
abundance began. And he who gains most, sits down by loss, seeing in
respect of his great expense it had been much better, both for his state and
mind, to have had a speedy overthrow, then so tedious a conquest. So that
lawing in these times is much like to gaming, wherein unthrifts cast the dice
who shall have one another money; and the lawyers chest like the butlers box,
which in the end receives all, and makes both parties to become beggars; for
as in both there is equal hope, so no more certainty of desired success, one
undoing that which another has done, and ouerruling that as unjust, which
another has determined to be just and equal.

And thus have I showed how the briber destroys other men's families.. Sect.
7. How the briber destroys his own family.
The like may also be said of his own; for howsoever he by bribing
principally intends to build his house, and to advance his posterity to
great honor and riches; yet oftentimes it comes to pass through the just
judgment of God, and by his infinite wisdom and power ouerruling al his
plots and purposes, that in stead of building his family he destroys it, in
stead of advancing his posterity he brings upon it utter ruin and disgrace.
This is manifest both by the Scriptures and by continual experience of all
times. The Wise man tells us, that he who is greedy of gain, that is, so
covetous as that he will not stick to use those unlawful practices of bribing
and oppression to enrich himself, he troubles and disturbeth his house;
whereas he that hates bribes shall live, Prou. 15.27. Job 15.34.
Prou. 15.27. So it is said Job 15.34. that fire shall devour the houses which
are built with bribes, that is, they shall be brought to utter ruin and
destruction. The which heavy judgments here threatened have accordingly been
inflicted, as experience of all times has taught us: for howsoever men may
advance themselves by these wicked courses for a time, yet it could seldom be
observed that the third heir had cause to glory in the gettings of his
bribing ancestors.

CHAP. IIII. That briberie is hurtful and pernicious to the Commonwealth.
But as bribers do destroy private families;. Sect. 1. Briberie overthrows
magistracy.
so they are alike hurtful and pernicious to whole countries and
Commonwealths: for first, briberie overthrows Magistracy, and all lawful
government, and brings with it an anarchie and confusion. To which purpose
one says, that oblatio muneris tinea est regiminis; Cass. in Epist.
Bribing is the moth of government. For howsoever men hold the places and have
the authority of Magistrates, yet if they love gifts they will so charm them
that they will have no eyes to see disorders, nor ears to hear complaints,
nor understanding to discern between good and evil right or wrong, but as
they are informed and lead by those who bribe the^. Whereupon a large door is
opened to al disorder and licentious liberty, no man being restrained from any
wickedness, but those who are unable to bring gifts, and to make their peace by
rewards.

Secondly, by bribing the Commonwealth is robbed,. Sect. 2. By bribing the
commonwealth is robbed and spoiled.
spoiled, and impouerished: for seeing no business can be dispatched, no
right obtained, no law executed but by the help of gifts; and considering that
these occasions, are in all states daily and continual, amongst innumerable
persons of all degrees, it must needs follow that in short time the whole
wealth of the country will be exhausted, and engrossed into the hands of these
robbers. Hence it is that the Prophet Esaias matcheth bribing Magistrates with
thieves, Esa. 1.23.
Esa. 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious and companious of thieves, every one
loves gifts and follows after rewards. Neither in truth is there any
difference between them, saving that thieves rob only some few private
persons, but these whole countries and Commonwealths; they by plain force,
and these by disguised subtlety and under color of law. So the Prophet Jeremy
compares them to cunning fowlers, which lay snares and make pitfalles to catch
men, and their houses to cages, in which they keep and store up that riches
which they have catched and seized upon by these unjust courses, Ier. 5.26.27.
Ierem. 5.26.27. For purposely do such Magistrates make laws, not for
maintenance of order, justice, and government; but that they may serve as
snares to entrap men, and that being catched they may redeem their liberty
and impunitie by large gifts. Or if there be any other made, they utterly
neglect the execution of them, though they be never so profitable and
necessary for the good of the Commonwealth, unless they bring some private
gain to their own chests.

Thirdly,. Sect. 3. Bribing peruerteth the whole course of justice.
by bribing justice is perverted, innocence oppressed, and injuries
countenanced and defended; and what can follow but the ruin of the
Commonwealth, when as justice, which is the maine pillar whereby it is vpheld,
is pulled down? This appears by testimonies of Scripture, and by examples:
Exodus 23.8.
Exodus 23.8. Gifts blind the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. If
then the wise and righteous, who have both wisdom to discern truth from
falsehood, and right from wrong, as also will, to embrace the good, and refuse
the evil, be seduced and perverted from their upright and just courses, and
mislead into the bywaies of error and injustice with bribes and rewards; then
what will become of those who naturally want that clearenesse of judgment to
know what is good, or that love of goodness to embrace it when it is
discerned? Deuteronomy. 16.19.
So Deuteronomy. 16.19. the holy Ghost joins wresting of the law, respecting of
persons, and taking of rewards in the same prohibition, thereby intimating that
these three go together, and that bribing is the cause of both the other, as
the words following plainly show. And at this as their maine end do wicked men
aim, when as they present their Judges with rewards, as appears, Prou.
17.23. Prou. 17.23.
A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom to wrest the ways of judgment.

This likewise appears by examples.. Sect. 4. The former point cleared by
examples.
When Samuels sons would not walk in their fathers ways; which was to
administer justice indifferently without respect of persons, or taking bribes,
1. Sam. 12.3.
as himself protests to the people 1. Sam. 12.3. but did turn aside after
lucre, and took rewards; then they also perverted judgment, as it is 1. Sam
8.3. 1. Sam 8.3.
So the Magistrates of Israel being corrupted with greedy covetousness, made
rewards the very end and maine scope of their judgment, Mich. 3.11. Yea even
righteous David, Mich. 3.11.
a man according to Gods own heart, was so entangled and corrupted with Zibaes
bribe, that he unjustly condemned innocent Mephibosheth before his cause was
ever heard; and when the injustice of this sentence appeared, by that just
apology which he made for himself; 2. Sam. 16.1.2. and 19.29.
yet was he so possessed with Ziba his gift and false report, that neither the
love which himself bare to justice, nor the remembrance of the unmatchable
kindness and manifold benefits, which he had received from his dear Jonathan,
could move him to revoke wholly his unrighteous judgment, nor to inflict upon
this insinuating vassal deserved punishment, for his treachery toward his
innocent master. So hard a thing it is to intertaine impartial justice, when
the heart is forestalled with rewards, or to walk in the narrow path of
righteousness, when the eye of judgment is hoodwinckt with bribes.

But this will better appear,. Sect. 5. Bribing Judges justify the wicked for
a reward.
if we more particularly examine the unjust carriage of those, who being in
authority, suffer themselves to be corrupted with bribes; for when prejudice
of the cause is wrought in their minds through the persuasion of golden
eloquence, there is none so wicked whom they will not justify, nor any so
innocent, whom they are not ready to condemn. Neither do they in determining
of causes, consider what is just, but only remember what they have received;
not what in equity and conscience they ought to do, but what they have
promised to do for their reward. And of these the Prophet speaks, Esa. 5.23.
Esa. 5.23. Which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him. For the former; when a cause is to
be handled and determined before a corrupt Judge, who loves gifts, and has
his hand open to receive rewards; then the proverb is always verified:
Pecuniosus damnari non potest: A monied man cannot be condemned; nay scarcely
reproved for his greatest faults; for as one says: Ambr. in 1. Cor.
Libertatem arguendi amittit, and peccat qui ab eo accipit, qus ideo dat ne
corrigatur; He loses his liberty of reproving, and thereby greatly offends,
which does receive a gift from him, who therefore bestows it that he may not
be corrected. For how can he freely rebuke such an one for his faults, whom
before he has made privy to his own gross corruptions? Or what power has
he to draw out the sword of justice, for the punishment of sin, when as he has
suffered his hands to be manacled with bribes? Or how can he in trial of right
administer righteous judgment without respect of persons, who has made fale
of both his ears, eyes, and tongue for a reward, and upon earnest received,
has obliged himself to use all favor to the one party, before the cause is
examined?

And as he is ready for reward to justify the wicked;. Sect. 6. Bribing
Judges oppress the innocent.
so also to wrong the innocent; for if their cause be so clear and manifest,
that it cannot with any colorable show of reason go against them; then do
they so tire them with delays, and so discourage them with endless pains,
and excessive charges (they being unable to counterpoise the gifts of their
adversaries) that they are feign to give it over before they can have a day of
hearing, or come to a lawful trial. So the Lord complains of the bribing
Judges of Israel, Esa. 1.23.
Esa. 1.23. Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards; they judge
not the fatherless, neither does the widows cause come before them.

But if the cause of the poor man have in it any difficulty, then though it
be never so just, yet he were better to give it over, and spare his cost and
save his further labor, then to prosecute his right before a bribing Judge;
for he shall (as the proverb is) but cast the helue after the hatchet, and
enter into an endless labyrinth, in which when he has long travailed, he
shall find himself as far from his hoped issue, as in the first hour of his
entrance, wanting the golden thread which should guide him in his way. And if
in the prosecution of his cause, for want of counsel he gives the least
advantage to his aduerfarie, though it do not concern the equity of the
matter, but only the error of the form, and faultiness of his plea, he is
sure to be crushed, and to have the cause, though never so just, to go
against him. And of this corruption, the Lord accuses the corrupt Judges of
Israel, Amos 5.12. They afflict the just, they take rewards, Amos 5.12.
and they oppress the poor in the gate. that is, sitting upon the seats of
judgment, which in those times were placed in the gates of their cities.

Yea, so greedy of gain is the bribing Judge,. Sect. 7. Bribing Judges stick
not to betray the lives of the innocent.
that for a reward, he will betray the lives of the innocent, and to enrich his
chests, set to sale the dearest blood of righteous persons, not caring so he
may have gold to purchase large possessions, though his fields be called
Aceldama, fields of blood. With such wicked Judges the Lord expostulateth,
Ezech. 13.19. Ezech. 13.19. and 22.12.
And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley, and for pieces
of bread, to slay the souls of them that should not die, and to give life to
the souls that should not live? etc. And such he accuses and condemns,
Ezech. 22.12. In thee they have taken gifts to shed blood.

And thus have I showed how many mischiefs the briberie of the Magistrates and
Judges, brings upon a State,. Sect. 8. Bribing Judges answered, who pretend
that they only take gifts to do justice.
through the perverting of justice; of all which, some will think themselves
acquitted, who can truly say in their own defense, that howsoever they
receive many gifts, yet it is not for perverting of righteous judgment, but
only they take rewards, and gratuities, for the doing of justice, and for the
righting of men's wrongs. For as amongst Sorcerers there are some called good,
and some bad witches; the one curing those diseases which the other has
caused, and helping what the other has hurt; and yet howsoever they differ in
name, yet in truth they are of one nature; and are both direct witches, who
equally labor to enrich Satan's kingdom, both with their own souls, and with
the souls of others who are seduced by them: So among bribers, there are some,
who may be called good in comparison of others, who take rewards, to right the
others wrongs, and relieve those whom others by their unjust sentences have
oppressed; notwithstanding these are bribers too, corrupt, unrighteous, and
naught, although not altogether of so malignant a disposition as the other. For
it is as great injustice to enforce a man to buy that which is his own
already, as to give unto him that which of right belongs to another; and he
that goes thus far to make justice, which is in her nature free, to become
venall, and of a slavish nature, within a while will be so blinded with gifts,
that he will not stick to set injustice also to sale; and as one says: Qui
non erubescat dicere, Greg. lib. 12. Moral.
quid mihi dabis vt tibi iustitiam faciam? nonne simile est ac sidicatur, quid
mihi vultis dare, vt abnegem, officium perdam, and deum vendam? That is, He
that blusheth not to say, what will you give me, and I will do you justice? is
as ready to say; what will you give me, and I will deny to execute justice,
neglect my duty, and sell God himself? Howsoever it is, it cannot be but
great prejudice to the uprightness of a Judge, and a shrewd presumption of his
corruption, when as he receives gifts of those who have suites depending
before him; for as a wife or maid would incur the danger of just suspicion,
of having an unclean heart, who being solicited by a fornicator to commit
whoredom, should receive his gifts, although she should deny his suite: for
howsoever in word she refuse his wicked motion, yet indeed she receives
pledges of his love: so likewise are such Judges not without cause to be
suspected, who receive gifts of those who labor to pervert judgment; for
howsoever in outward show, they make profession of integrity, yet in action
they receive the pawnes of unrighteousness, which will cause them to prejudice
the cause, and to hault in the administration of justice, and to respect the
person of one, more then of another, and the cause for the persons sake.

Fourthly,. Sect. 9. Briberie is a cause of treachery and treason.
the sin of bribing is pernicious to the commonwealth, as it is a cause of
all treachery and treason against the State. For he that will not stick to
sell justice and injustice, will not stick to set the commonwealth to sale
also, and betray it into the hands of the enemy for large gifts, when he does
but get opportunity, and can do it safely, secretly, and without danger. Of
this, great Philip of Macedon had often experience in his time; and therefore
he thought no castle so impregnable, no fort so strong, but that there might be
found room and passage for an ass laden with gold to enter into it. But much
more does this corruption abound in our times; for who sees not, that it is an
usual thing in the time of war (as the proverb is) Argenteis hastis
pugnare, to fight with silver pikes, to undermine a State with silver
pick-axes, and to batter down the walls of the best defenced City with these
golden bullets? Neither do the great Commanders of these times usually bring
their forces against any country or city, or venture to win it by invasion
and assault, before they have first made way unto themselves by large gifts,
and by corrupting bribes have made a great party of the adverse side, or at
least some special men, who may give them from time to time secret
intelligence of all affairs of the State, of oportunities to be used, and
impediments to be removed, and who will when occasion serves, betray their
country, as much as in them lies, into the enemies hand. And by this means
more cities are sacked, and more countries subdued, then by force of arms and
dint of sword: yea in truth, so does this bribing corruption infect all States
in these days, that were it not that the Princes and governors (being taught
by manifold experience the greatness of this danger) had a most vigilant eye
to foresee and spy out these mischiefs, and a severe hand to punish treachery
when it is discovered, scarce any State would remain unshaken, and vnruined,
by these corrupt courses.

Lastly, bribing is pernicious to the commonwealth,. Sect. 10. Bribing
brings the common wealth to destruction.
as being in it self a notable means to bring it to destruction; for not
only it overthrows justice and truth, which are as it were the sinews,
wherewith all States are strengthened and held together, and even the very
pillars upon which the good and safety of all commonwealths are built; which
being taken away, the State must needs be weakened, dissipated and brought to
ruin; but also it inflameth the fire of Gods wrath against that country where
it much abounds, and brings down his fearful judgments upon it, whereby
it will soon be destroyed, though there were no enemies to oppose against it.
And as this truth is warranted by manifold experience of these times, so by the
infallible word of God which cannot lie. Pro. 29 4.
So Prou. 29.4. A King by iudgemen maintains the country, but a man
receiving gifts destroys it. The Prophet Ezechiel also reckons this sin
of bribing amongst those capital sins, which moved the Lord to bring upon
Jerusalem, destruction and desolation. Ezech. 22.12.14.15. Ezech. 22.12.
The Prophet Micah likewise, having showed that all sorts of rulers amongst the
people of Judah were corrupted with bribing, says, that for this cause, Zion
should be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem should be made an heap of stones,
and the mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest: Mich. 3.11.12.
Mich. 3.11.12.

CHAP. V. That the sin of bribing is excceding hateful to the Church.
But as the sinue of bribing is pernicious to the commonwealth;. Sect. 1.
Bribing is the door, whereby insufficient Ministers enter.
so likewise it is exceeding hurtful to the Church. For as Judas being
possessed with greedy covetousness, cared not to betray our head Jesus Christ
for a reward, saying unto the high Priests, What will you give me and I will
betray him; so the greedy patrones of these days, intending only their own
gain, stick not to betray the body of Christ, to wit, his Church into the
hands of Ieroboams Priests, made of the basest of the people, in the first
place demanding with Judas, What will you give me; never regarding in the mean
while how few their graces be, whom they present, so their gifts be many; nor
how unfit they are to teach the people, so they are sufficient to bring large
rewards, or at least to subscribe unto bonds, by which they exclude themselves
from the greatest part of their living. Whereby it comes to pass, that the
people wanting instruction, are destroyed for want of knowledge, and remaining
blinded with ignorance, are made an easy pray to be seduced and mislead into
errors and heresies, by the Priests, Jesuits, Papists, Brownists, Familists,
and all other sectaries and wicked heretics. Of all which mischiefs the
corrupt bribing, which is used in these days, is the principal cause; for if
it were not for the gifts of the purse, the gifts of the mind would be
respected and preferred. But let all such corrupt patrons know, that they are
no better then sacrilegious thieves in the sight of God and men, who by robbing
the Church of such livings, which are dedicated and consecrated unto God for
holy uses, do make both themselves and their families liable to Gods heavy
plagues and fearful judgments. For if Balthazar was cut off in Gods wrath for
drinking in the vessels of the Temple, which his predecessor Nebuchadnezer had
unjustly brought into his treasury; then what shall become of them, who have
not only the most part of their plate made of Church-mettall; but also have
sacrilegiously taken the bread which they eat, and the meat and drink which
they continually feed upon, Dan. 5.
out of the Churches storehouse? If Ananias and Sapphira were smitten with
present death, for keeping back part of the price which was raised out of
their own possessions, after it was consecrated to the Churches maintenance;
then what death and condemnation is due unto them, who violently rob and spoil
the Church of her own revenues and lawful right, unto which God in his word,
and good Princes by their laws have entitled it; and wherewith others tendering
more Gods glory, and the flourishing estate of the Church, then their own
particular, have richly and religiously endowed it?

Secondly, by this bribing,. Sect. 2. By bribing, sufficient Ministers are
corrupted.
even those Ministers which are able to teach the people, are so corrupted,
that they speak not those things which are profitable, but such things as are
plausible to their benefactors; they daube over their faults with untempered
mortar, promising peace where the Lord denounces war, and immunitie from
punishment, when the sword of Gods judgment is already drawn, and ready to
strike. And of this corruption the Lord accuses the Priests of Judah, Mich.
3.11. The heads thereof judge for rewards, Mich. 3.11.
and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for
money, etc.

CHAP. VI. That the sin of bribing is most pernicious to the briber himself.
ANd thus it appears that the sin of bribing is pernicious both unto Church
and Commonwealth.. Sect. 1. Bribers deprive themselves of a mark of Gods
children.
Now in the last place it follows that I show and prove that as bribers are
bad unto all others, so they are worst of all to themselves, in respect of the
manifold evils which they bring upon their own heads: for first, as they
deprive themselves of a notable sign of the child of God, who shall dwell in
his holy mountain, and be an inheritour of the kingdom of heaven, which is,
not to receive rewards against the innocent; Psalm. 15.5.
so they take upon them the mark of destruction and condemnation; and carry
as it were upon their sleeue, the badge of a wicked man. So it is said Prou.
17.23. Prou. 17.23.
A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom, to wrest the ways of judgment.
Psalm. 26.10.
And these are the properties whereby David describes a bloody or heinous
sinner: Psalm. 26.11. In whose hands is wickedness, and their right hand is
full of bribes.

Secondly,. Sect. 2. Bribes blind the eye of the mind, and corrupt the
judgment.
whereas men chiefly excel the brutish creatures in the light of reason, and in
the use of the understanding, and of a sound judgment; gifts and rewards blind
the eye of the mind, and the affections being therewith corrupted, do so
corrupt the judgment also, that they cannot discern between right and wrong,
truth and falsehood; but like beasts follow their sense, lusts, and passions,
rather then the direction of their reason and understanding. And this argument
the Lord himself uses to enforce his prohibition, concerning taking of
bribes, Exodus 23.8. Thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise,
Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19.. Sect. 3. Bribes make men base and sordidous.
and peruerteth the words of the righteous. So Deuteronomy. 16.19.

Thirdly, if a man suffer himself to be corrupted and ouerswaied with gifts
and rewards; though in his own nature he be of never so generous and free a
spirit, yet in short time it will make him so base and sordidous, that there is
no pray of such small value, which will not make him stoop to seize upon it, no
course or carriage so inhumane, dishonorable and dishonest, which he will not
be content to take and use, for the inhaunsing of his gain. This the wise man
observed in his own experience: Prou. 28.21. Prou. 28.21.
To have respect of persons is not good; for that man will transgress for a
piece of bread. And the Lord accuses the rulers of Jerusalem, not only for
perverting judgment, but also that they were base and sordidous in their
bribing, polluting Gods name by their injustice for handfuls of barlie and
pieces of bread, Ezech. 13.19. Ezech. 13.19.
In which respect such corrupt Judges are fitly compared to a pair of scoles,
which when they seem most equal, will incline to either side by the addition
of the least weight, and turn again to the contrary side, when that weight
is ouerpoised with a greater.

Fourthlie,. Sect. 4. Bribing makes a man obnoxious to Gods fearful
judgments. 2. King. 5.16.21.27. Job 15.34.
this sin of bribing does make a man liable and obnoxious to Gods fearful
judgments, both in respect of his person and state. Of the former we have an
example in Gehezi, who taking an unlawful bribe from Naaman, had that heavy
punishment of loathsome leprosy inflicted, both upon himself and all his
posterity: and for the other it is said, that fire shall devour the houses of
bribes, Job 15.34. And howsoever men think (by receiving rewards to pervert
justice and truth) to advance themselves and theirs to great wealth and plenty
of all things, yet in the end this riches will melt and vanish away, and those
who lately flourished in their unjust courses shall be brought into poverty
and calamity, according to the saying of the Wise man, Prou. 21.6. Prou.
21.6.7.
The gathering of treasure by a deceitful tongue, is vanity tossed to and fro
of them that seek death. 7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, for
they have refused to execute judgment.. Sect. 5. Briberie brings Gods curse,
woe and destruction. Deuteronomy. 27.25. Esa 5.20.23.24.


Fiftlie, it brings upon those who are corrupted with it, Gods heavy curse
and malediction, as appears, Deuteronomy. 27.25. Cursed be he that takes a reward
to put to death innocent blood. It makes them subject to that fearful woe
denounced, Esa. 5.20. Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of
good. Which put light for darkness, and darkness for light, etc. 23. Which
justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. Yea it brings upon them utter destruction; For as the
fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the flame consumes chafe: so their root
shall be as rottenness, and their bud shall rise up like dust, because they
have cast off the law of the Lord of hosts, and contemned the word of the holy
one of Israel. As it is, verse. 24.

Lastly,. Sect. 6. Briberie disinheriteth men of heaven.
by these bribing courses they disinherite themselves of their heavenly
patrimony, and set to sale the kingdom of heaven for earthly and base prifes:
for they that take rewards against the innocent shall never dwell in Gods holy
mountain, Psalm. 15.5.
as it is, Psalm. 15.5. So the question being asked who should dwell with ye
devouring fire, and with the everlasting burnings; that is, with the Lord, who
is called a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 22.29.
Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29. answer is made; He that walks in justice, and
speaks righteous things, refusing gain of oppression, shaking his hands from
taking of gifts, etc. He shall dwell on high, Esa. 13.15.16.
etc. as it is Esa. 33.15.16. So that he who gains by oppression, and fills
his hands with bribes, can never endure Gods glorious presence; but shall be
consumed like stubble with this devouring fire. To the same purpose is that,
Pro. 15.27.
Prou. 15.27. He that hates bribes shall line; whereby contrariwise is
implied, that he who loves bribes shall not live, neither the life of grace in
this world, nor the life of glory in the world to come.

By all which it is clear and manifest, that the briber loses in his greatest
gain, for whilst by his wicked and unjust courses, he compasses some earthly
trifles, he forgoeth all his title and intrest in Gods glorious kingdom, and
through his worldly profaneness and sottish folly, he does with Esau make
sale of his spiritual birthright for a mess of pottage, or such like
transitory vanities of like value, and less necessity. Whilst he provides
for his body, he destroys his soul; whilst he labors after earthly
things which are vain and momentany, he loses heavenly things, even that
superexcellent and eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.
And whilst he hourdeth up the rewards of iniquity, and gold which shall
perish with him; he forgoeth the fruition of the immortal God, in whose
presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore: Psalm. 16.11. Psalm. 16.11.. Sect. 7. The conclusion.


And thus have I showed the greatness of this sin of briberie, and the
manifold evils which it brings both to private persons, and societies; to
whole co^mon-wealths, and to the briber himself. Now as this sin is of
extraordinary strength to hold men in subjection unto it, both in regard of
the corruption of man's nature which is most prone to intertaine it, and in
respect of the universality of this sin, and the mighty patrons which both
countenance it with their practice, and defend it with their power: so my
earnest prayer unto almighty God is, that he will join with my labors a more
then usual blessing, and an extraordinary virtue and power of his holy
spirit, to beat down this strong hold of sinue, and to bring us in subjection
to his will, not only in things profitable and gaineful, but also in those
which seem accompanied with loss and hindrance. That so respecting not our
own particular gain, but his glory, and doing him faithful service in this
life, we may reign with him in eternal glory in the life to come. The which
mercy he vouchsafe for his Christ's sake: to whom with the Father and the
holy Spirit be all honor and glory, praise, power and dominion now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 84. line 31. read, deridetur. p. 101. l. 35. r. sinners. p. 111. l. 34.
marg. r. their. p. 124. l. vlt. r. our own. p. 129. l. 36. r. run secretly. p.
131. l. 35. r. and labor. p. 138. l 6. r. stop. p. 144. l. 2. r. theft even in
theft. p. 150. l. 5. r. example, for the same sin the. p. 174. l. 19. r. by
inflicting. p. 197. l. 3. r. that they be not. p. 200. l. 11. marg. r. Eccles.
3.4. p. 201. l. 35.36. r. whom they see outwardly. p. 203. l. 25. r. vultus.

A TREATISE OF ANGER. Wherein is showed the lawful, laudable, and necessary
use of just and holy Anger, and what is required thereunto. AND AFTERWARD IS
DECLARED, what corrupt and unjust Anger is, the kinds, causes, effects, and
properties thereof, together with the preservatives and remedies, whereby it
may be either prevented, or cured and expelled. By JOHN DOWNHAM Batchelar in
Divinity, and Preacher of Gods Word.

PROVE. 26.31. He that is slow to Anger is better then the mighty man: and he
that rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a City.

LONDON: Printed by T. E. for William Welby, dwelling in Paules-Church-yard at
the sign of the Grayhound. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, BARON of Ellesmere, Lord
Chancellor of England, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel,
my very good Lord: health and prosperity with increase of all spiritual
graces in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
Having had through your Honorable bounty, a part of the Lords Vineyarde
allotted unto me his most unworthy woorkeman, by your Honor his most worthy
Steward, to the end I should plant and water, purge and prune it, I thought it
my part not only to perform my duty in this behalf, in such measure as God
enableth me, but also to present unto your Honor the first fruits of my
labor which have yet offered themselves to public view, to the end that I
might thereby both show my self not altogether negligent in our great Lord and
Masters business, and also give some token of most obliged duty and humble
thankfulness to you his Honorable Steward, by whose appointment I have
obtained a place wherein I may employ my pains, whereas otherwise I should
either have stood idle in the market place, or else been compelled to have
dug in another man's ground, with great labor and little fruit. If these my
first fruits seem unpleasant in your most learned and judicial taste, either
impute it to the immaturitie caused by their short time of grouth and
small-experienced skill of the Vintager, or else consider that they are
destinated to a physical use for the purging away of choler, and therefore
though they be not pleasant in taste, yet may they be profitable in
operation. Such as they are (in all humility, craving pardon for my boldness)
I commend them to your Honorable Patronage and protection, and your self to
the Almighties, most heartely beseeching the glorious and great Lord of the
Vineyard long to continue you his faithful Steward amongst us, to the
advancement of his glory, the propagation of his Vine, and the exceeding
comfort of his poor contemned Laborers. Amen.

Your Honors in all humble duty most bounden JOHN DOWNHAM.

To the Christian Reader.
COnsidering the universal infection of this contagious disease of the Soul,
VNIVST ANGER, and the manifold pernicious evils which it works, both private
and public, I thought good to prescribe out of Gods word, some remedies for
those Patients which are committed to my cure, whereby they might either be
preserved from these feuerlike fits, which cause men outwardly to shake and
tremble, when as inwardly they are most inflamed, or else have their heat
somewhat allayed and abated, when they are already fallen into them. The which
my prescript I thought at the first should have been communicated to no more
then mine own Patients, till I was persuaded by more skillful Physicians then
my self, that the publishing thereof might redound to others profit And
therefore desiring nothing more then to exercise my poor talent to the glory
of my master who bestowed it, and the benefit of my fellow servants, for whose
good also I have received it, I willingly condescended to their motion. And for
as much, as I had only shadowed a rude draught without color or countenance,
I was feign to take a review of my work, altering some things, and adding
others as it were new lineaments, which I thought more fit for the Press then
for the Pulpit. If any think me too quick in practice, they will (I hope)
excuse me, if they consider that I make experience of my slender skill, not in
the vital parts, but in the feet of the soul, namely the affections, and yet
the curing of them, or but this one of them, may greatly redound to the
benefit of the whole, for as the diseases of the feet do grieve the heart,
and offend the head, and the curing and healing of them does ease and comfort
both, so when the affections are distempered being infected with the contagion
of our original corruption, even the chief parts of the soul, the
Understanding and Will, are not a little disturbed and disordered, by receiving
from them their contagious pollution. And therefore he who can skilfully purge
these nether parts shall ease the higher, by drawing down those corrupt
humors which do offend and annoy them. Seeing then, there may come by my
practice great good with little danger, I have the rather adventured the cure:
being contented to undergo the censure of some for too much have, who (I fear
me) are in these cases as much too slow, to the end that I may to the
uttermost of my skill benefit many. The Lord who is the only true Physician of
souls diseased with sin, bless this and all other my endeavors that they
may be profitable for the setting forth of his glory, the benefit of my
brethren, and furthering the assurance of mine own salvation.

Amen.
A TREATISE OF Anger, wherein the lawful use, and the unlawful abuse of this
affection is showed out of Gods word.
Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not, let not the Sun go down on your
wrath.


CHAP. I.
THE miserable ruins of our excellent state by creation, Sect. 1.
which were the lamentable effects following the sin of our first parents,
and the foul spots of original corruption, which like a contagious leprosy
derived from them have infected all their posterity, do not so evidently
appear in any part of the body of soul as in the affections, which are so
corrupted and disordered that there scarce remains any small relics of their
created purity. And hence it is that the heathen Philosophers though they did
not perceive how much the bright shining beams of our reason, and the
understanding part of the soul, were dimmed and darkened with the foggie mists
of original sin, but highly extolled with over partial praises, the
excellency and perfection of them, yet they plainly discerned the great
corruption of our disordered affections, insomuch that some of them being
ouerswayed with too great vehemency of affection in speaking against the
affections, have condemned them as simply, and in their own nature evil, and
therefore wholly to be abandoned, seeing there was no hope they should be
amended: others with a more judicial insight discerning between the things
themselves and their corruption, have written whole tractates for the reforming
of them, esteeming the chief top and perfection of wisdom to consist in
the well governing and ordering of these disordered and tumultuous passions.

If then the heathen Philosophers walking in the dark night of ignorance and
error, and illightened only with a small glimmering spark of natural
reason, could thereby both discern their corrupt affections, and also did
study to reform and bring them under the rule of reason, how much more
earnestly should we endeavor not so much to marshall them under the conduct of
natural reason, which is it self but a blind leader, as to reform and purge
them by the word of God, which like a glorious shining Sun, has dispelled
the foggie mists of ignorance and error, and so discovered all the spots and
deformities of them, far more clearly then our blind reason.

And as we are earnestly to labor for the reforming of all the affections, so
most earnestly of all this of anger, which of all other is most turbulent and
violent if it be not bridled and restrained. And for our better furtherance in
so good an endeavor, I have made choice of this text, to the end I might show
how far forth anger is to be approved and embraced, and in what respect it
is to be avoided and shunned. In handling whereof I will first show the meaning
of the words, and afterward entreat of their several parts.

In showing the meaning of the words I will first define what anger is, and
then set down the diverse sorts thereof. What anger is in general.
Anger therefore generally considered, is thus defined: it is an affection,
whereby the blood about the heart being heated, by the apprehension of some
injury offered to a man's self or his friends, and that in truth, or in his
opinion only, the appetite is stirred up to take revenge.

First, we will speak of the thing defined, The names of anger with the
notation.
and after of the definition. Anger in the Latin tongue is called (Ira) which
name has his notation from the effect, for when by the apprehension of an
injury, the heart is inflamed with the heat of anger, it does make a man
(quasi ex se ire) as it were to go out of himself, and in this respect he
who was angry, was said by an usual Latin phrase (non esse apud se) not to be
with himself, and ad se redijsse, to have returned to himself, when his anger
was passed over. The Grecians did especially use two names to express this
affection, which did contain in them the very nature of Anger. The first (...)
which signifies the perturbation it self, or the heating of the blood by the
apprehension of the injury offered: the other (...) which signifies the
appetite or desire of revenge, which follows the perturbation. So that these
two names contain in them, both the material and formal cause of anger: for
the material cause is the heating of the blood about the heart, which is
signified by the first name (...): the formal cause is the appetite or desire
of revenging the injury offered, which is understood by the other name (...).

The most usual name used by the Hebrews to signify anger is Aph, which
signifies also the Nose, and by a synecdoche the whole face: which name is
given unto it either because in a man's anger the breath does more vehemently
and often issue out of the nose, which is as it were the smoke issuing from the
flame kindled about the heart, or else because in the face anger is soonest
discerned, by the often intercourse and change of colors.

Our English word anger is derived from the latin word Angor, which either
signifies throtling and choking, or vexation and grief, because anger works
both these effects if it be immoderate: for it stops the throat leaving no
passage for words, and it vexes and tormenteth both the body and the mind.

And so much for the name: The definition explaned.
now we will speak of the definition. First I say it is an affection, for the
whole essence of a man consists of these three things, body, soul, and
affections, which do participate of both the other: now anger cannot be said
to be a quality or property of the soul alone, for the material cause
thereof is the boiling of the blood about the heart, nor of the body alone, for
the formal cause, namely the appetite and desire of revenge stirred up by the
apprehension of the injury offered, does more properly belong to the soul,
and therefore I call it a mixed affection proceeding from them both.

I add the material cause, namely the heating of the blood about the heart,
which heat or inflammation is caused by the apprehension of the injury
offered, or the dislike which the heart conceiueth of the injury apprehended:
which is either in truth an injury, or but in opinion and appearance only:
for anger has not always a true cause, but sometime fained and imaginary: and
this material cause (namely the heating of the blood by apprehension of the
injury) the formal cause follows, that is to say, an appetite or desire of
revenge, for before we desire to revenge the injury, we first apprehend and
feel it, which desire is either just or unjust: just, if we be angry for a
just cause, with those with whom we ought to be angry, after a just manner,
observing a fit time, and to a good end: unjust, if these circumstances be not
observed. Furthermore in this definition the cause of anger is expressed,
namely injury offered, (for anger always presupposes injury) and the subject
thereof which is the heart, as also the object, to wit, revenge of the injury.

And so much for the general definition of anger: Sect. 2. The kinds of
anger. Natural anger. Corrupt anger Sanctified anger. The Stoikes confuted.
now we are to show the diverse sorts thereof, or rather the diverse acceptance
of the same affection. First it is taken for the natural affection of anger as
it was created of God, and had his being in man before the fall. Secondly, as
it is corrupted since the fall by original sin. Thirdly, as it is renewed
and sanctified by Gods spirit. We are not therefore with the Stoikes to
confound these three together, and and without difference to condemn them all:
for howsoever this affection as it is corrupted is most turbulent, and of all
others most pernicious, yet we are to hold that the natural affection
considered, either as it was created by God, or so far forth as it is renewed
and sanctified by Gods spirit is just, holy, and lawful.

And this may easily be proved by diverse reasons: That the affection of anger
is in it own nature lawful.
first because it was created by God, and was in man before the fall, and
before any evil entered into the world: being therefore the Lords own
workmanship, which by his own testimony was approved to be very good. Genesis
1.31. Genesis 1.31.
and of greater antiquity then evil it self, it follows, that the
affection in it own nature is to be esteemed as good and lawful. Secondly,
because in many places of the Scriptures it is attributed to God himself, Romans
1, 18. Ioh. 3.36.
Romans 1.18. the anger of God is made manifest from heaven against all impiety.
Ioh. 3.36. he that believes not in the son shall not see life, but the anger
of God shall abide upon him. Seeing therefore it is ascribed unto God, to whose
most perfect and just nature nothing agrees but that which is just and holy,
it follows that this affection it self is so to be esteemed. True it is that
neither this nor any other affection is in God if we speak properly, but only
attributed unto him, that our weak capacities may better conceive how he
exercises his works and eternal counsels toward his creatures: But yet
forasmuch as nothing is attributed and ascribed unto him which is not good and
just, so far forth as it is ascribed, it evidently shows that anger in it
own nature is not evil.

Lastly, this manifestly appears in that this affection was truly and
naturally in our Savior Christ himself as he was man, Mark. 3.5.
as it is evident Mark. 3.5. where it is said that he looked angerly upon the
Scribes and Pharisees, mourning for the hardness of their hearts: so likewise
being incited with an holy anger, to see his Fathers house turned into a
market, he drives the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, John. 2.17. Pet.
2.22.
John. 2.17. Seeing then Christ was angry and yet free from all sin, it
follows that Anger in it own nature is just and holy.

Objection. 1.
But it may be objected that anger is in many places of the Scriptures condemned
and forbidden: Mat. 5.22.
as Mat. 5.22. He that is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of
judgment, Answer.
I answer, that not anger simply but unadvised anger is there condemned: and
in a word all other places where this affection is forbidden, are to be
understood, not of the affection it self, as it was created or is renewed by
Gods spirit, but as it is corrupted and depraved with original sin: for
anger being sanctified, is not only just and lawful, but also commendable,
profitable, and very necessary, as being the whetstone of true fortitude,
whereby we are stirred up and encouraged to maintain the glory of God, and
our own persons and states, against the impiety and injustice of men. Though
anger therefore be but a bad Mistress to command, yet it is a good servant to
obey: though it be but an ill Captain to lead our forces into the field
against our spiritual and temporal enemies, yet it is a good soldier so long
as it subiecteth it self to the government and discipline of sanctified reason.

Objection. 2.
But it is further objected by the Stoikes that anger is a perturbation of the
mind and therefore evil. To this I answer, Answer.
that as the perturbation of the mind which is moved upon unjust causes is
also unjust and evil, so that which is caused upon just and necessary
occasions is just and commendable: as for example, when a man sees God
dishonored, Religion disgraced, wickedness unpunished; If therefore his mind
be perturbed and troubled, this perturbation is not to be condemned, nay to be
commended, and they rather to be condemned who are not so troubled. Thus was
our Savior perturbed when he saw Gods house dishonored, John. 2.17. and
11.23. Nom. 24.7. King. 19.
as also when he raised up Lazarus: thus was Phinees disturbed and troubled in
mind, when he saw that shameless sin of Zimry and Cozby: and Elias when
religion was contemned, idolatry erected, and the Lords true Prophets
destroyed.

Though therefore anger be a perturbation of the mind it does not follow that
it is evil, for not the perturbation it self but the cause thereof makes it
good if it be good, and evil if it be evil. 3. Objection.
Furthermore whereas they object that anger blinds and confounds reason,
Answer.
I answer first, that if anger be temperate and moderate, it does seruiceably
wait upon reason, and not imperiously over rule it: and rather makes a man
more constant and resolute in walking the path of truth, which he has
discryed with the eye of a clear judgment, then any ways dazell or offend
the sight whereby he should be caused to stumble in the way, or else turn
aside into by paths of error.

Secondly, though it should be granted that for the instant Reason is somewhat
disturbed with the passion, it does not follow that it is evil or
unprofitable, for before the affection is inflamed, the reason apprehends and
judges of the injury, and so as it were first kindles the flame, which being
kindled, does for the instant perturbe the mind, but the perturbation being
quickly over passed and the mind quieted, Reason is made no less fit thereby
to judge of the injury, and much more fit to revenge it. And therefore moderate
and sanctified anger is so far from hurting and hindering the judgment of
Reason, that it rather seruiceably aydeth and supporteth it, by inciting and
encouraging it courageously to execute that which Reason has justly decreed
and resolved: as therefore the most precious eye-salue does presently after it
is put into the eye dim and dazell the sight, but afterward causes it to see
much more clearly: so this affection of moderate and holy anger does at the
first somewhat perturbe reason, but afterward it makes it much more active in
executing and performing all good designs. And so much for the lawfulness of
Anger, both in respect of the first creation thereof, and as it is renewed and
sanctified by Gods spirit, as also concerning the diverse sorts of Anger.

Now in the next place we are to consider which of these is commanded or
forbidden in my text. What anger is commanded and what forbidden.
First for the affection as it was created by God, howsoever it was just and
holy in it self, yet now the beauty and excellency thereof is defaced with the
foul spots of original sin, so that there remain only some relics of
the perfection wherein it was created, till it be again renewed and restored
by Gods sanctifying spirit. This therefore is not here commanded or forbidden,
but only that we labor as much as may be, that it may come near his former
excellency. The other two sorts, namely, corrupt and sanctified anger, the one
in these words is commanded, the other forbidden.

These words therefore may be divided into two general parts. The general
division.
The first an exhortation or commandment, wherein just and holy anger is
enjoined or commended unto us in the first words (Be angry,) the second a
prohibition or dehortation from unjust, and corrupt anger in the next words
(but sin not,) and because by reason of our corruption we are prone to fall
into it, the Apostle in the words following limiteth and restrayneth it to a
short time, least it should turn into malice. Let not the Sun go down,
etc. as though he should say, though through infirmity ye fall into rash and
unadvised anger, yet continue not in your sin. Let not the Sun go down on
your wrath.

The most of our new interpreters think that the first words are rather a
permission then a precept, That just anger is here commanded.
and therefore to be understood thus. If you be angry, sin not; or thus, Are
you angry? sin not: that is, though through infirmity ye fall into anger,
yet add not sin unto sin by continuing in it. But I see no reason why the
words should be thus wrested, seeing there follows no absurdity or
inconvenience, if they be plainly understood without any alteration, which
cannot be avoided if we admit of their exposition: for I would ask of them
whether is here meant a lawful and just anger, or that which is unlawful and
unjust? if lawful and just, why may it not be commanded, seeing it is as
necessary and profitable to the furthering of Gods glory, and our good, as any
other sanctified affection? if unjust and unlawful as they understand it, I
would know how we can be angry and sin not. But say they if a holy anger
were here meant, what needs the constraint? Let not the Sun, etc. Seeing the
longer it lasted, the rather it were to be commended, if it were just and holy:
I answer these words are to be referred not to the precept (be angry) but to
the prohition (but sin not) where unjust anger is forbidden as before just
anger was commanded and this is manifest in the text, for he does not say, Let
not the Sun go down (...) upon your anger, but, (...), upon your Wrath, or
unjust and inueterate anger, as this word is commonly used.

So that the sense of these words is briefly thus much: The meaning of the
words.
be angry and spare not, so that your anger be just and holy, but seeing by
reason of your infirmity and corruption your just anger may easily degenerate
and become unjust, if due time, place, person, and other circumstances be not
observed, therefore take heed you sin not, by being unjustly angry, yet if
through infirmity ye fall into this sin, do not harbor it, no not one day.
Let not the Sun go down on your wrath.

And so much for the meaning of the words: Now I will entreat of their
several parts. Sect. 4. Of just anger.
And first concerning just anger, what it is, and what is required in our anger
that it may be just and holy. The definition of just anger.
T this anger is an holy and reasonable desire of revenge stirred up in us,
upon just, weighty, and necessary causes, whereby we being after a lawful
manner angry with our own and others vices and sins, rather then with the
persons, do desire justly to punish and revenge the vices and sins, to the
end God may be glorified, the parties amended, and that the anger of God being
pacified, may be auerted not only from the party offending, but also the
Church and common wealth. First then it is required to holy and lawful anger,
that the cause thereof be just: now the just causes of anger are diverse. First,
when we are moved thereunto with a zeal of Gods glory: The first cause of
just anger the glory of God.
for when we see God dishonored, and his glory defaced, it is not only
lawful to be angry with the offenders, but also necessary: for we profess our
selves to be Gods subjects, now we know that no good subject can with patience
endure to hear or see the glory of his Sovereign impeached? we profess our
selves Gods servants, and what good servant can abide to see his master
disgraced? we profess our selves Gods children, and good children are more
grieved and offended when they perceive that their parents are any ways abused
or injured, then if the injuries were offered to themselves: if therefore we be
loyal subjects, faithful servants, and loving children, we cannot choose but
be incited to a holy anger if we see our glorious Sovereign, our good
master, and gracious father, by any means dishonored.

When Moses saw that the children of Israel had contrary to Gods express
commandment reserved Manna till the next morning, Example.
he could not contain himself from showing this holy anger, when he saw his
Lord and masters will not observed, Exodus 16.20. Number. 12.3.
Exodus 16.20. So that though Moses were the meekest man that was on earth, yet
could he not with patience endure, to see Gods ordinance contemned. In like
manner when he saw that honor and glory which was due only to God almighty,
derived to a base and brutish Idol, he was provoked to an holy anger, and so
wholly possessed with a divine and heavenly rage, that he not only breaks
the two Tables written by Gods own hand, but sharply reuengeth this idolatry
with the death of three thousand of the offenders. Exodus 32.
So that though the people were dearer to him then his own life, yea then the
salvation of his own soul, Verse. 32. Number. 25.7.8.
yet was the glory of God more dear and precious unto him then either of both.
Phinees also when he saw God dishonored with that shameless sin of Zimry
and Cozby, being provoked with an holy anger he revenged this dishonor, with
the death of both the offenders. Thus also was Elias zealous for Gods glory, 1
Kin. 19.14.
because the Children of Israel had forsaken his covenant, cast down his
alters, and slain his Prophets.

And thus was our Savior Christ possessed with a fervent zeal of his fathers
glory, John 2.17
John 2.17. If therefore we would approve our selves to be Gods Children, we
must follow their example: and for as much, as nothing more dishonors God
then sin, nothing should offend and displease us more then sin, whether it be
in our selves, or in our neighbor. When therefore we fall into sin, we are
to be offended with our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
that so we may auert the Lords anger from us; for as they which judge
themselves, shall not be judged of the Lord, so they who are angry with
themselves for sin, shall escape the Lords anger. And this our anger must
proceed to a holy revenge. Those who have offended by surfeiting and
drunkenness, are to punish themselves with fasting and abstinence. Those that
have wallowed themselves in voluptuous pleasures, are to subdue and mortify
them, though they be as dear and precious unto them as their right hand and
eye. Those who have defrauded their neighbor by purloyning away his goods, are
with Zacheus to make restitution four fold, Luke. 19.8.

And as we are bound by the law of charity to love our neighbors as our
selves, so also to be angry with them as with our selves, namely, with this
holy kind of anger for sin. Whenever therefore we see them by their
sins dishonor God we are to be displeased therewith, and so far forth as
the limits of our callings extend to show our selves offended, according to the
example of the Prophet Jeremy, who because the people would not hear the word
of the Lord was even filled with divine wrath, Ier. 6.10.11
Jeremy 6.10.11. But how cold men's zeal of Gods glory is in this age frozen
in the dregs of sin, too lamentable experience shows: for first who almost is
angry with himself for his sins in this respect, because he has by them
dishonored God? every one shows spleen enough if his sins receive
condign punishment, but having to do with themselves, in respect of the sin
it self, they are like mild doves, without gaul. The adulterer is much
displeased if for his sin he be enjoined to mask in a white sheet, though
thereby he have deserved death, but the poison of his sin is most sweet to his
enuenomed appetite. The covetous extortioner is much offended if he be justly
deprived of that riches which he has unjustly gotten, but he is not angry
with his sin into which he is fallen by unjust coming by them. The
blasphemer is enraged if he be but reproved for his blasphemy, though by the
law of God, he deserves to die for it, but he is nothing displeased with
himself for dishonouring the Majesty of God: In a word every one is angry
with the smallest punishment, yet not moved with the greatest sin: but if we
would be angry and sin not, we must not be so much displeased for incurring
that punishment which we have justly deserved, as that by our sins we have
dishonored God.

And the like abuse there is of our anger toward others: men are soon stirred
up to choler against their neighbors, upon every slight occasion and show of
injury offered to themselves, though it be but an unkind word, or a mistaken
speech, or but a strange countenance, but when God is dishonored, his name
blasphemed, his religion derided his Sabaths profaned, his whole worship and
service contemned, they can look upon the offenders with a smiling countenance
and so confirm them in their sin, or if they be angry, they will either not
be seen in it at all, or else they will show it after so cold a manner that it
shall hardly be discerned. Whereas if there be the least injury offered to
themselves, they can contain their fury in no limits, till it be satisfied
with revenge even unto blood. But if we would approve our selves to be Gods
Children and servants, we must be as truly zealous of his honor and glory as
of our own credit and reputation.

The second cause of just anger is, when injury is unjustly offered unto our
selves: Sect. 5. The second cause of just anger is injury offered to a man's
self.
for by the law of God we are bound to seek the preservation of our own good
name and state: and therefore when either of them is violated or impeached, we
may justly use the aid of this holy anger in defending our selves and
repelling injury, yea also in taking such revenge as is fit in respect of our
callings: that is by unsheathing the Sword of justice, if it be committed into
our hands, or by seeking the help of the Magistrate, if our private estate will
not admit us to be our own caruers. Many examples might be brought to clear
this point if it were necessary. Though Moses were the meekest man living, yet
when he was contumeliously abused by Corah and his companions, it is said he
waxed very angry, Number. 16.15.
and prayed unto the Lord that he should not respect their offerings Number.
16.15. though the Apostle Paul were of more then an admirable patience, yet
being unjustly smitten by the commandment of the high Priest, he shows his
anger by a sharp reproof. Act. 23.2.
Act. 23.2 yea our Savior Christ the lively picture of true patience, when
contrary to all justice he was stricken by the high Priests servant, he shows
himself displeased by his reprehension; John. 18.23
though at that time he offered himself as it were to suffer all contumelious
injuries which pride assisted with malice could imagine or impose.

Objection.
But here it may be objected that our Savior has taught us if we have
received a blow on the one cheek to turn the other. Mat. 5.39.
Answer.
I answer that Christ's meainng is not, that we should expose our selves to all
injuries, but that we should refrain from private revenge without any calling
thereunto, which he would have so far from us, that rather we should be ready
to receive a new injury, then unjustly revenge that which we have received.

The third cause of just anger is when injury is offered to our brethren:
Sect. 6 The third cause of just anger is injury offered to our neighbor. Act.
7.24. 2 Samuel 13.21.
for as by the law of charity we are bound to love them as our selves, so the
same law binds us to be angry for those injuries which are offered unto them,
as if they were offered unto our selves. And thus was Moses angry with the
Egiptian who wronged the Israelite, Act. 7.24. Thus was David angry with Ammon
for deflowring his sister. 2 Samuel 13.21. and with Absalon for his cruel
murdering of Ammon. And thus was good Nehemie provoked to anger when he saw
the people oppressed. Neh. 5.6.
Neh. 5.6. And this anger is not only lawful but also necessary, and the
neglect thereof a grievous sin in Gods sight, as we may see in the example of
Elie: for when his sons abused the Lords people and he would not for their
sin show his anger in correcting them, otherwise then by mild and loving
admonitions, his indulgencie moved the Lord to inflict upon him a most heavy
punishment, Bernard.
Et quia ira Eli tepuit in filios, ira Dei exarsit in ipsum. Because Elie his
anger was lukewarm toward his sons, the anger of God waxed fire hot against
him, and that justly: Gregory.
for as one says, Non irasci cum oportet, est nolle peccatum emendare. Not to
be angry when just cause is offered, is to nill the amendment of sin, and
not to hinder sin when a man has good opportunity and a lawful calling
thereunto is to be come accessarie.

But as they offend against the party who is injured, so also against him who
does the injury. For by not showing themselves offended, they give
approbation, and by giving approbation they countenance and confirm him in his
sin. Whereas if they showed their displeasure it might be a notable means
to reclaim him, by working in his heart a consideration of his offense, for
which he is reproved. And in this respect Solomon says that anger is better
then laughter, for by a sad countenance the heart is made better. Eccles. 7.5.
Eccles. 7.5.


And so much for the just causes of anger: Sect. 7 The cause of just anger must
be weighty.
but there is further required to holy and lawful anger, not only that the
cause be just, but also weighty and of some importance; for if every small
trifle be sufficient to provoke us to anger, well may we manifest great
justice, but without question we shall show little love: for love suffers
long, it is not easily provoked to anger, it suffers all things. 1 Cor.
13.4.5.7. 1 Pet. 4.8.
1 Cor. 13.4.5.7. it covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. how little
love therefore have they who are angry upon every small and trifling occasion,
how just so ever it be? Let us then before we let the raynes loose to anger,
consider not only of the justness of the cause, but also whether it be light
or weighty; and if we find that it is but a trifle, we are either wisely to
dissemble it, or mildely to pass it over, knowing that in many things we
offend all: Iam. 3.2.
if weighty then we may not only justly, but also necessarily we are bound
to show our anger; for it is no less a sin to show mildenes where the Lord
requires anger, then anger where he requires mildness.

And so much for the causes of our anger: Sect. 8 What is required to just
anger in respect of the manner. 1 Moderation.
now we are to speak of the manner, wherein first this general rule is to be
observed, that we use moderation, least we mingle therewith our corrupt and
carnal anger, and so it degenerates into fleshly anger, and from that to fury.
Let us therefore herein imitate the Lord himself, who in wrath remembers
mercy; and not so be carried away with the violence of anger, that in the
mean time we forget love. And on the other side we are not with Ely to be
altogether remiss and mild, when either Gods glory or our neighbors good
requires that we should show just anger, and so by approving the sin for his
sake that offends, make our selves accessory to the sin, and consequently
subject to the punishment; but we must keep the mean if we will approve our
anger to be just and holy. The neglect of moderation.


The neglect whereof causes many to fall into sin: for some if they can
mask their deformed anger under the fair visard of a just pretense, they
think they may lawfully show all violence and fury in their affections: but
let such men know that though the cause of their anger be never so just, yet in
the manner they grievously sin against the rule of Charity; in respect
whereof they may fitly be compared to cruel hangmen, who having a just cause
to execute their office (namely the Judges lawful commandment) do in the
execution thereof use all barbarous cruelty: so they being commanded by God
to be angry with the sins of their brethren, seem glad they have gotten
such an occasion to show their rage and fury: But howsoever such men pretend
the goodly title of justice, yet if they be unmasked there will appear
nothing but rancour and malice, disguised under this fair pretext: for let
their friend to whom they are and must be much beholden commit offenses far
more notorious, and they who seemed almost choked with a small gnatte, can
find room in their consciences to swallow a pill of sin as big as a
Camel, if it be sugered over with the sweet title of friendship.

Others under pretense of a mild or patient nature, are content to hear God
dishonored, his servants scorned, and all religion disgraced; but cursed be
such mildness as causes us to betray the glory of God and his truth, by
holding our peace and wincking at the offenders. These men who are so mild and
modest in defending Gods cause that they are ready to blush if they but in a
word show their dislike of sin, as though they had done that whereof they
might be ashamed, will blush and swell for anger if their own credit be but
touched, or their reputation suffer any disparagement; and whence does this
proceed but from the over much love of themselves, and over little love of God?
whence is this bastard mildness but from pride, the mother of evil, which
causes them to seek the praise of humanity and courtesy by betraying Gods
glory?

The second thing required in the manner, Sect. 9. 2 Christian modesty and
charity.
is that we observe Christian modesty and charity, in abstayning from
malicious and wicked speeches, or unjust and spightfull actions in expressing
our anger: and to this purpose we are always to remember of what spirit we
are; for undoubtedly how just so ever our cause be, if we defend it with
spiteful and bitter speeches it is not the spirit of God which speaks in us.
John. 18.23
Let us rather follow the example of our Savior Christ, who when he was
buffeted and grosely abused reproved the offender with great mildness, and of
Michaell Tharchangell who when he strove with the Devil himself about the
body of Moses, Jude 9
durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said the Lord rebuke thee.

The third thing required is, Sect. 10. 3. A fit decoru^ and due respect of the
parties.
that in our anger there be observed a fit decorum, and due respect, and that
both in regard of the party himself, who is provoked to anger, and also the
other, with whom he is angry; for first in respect of the party himself, he
is not to behave himself alike in what place and calling soever he be: for if
he be a Magistrate, he is to show his anger not only in countenance and word,
but also in action; if he be a father he is not with Elie to show his
displeasure to his rebellious sons only by mild admonition, but also by
discreet correction: on the other side it is sufficient for him who is a
private man if he manifest his anger in word or countenance. Nay, it is
unlawful for him to proceed any further, unless his calling warrant him
thereunto. Again, the offenders are not to be used all alike, a mean private
man is not to show his anger in the same manner to a noble man or a Magistrate,
as he would to his equal or inferior, for though he may justly be angry with
his sin, yet he is to reverence his place and calling. The Son must not
show his anger toward his father, as the father shows his toward his son,
for he is bound to fear and reverence his person, though he justly hate his
sin.

And both these points have the Saints from time to time duly observed:
Examples.
Moses a Magistrate to whom the sword of justice was committed, when he was
provoked to anger by the sin of the people, did not only show his anger in
countenance or by a mild admonition, but by unsheathing the sword of justice,
Exodus 32.27
and justly punishing the offenders for their execrable idolatry. John Baptist
having only authority to use the sword of the Spirit, being offended with the
hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat: 3.7
expresses his anger by sharp and vehement reprehensions: Jacob being a
private man, Genesis 31.36
shows his anger toward churlish Laban his father in law, by mild and
gentle admonitions. Jonathan being justly incensed by the barbarous tyranny of
his merciless father, 1 Samuel 20.34 Dan. 3.16
signified his anger only by rising from the table and departing. The three
Children though with a godly zeal they abhorred the Kings profane Idolatry,
yet they showed their displeasure in humble and respective words. And so though
Paul detested the gentilisme of Festus and Agrippa, Acts 25
yet he used them with all due respect as it beseemed their high calling. By
all which examples it is manifest that we are to use Christian seemelinesse and
discretion if we would have our anger approved as just and holy.

And so much for the manner of our anger: Sect. 11 The object of just anger.
in the next place we are to speak of the object thereof; and that must not be
the person of our neighbor, but his vice, sin, and injustice. For though we
are to be angry at, yea, to hate the vices of men, yet we are to love their
persons, and in the midst of our anger, to seek their good, especially the
salvation of their souls, and in regard hereof, we ought to grieve more for
their sin, then for the injuries which by their sins they have offered us: and
thus was holy David affected, whose zeal did even consume him, because his
enemies had forgotten the word of the Lord. Psalm. 119.139. Mark. 3.5.
Ps. 119.139. and such was the anger of our Savior Christ, who in the midst
thereof did mourn for the hardness of their hearts. Mar. 3.5. But on the other
side, we are to take heed that we do not approve of the sin for the offenders
sake, for we ought to hate sin in our friends, parents, yea in our own hearts,
or whersoeuer else we find it, and in no wise to love this deadly poison, though
it be brought to us in a vessel of gold never so precious in our eyes. Here
therefore we must avoid two extremes, the one to hate the person for the
sins sake: the other to love the sin for the persons sake: for as we would
condemn his folly who would loath an exquisite picture, because it had a spot
of dirt upon it, or his that should so extremely dote upon the rare
workmanship of so excellent a feature, that he also would be in love with the
dirt for the pictures sake, and on the other side, commend his wisdom who
should so like the picture, as in the mean time he disliketh of the deformity.
So alike foolish is he who will be angry at the person of man it self, which
was formed after Gods own image, because this image is spotted and defiled
with sin, or he who will like and approve of such filthy corruption and
deformities wherewith it is defaced; but he is truly wise who so hates the
polluted spots of sin, that in the mean time he loves Gods excellent
workmanship, and so esteems of the workmanship, that he is much displeased
with the pollution which deformeth it. But the practice of the world is far
otherwise: for men will hardly be friend to the person, but they will be a
friend to the sin also, nor an enemy to the sin, but they will withal
malign the person; or else that which is worse, they will hate the person of
their neighbor and love his vice.

And so much for the object of just anger. Sect. 12. The time of just anger.
The fourth thing to be considered in just anger, is the time, which must be
short. Not that it is unlawful to continue long in anger if it continue just,
but least our holy anger by reason of our corruption degenerate into malice.
For as the most pure wine does in time wax sower upon the dregs; so our most
holy anger if it be long retained, is in danger of receiving some sowernes of
malice from the dregs of our corruption. The safest therefore and best course,
is quickly to be appeased, especially if the party offending show signs of
repentance, either for his sin toward God, or his injury offered unto us: for
seeing upon hearty sorrow God pardons and forgiueth, let us not retain that
which he remitteth.

And so much for the time: Sect. 13 The ends to be propounded in just anger.
The last thing to be considered is the end, which (if we would have our anger
just and holy) must be just and holy also. The end of our anger is just and
holy, when therein we propound unto our selves either the glory of God, or the
public good of the church or common wealth, or the private benefit of him who
either suffers or does the injury. The glory of God.
First, for the glory of God, we set it forth by our anger, either when being
private men we show our selves his children and servants, by manifesting our
hatred and detestation of sin in word or countenance, and so adorn the
profession which we profess, or being Magistrates do become his instruments
in punishing sins, and executing justice; if therefore either private men or
Magistrates propound unto themselves this maine and principal end in their
anger, it is just and holy.

The second end is, 2. The good of the Church and commonwealth
the good of the Church and common wealth: which end, though it appertain unto
all which are members of these bodies, yet does it more properly belong unto
Magistrates, who are to show their anger in punishing sin, not only that
civil justice which is the proppe of the common wealth, may be maintained,
but also that Gods anger which hangs over whole Countries, where sin is
countenanced or not justly punished, may be auerted: for if sin be punished
by men in authority, God will not punish the common wealth for it. Whereas
otherwise if Magistrates wincke at sin, and so neglect their duty imposed by
God, the Lord will in anger take the sword of Justice into his own hands, and
punish not only the malefactor for offending, but the Magistrate for not
executing his duty, yea, the whole Common wealth, which is stained and
polluted with their sins.

Examples hereof are plentiful in the word of God, Examples.
for the sin of Zimry with Cozby, Numb. 25
God sent a grievous plague amongst the people, but after Phinees had executed
justice by slaying both the offenders, the plague ceased. For the sin of Achan,
Ios. 7.
God took away the hearts from the people so that they fled and some of them
fell before the men of Ai, but when the malefactor was justly punished, Gods
anger was appeased. Judge. 21
Because the Beniamites did not punish but rather countenance the sin of those
who so shamelesly did abuse the Levites Concubine, we know what followed, not
only the offenders, but also the whole tribe (some few excepted) were attached
by gods heavy judgment. If therefore Magistrates would have the Lords anger
auerted, either from themselves or the common wealth, they are to show their
anger in punishing sin: and if in drawing out the sword of justice against
iniquity, they propound unto themselves the good of the Church and common
wealth, their end is just and holy, and their anger also.

The third end of just anger, 3. The good of the party who suffered the injury.
is the good of the party who suffers the injury, for hereby the offender is
restrained from committing the like, when either private men sharply reprove
him, or Magistrates severely punish him for his offense; whereas if neither
private men do by their anger show their dislike, nor Magistrates inflict
punishment for his misdemeanour, he is ready to redouble his injuries.

The last end is the good of the party who by offering the injury provoke us
to anger. 4. The good of the party who offered the injury.
For private men are to be angry with their neighbor, not because they malign
him or seek his hurt, but because they may discourage him in his sin and so
work his amendment. And in like manner Magistrates must show their anger in
punishing offenders, not to revenge themselves on their persons, but that they
may seek their good in reforming their vices. For what greater good can a man
do his brother then to reclaim him from his sin, which otherwise would
destroy both body and soul by remaining in it?

Objection.
But here it may be demanded how he seeks his good and amendment, when the
punishment is capital. Answer.
I answer first in those cases there is a comparison of the public good of the
common wealth, with the private good of the party offending, which is to be
neglected in respect of the other: if therefore his offense be such as
deserves death, he is to be punished with death, that the burden do not lie
upon the land. Secondly, I answer, he does the party good by bringing him to
the sight of his sin, and repentance by apprehending the pain of the
punishment; whereas otherwise he would desperately run on in his sins, and
so cast away both body and soul. To prevent therefore and cure this desperate
disease, it is necessary to apply desperate physic, and to destroy the body,
that both body and soul may be saved.

And these are the things required in just and holy anger, which if we observe,
our anger will be not only lawful but also necessary, both for the setting
forth of the glory of God, and also for the good of our selves and of our
neighbors.

CHAP. II. Of unjust Anger.
ANd so much for the first part of my text, Sect. 1.
wherein just anger is commanded: now I am to speak of unjust anger forbidden
in the words following, but sin not, that is, by falling into corrupt and
unjust anger. Unjust anger condemned as a great sin.
Which vicious affection is not only here condemned, but also in other places
of the Scripture, as in the 31. verse of this Chapter, Let all bitterness,
Colos. 3.8.
and anger, and wrath, and evil speaking, be put away from you with all
maliciousness. So Col. 3.8. Put ye away all these things, Gal. 5.20.21
wrath, anger, maliciousness, etc. and in the 5. Chapter of the Galathians
verse 20.21. it is reckoned among the works of the flesh, which who so follow
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. It is forbidden also in the sixth
commandment under the name of murder; both be cause it is the chief means
and cause which moves men thereunto, as also because it is the murder of the
heart, and therefore murder in truth in Gods sight, who more respects the heart
then the hands, for a man may be innocent before him, though his hands have
slain his neighbor, if his heart have not consented thereunto, as appears in
the old law, where Cities of refuge were appointed for such by the Lords own
commandment: but if the heart have consented and desired any way to violate the
person of our neighbor (which unjust anger always affects) though our hands
are free from the act, we are guilty of murder in the sight of God. And this
our Savior Christ teaches us in the exposition of the sixth commandment, Mat.
5.22
Mat. 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly is culpable of
judgment. By these places it is evident that anger is forbidden and condemned
as a great sin, and therefore it is to be avoided of us as a most dangerous
enemy to our souls health. The generality of this vice of unjust anger.
Which that we may perform with so much the more vigilant care: Let us further
consider that this vice is generally incident to all by reason of our natural
corruption: so that there is none so young, nor any so old, none so wise, nor
any so foolish, neither male nor female, which do not carry this fire in their
bosom: and therefore unless they quench daily this fiery dart of Satan with
the water of Gods Spirit, and the shield of faith, they will be in danger of
burning, Prou. 6.27
for who can carry fire in his bosom and not be burnt? Prou. 6.27.

But the dangerousnes of this affection will more evidently appear if we
consider the violence thereof: Sect. 2 The violence of this turbulent affection.
for there is scarce any other affection so strong which it does not easily
subdue. Love is said to be stronger then death, Can. 8.6. and yet anger if it
be once admitted easily overcomes it, Can. 8.6
for there was never any love so hearty and entire but anger has subdued it.
The Father in his anger forgets his love to his child, and the child to his
father, the husband to his wife, the wife to her husband, and causes them in
stead of duties of love to bring forth the fruits of hatred: yea it makes a
man to forget the love of himself, as appears by those men who to satisfy
their anger, violently thrust themselves into imminent dangers of death. Nay,
it makes a man offer raging violence against such a friend as is more dear to
him then his own life, as it is evident in the example of Alexander, who in his
anger slew his friend Clitus, who^ he loved so entirely that he needs would
have revenged his murder by putting himself to a wilful death. As therefore
we cannot discern the heat of the Sun, when we are near unto a scorching
fire, so the heavenly heat of divine love is not felt, if the furious flame of
anger be kindled in our hearts. Covetousness also is a most violent and strong
vice, which nothing almost can vanquish but death, and they who are possessed
therewith do love their riches better then their own lives, as we may fee in
their example, who being deprived of them murder themselves; yea they are more
dear unto them then the salvation of their own souls, as may appear by
those who fall into outrageous sins, whereby they plunge their souls
headlong into hell, that they may get momentarie riches; and by them also who
despise the means of their salvation in comparison of a small worldly trifle:
and yet anger being once admitted does overcome covetousness, as it is evident
in the example of them, who to satisfy their furious anger by the death of
their enemy, are content to forfeit their goods though they be never so
covetous; besides the double hazard of their lives which they incur, both in
their private quarrel, and in satisfying by deserved punishment public
justice. The like also may be said of them, who by anger being incited to
revenge, are content to spend all their substance by prosecuting wrangling
suites in Law, of little or no importance, to the end they may impouerish him
also with whom they are offended; and so are content to pull the house upon
their own heads, that they may ouerwhelm another under the weight of the same
ruin.

Fear also is an affection of no small force and violence: for oftentimes it
compels men to thrust themselves into imminent dangers that they may avoid
dangers, and to kill themselves for fear of greater torments: and yet anger
vanquisheth fear, many times causing them who would tremble to see another
vvound, contemn their own death, and so turns the most cowardly fear into
most desperate rage and furious resolution.

So that other affections lead a man, but this draws him, others entice him,
but this compels him, other dazzle the sight of reason, but this makes it stark
blind, other make us prone unto evil, but this casts us headlong even into
the gulf of wickedness.

Considering therefore that this turbulent vice of unjust anger is in the eyes
of God so heinous, Sect. 3.
in regard of us so general, and in respect of it own nature so strong and
violent, I purpose to entreat of it at large, to the end we may learn the
better to prevent it, or the more easily to subdue it. And to this purpose I
will first show what it is, and what are the causes and properties thereof;
secondly, the kinds of it; and lastly, I will prescribe the preservatives and
medicines, whereby we may cure this vice in our selves, or in others.

For the first. The definition of unjust anger.
Unjust anger is a wrongful and an unreasonable desire of revenge, stirred up
in us by unjust causes, whereby we having no respect of the glory of God, nor
the good of our selves or our brethren, are after an unjust and immoderate
manner, angry with them with whom we ought not to be angry. That unjust anger
is a desire of revenge, Anger an unreasonable desire of revenge.
it is so evident that it needs no proof: for we know by daily experience,
that he who is provoked unto anger by an injury offered in truth or in his
opinion, desires revenge according to the nature of the injury received, or
the opinion which he has conceived of it. If he be injured by a scornful look
he seeks to revenge it with a disdainful countenance: if by words he
reuengeth by words; if in deeds he desires to revenge by deeds; yea oftentimes
the fury of anger casting a mist before the sight of reason, causes small
injuries to seem great, and according to that false opinion, inciteth men to
take revenge without all proportion. For an angry look with angry words, for
angry words with blows, and for blows with death, according to the violence
of the affection, and not the quality of the injury received.

Now that this desire of revenge is unjust and unreasonable, Sect. 4.
it appears by that which follows in the definition. And first because the
causes thereof are unjust.

The causes of unjust anger are either internal or external. The causes of
unjust anger. 1. Internal. 1. Self love
The internal causes are diverse, as first, self love, whereby we so
immoderately love our selves, that we never think of the injuries and
indignities which we offer others, or else suppose them to be none; or else
lightly esteem of them, as not worthy the recital; but on the other side, it
makes men hainously aggrauate injuries offered unto themselves: and so to make
huge mountains of small molehils; it causes the heart easily to apprehend the
wrong, busy in meditating of it being apprehended, eager in seeking revenge
after meditation, and the hand no less forward in acting those tragedyes which
the heart has invented. For by self love men are induced to think themselves
worthy of al love and honor, and therefore if a small injury be offered unto
them, they suppose that death is too small a revenge for so great an indignity
offered to such worthy personages. Yea, if they be not so much respected as
their hautie ambition desires, or if others be preferred before them, and that
deservedly, this is matter enough to provoke them to furious rage, not only
against them of whom they are not regarded, but them also who are preferred in
others judgment. And this is evident in the example of Caine, who because God
respected the offering of Abell more then his, Genesis 4.
was incensed to wrath, and had his anger so inflamed that nothing could quench
it but the blood of his dear brother; and in Saul who could with no patience
endure, that the praises of David should surmount his in the sight and audience
of the people, 1. Sam. 19.8
but was enraged with deadly anger against him, who for his merits deserved to
be advanced.

And thus does self love make a man winck at those iniuryes which he offers
others, and to put on the spectacles of affection when he looks on those
wrongs which are offered to himself, whereby it comes to pass that every
small injury seems great and provoke to great anger. Whereas if we thought
meanly of our selves and loved our neighbors as our selves, we would not suffer
our judgment to be so over balanced with the weight of affection in judging of
the injury, nor give the reins to our anger in persuing it with revenge.

The second internal cause of unjust anger is pride and arrogance of spirit,
which is a fruit of self love; Sect. 5. The second cause of unjust anger,
Pride.
for self love it is which makes us have an high opinion of our selves, this
high opinion causes arrogancy and pride, and pride causes men to be more
sharp sighted in discrying wrong, and more furiously insolent in taking
revenge. The reason hereof is apparent: proud men being jealous of their
honor and reputation, are also very suspicious of contempt, so that the least
injury provoke them to choler and disdain, because they are ready to
imagine that thereby they are exposed to contempt. And this is the reason why
proud men do more impatiently suffer an injury offered in company where they
would be respected, because they think it a great disparagement to their
credit and reputation. An example hereof we have in Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 3.19
who waxed pale for anger, because he thought himself disgraced in the sight
of all his princes and people, by the repulse which he received of the three
children, who refused to obey his wicked commandment. Esthe. 3.5.6.
And in Haman who was so enraged with fury, because Mordecay would not in the
sight of the people do him that reverence which his proud heart desired, that
he thought his death too small a revenge for such an indignity, unless also
for his sake he utterly rooted out his whole kindred and nation. So that the
least spark of anger kindled with the smallest occasion, bursteth out into a
raging flame of fury, if it be blowed with the wind of vainglory. Whereas on
the other side, he that is humble is not provoked to anger though he be
neglected, because his lowly conceit makes him think that he is not worthy to
be much esteemed: nor yet though he have received an injury, because he is
ready to think that he has deserved it, either by like falts committed against
men, or more heinous sins against God.

The third internal cause of unjust anger is covetousness, Sect. 6. The third
cause of unjust anger Covetousness.
for this vice makes men desire much riches, and if their hopes fail them and
be not correspondent to their desires, their unquiet and turbulent thoughts are
fit harbingers to prepare a lodging in their hearts to entertain anger. It
makes them undertake great matters, which when they are not able to compass,
their hearts are filled with vexation, and they become more wayward then
children; or else if their couelous desires carried with the wings of ambition
mount not so high a pitch, they basely stoop even to the most sordidous pray;
and finding themselves unable to compass great matters abroad, they
entermeddle with every domestical trifle at home; and if they see any thing
miscarry through the default of wife, child or servant, though it be of no
value, their anger can contain it self in no bounds of reason. So that these
men are angry abroad, but mad at home, chollericke with every man which
hinders or does not further their commodity, but outrageous to their wives,
children and servants, if they sustain the least loss.

The fourth internal cause of unjust anger, Sect. 7 The fourth cause nice
luxuriousness.
is nice luxuriousnes or luxurious nicenes; which commonly being the fualt of
women, or at least a womanish fault, is especially to be seen in domestical
matters. For if you come into the house of one who is nice and curious, you
shall easily perceive how soon they are incited to great anger upon little
cause. If the decking and adorning of their house be not fully answerable to
their minds, if their costly cates be not so daintely cooked, that they may
delight their curious-learned taste and cloyed appetite, if a spot or wrinckle
be upon their garments, or but a glass broken, if their nice ears be offended
with the least displeasing noyce, though it be but by some chance, they are so
enraged with anger, that the house will scarce hold them, or at least not
contain their clamorous voices. These curious folks are not only offended
with injuries, Seneca de ira. li. 2. cap. 5
but also with shadows and apparances. Nam vbi animum simul and corpus
voluptates corrupere nihil tolerabile videtur non quia dura sed quia molles
patiuntur, for when voluptuous pleasures have corrupted both mind and body,
nothing seems tolerable; not that the things which they suffer are grievous,
but because they that suffer them are nicely effeminate. And like as they who
are tormented with the gout, are angry if a man come but toward them, and cry
out if they be but touched: so but a show of injury moves these voluptuous
wantons to choler and anger, and the least injury offered in truth inciteth
them to rage and fury. Whereas others who have not their minds effeminated
with this luxurious curiosity, they can easily pass over such trifling
imperfections, A Prolepsis.
and repel anger in far more violent assaults. If any think these toys too
small to undergo a public censure, I would have such know that the lesser
the occasion is which provoke to anger, the greater is their sin who are so
easily provoked, and the rather they deserve a sharp reprehension, for that
anger which is incited by every light and trifling cause, then if it were
weighty and of some importance: for howsoever the occasions are but small, yet
their sin is not small, nay their sin is therefore great, seeing the
occasion which moves them thereunto is but little, especially considering that
the same parties who are fire-hot in these trifles which concern themselves,
are key cold in those things which much concern Gods glory, and their own
spiritual good. For I appeal unto their own consciences whether they are not
provoked unto more violent anger for these trifling toys, then when they
dishonor God by most grievous sin, or see him dishonored by others, and if
their consciences plead guilty, let them rather be offended with their own
corruptions, then with the Physician which desires to cure them.

The fifth internal cause of unjust anger is curiosity, Sect. 8. The fifth
cause of unjust anger, Curiosity.
whereby men are tickled with a vain desire and itching appetite to see and
hear all things: how their friends behave themselves in their private
meetings; what their adversaries do and say behind their backs; how their
servants bestow themselves in every corner; whereof it comes to pass that
desiring to know all things, they know many things which displease them, and
provoke them to anger, for which they may thank their vain curiosity: for if
with the wise man they would think it their glory to pass by infirmities.
Pro. 19.11. or follow his counsel, Prou. 19.11. Eccle. 7.23.
Eccl. 7.23. Give not thine heart to all the words that men speak, least thou
do hear thy servant cursing thee; They might have less cause of anger, and
more contentation of mind. Whereas by inquisitiue inquiry after every rumor,
and curious prying into small domestical faults, they inflame their hearts
with great anger. For as the looking upon a small Print does more offend the
fight, then a greater, because we hold it nearer our eyes, and more intentiuely
behold it, the Letters standing thick and near together: so often times it
comes to pass that these small domestical faults being curiously pryed
into, do more offend and anger us, because they are near unto us, and fall out
thick, and as it were, one in the neck of another, then greater injuries
offered abroad, which fall out more seldom, and are not so much subject to our
view.

The sixth internal cause, Sect. 9. The sixth cause credulity and listening to
tale-bearers.
is to have an open ear to every talebearer, and a credulous heart to believe
them. Pro. 26.20. Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebearer
strife cease. So that as wood is the fires fit nourishment, so is a
talebearer fit to nourish anger. Prou. 26.20.
An example hereof we have in Saul, who giving a credulous ear to those lying
suggestions of that pickthank Doeg, was incensed to such raging anger, that the
blood of the innocent Priests was not sufficient to quench the heat thereof,
unless he spilt also the blood of all the inhabitants of Nob, 1 Samuel 22.19
yea, of the Oxen, Asses, and Sheep, with more then brutish fury. And therefore
David speaking of Doegs tongue, Psalm. 120.4
Psalm. 120.4. compares it to coals of Juniper (that is to hot burning coals)
because it so furiously inflamed Saul's anger. 2. Sam. 16
Yea, David himself giving ear to the false report of Ziba, was moved to
unjust anger against innocent Mephibosheth; and therefore having experience of
those manifold evils which followed credulity and listening after tale-bearers,
he professes that he will destroy him that privily slandereth his neighbor,
Psalm. 101. 5 7
Psalm. 101 5.7. And hence it is that James compares the tongue to a fire,
because nothing more inflameth the heart to furious anger, James. 3.6. Iam. 3.6


The last internal cause of unjust anger, Sect. 10. The last cause want of
meditation concerning humane infirmities.
is want of meditation concerning the common imperfections, whereunto we are all
by nature subject: for if we did but consider that in many things we offend
all, and that we our selves have the same faults, or greater then those which
we espy in others, we would not hastily be moved to choler upon every
trifling occasion. Iam: 3.2
But it is the custom of men addicted to anger to imitate the Lamiae, who (as
the Poets feign) use their eyes abroad, and put them into a box when they come
home: so these are but too quick-fighted abroad in spying the faults of others,
but stark blind at home in discerning their own faults; and though they have
a great beam in their own eyes, yet they can easily discern a small more in
the eye of another. And the reason is, because they put their own faults into
that part of the wallet which they cast behind their backs, and therefore
never look upon them, but the faults of others into that part which hangs
before them, whereinto they are always curiously prying.

The external causes of unjust Anger. CHAP. III.
AND so much for the internal causes of unjust anger: Sect. 1. 1 Virtuous
actions and demenor
now we are to speak of the external; by which I understand all outward
occasions which are unjustly taken, as first, when we are angry with our
neighbor for his virtuous actions. For some there are whose malignant eyes do
abhor nothing more then the bright beams of virtue, either because they
think that the beauty of others perfection, causes the deformity of their
vices to seem more vggly, and that their degenerated natures are become like
unto Satan's, Examples.
who hates virtue because it is virtue. An example hereof we have in Cain,
whose anger was kindled against his brother, because he was accepted in Gods
sight, as being more holy then himself. Gen: 4.5.
Genesis 4.5. As also in Saul who was incensed against Jonathan, for his virtuous
demeanor toward David. 1. Sam. 20.30. 1 Samuel 20.30
In Asa who was offended with the Prophet the Ambassador of the Lord, for
delivering faithfully that embassage which the Lord had put in his mouth, 2
Chro. 16.10 Dan. 3.13
2. Chron. 16.10. In Nabuchadnezzer who was enraged against the three Children
because they refused to commit Idolatry, Dan. 3.13. and in the Jews who were
filled with wrath because our Savior Christ made a true exposition of the
Scriptures, and rightly applied it unto them, Luke 4.28
Luke 4.28. and too many examples we have in these days, of such as cannot
with any patience endure to hear their duties taught them, and their vices
publicly reproved out of Gods word, or yet any private admonition, but they
are ready (like those that are in a raging fit of a burning ague) to despite
the Physician that endeavors to cure them. So that in our times he is like
to incur more anger yea, and danger also that reproves sin, then he that
commits sin; he that reprehendeth Atheism and profaneness, then he that
lives in them. Yea, so desperate is the disease of this declining age,
sursetted with sin, that the Physician may sooner incur hurt and damage by
the fury of his patient, then the patient help and health by the skill of the
most exquisite Physician.

Secondly, Sect. 2
the cause of our anger is unjust, when it is only imaginary, having no other
ground but our own suspicion. And thus was Eliab angry with his brother David,
because he suspected him to be proud, whereas in truth his own pride was the
cause of his suspicion. 1 Samuel: 17.28
1 Samuel 17.28. and this is the most common cause of Anger in these days; for
want of love causes men to interpret the actions of others in the worst sense,
and upon their false surmises they ground their anger. One is angry because
saluting his neighbor, he did not resalute him, whereas perhaps he did not
see him, or at the least having his mind otherwise occupied did not observe
him: another is offended if any in his company is merry, thinking that he
makes himself sport with his infirmities; another because he is too sad,
imagining that it is because his company displeases him. In a word as men's
surmises are innumerable, so also are the causes of unjust anger. Yea so prone
men are to invent causes where none is, that oftentimes they are sore
displeased because they have received small benefits not answerable to their
expectation, or not equal to those which they see bestowed upon others; and so
they are provoked to anger with small gifts, as though they had received great
injuries, but let us be ashamed of such folly and learn to leave it. Has thy
friend given more to another then thee? why it may be he has deferued more,
and though he has not, yet that which thou have received might content thee
if thou would make no comparisons. Nunquam erit foelix quem torquebit
foelicior, Seneca de ira lib. 3. cap. 30.
he will never be happy who is vexed when he sees one more happy. Has he
given thee less then thou did hope for? why perhaps thou did hope for more
then thou did deserve, or then thy friend could conveniently give, but if
thou would not be ungrateful, consider rather what thou have received, then
what thou have not received, before how many thou art preferred, rather then
how many are preferred before thee.

Thirdly, the cause of our anger is unjust, Sect. 3. Thirdly, when the cause is
light and of no moment. 1 Cor. 13.7.
when we are provoked thereunto by every small and trifling occasion; because
hereby love and charity is notably violated, when every slight cause incenseth
us to anger: for love suffers all things. 1 Cor. 13.7. and therefore their
love is small who will suffer nothing. Love covers a multitude of sins.
Pro. 10.12. they therefore who rather find causes where they are not, then
cover them where they are, do plainly show their want of love, and their too
great pronenesse to anger, it is the nature of love to make great faults seem
little, and little faults none at all: but anger makes every small slip a
capital offense. and every word of disgrace worthy a stabbe. And as when we
behold the Sun rising through thick and foggie vapors, we imagine it to
be of a far greater quantity then when the air is pure and clear: so when
the soggie mists of anger do ouershadow reason, we suppose every fault to be
greater then it would appear if this turbulent affection were dispelled with
the lively heat of ardent love.

Some are angry at the imperfections of nature, which being not in the parties
power to amend, should rather move compassion then provoke anger. Others are
angry at faults committed at unawares, unwillingly and unwittingly, whereas
they might with as great reason be angry with a traveler for going out of his
way, or with one who stumbleth in the dark for not keeping footing, or with a
blind man for iustling or rushing against them; For as the want of bodily sight
causes the one, so ignorance which is nothing else but the blindenes of the
mind, causes the other; or with one who is sick because he is sick, for
what is ignorance but the minds malady? but he whose heart is seasoned with
true wisdom, is not easily provoked with faults of ignorance, unless it be
wilful or extremely rechlesse, considering that while we continue in this
vale of misery, our minds are shadowed with more then Cimerian darkness. And
therefore these small trifling errors whereinto we fall for want of
knowledge, will in them rather move laughter, or at least pity, then provoke
anger. For as the unhappy speeches and shrewd turns of little children are
excused because they proceed from want of wit; so should the same excuse serve
for them who commit faults through ignorance and simplicity.

Lastly, our anger is unlawful,. Sect. 4. 4. When the end is unlawful.
when as in our anger we propound unto our selves no lawful end; as the
glory of God, the public good of the Church or commonwealth, or the private
benefit of our selves, or of our neighbors: but rather private revenge and
satisfying of our tumultuous affections by the hurt or destruction of him with
whom we are displeased. And this is always to be observed in all examples of
unjust anger, as in Caines anger toward Abel; Saul's toward David;
Nabuchadnezers toward the three children; the Scribes and Pharisees toward our
Savior Christ.

And so much for the causes of unjust anger. Now we are to speak of the
properties thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Of the properties of unjust anger
THe first property of unjust anger, is,. Sect. 1. The first property, want
of moderation.
that it is immoderate; for though our anger have never so just a cause, yet if
it grow violent, and degenerate from anger to wrath and fury, it is unjust,
for it sauoureth not of the spirit of God who is merciful and easy to be
entreated, but rather of the flesh and the corruption thereof. And therefore
wrath (that is, violent anger) is numbered amongst the works of the flesh, the
doers whereof shall not inherit the kingdom of God: Gal. 5.20.21.

Now if we would know how to discern when our anger is immoderate, it is
easily known by the fruits thereof. As first, when it provoke us to utter
words dishonorable to God, either by profane blaspheming of his holy name, or
wicked cursing and imprecations; whereby we desire that he should be the
executioner of our malice; or opprobrious to our neighbors, as when our anger
bursteth out into bitter and reuiling speeches tending only to his disgrace.
An example whereof we have in Shemei, 2. Sam. 16.5: who reproving David for
his sins, uses such gall and bitterness, that it clearly appears his anger
proceeded not from the hatred of his sin, but rather of his person.

Secondly, 2. By the want of fit decorum.
when we have no regard of any decorum or order, either in respect of our
selves, or those with whom we are angry. Not in respect of our selves, as
when by anger we are provoked to take revenge being but private men, whereas
revenge belongs only to God, and to the Magistrate who is the Lords deputy,
Romans 12.19.
according to that Romans 12.19. Avenge not your selves, but give place to anger:
(that is, to Gods anger and revenge) For it is written, vengeance is mine, and
I will repay it, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
says the Lord. They therefore who take upon them revenge having no lawful
calling thereunto, violate Gods ordinance by arrogating to themselves one of
Gods royal privileges, and so make themselves guilty of high treason against
God, as they are guilty of treason against an earthly Prince, who intermeddle
with any of their royal prerogatives.

So also our anger is immoderate when we have no respect of the party with
whom we are angry; as when the son being provoked to anger against his
father, though it be for a just cause, does not use him with that respect and
reverence which becomes him, but bursteth out into undutiful and insolent
speeches: quite contrary to the example of Jacob, who being but a son in law
did not in his anger forget his duty, but used all discretion and moderation:
Genesis 31.36. And of Jonathan, Genesis 31.36.
who though he had just cause to be angry with his father Saul, yet he only
showed it by rising from the table and departing: 1. Sam. 20.34.
1. Sam. 20.34. And the like may be said of the servants anger toward his
master, the subjects toward the Magistrate, and of all inferiors toward their
superiors. For howsoever the law of God binds us, to be angry when just
cause is offered, yet it also tieth us to moderation and discretion: For it is
the author of order and not confusion.

The second property of unjust anger,. Sect. 2. The second property of unjust
anger is in respect of the object.
is in respect of the object; for whereas just anger opposes it self only
against sin and injustice, unjust anger is incensed against the person of the
offender, yea oftentimes of them who are innocent, nay because they are
innocent, as appears by those examples which before I rehearsed. But if we
will be Christ's Disciples, we must follow his doctrine and example. Matthew. 5
44.
His doctrine, Math. 5.44. Love your enemies, do good to those that hate you,
etc. That you may be the sons of your father which is in heaven. Where he
plainly intimates, that they are not the sons of God, who do not love the
persons of their very enemies: we must follow also his example, who prayed for
his enemies even while he was upon the cross subject to their outrageous
injuries: Luke 23.34. Luke 23.34. Act. 7.66.
Which blessed president holy Stephen imitated: Act. 7.66.

But many are not only incensed against the persons of their enemies who are
men like unto themselves, but also with brute beasts, which are not capable
thereof, as we may see in the example of Balaam, Number. 24.10. Number. 24.10.
Yea even with things which want both sense and life: and so was Xerxes angry
with the rivers, Plutarch. de cobib. iracun.
and sent letters full of menacing threatenings to the hills. And many such are
subject to continual view, who if any thing in their hands displease them,
will not stick to dash it against the ground, though after, they are feign to
take it up again: or to spoil and break it in pieces, though afterward they
must be glad to bestow great labor in repairing that which by greater folly
they have defaced. But these men may fitly be compared unto children, who
having gotten a fall beat the earth; so they having received some hurt through
their own folly or negligence, are angry with those things which are ruled by
them as bare instruments.

The last property of unjust anger respects the time,. Sect. 3.
when as it being long retained becomes hatred. And this happens not only
when men are provoked unto anger upon weighty causes, but also when it is
grounded on the most slight occasions: for when vain trifles have stirred them
up to wrath they persevere in it, lest they might seem to have begun without
cause, and so against all reason the injustice of their anger makes them
persist in it with greater obstinacy. For therefore they retain it, yea
increase it, that the greatness of their anger may make men believe that it
could not choose, but arise from some weighty occasion and just cause: and so
they choose rather to seem just, then to be just. But more of this afterward
when I come to speak of the restraint of unjust anger.

CHAP. V. Of the kinds of unjust anger.
ANd so much concerning the causes and properties of unjust anger.. Sect. 1.
Now we are to speak of the kinds thereof. It admits of a twofold
distinction; first, it is either hidden and covert, or else professed and
manifest. Hidden anger is of two sorts; Hidden anger which is commendable.
the first is commendable, when as men labor by all means possible to subdue
the affection, and to smother the flame after it is kindled that it burst not
forth into unseemly words or actions sauouring of revenge. And this is a
fruit of the spirit, which when it cannot repel anger and keep it from
entrance; in the next place it endeavors to expel and repress it.

The other sort of hidden anger is to be condemned, Hidden anger which is to be
condemned.
when as men nourishing it in the heart do notwithstanding conceal it, that
they may have the better opportunity of revenge, which they are purposed to
seek with such a full resolution, that they refuse all parley, lest they might
be brought to a truce, or conclude a peace. This anger is far worse then that
which is professed, both in respect of the party who is angry, and the other
with whom he is angry. In respect of the party himself, because containing
in him this turbulent affection, it does vex and torment him, like a raging
fire which has no passage, or a violent stream whose current is stopped. And
hereof it is that anger is said to be of the vipers brood, because it pineth
and consumes him in whom it is bred. In respect of him also with whom he is
angry, because it makes him less wary in preventing his malice, and
therefore the more easily surprised. In regard whereof a secret enemy is more
dangerous then one who professes his emnitie: for as a small company of men
lying in an ambushment, will more easily overcome a greater force, then if they
should march against them with banners displaied: so a weak enemy hiding his
anger, and watching his best opportunity of revenge, is more like to
circumuent and surprise one more mighty then himself, then if he should
profess his malice.

Examples hereof we have in the Scriptures: Examples.
as in the old serpent, who cloaked extreme malice under goodly words and
fair promises, professing himself a kind friend to our first parents, when he
wholly intended their eternal destruction: Genesis 3.1. etc. As also in Cain,
Genesis 3.1.
who talked familiarly with his brother as in times past, when as he already
had resolved his murder in his heart, which also presently after he acted with
his hands: Genesis 4.8. Genesis 4.8.
So Absolon like a cunning courtier concealed deadly malice two years together
against his brother Ammon; to the end that being not suspected, he might
obtain the more fit opportunity of revenge: 2. Sam. 13.22.23. The like
example we have in Ioab, 2. Sam. 13.22.23.
who kindly saluting Amasa, cruelly stabbed him while he lovingly embraced
him: 2. Sam. 20.9. 2. Sam. 20.9. Luke 22.47.
As also in the traitor Judas, who betrayed his master while he kissed him:
Luke 22.47. Neither is our age fruitful in all sin, barraine of such examples:
for how many Italionate machiauellians live among us, who will not stick to
give most kind congeis with hand, cap and knee to them from whom they are most
enstranged in their hearts; and look most smoothly upon them against whom they
have conceived deepest malice? So that their anger is like unto rivers which
are most dangerously deep, where the stream runs stillest and smoothest. If
you ask these men the reason hereof, they will tell you, that (according to
the rules of their master Machiauel) Professa perdunt odia vindictae locum:
Senec. in Medea.
Professed anger takes away opportunity of revenge. But let us know, that as
in malice, and dissembling thereof, they are like unto the devil himself, so
without repentance they shall be like to him in punishment. And so much for
hidden anger.

Professed anger is to be seen when either men of set purpose do neglect the
signs and duties of love,. Sect. 2. Professed anger two sold.
or else in showing and bringing forth the fruits of anger. 1. Sullen or sient
anger.
For the first, some in their anger are sullenlie silent from day to day, and
month to month, not vouchsafing to speak a word to those with whom they are
displeased, though they daily converse with them; as though with their love and
charity they had lost their tongues also. But such men forget the end why God
gave them a tongue, that is, that it might be not only an holy organe to sing
our Creators praise, but also that we might be enabled thereby to converse more
familiarly and lovingly one with another; as also that thereby we might
preserve this love begun by taking away all offense; for as the Lord has given
a tongue to enquire out an injury, as also to reprove and reprehend the
offender, so he has given the same tongue to make a just excuse for the
working of reconciliation. It may be if thou would come to expostulate the
matter with thy neighbor, he would either justly excuse his fault, or humbly
confess it, and desire pardon, whereas now thou make him thine enemy by
denying him all means and hope of reconciliation: for what hope can he
conceive of peace, seeing thou will not so much as come to a treaty?

Secondly,. Sect. 3. 2. Anger is manifested by evil speaking or evil doing. 1.
Evil speaking.
professed anger is showed by the manifest fruits thereof, and they are of two
sorts, evil speaking and evil doing. By evil speaking, as when men do
manifest their anger in spightfull railing words which are far unbeseeming
not only a Christian, but also an honest Infidel. This is condemned in the one
and thirty verse of this Chapter: Let all bitterness, anger, and wrath,
crying, (that is, clamorous railing) and evil speaking be put away from you.
And that we may the rather be moved to abstain from this odious vice, let us
consider that God made the tongue to be an instrument of his praise, and not
to dishonor him by cursed speaking. And therefore he will not hold him
guiltless, which makes this heavenly organe of his spirit created to show
forth the Creators praise, a cursed instrument of Satan in reuiling and
slandring our neighbor. And this our Savior Christ teaches us: Whosoever
(says he) shall say unto his brother Raca; (that is, the least word of
reproach) shall be worthy to be punished with a council (that is, Matthew. 5.22.
an assembly or senate of Magistrates) And whosoever shall say fool, shall be
punished with hell fire, Matthew. 5.22. Let us remember, that by our words we
shall be justified, and by our words we shall be condemned: and good reason,
for Verba sunt animi indices, the tongue is the hearts interpreter, and
therefore our Savior Christ says, Mat. 12.27.34.
Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur: Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. Yea this the wise Socrates well knew; and therefore when a certain
father had sent his son to him, to the end that seeing him he might perceive
his disposition, he said to the young man: Loquere adolescens, vt te videam,
Speak young man that I may see thee: noting thereby that the disposition of
his heart was best known by the words of the mouth. Seeing therefore God
judges according to the heart, and seeing the heart is best discerned by the
tongue, great reason it is that by our words we should be justified or
condemned. Let us remember also, Matthew. 12.36.
that if for every idle word we must give an account at the day of Judgment,
how much more for railing and reuiling speeches? and if these meditations
always run in our minds we will in our greatest anger follow the practice of
the Prophet David, Psalm. 39.1. that is, Psalm. 39.1.
we will bridle our mouths that we may not sin with our tongue.

Secondly, professed anger is expressed by evil doing, 2. Evil doing.
when either in our anger we offer injuries or seek revenge for those which
are offered us; both which are forbidden in the word of God. The first, Leuit.
19.13. Leuit. 19. Psalm. 15.3.
Thou shall not do thy neighbor wrong: and Psalm. 15.3. it is set down for a
note of an inheritour of Gods kingdom, not to do evil to our neighbor: and
consequently he that is provoked by anger to offer injury to his brother,
can have no assurance without repentance that he is an heir of Gods kingdom.
And this may further appear Matthew. 5.22. for if he who uses reproachful words
be in danger of hell fire, Mat. 5.22.
what shall we think of him that goes further, namely, to wicked deeds? As
therefore we tender our souls salvation, let us rule our hands, though we
cannot rule our affections.

Secondly, it is expressed by revenging injuries received, which though it be
not altogether so great a sin as the other, yet it is also condemned and
forbidden as no small sin in the word of God: Matthew. 5.39.
Matthew. 5.39. Resist not evil; but to him who smites thee on the right
cheek, turn the left also, etc. Romans 12.19. Romans 12.19.
Avenge not your selves, for it is written, vengeance is mine, and I will
repay, says the Lord. And so much for the first distinction of anger.

Secondly,. Sect. 4. A second distinction of anger in respect of the subject.
anger is distinguished into three kinds in respect of the subject thereof. The
first is of those who are soon angry and soon pleased. The second of them
who are slow to anger, and also slow in being reconciled. The third of those
who are soon provoked to anger, and also long continue in it.

For the first, 1. Hasty anger.
they may not unfitly be compared to flax which is soon kindled and set on
fire, but soon also extinguished, unless the flame be continually nourished
with new matter: so their anger is easily inflamed by the least spark of
occasion, but soon mitigated, unless it be nourished with new prouocations:
or their anger may be likened unto fire in thorns, which makes a great blaze
for the time, and yields a crackling noise, but soon goes out, unless a
new supply of matter be continually added: so they are soon inflamed, but
when their anger has a little spent it self in words like the crackling of
thorns, it is soon quenched and pacified.

These men in the world are said to have the best natures, Hasty natures in
the world commended. Psalm. 103.8.9.
but in truth it is far otherwise. For that nature is best which most
resembles God himself, who as he is slow to anger, so he is ready to
forgive, Psalm. 103.8.9. If therefore we would in truth have good natures, we
must imitate the Lord, that is, be long before we are provoked to anger, and
ready to be reconciled; Iam. 1.19. Matthew. 5.25.
to the first we are exhorted, Iam. 1.19. Be slow to wrath; to the latter,
Matthew. 5.25. Agree with thine adversary quickly, and that not only when
thou have offended him, but also when he has offered the injury unto thee,
and that not once or twice, or till seven times, but unto seventy times seven
times, Matthew. 18.22.. Sect. 5.
as our Savior exhorts, Mat. 18.22.

But lest we should content our selves with this nature which of natural men
is thought commendable, let us consider; Hasty anger forbidden.
first, that it is condemned and forbidden in the word of God. Eccles. 7.11. Be
thou not of an hasty spirit is be angry, Eccles. 7.11.
for anger rests in the bosom of fools. Yea our Savior condemns it as
murder in Gods sight: Mat. 5.22. Matthew. 5.22. Hastiness to anger, a foolish
and dangerous vice.


Secondly, we are to consider, that this hastines to anger is a foolish vice;
for as it always begins with rashness, so it most commonly ends with
repentance; for after the hasty man has injured his neighbor by unadvised
words or injurious deeds, then he shows himself sorry for it; and so like a
foolish Surgeon, first he breaks his head and after gives him a plaster,
which though it heal the wound, yet oftentimes it leaves a scarre.

And yet I speak of the least evils which accompany rash anger; for how many
have there been who in their fury have revealed their friends secrets, more
dear unto them then their own lives? Yea, how many through this rash anger
have violated the persons, nay murdered them with whom they were lincked in
the straitest bond of friendship? and so have done that in a moment, which they
have with bitterness repented the whole course of their lives; then the which,
no greater folly can be committed. And therefore it is well said of the wise
man, Prou. 14.17. Prou. 14.27. verse. 29.
He that is hasty to anger commits folly: and verse. 29. He that is slow
to anger is of great wisdom; but he that is of an hasty mind, exalts
folly. And lest we should think that he seldom thus offends, he tells
us, Prou. 29.22.
Prou. 29.22. that a furious man abounds in transgression. Prou. 12.16.
Eccles. 7.10.

Object. 6.
But here the choleric man will allege for himself, that he is hasty by
nature, and therefore to be borne with. Answer.
I answer, that we have not this nature by creation, for we were created
according to Gods own image, who is slow to anger; but this corruption has
taken hold of us by reason of our original sin; and therefore we are not to
excuse one sin by another, but rather earnestly to labor that this pollution
may be washed away with the water of Gods spirit, who by his grace does
reform nature. For those who are regenerate by the holy Ghost, though
naturally they be as ravenous and cruel as the Woolfe, and Leopard, they
shall be made as mild and innocent as the Lamb and Kid: And though they be
as fierce and furious as the Lion or Bear, they shall become as tame and
gentle as the Cow or Calfe, Esa. 11.6.7.
according to the prophecy, Esa. 11.6.7. The Woolfe shall lie with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the
fat beasts together, and a little child shall lead them, and the Bear shall
feed with the Cow, and their young ones shall lie together: not that
regeneration does take away nature and the affections, but because it does
partly subdue their violence and fury, and partly sanctifies and reformeth
them; so that whereas they were hurtful and pernicious, now they are good and
profitable to themselves and others, the quality and the object of them being
altered. Their love which was immoderately set on the world and the pleasures
of the flesh, is now fixed upon God, their neighbor, and spiritual things.
Their ambtious hope which expected nothing but honors and riches, now longs
after the presence of God, and fullness of joy in the heavenly Jerusalem. Their
timorous fear whereby they were restrained from doing good, and constrained to
do that which was evil, because they would not displease men; is now a
notable bridle to curb in their unlawful desires, and a sharp spur to
prick them forward in the course of godliness, because they would not offend
God: and whereas before it was a corrupt fountain from which nothing did
spring but polluted streams of sin, whose descent is into the deep gulf of
eternal perdition; now it is become the Welspring of life, to make us avoid
the snares of death, Prou. 14.27.
as it is, Prou. 14.27. So likewise rash and unbridled anger, which before
regeneration caused men to rage against the person of their neighbor, does now
oppose it self against sin and injustice only, whereby God is dishonored and
the Church and commonwealth damnified.

Do not therefore hereafter excuse thy furious and rash anger by alleging thy
nature; for thou might as well say, I cannot abstain from it, because I am
carnal and unregenerate, as because I am hasty by nature: for those who have
laid aside the old man, and are renewed by Gods spirit, have this affection
partly tamed and subdued, and partly sanctified, reformed, and made fit for
necessary and profitable uses; whereas on the other side they that let the
raines loose to this corrupt affection were never washed with the water of Gods
spirit, and consequently while they continue in this state cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven: Ioh. 3.5. John 3.5.


But that we may never allege this vain excuse, let us consider further, that
it is no better then Lazers rags to cover the deep festred sores of our
corruption; or then Adams fig leaves to hide the nakedness of sin, which may
be as fit a vizour to disguise even the most ugly vices, as this of anger: for
nature corrupted provoke not only to rash anger, but also to all outrages.
And therefore the murderer by as great show of reason might excuse his
murder, because he is by nature cruel; or the adulterer his adultery,
because he is by nature lecherous; or the thief his theft, because he is by
nature covetous, as the hasty man his anger because he is by nature
choleric. As therefore if a murderer or thief should come before a Judge,
and excuse his fact by saying it was his nature, and therefore he could not
choose but commit it; the Judge would answer, that it was his destiny also
that he should be hanged: So when we shall be arraigned before the Lord
chief Justice of heaven and earth, the alleging of our corrupted nature will
be so far from excusing us, that it alone will be sufficient to condemn us.
And so much for the first sort of anger which is to be seen in angry and
choleric men.

The second sort is of such as are slow to anger,. Sect. 2. 2. Anger which is
slovvly entertained but long retained.
but being incensed are hardly pacified. And these are like unto more solid
timber, which is long before it be kindled, but being kindled, continues long
in burning. As these are better then the other in respect of their slownesse to
wrath, so they are far worse because they continue in it; for anger retained
becomes hatred, which is an affection far more pernicious then anger it
self, and much more incorrigible; for as rash anger is most commonly joined
with repentance, so this inueterate anger is always joined with perseverance
in evil. And he that is subject thereunto does not only fall into sin, but
also is resolved to continue in it; yea he takes delight therein often times by
meditating on revenge; as we may see in Esau, who was resolved to retain his
anger against Jacob till his fathers death, and in the mean time comforted
himself by thinking on revenge: Genesis 27.41.42:
Genesis 27.41.42.

But if we would be the children of our heavenly father, we must resemble
him, not only in slownesse to anger, but also in swiftness to forgive: and
though our brother offend us seventy times seven times, yet must we
continually be ready to embrace reconciliation: Mat. 18.22.
Matthew. 18.22. and so we shall not be overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with goodness, as the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 12.21.
Romans 12.21. Whereas if we continue in malice we shall make our selves like
unto Satan, and subject to Gods wrath: Matthew. 7.2.
For with what measure we mete, it shall be measured unto us again: Matthew.
7.2. And as we forgive men their trespasses, so will our heavenly father
forgive us: Mat. 6.14.15.. Sect. 9. Hastiness to anger and slovvnes to
reconciliation.
Matthew. 6.14.15. And so much for the second sort.

The third sort is of them who are easily provoked unto anger, and being
provoked will never be reconciled. These men are monsters in nature, and flat
opposite to the Lord: for whereas he is slow to anger and ready to forgive,
they are most slow to forgive, and most prone to anger. This anger I know not
how to express, nor to what I may compare it, seeing natural things cannot
resemble it, because it is monstrous and against the nature of all things,
saving man. For the most fierce Lions and cruel Tigers have some cause which
incenseth them to anger, and some measure and end of their fury after it is
provoked; and therefore they are far worse who are angry without a cause, and
know not how to make an end. Seeing therefore natural things are not fit to
resemble them, let us consider artificial. They are like unto tinder, which
being kindled with the least spark, will also retain the fire till it be
consumed. But herein they are unlike: the tinder may easily be extinguished;
but their anger can by no means be mitigated: the tinder does but consume it
self, or at the least those things which are near about it; but those that
are from them furthest distant are often scorched with the burning heat of
their furious passion. It is like unto wild fire, which most easily takes
hold of every thing, and is most hardly quenched: but herin it is far more
violent and pernicious, that whereas wild fire may be extinguished with vinegre
or milk, this can be quenched only with blood, yea with the heart blood. There
is nothing therefore in the world natural or artificial, which does
sufficiently express this vile affection; it only can be resembled by the
malice of Satan, who for no cause maligned God and us, and yet his malice will
never have end. Unless therefore we would be worse then all things natural or
artificial, yea as bad as the devil himself, we must be either slow to
anger, or ready to forgive.

CHAP. VI. The manifold and great evils which acccmpanie unjust anger.
ANd so much for the kinds of anger.. Sect. 1.
Now we are to set down the preservatives, whereby we may be preserved from
this sickness of the soul, and some medicines to cure us when we are fallen
into it. But for as much as it is in vain to prescribe physic, unless the
patient will take it; and seeing few or none are willing to take physic
unless they see the necessity thereof, in respect of the dangerousnes of
their disease; I will first show the greatness and malignitie of this
sickness of the mind, unjust anger, and afterward prescribe the remedies.

The greatness and dangerousnesse of this disease appears by those great
evils which it works, The dangerousnes of anger showed by the evils which it
works.
and that both private and public. The private evils concern either our
selves or our neighbors. The evils which concern our selves are incident to
the whole man, or to his several parts, the body and the soul.

The evils which anger brings to the whole man are diverse. First, The evils
which anger brings to the whole man. 1. Unjust anger defaceth Gods image.
It overthrows peitie. Ioh. 4.20.
it defaceth in us the image of God; for whereas the image of God does
specially consist in the virtues and graces of the mind, anger overthrows
them all, and first of all piety which is the chief of all, and the sum of
the first table.

It extinguisheth the love of God: for how should we love God whom we have not
seen, if we do not love our neighbor whom we have seen? 1. Ioh. 4.20. And
how do we love our neighbor, if upon no cause or every trifling cause, we be
incensed to iniust anger against him?

It overthrows the principal part of Gods worship, invocation: for if we
would compass the Altar, and there offer up the sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving, we must first wash our hands in innocence: Psalm. 26.6. 1. Tim.
2.8.
Psalm. 26.6. And this the Apostle Paul requires, 1. Tim. 2.8. That we lift up
pure hands without anger. And our Savior Christ commands, that before we
offer any gift unto the Lord, we first seek to be reconciled: Matthew. 5.23.
Matthew. 5.23.
So long therefore as we continue in our anger, we are unfit to pray, as it
most manifestly appears in the fifth petition, where we desire so to be
forgiven as we forgive: and because the Lord would have us deeply consider
thereof, he thinks it not sufficient to set it down in the Lords prayer,
Matthew. 6.12.
Matthew. 6.12. but he again does single this out of all other the petitions;
and inculcates it the second time, verse. 14.15.
verses 14.15. If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will
also forgive you; but if you will not forgive men their trespasses, no more
will your father forgive your trespasses. If therefore we offer up this prayer
unto God continuing in our anger, what do we else but entreat the Lord that
he will continue his anger toward us? A notable place to this purpose we have,
Eccl. 28.1.2. etc.
Eccles. 28.1. He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance of the Lord, and
he will surely keep his sins. 2. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has
done to thee, so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also when thou prayest. 3.
Should a man bear hatred against man, and desire forgiveness of the Lord? 4. He
will show no mercy to man who is like himself, and will he ask forgiveness
of his own sins? 5. If he that is but flesh, nourish hatred (and ask pardon
of God) who will entreat for his sins? 6. Remember the end, and let enmity
pass, etc.

It also makes men notably sin against the third commandment, by causing
them through impatience to fall into cursing and imprecations, swearing and
blaspheming the name of God.

It causes them also grieuouslie to sin against the fourth commandment, by
making them unfit for the exercises of the Sabbath, as invocation and hearing
of the word, because they who are possessed therewith have their minds
disturbed and distracted either by thinking upon the injury, or else of
revenge. So that there is not one commandment of the first table which anger
does not notoriously violate.

But as it overthrows the virtues of the first table which respect piety, so
also of the second table which respect justice: It overthrows justice and
charity.
and first of all justice it self; whose general rule is this, Vt suum cuique
tribuatur, that that be given to every one which belongs to him. For anger
makes men not only to neglect all good duties which they owe unto their
neighbors, but also to oppress them with undeserved injuries and unjust
revenge.

It overthrows also charity which is the sum of the second table, whose
general rule is this, That we love our neighbors as our selves: for anger in
stead of performing any duties of love, causes men to bring forth the fruits
of hatred: and in stead of loving their neighbors as themselves, it makes
them to hate them as their mortal enemies.

Infinite it were to stand upon particulars, but by this which has been said it
is apparent, that the furious flame of anger does consume in us all the virtues
and sanctifying graces of Gods spirit, wherein principally the image of God
consists.

Secondly, as it defaceth in us the image of God,. Sect. 1. 1. Unjust anger
makes men like the devil.
so it does make us like unto Satan, for he is the spirit of dissension, wrath
and revenge, as God is a spirit of love and peace. It is the nature of Satan to
delight in rage and fury, for he is a murderer from the beginning, Ioh. 8.44.
John 8.44. not only murdering himself, but provoking others to murder, by
filling their hearts with wrath and revenge. And this the Heathens were not
ignorant of; for they called these wicked spirits which are the authors of
anger, dissension and revenge, furies, because they filled men's minds with
fury and madness.

Thirdly,. Sect. 3. 3. It makes men subject to Gods anger. Mat. 6.14.15.
it makes us subject to Gods anger: for as we forgive others, so does God
forgive us, Matthew. 6.14.15. If therefore we retain our anger toward our
brethren, God will retain his anger toward us. We know by common experience,
that he who is appointed an arbitratour or daiesman to reconcile neighbors, is
oftentimes by the froward behavior and obstinate stifnes of the one party so
offended and displeased, that whereas he was indifferent he is made an
adversary: so the Lord plaieth the part of an vmpire or arbitrator, to work
reconciliation between brethren. But if either of them be so stiff and
contentious that he will not be reconciled, what does he else but by refusing
the Lords arbitrament and determination make God his enemy?

Fourthly,. Sect. 4. 4. Unjust anger exposes men to contempt.
it exposes men to contempt: for howsoever they are therefore angry, because
they would not be despised and disregarded, yet nothing in truth does sooner
work contempt in the minds, not only of strangers, but also of a man's own
children and servants, then unjust anger. For when their anger and the fruits
thereof, clamorous brauling and fighting, are usual and common as well for
trifles as weighty matters, men desperately contemn both, when they have no
hope to prevent either. They therefore who desire that these bitter drugs of
correction should have any effectual operation in the minds of inferiors,
Correction to be used like Physic.
for the purging away of their faults and vices, must use them like Physic,
which if it be ordinary will work no extraordinary effect, because it
grows familiar with our natures, and therefore not fit to work upon them:
nam medentur contraria. And hence it is that Physic becomes unprofitable to
those men in the time of grievous sickness, which upon every trifling occasion
have used it in the time of health, and made it as it were sauce to digest
their meat: so if we would have the physic of the mind, correction and
chastisement, to work desired effect, they must be used sparingly, and not for
every slip and infirmity, which oftentimes in wisdom should be dissembled
as though it were not perceived, The vanity of ordinary scolding and brawling.
and often pardoned in hope of amendment. Otherwise, if every toy and small
oversight provoke anger, and anger incite to scolding and fighting, not only
the parties corrected are not bettered, but rather made more obstinate and
obdurate in their vices (for their hearts like anuils become harder with often
beating) but also he that corrects, does disfurnish himself of all fit
remedies to cure more desperate diseases. For if he use bitter chiding and
severe fighting for the cure of every trifling fault, what remedy does he
reserve for correcting and reforming heinous offenses? surely none. Whereby it
comes to pass, that inferiors will not be restrained from committing all
faults, but rather will be as easily induced to commit the greatest as the
least, because there is no great difference in the punishment.

But he who is wise and discreet will pass over many small faults as though he
perceived them not, Discretion required in correction. Senec. de ira lib. 2.
cap. 23.
both because (as one says) Graetissimum est genus veniae nescire quid quisque
peccauit: It is the most acceptable kind of pardon to seem ignorant of the
fault; as also lest taking notice of every little slip, he make the offender
shameless and impudent in defending that as well done, which he cannot excuse
as not done. Whereas so long as he thinks his fault unknown he will be so
fearful of committing the like, that he will be careful in hiding that
which he has already committed. But if he perceive that the offender takes
occasion by his ignorance to offend often in the like kind, then is he to
take notice of the fault by using mild admonition; if that will not prevail,
then more sharp reprehension; but yet in private, for many witnesses of the
fault makes him less ashamed to commit the like; whereas fear of open
disgrace will restrain him from it, so long as he is not already disgraced.
But if the offender impudently and obstinately persist in his vice, or that the
fault at the first be more notorious, then is he to proceed to chastisement and
correction as the Surgion to the mortifying of a member, when the sore is past
all other cure. In doing whereof he is to avoid all furious anger, and to use
soberness and discretion, joining with his chastisement wholesome admonitions,
conuincing the conscience of the offender, by laying open the heinousness of
his fault out of the word of God; or else by showing him how he has offended
against the law of nature or civil honesty. And hereby it will appear to the
offender, that his punishment proceeds from the hatred of his sin, and not
of his person; and so it will cause him also more to hate his fault, then either
his superior that corrects him for it, or then the punishment it self which
is deservedly inflicted.

If superiors would use this mild and sober discretion, The profit that
follows well governed discretion.
surely it would better contain inferiors in obedience, then furious anger.
For whence is it that one man's look is more regarded then another words? one
man's mild admonition, then another bitter reprehension? one man's discreet
reproof, then another continual brawling and fighting? surely from mild and
well governed discretion which works in inferiors an awful love and
sonne-like fear, which more strongly contains them in obedience, and more
forcibly restrains the^ from committing any fault repugnant thereunto, then
furious anger and rage, or the fruits thereof, continual chiding and fighting.
For continual anger and severe punishment for every small fault, without
admitting any excuse, does not make inferiors sorry because they have offended,
but careful and cunning in hiding and dissembling their faults, or shameless
and impudent, either in denying or defending them.

Again, as many stripes do harden the skin to endure them; so do they
harden the heart to contemn them; and they which use much chiding, do move
their inferiors to imagine that it is their natural communication and not any
reprehension. If lightening and thunder were as common as the sun shine,
though they be terrible in their own nature, yet who would regard them being
so usual? and how much less then the impotent brawling of an angry man? They
therefore who would have their anger feared and respected, must let it like the
thunder happen seldom, or else it will not be regarded like the thunder. When
the Fox first saw the Lion, he trembled and quaked for fear, not daring to
come near him; when he saw him the second time he approached somewhat nearer,
but when he saw him daily, he feared not almost to come within the reach of
his paw: So if thou but seldom show thy self like a Lion, thou will be
feared and respected; whereas if continually thou appear in this shape, even
thy most base underlings will not regard thee. Yea, if peradventure they spy
the Asses ears under the Lions skin, that is, folly in thy fury, (which are
seldom severed) they will not stick to ride, and deride thee.. Sect. 5. The
evils which unjust anger brings to the body. 1. It deformeth it.


And so much for the evils which anger brings to the whole man. Now we are
to speak of the evils which it brings to his several parts, and first of
his body. Whereas the body of man is excellent by nature, and far
surpassing all other earthly creatures, anger does so deforme it, that it
becomes more ugly and horrible then any of them. For it makes the hair to
stand an end, showing the obdurate inflexiblenesse of the mind: The eyes to
stare and candle, as though with the Cockatrice they would kill with their
looks: The teeth to gnash like a furious Bore: The face now red, and soon
after pale, as if either it blushed for shame of the minds folly, or envied
others good: The tongue to stammer, as being not able to express the rage of
the heart: The blood ready to burst out of the veins, as though it were
afraid to stay in so furious a body: The breast to swell, as being not large
enough to contain their anger, and therefore seeks to ease it self, by
sending out hot-breathing sighs: The hands to beat the tables and walls,
which never offended them: The joints to tremble and shake, as if they were
affraide of the minds fury: The feet to stamp the guiltless earth, as
though there were not room enough for it in the whole element of the air; and
therefore sought entrance into the earth also. So that anger deformeth the body,
from the hair of the head to the sole of the foot. How ugly therefore is
anger it self, when the effects thereof are thus monstrous in so beautiful a
subject? How monstrously does it deforme the mind, when the signs thereof be
thus horrible in the body?

But as it deformeth the body,. Sect. 6. 2. It exposes it to dangers.
so it exposes it to infinite dangers by provoking men to enter into private
frayes and needless quarrels, with such desperate resolution, that they wholly
neglect themselves that they may hurt their enemy. Like to the Waspe or Be,
which venture their own lives, that they may but sting those that anger the^;
so they, that they may satisfy their fury by revenging a small injury are
ready to receive a greater, for they care not to defend themselves so they may
offend their enemy: nay they are desirous to give wounds, though it be through
their own bodies. And hence it is that some painting anger have put in either
hand a sword, as being fit to hurt another, but not to defend himself.

But what should I speak of receiving hurt by outward enemies, seeing the
angry man when he has no other foes to hurt him, does with his own hands
offer violence unto himfelse? as is evident in their example who in their rage
will not stick to pull off the hair of their own heads and beards, and to
offer many other furious outrages against their own persons. So that the wise
Solomon might well say, That a man of much anger shall suffer punishment: Prou.
19.19.
for if no man else will, he will punish himself. And so much for the body.

But anger brings no less evils to the soul.. Sect. 7. The evils which
anger brings to the soul. 1. It blinds reason.
First like a dark cloud it ouershadoweth and blinds the light of reason,
and for the time makes men as though they were distraught of their wits.
Whereof it is that anger is called Breuis furor, a short madness; because it
differs not from madness, but in time. Saving that herein it is far worse,
in that he who is possessed with madness, is necessarily, will he, nill he,
subject to that fury: but this passion is entered into wittingly and willingly.
Madness is the evil of punishment, but anger the evil of sin also:
madness as it were thrusts reason from it imperial throne; but anger abuses
reason by forcing it with all violence to be a slave to passion.

And in this respect it may fitly be compared unto a cruel tyrant, who having
invaded the government of the commonwealth, does overthrow counsel, law, and
order, and ouerruleth all by force and fury: so anger having obtained
sovereignty over the mind, takes away all judgment, counsel, and reason,
and ouerswayeth all by foolish affection and raging passion. Eccles. 7.11.
And therefore Solomon says well, that anger rests in the bosom of fools;
for either fools it finds them, or fools it makes them. The reason is
apparent, because anger makes men rash and unadvised in their deliberations,
and so their counsels and designs prove imperfect and without life, like
abortiue birthes which are borne before their time.

Examples hereof we have in Simeon and Leui, Examples. Genesis 34.25.
who like mad men imbrued their hands in the blood of many innocents to
revenge the injury of one offender. In Saul, who for an imaginary fault of
one man, put to death, man, woman and child, in the City of Nob; and not
satisfied herewith, 1. Sam. 22.19.
he raged also against the beasts with more then beastly cruelty. Yea David
himself being haunted with this fury, vowed the death, not only of churlish
Nabal; 1. Sam. 25.13.22.
but also of all his innocent family for his fault.

You see then that anger peruerteth judgment, overthrows counsel, and
puts out the eyes of reason, making it the slave of passion, fit to execute
those works of darkness, in which rage imployeth it. Like unto the
Philistines, Judge. 16.21.
who having put out the eyes of Sampson, made him to grind in their mill, and
to do their drudgerie: So this raging passion, having put out the eyes of
reason, makes it a fit instrument for his own business, that is, in plotting
and devising that revenge which is pleasing and acceptable unto it. Whereby it
evidently appears, that furious anger is a notable means which Satan uses
to work our destruction. For when once by rage he has blinded the eye of
reason, he can easily lead us into a gulf of all wickedness. In respect
whereof, Satan is compared to a cation Crow, which intending to make the
carcass of some silly Lamb his greedy pray, does first pick out the eyes,
that it may not be able by flight to prevent a further mischief: so he
indeuouring to make a pray of our bodies and souls, does first seek to blind
reason, which is the eye of the soul, with the fury of passion, that so not
having judgment to discern his sleights, nor wisdom to avoid them, he may
the more easily lead us into the pit of perdition. Or he may be likened to a
cunning fisherman, who troubles the water that the fish may not descrie his
net: so Satan blinds our reason with this turbulent affection, that we
should not discern the sins which like nets he has laid to entangle us,
before we be fallen into them. For anger casting a mist of perturbation
before the sight of reason, makes men unable to judge of good or evil, right
or wrong; and whereas reason in it own nature judges that which is right,
anger makes that seem right which it judges.

If therefore we avoid those things most carefully which hurt the eyes; or if
they be hurt, use such medicines as are fit to cure them, because the eye is
the light and guide of the whole body: with how much more attentive care ought
we avoid anger that blinds reason, seeing it is the light and guide of the
soul? which only eye of humane direction being put out, like Polyphemus we
wander in the deserts of sin and wickedness. If men abhor drunkenness
(and that worthily) because it makes them differ from brute beasts only in
shape of the body; why should they not for the same cause hate this vice of
anger, which like a burning ague does so distemper and disturb the mind, that
while ye fit lasts, it utters nothing but rauing?

Secondly,. Sect. 8. 2. It inflameth the soul with the heat of surie.
as anger hurts the soul by blinding reason, so also it does macerate and
vex it by inflaming it with fury; for what greater torment can be imagined,
then to have the mind distracted upon the rack of rage? As therefore we
would account him a mad man, who with his own hands should set his house on
fire and consume it: so alike mad is he to be thought, who will set his soul
on fire with the raging flames of anger, wherein it is not only tormented in
this life, but also (without repentance) in the life to come it shall be
tormented everlastingly; because unjust anger is murder in Gods sight, as
appears, Matthew. 5.12.
Matthew. 5.22: and murderers shall not inherit the kingdom of God, but have
their portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death: Revel. 21.8. Revel. 21.8.


Seeing therefore anger inflicteth on the soul the wound of sin, and sin
unless it be cured with the sovereign salve of Christ's merit, causes death:
let us carefully arm our selves against the violence of this passion, and
manfully repel this fiery dart, with the shield of faith. Yea let us so
strongly curb it in with the raines of reason, that no outward injury prick
it forward to seek unjust revenge. For as we would condemn him of folly, who
when a wrong were offered him by another, should in revenge wound his own
body: so more foolish is he to be esteemed, who when another offers him
injury does in seeking cruel and unjust revenge wound his soul with sin.

And so much for the evils which anger brings to a man's self.. Sect. 9. The
evils which anger brings to our neighbor. 1. It overthrows all friendship.
Now we are to entreat of the evils which it brings to our neighbor. First
it overthrows that excellent and comfortable virtue to mankind, true
friendship; for there was never any friendship so inviolable, which anger (if
it were admitted) has not violated. And hence it is that wise Solomon
counsels us, not to make friendship with an angry man, because he will be
sure to break it: Pro. 22.24. Prou. 22.24.
Well therefore may that speech of Inno to Alecto be applied to anger:

Tu potes vnanimes armare in praelia fratres,
atque odijs versare domos: Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7.

Thou it is who can arm most loving brethren one against the other, and
overthrow whole houses and families with contentious discord.

Secondly,. Sect. 10. 2. It provoke men to offer injury.
it provoke to offer all indignities and wrongs to a man's neighbor; as also
to revenge the smallest injuries without all proportion. For men incensed with
anger will wittingly and willingly revenge those injuries, which have
unwittingly and unwillingly been offered; for angry words they will give
blows, for blows wounds, and for wounds death. And therefore the Wise man
says; That anger is cruel, and wrath is raging: Prou. 27.4.
Prou. 27.4. Yea it provoke men not only to revenge small injuries; but also
no injuries; for anger rages even against the innocents, and that oftentimes
because they are innocent, and but too virtuous, as the furious man imagines.
And this is evident in the example of Cains anger against Abel; Saul's against
Jonathan and David; Nebuchadnezzars against the three children; Herod's against
the innocents; the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ, as before I proved.

But as anger causes men to be hurtful to all others, Anger most hurtful to
a man's own family.
so especially to those whom they should most love, cherish, and defend, that
is, they who are of a man's own family: who because they are necessarily
conversant with them, are continnallie subject, and even exposed to their fury
and outrage: the wife to their bitter speeches (if they do not worse, that is,
like mad men beat their own flesh) the children to furious and unreasonable
correction, the servants not only to reuiling speeches, but also to cruel
stripes and blows: so that (as one says well) we may know an angry man, if
we but look in the faces of his servants, Plutarch de cohib. irac.. Sect. 11.
The evils which anger brings to commonwealth.
namely, by their scarres and bruises.

And so much for the private evils which accompany unjust anger. Now we are to
speak of the public. Unjust anger is the cause of all tumults and vprores,
seditions and conspiracies, massacres and bloody wars, yea the overthrow and
confusion of all cities and commonwealths. It is the cause which inciteth the
Magistrate against the subject, and the subject against the Magistrate, the
Prince against the people, and the people against the Prince, kingdom against
kingdom, and nation against nation: and that not only upon weighty causes,
but also upon trifling occasions. For as to make a furious and unquenchable
flame, it is not material how small the fire is that kindles it, so the
matter be apt to receive it wherein it is kindled, for one coal is enough to
burn a whole city, if it fall among flax, and one spark if it light in
tinder or gunpowder: so it mattereth not how small the cause is which inflameth
anger, for if the mind which receives it be subject to be inflamed, it is
sufficient to set on fire and consume whole Kingdoms and Common wealths,
especially if power be correspondent to the violence of the affection.

Infinite examples might be brought to make this manifest: Examples. Genesis 34.
as of Simeon and Levy, who in their anger put a whole City to the sword,
though their quarrel were but to one man. Of Abimelech, Judge. 9. 1 Samuel 22.
Hest. 3.
who in his fury destroyed all the city of Sichem; of Saul destroying Nob; of
Haman who being incensed only against Mordecay, laid a plot for the
destruction of the whole nation of the Jews. But I shall not need to stand
upon it, seeing not only the book of God, but also ancient histories, yea
even our own Chronicles and daily experience, do make this but too evident.

You see then the manifold evils which wait upon this raging disease of the
mind, unjust anger; for it is not only a deadly impostume breaking out in our
selves, but also an infectious and contagious plague, which destroys whole
peoples and common wealths. With how great care therefore should we use all
good means and wholesome remedies, to prevent or cure such a dangerous disease?

CHAP. VII. The remedies of unjust Anger.
THe remedies against anger are of two sorts: first, Sect. 1.
those which cure anger in our selves; secondly, those which cure it in others;
and they both are of two kinds: first, such as prevent anger and preserve us
from falling into it: secondly, such as free us from it after it has taken
place. For anger is a disease of the mind: as therefore wise Physicians think
it the better and safer course to preserve health and prevent sickness, then
to remove the disease after it has taken possession of the body; We must first
seek to prevent anger. Sen. epi. 119
so the best course in ministering spiritual Physic, is to preserve the soul
from vice, rather then to purge it away after it has infected it; for Vitia
facilius repelluntur, quam expelluntur, Vices are more easily kept from
entrance, then thrust out after they are entered: for as the common proverb is,
there are but twelve points in the law, and possession is as good as eleauen of
them. If therefore anger have gotten possession, we shall hardly dispossess
it: It is our souls mortal enemy; as therefore we first seek to keep the
enemy from entering the frontires of our country, but if he be entered, as
soon as we can to expel him, so we must first endeavor to repel anger by
stopping the passages of our hearts, that it may have no entrance, but if it
have taken place, quickly to expel and remove it. For if we suffer it to
fortify it self, it will grow so strong and violent, that we shall be unable
to dislodge it. And as in a siege of a City the Citizens provide all things
necessary for their defense before the assault, that the enemy when he
approaches the walls, may not take them unprovided; so if we will repel anger
when it comes, we are to fortify and arm our selves against it before it
comes: for if it take us unprovided, it will easily make entrance, and more
easily overcome us.

Let us therefore first of all endeavor to use all good means by which we may
prevent anger: for if it have once gotten hold of us, it will easily plunge us
headlong into violence and fury, whereas we may with greater facillity prevent
the danger before we fall into it. For as experience teaches us, a man may
easily contain himself from running down the hill, while he is on the
top, but after he is entered into a full race, he cannot stay himself before
he comes to the bottom: so it is more easy for any to abstain from running
into anger, then to contain himself when he is in the race, from falling into
the bottom of fury.

Let us then see the means how to prevent anger: Sect. 2 The means to prevent
unjust anger.
the first remedy is by taking away the causes thereof, for sublata causa
tollitur effectum; The causes thereof are to be removed. 1 Self-love.
The cause being taken away the effect cease.

The first cause of anger, is self love: if therefore we would not fall into
anger, we must labor to bannish self love, and to follow the rule of
charity; Love our neighbors as our selves, and do nothing unto them, which
we would not have them do unto us. Before therefore we let the reins loofe
unto our anger, let us set our selves in the place of him with whom we are
angry, and consider how we would desire to be used if we had so offended, and
in like manner are we to behave our selves toward him. So shall we not
aggrauate those injuries which are offered us, and extenuate those which we
offer others, so shall we not have our judgment ouer-ballanced with an
unequal affection, so shall we not be incensed for suffering that, which we
have often offered.

The second cause of anger is pride and hautinesse of spirit: if therefore we
would not fall into anger, Sect. 3. 2 Pride.
we are to subdue pride, and labor for the contrary grace of humility. For
they who would be meek with our Savior Christ, must also learn of him the
lesson of true humility, Math. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly
of heart. Mat. 11.29.
If we would lay aside that arrogant conceit which we have of our selves, and
the ouerweening opinion of our own excellencies, if we would consider with
Abraham that we are but dust and ashes, and with David, Genesis 18.17. Psalm. 22.6.
Job. 17.14.
that we are worms and no men; or if we would in sincerity of heart say with
Job, Unto corruption, thou art my father, and unto the worm, thou art my
mother, and my sister. If we would but remember that by our sins committed
against God and our neighbor, we have deserved not only contumelies and
wrongs, but also eternal death of body and soul; we would not so easily be
provoked to anger upon every trifting occasion, nor think it any great
disparagement to endure lesser injuries, seeing we have deserved far greater.

The third cause is Covetousness, Sect. 4. 3 Covetousness.
which vice we must banish out of our hearts, if we would not be overcome with
unjust anger, so shall we not gape after great preferments, nor expect much;
and consequently, we shall not be disturbed with unquietness, nor incensed
with anger, when we come short of our hopes. So shall we not intermeddle with
every domestical trifle, but commit some thing to the care of Servants, some
thing to Children, and most of all to the Wife, who is a joint governor in
this little common wealth. And if any thing miscarry under any of their hands,
we will not so much look to the means, as to the supreme cause, the
providence of God, considering that if he build not the house, they labor in
vain that build it, if he bless not their labors they cannot prosper. Psalm:
127.1


The fourth cause is luxuriousness and curious niceness; Sect. 5. 4.
Luxurious niceness.
if therefore we would subdue anger, we must subdue this vice also, and labor
to attain unto decent homelines, the Nurse of good hospitality, and the
preserver of peace and quietness, for if with our first parents Adam and Eve,
we were clothed with skins, that is, with mean attire, we would not be so
easily provoked to anger if a spotte or wrinckle be found upon our garments, if
with them we did feed upon roots and herbs, we would not eat with surfetted
and cloyed appetites, and consequently (our meats being saused with hunger)
our tastes would not be so want only curious, that no ordinary cookery can
please them. If with Abraham we dwelled in tents like Pilgrims, we would not
be so nice in decking our houses, nor so angry for a copwed: If with Jacob we
had the earth for our bed, a stone for our pillow, and the sky for our Canopy,
we would not be so much displeased for the hardness of a fetherbed, or
vneasinesse of a down lodging: take away therefore luxurious niceness, and
you shall take away also the most common cause of unjust anger.

The fifth cause of unjust anger, Sect. 6. 5. Curiosity.
is vain curiosity in desiring to hear and see all things. If therefore we
would avoid anger, we are to abandon this troublesome companion needless
curiosity. For many things will neither grieve nor hurt us, if we never hear
nor see them. Whereas he that busily inquireth what is said against him in
every company, he that listneth at every door, and under every wall, he that
rippeth up ill words spoken against him in secret, does both disquiet himself
with anger, and make his own faults more public. Antigonus when he heard two
of his subjects speaking evil of him in the night near his Tent, called unto
them, willing them to go further off least the king should hear them. Whose
example if we would follow, our anger would not so much vex our selves, nor
trouble others.

The sixth cause is to have open ears to every talebearer, Sect. 7. 6.
Credulity.
and credulous hearts to believe them. For it is the nature of men, to be most
desirous of hearing that which most displeases them, Et libenter credere quae
inuit audiunt, Senec. de ira. lib. 2. cap. 22.
willingly to believe those things which they are most sorry to hear. But if
we would avoid unjust anger, we must avoid this vice also: Senec. de ira lib.
3. cap. 29.
Multos absoluemus si caeperimus ante iudicare quam irasci, we shall acquit
many, if we will not be angry before we judge. Let us not therefore suffer
execution to go before judgment, but rather defer our more severe censure,
till time have revealed the truth, considering that it is most usual with men
to report untruths, some that they may deceive thee; some because they are
deceived themselves; some because they would set friends at variance; some in
their accusation will feign an iuiury offered us, that they may take occasion
to show their sorrow, because it was offered; but scarce any of them will stand
to that which they have spoken. And therefore let us not be angry before we
judge, nor judge before we hear both parties: for what injustice is it to have
both ears open to an accusation, and both shut to an excuse? to proceed to
sentence of condemnation before we ask the party accused, what he can say for
himself? what greater wrong then to believe in secret, and to be angry openly?

The last cause of unjust anger, Sect. 8.
is want of meditation concerning human infirmities, 7. Want of meditation
concerning human infirmities.
either those which are common to all mankind, or those which are more proper
and peculiar to our selves. If therefore, we would be restrained from anger, we
must often think of this contagious leprosy of original sin, which has so
generally infected all the sons of Adam, that there remains nothing in us
but pollution and filthiness. And then as one infected with the plague, is not
offended with him that is subject to the same infection: As the Lazar does
neither with scorn nor choler, but rather with pity and compassion behold
the sores of his fellow: so the plague and sore of sin which we see in
another, will not make us angry with the party which is infected and visited,
but rather in commiseration and pity to use all good means vvherby he may be
cured, if we consider that this plague and sore of sin is so universal that
it has infected all mankind.

When word was brought to Anaxagoras that his son was dead, Plutarch de
cohib. irac.
he was not much moved with the news, because (as he said) he knew and had
considered long before that his son was mortal: so if we would consider
and meditate on humane frailty and infirmities, we should not be so much
vexed: when they show themselves, because they would not happen beyond our
expectation. If he that hyreth a servant, would think with himself, that he
hireth one who is not free from faults, if he that choseth a friend would
then consider that he has his wants and imperfections: If he that marryeth a
wife would remember that he marryeth a woman, and therefore one subject to
infirmities: neither the small faults of his servants, nor imperfections of his
friends, nor infirmities of his wife would easily provoke him to choler and
fury, seeing he did not come short of his reckoning.

Moreover we are to meditate upon our own peculiar infirmities and wants,
and before we are angry with another to enter into our selves, Plutarch de
cohib. irac.
and to say with Plato: Nuncubi and ego talis? have not I also offended in
this or in that which is worse? am I clear from offering the like injuries or
greater to my brethren? Alas no, but though I were, yet how often have I
provoked God to anger by my sins? for which great debt how can I crave
pardon, if I cruelly exact every trifle of my fellow servant? Thus if we would
speak unto our own consciences in the presence of God, we would not so easily
be incited to anger and revenge, seeing we our selves do many things which
need pardon, and our greater faults might serve to excuse those which are
less in others, if we would but look upon them: for no man without blushing
could extremely punish those faults in his neighbor, for which he shall need
to crave pardon himself.

And so much concerning the first remedy of anger, which is by removing the
causes thereof.

The second means to subdue anger, is to labor for patience. CHAP. VIII.
THe second means to subdue anger, Sect. 1. All things happen by Gods own
providence. Romans 8.20.
is to labor for the contrary virtue of patience and long suffering. And to
this end we are first to confider that nothing happens unto us without Gods
all seeing providence, who if we be his children will dispose of every thing
for our good. Why therefore should we vex our selves with anger, seeing God
will turn the injuries of men into blessings? let us rather when any wrong is
offered us, which we cannot by just and lawful means avoid, say with our
savior Christ, Ioh. 18.11.
John. 18.11. should not I drink of the cup which my father has provided for
me? should I be angry with the cup because the Physic is bitter? or with the
hand whereby it is conuayed unto me? My heavenly father corrects me for my
good and amendment, I will not therefore be angry with the rod wherewith I am
beat, but rather look to the hand which inflicteth the chastisement, and I
will say with David. Psa. 139.10
Psalm. 139.10. I am dumb and do not open my mouth because thou do it.
Otherwise I should commit as great folly as he who is angry with the staff
wherewith he is beaten, and never regards the smiter, and show my self as
mad as the dog, who looks not to the caster, but wreaketh his anger by
biting the stone.

Secondly, Sect. 2. Our injuries received less then our sins have deserved.
we are to consider that the injuries which we have received are much less
then by our sins we have deserved; for they are but light, or if not light
yet momentary, but our sins have deserved infinite and eternal punishments.
If therefore the Lord use these earthly rods to correct our sins, we are
rather to admire his mercy then to be angry at so gentle chastizement; let us
therefore look upon our sins and not upon our punishment, and so shall we
patiently bear the injury offered, as sent from God, because in respect of him
it is no injury; and not as it is inflicted by man, and be ready to follow the
example of David, who when he was injuriously abused by Shemei, was not
provoked by anger to take revenge, because he looked not upon Shemei, 1 Samuel
16.10.11. Sect. 3. 3. Means to meditate on Christ's passion
as being but the instrument, but upon God who was the author. 2 Samuel 16.10.11.

The third means to subdue anger by arming us with patience, is to call
continually to remembrance the bitter passion and sufferings of Christ for our
sins. For if we consider how patiently he endured scoffs and reproaches,
railing and reuiling, buffeting and scourging, yea death it self, and the
anger of God more grievous then death, not for any demerit of his, but for our
sakes; we may easily suffer such small injuries as are offered unto us by men,
Mat. 5.39. Number. 21.8.
at our savior Christ's request, seeing we have deserved far greater. As
therefore those which were slung with the fiery serpents, were healed if
they did look up to the brazen serpent, which was erected to this end: so if
this fiery serpent of unjust anger have stung us, and the burning poison
thereof has inflamed us, let us cast the eyes of our souls upon the true
brazen serpent our savior Christ, hanging upon the cross, and suffering the
wrath of God due to our sins, and so the heat of our wrath and anger will
soon be cured and cooled.

The fourth means to work patience and repel anger, Sect. 4 4 The necessity
of this duty.
is to consider the necessity hereof, for if the love of our brethren be not
of more force to restrain us from revenge, then anger to provoke us thereunto,
we can have no assurance that we are the Children of God, 1 John 3.10. 1 John
3.10 15
In this are the children of God known, and the children of the devil,
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not
his brother. So Verse 15. Whosoever hates his brother is a manslayer, and no
manslayer has eternal life abiding in him.

But some will say, though I am rashly angry, yet may I love my brother. I
answer with the Apostle. 1 Cor 1.3.4.7
1 Cor. 13.4.7. that love both suffers long and suffers all things: and
therefore they want this love who will suffer nothing, and be provoked every
minute; nay he says expressly in the fifth verse, that love is not provoked to
anger, that is, to rash and unjust anger; and therefore they are destitute of
love who are so easily provoked.

Secondly, it is most necessary to subdue anger, because while we remain
therein we can have no assurance that our prayers are acceptably heard of God;
not only because we pray so to be forgiven as we forgive, and therefore if we
retain our anger toward our brethren, we pray that God will retain his
toward us; but also because our Savior expressly tells us, That if we do
not remit men their trespasses, our heavenly Father will not forgive us our
sins. Mat. 6.15
Mat. 6.15 And that with what measure we mete unto others, it shall be measured
unto us again. Mat. 7.2. Mat. 7.2.
Let us remember the parable of the servant, who being forgiven ten thousand
talents, and after exacting with all cruelty of his fellow servant an hundred
pence, was cast into the prison of utter darkness. Mat. 18.23
Mat. 18.23. Mat. 18.23.
Whereby thus much is understood, that if we will not forgive injuries to our
brethren, seeing the Lord has forgiven our infinite heinous sins, we shall
be used like that merciless and cruel servant. And therefore let us follow
the counsel of the Apostle Ephesians. 4.32. Ephesians. 4.32.
Be courteous one to another and tender hearted, freely forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake freely forgave you. And so much for the necessity
of this duty.

The fifth means to arm us with patience against the assaults of anger, Sect.
5. The examples of patience in others.
is that we propound unto our selves the examples of others: for the looking
upon green color is not more sovereign for those who are troubled with
inflammation of the eyes, then the beholding of the clemency and patience of
others, is for those whose hearts are inflamed with anger. First therefore, let
us set before us the example of God himself, who is merciful, gracious, and
slow to anger, Exodus 34.6
as himself describes himself, Exodus 34.6. And hereof the Prophet David
tasted by often experience, and therefore he says likewise, Psalm. 103.8 9
Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of
great kindness. And as he is not easily provoked to anger, so being provoked
his anger lasts not long; for he will not always chide, nor keep his anger
for ever, as it is verse 9. Nay no sooner can we knock at the gate of his
mercy, but he is ready to open, as he has promised. Mat. 7.7.
Mat. 7.7. If therefore we would resemble our heavenly father, and so approve
our selves to be his children, we must learn to imitate his patience and long
suffering.

Secondly, we are to propound unto us the example of our Savior Christ, the
lively character and express image of his father, Mat. 11.29
as he exhorts us. Mat. 11.29. Learn of me for I am meek and lowly of heart,
and you shall find rest to your souls. 1 Pet. 2.22
What this meekness was, Peter tells us. 1 Peter 2.22. Though he were free
from sin, and had no guile found in his mouth, yet when he was reviled, he
reviled not again, and when he suffered he threatened not. Though in respect of
his infinite power, he was able not only to have threatened, but also to have
utterly destroyed his enemies. If therefore Christ was so mild and patient, who
was free from sin, surely much more should we be (if it were possible) who
by our sins have deserved the greatest injuries, yea, eternal death.

But if these examples be too high for our imitation, let us cast the eyes of
our minds upon the patience and long suffering of our fellow brethren. As of
Abraham, who when just cause of offense was offered by Lot and his shepherds,
was rather content to part from his right, then he would have any discord and
dissension. Genesis 13.8. Genesis 23.8
Of Moses, who then was ready to pray for the people, when they were ready to
stone him, Exodus 17.4.11. Exodus 17.4.11.
Of David who having revenge in his own hand, when he was provoked by the
outrageous injuries of Shemei did notwithstanding contain himself, 2 Samuel
16.10. and of Stephen, 2 Samuel 16.10
who when the stones flew about his ears, prayed for his enemies that threw
them at him, Acts 7.60. Acts. 7.60. The example of others being in their fury.


Or if these examples will not move us to the love of mildnes and patience, let
us set before our eyes those men which are subject to the fury of anger, and so
shall we easily discern in others what an ugly and brutish vice it is in our
selves. One says, Sen. lib. 2. de ira, cap. 36.
that if an angry man would look himself in a glass in the midst of his
fury, he would appear so horrible in his own sight, that it would be a
notable means to work an hatred in his heart, of so deformed a vice; but for
as much as angry men will hardly be brought to this while they continue in
their rage, or if they could, they have somewhat relented already, and so the
copy of their countenance is changed; or though it were not, the fury of
their affection so cloudeth the judgment of reason, that they think all
things become them which they do in their passion: Let us therefore follow the
example of the Spartanes, who would cause their children to look upon their
Hellots and slaves when they were drunken, that they might be brought into
detestation of so vggly a vice, when they beheld the beastliness thereof in
others: So let us set before our eyes other men, while they be in their fury,
and consider how it deformeth the body, and disableth the mind, the lamentable
tragedies which it acts, and follies which it commits; and the vggly
deformity, joined with brutish folly, must needs move us to hate so foul a
vice.

The sixth means, Sect. 6. 6 To abstain from multitude of business.
is to abstain from multitude of business, because not only the mind is
distracted and disturbed therewith, and so made a fit Inn for anger to lodge
in, but also because in such abundance of business, some things of necessity
will miscarry, and among such a multitude of Irons, some will burn, and so
inflame the mind to anger.

The seaueth means, Sect. 7. 7. To abstain from contentious controversies.
is to avoid contentious controversies; for facilius est a certamine abstinere
quam abducere, howsoever it be very easy to abstain from them before they
are begun, yet after a man is entered into them, he cannot easily give them
over. Because he thinks that it will derogate from his wit and judgment,
Seneca. lib. 3. de ira. cap. 8.
if he be forced to yield though it be to a truth: and besides men naturally
desire to bring others to be of their opinion, and therefore they will use
great earnestness to persuade, and oftentimes burst out into anger and fury,
if they cannot obtain their desire.

The eight means, Sect. 8. 8. To avoid the company of chollerick men
to prevent anger, is to avoid the company of those who are angry and
chollericke: because men will easily be infected with their contagion. And this
Solomon teaches us. Pro. 22.24. Make no friendship with an angry man, Prou.
22.24.
neither go with the furious man, least thou learn his ways, and receive
destruction to thy soul. And also because they are likely to be provoked by
them, and to receive the heat of their flame. For as one stick of wood being
set on fire, does kindle that also which is next unto it: So one man being
inflamed with anger, inflameth them also who are near about him, with his
prouocations.

Lastly, Sect. 9. 9. To bridle anger for a day.
those who find themselves by nature prone to anger, are to labor, and as it
were to vow with themselves, that they will contain their fury for one day,
whatsoever occasion shall be offered, and after that another, and a third, and
so by little and little they shall attain unto an habit of patience, and
custom will alter nature.

CHAP. IX. The remedies to expel or bridle Anger.
ANd so much for those means and remedies, Sect. 1.
whereby we may prevent and repel anger, before we fall into it. Now in the
next place I will set down, how we are to behave our selves after that anger
has made an entrance, and taken place in us. And this the Apostle teaches us
in the restraint: Let not the Sun go down on your wrath. That is, if
through infirmity ye fall into unjust anger, yet continue not in it, but
rather abandon this corrupt affection with all possible speed. So that our
anger must not sleep with us, and after we awake, awake also; we must not use
it like our garments, lay it aside ouernight, with a purpose to take it again
the next day: but rather we are to put it off like the old man, with full
resolution never again to entertain or assume it, or like some polluted
rags which are not vvorth the vvearing. And this must we do not once or
twice, but if every day with the Sun anger arise in our hearts, we are
every day to dislodge and expel it, before the Sun going down. And as the
night does cool the heat which in the day time the Sun has made, so must it
also quench the flames of anger kindled in our hearts. And not without great
reason he requires that before night comes we abandon anger, The danger of
anger retained.
for otherwise we shall give place to the devils tentations, as he intimates
in the words following: for having exhorted us not to let the Sun go down on
our wrath, he presently adds, neither give place to the Devil. Noting
thereby that they who do not only entertain anger in the day, but also lodge
it in the night, do thereby lay themselves open to the fiery darts of Satan.
1 Pet. 5.8.
For he continually goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. And when he finds such as have retained anger even in their beds,
thinking them a fit pray, he approaches and with his bellows of fury he more
inflameth the fire of anger, till it blazeth out into furious revenge: he
aggrauateth the injury received, telling them that if they put up such an
indignity, they will expose themselves to the like, or for suffering this,
loose all their credit and reputation, by incurring the note of cowardice. And
so having wrought in their hearts a full resolution to take revenge, in the
next place he puts into their heads the most fit means and opportunity of
performing it with all rage and cruelty. And so often times it comes to pass
that when they arise, they put that in practice, which they have devised lying
upon their pillow.

To prevent therefore so great an evil; if we cannot altogether repel anger,
yet let us soon expel it. For though at the first it be but a small spark,
yet if it be nourished it will quickly increase to a furious flame. As
therefore when a house is newly set on fire, men labor earnestly, and with all
speed to quench it, before it have taken hold of the main posts and great
beams; otherwise it will be too late afterward, when it is increased to his
full strength: so when our hearts are first set on fire with anger, we are
presently to quench it with the water of the spirit, for after we are thoroughly
enflamed, it will be too late to apply any remedy till the flame have spent
it self.

Objection.
But some will say, I fall into anger many times when I never mean it, and it
has overcome me before I am aware; how therefore should I prevent that which
I do not foresee, or free my self from it, seeing it violently ouer-ruleth me?

Answer.
To the first I answer, that if we carefully vvatch over our selves, we shall
easily perceive when we are inclining to anger: for as there are many signs
which go before a storm, and many symptoms, which discover diseases before
we fall into them: so we may easily discern in our selves many notes and
signs, of this tempestuous storm and raging fever of the mind, Unjust Anger.

To the other I answer, that anger does not presently as soon as it is
entered into the heart overrule us, before it be grown to greater strength
then it has at the first, for as the greatest fire has but a small beginning,
and when it is but begun, is easily quenched: so the most furious anger
attaineth not to his full strength at the first entrance, but by little and
little increases like a flame, by taking hold of new matter. And therefore
howsoever after it has wholy inflamed a man, it is most hardly quenched, yet
in the beginning thereof, it is easily suppressed.

But let us see the means how we may subdue anger after it has given the
assault. Sect. 3. The first means to withdraw the food thereof
The first means is by withdrawing the food from it, wherewith it is
nourished: for as the greatest fire if new matter be not supplied will of it
self go out: so the most furious anger will soon be mitigated, if it be
not continually nourished with a new supply of matter.

The chief nourishment whereby anger is nourished and increased, is
multiplying of words, Multiplying of words the chief food of anger.
for though the injury at the first be small, yet if either it be aggrauated by
him that suffers it, or defended by him that offers it, it incenseth men to
great anger. Well therefore in this respect may words be said to be but wind;
for as nothing sooner then wind causes a small spark to burst out into a
furious flame: so nothing sooner does cause a small spark of anger increase to
a raging flame of revenge, then the vvinde of words. We are not therefore to
imagine with some, that we can disgorge our stomachs of anger by vomitting our
spleen in bitter words; for they do not only in their own nature whet and
sharpen our own affections, but also provoke the other, with whom we are
offended to requite us with the like, and so to add new matter to the old
flame. As well therefore may we think to quench the fire with wood, as anger
with words, for as wood is the nourishment of the fire, so words are the
nourishment of anger. Let us rather in our anger imitate the wise Socrates,
Plutarch de cohib. irac.
who when he was most angry, used most modesty, mildness of speech, and
lownes of voice, and so withdrawing the nourishment from the fire of anger, it
will soon of it self be extinguished.

The second means to subdue anger, Sect. 3. The second means to withdraw a
man's self out of company.
is to get out of the company of others, especially of them who have offended
us, according to the example of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.34. who being justly
provoked by his unjust and cruel father, rose from the table and departed,
least by his fathers prouocations, he might have done or said that which did
not beseem him: 1 Samuel 20.34.
whose practice if we would imitate, we shall not only appease our anger
by removing out of our sight the object and cause thereof, and prevent further
occasions of increasing it, but also cover our infirmities, which otherwise we
should discover by the violence of the passion.

As therefore they who are vexed with the falling sickness, (if they cannot by
their own ordinary remedies prevent their fit) will go out of the company of
others, that falling secretly, they may have no witness of their deformity:
so they who are not able to curb in their anger, with the reyne of reason,
were best to withdraw themselves, and to keep private, while their fit
lasts: that so they may hide the ugliness of their vice, which being seen
does often move their adversaries to scorn and laughter, and their friends to
sorrow and pity. And this is made a note of a wise man by the vvisest. Prou.
12.16.
Prou. 12.16. A focle in a day shall be known by his anger, but he that
covers his shame is wise.

The third means to vanquish anger, Sect. 4. The third means to restrain it
for a while from bursting out into fury.
is for a while to bridle and restrain it from bursting out into present
revenge. For if we resist it in the first encounter, we shall find the
strength thereof much weakened, and this the wise Athenodorus knew well; who
being to depart from Augustus, was requested by him that he would leave
behind him some good instruction, for the well governing of his Empire:
Plutarch in Apotheg.
to whom he gave this counsel, that he should do nothing in his anger,
before he had numbered on his fingers the letters of the Greek Alphabet. An
example hereof we have in Socrates, Senec. de ira. lib. 1. cap. 15.
who finding his anger incensed against his servant, deferred to take
correction, saying: I would beat thee if I were not angry. And also in Plato,
who being provoked to anger by some notable fault committed by his servant,
took a cudgel into his hands, and held it over him a good space, as if he
would have stricken; And being asked of his friend Speusippus, what he meant
by such kind of action. O (said he) Exigo poenas ab homine iracundo. Senec. de
ira. lib. 3. cap. 12.
I take punishment of one who is angry: meaning of himself, by bridling his
affection. If then the heathen could thus defer and curb in their unruly
passions: who had only the small glimse of natures light, and heathen
Philosophy to direct them; let us be ashamed to come behind them, seeing we
have not only that, but also the bright sun shine of the word of God to
guide us.

And that we may the rather be moved to abstain from sudden and desperate
resolutions when our anger is provoked, let us consider that we are in great
danger to do those things in a moment, which we shall repent our whole life;
for Ira breuis furor, Anger is a short madness. That in such shortness of
time we cannot rightly examine the circumstances of the matter, which in such
cases are most material, whereas veritatem dies aperiet, Truth is the daughter
of time, and will bring all to light. Senec. de ira. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Quicquid voles quale sit scire tempori trade. Nihil diligenter in fluctu
cernitur. Whatsoever thou would be perfectly informed of, commit it to time,
for nothing is thoroughly known on the sudden. That it is a foul shame, first
to be angry, and then to judge, first to take punishment, and then to examine
the cause; that is to say, whether has offended, he that takes punishment, or
he on whom it is inflicted: whereas in process of time the truth will appear,
whether revenge may be more justly taken or omitted. And then if after due
examination he inflict deserved punishment, it will be more effectual for the
reformation of the offender, when he sees that it does rather proceed from
true judgment, then from the spleen. As therefore Phocion said to the
Athenians, when by hearing of Alexanders death, they were thereby moved to use
more unbridled speeches, and insolent practices. O ye Athenians if Alexander
be dead to day, Plutarch de cohib. irac.
he will be dead to morrow also; And therefore you may well defer these
courses, till ye be fully informed in the truth: so may I say to the angry man:
do not so hastily revenge thy self on thy inferiors, for if it be a fault to
day, it will be a fault to morrow also: Senec. de ira lib. 2. cap. 23.
and as one says, Potest poena dilata exigi, non potest exacta reuocari;
punishment delayed may be inflicted, but being inflicted it cannot be recalled.
Non peribit potestas ista si differetur. Sine id tempus veniat quo ipsi
iubeamus. Senec. de ira lib. 3. cap. 32.
Thy power to punish being deferred is not lost: let it therefore so long be
delayed, till thy self may command the punishment to be inflicted, and not
thy passion of anger.

The fourth means to subdue anger is this: Sect. 5. The fourth means.
let the angry man think with himself whether he is purposed ever or never,
to lay aside his anger. If ever, how much better were it that he should leave
his anger, then that it should leave him? that he should vanquish it, then that
it should be overcome of it self? that he should quench it with the water of
the spirit, then that it should last until it burn out? for not only this
but all other passions will in time tire themselves, and fall down with their
own ruin. But if they purpose to live in perpetual enmity, let them
consider that they nourish in themselves a Viper, which will fret out their
own bowels. For who receives more vexation, grief and disquietnesse by anger
then himself, who is subject to the passion? and what does sooner cut off the
thread of life, then the sharpness of fretting grief? Lastly, let him think
with himself what good time he spends in a bad matter, which being so short
and precious, should be more esteemed and better employed; as in seeking to get
friends, and not to loose them, being gotten, by unjust anger, in pacifying and
reconciling enemies, rather then exasperating them by offering new injuries; in
performing the works of charity and christianity, that so we may hear at the
latter day that comfortable sentence: Come ye blessed and inherit the kingdom
prepared for you: For I was an hungered and you gave me meat, Mat. 25.34
etc. rather then in acting the works of the flesh, among which anger is
numbered, Gal. 5.20
Gal. 5.20. which who so commit shall not inherit the kingdom of God, but
shall hear that fearful sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat.
25.41
which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.

The last and chief means both to keep us from falling into anger, Sect. 6.
The last means fervent prayer.
and to subdue it after it has taken hold of us, is earnest and hearty prayer
unto God, that he would vouchsafe us the gracious assistance of his holy
spirit, whereby our affections may be so ruled and sanctified, that they being
freed from natural corruption, may be made fit and serviceable for the setting
forth of his glory, the good of our brethren, and the furthering of our own
salvation. For it is only the water of the spirit, and the shield of faith,
which is able to quench the fury of our passions; Luke 11.13
and prayer is a chief means to obtain these spiritual graces at Gods hands.

CHAP. X. The remedies to cure Anger in others.
ANd so much for the remedies which serve to cure anger in our selves: Sect. 1.
The first means is silence.
now we are to speak of the remedies whereby we may cure it in others. The
first means to mitigate anger in another, is to use silence: for as the fire
cannot long continue if the wood be taken from it, so anger cannot long endure,
if words and cross answers be not multiplied: whereas on the other side,
cross speeches and perverse replies, make the chollericke man proceed from
anger to rage, from folly to fury and madness. And this the wise man teaches
us. Prou. 26.21. Prou. 62.21
As the coal makes burning coals and wood a fire, so the contentious man is
apt to kindle strife. Prou. 30.33
So Chap. 30. and the last verse. As he that wringeth his nose causes blood to
come out: so he that forces wrath brings forth strife. By silent yielding
therefore thou may easily abate another anger, whereas cross answers make
it ragingly violent. For as the cannon shot loses his force, if it light in
soft earth or wool, but dasheth the stony wall in pieces: so the violence of
the most furious anger is abated when it is not resisted, but furiously rages,
where it finds any opposition. And hence it is that Plato calls anger
Neruos animi, qui and intenderentur acerbitate, and laxarentur mansuetudine:
The nerves or sinews of the mind, which are intended and made stiff, with
sharpness and bitterness, but slack and easy, with courtesy and
gentleness. If therefore thou would pacify another wrath, follow the
counsel of Jesus the Son of Syrach, Eclus. 8.4.
Chap. 8.4. Contend not with a man full of words, neither heap up wood on his
fire. Where he notes, that as the wood increases the fire, so multiplying of
words increases anger.

But silence is not always expedient, Sect. 2. The second means a soft
answer.
especially when men have a just cause, and an honest excuse: for oftentimes
the angry man will imagine, that silence argues contempt; as though they were
silent because they scorned to return an answer. And therefore the second
remedy; namely a soft and mild answer, either excusing their fault by showing
their innocence, or in all humbleness confessing it, and craving pardon, is
more fit physic to cure anger in some natures and dispositions. And this
medicine the wise Physician prescribes us, Prou. 15.1.
Prou. 15.1. A soft answer puts away wrath: but grievous words stir up
anger. Prou. 25.15
So Prou. 25.15. A prince is pacified by staying anger, and a soft tongue
breaks the bones, or as it is in the original, a man of bone, that is, such
an one as is most stiff and obdurate. An example hereof we have in Abigaile: 1 Samuel 25.24.
who by her mild and discreet speeches quickly appeased David's furious anger.

As therefore Iron which is red hot, being dipped in cold water, presently
loses all his heat, and returns to his natural coldness: so is the heat
of the hottest anger soon mittigated with a cold and mild answer. Whereas
on the otherside, cross and untoward speeches, makes the least spark of
anger flame out into fury: as we may see in the example of Moses, who though
he were the meekest man living on the earth, Number. 12.3.
as it is Number. 12.3. yet by the contentious wrangling of the people, he was so
provoked to wrath, that he grievously offended God, by speaking unadvisedly
with his lips, as may appear by comparing the twentieth chapter of Numbers, the
10 and 11 verses, Number. 20.10 11. Psalm. 106.32 33.
with the 106 Psalm. the 32 and 33 verses. As therefore if a man blow upon a
spark he makes it increase to a flame, but if he spit upon it he quenches
it, and both proceed out of the mouth: so he that utters cross answers,
does make the least spark of anger become furious rage, whereas mild and soft
answers do easily appease it.

The last means, Sect. 3. The third means discreet admonition.
is after his anger is ouerpast to give him wholesome counsel and good
admonitions, whereby he may be taught the great evils which follow anger. For
as it is not fit to minister Physic to a sick patient, while he is in a fit
of an ague, and therefore discreet Physicians rather make choice of their
patients good day: so it is in vain for a man to seek the curing of anger by
good counsel, unless he stay till the fit be passed over, and the heat of
anger somewhat assuaged. For a man cannot; nor will not hearken to another man's
reasons, while he is subject to his own passions. And as a man hears nothing
almost which is said when his house is on fire, for the noise of the multitude,
the crackling of the flame, and the perturbation of his own mind: so the
violence of this affection, and fury of this passion, does make a man while he
is in a fit of rage, deaf to all reason. And therefore they are to be
admonished when the fury has somewhat spent it self, and the great evils of
anger both in respect of their souls and bodies, their neighbors and friends,
the Church and common wealth, are as it were in one view, to be presented to
their more sober meditations.

But they who admonish are to remember, Mildness required in admonishing an
angry man.
that they use all mildness and discreation in their admonition, least while
they go about to prevent anger for the time to come, they presently provoke
it. For if they be too austere and rough in using too insolent inuectiues and
bitter reprehensions, they do not only commit themselves a great absurdity,
while in reproving anger they show their own spleen, but also make their
admonition altogether unprofitable. Because the angry man (if he see them so
sharp and severe) will rather think how he may defend his fault by
aggravating the injuries which he has received, then either confess it, to
such a synick censurer, or labor to amend it. For as no man will suffer his
wound to be searched by such a Surgeon as has a rough hand, and a hard heart,
neither will any patient commit himself to the cure of a froward and
merciless Physician: so no man can abide (and therefore much less an angry
man) to have his gauled faults, too much rubbed, or the wounds and diseases of
his mind, healed and cured, with too sharp a corrasiue and loathsome potion of
insolent and bitter words. They therefore who will angerly reprove anger, are
no fit Physicians for them who are subject to this passion. For to such they
will either hide and dissemble their imperfections, rather fayning themselves
well, then they will discover their disease to such a crabbed Physician; or
else they will justify, and defend them as lawful and necessary. And as the
fearful Snake, when he has no means to fly away, will turn again, and
desperately leap into the face of him that pursues him: or as the timorous
Stagge, when he can escape no longer by running, makes a stand, turning
cowardly fear into desperate rage. So the angry man being so hardly pursued
with sharp inuectiues and bitter reprehensions, that he has no evasion of
excuse to cover his fault, nor hope of pity by confessing it, does as it were
fly into the face of the reprouer, by obiecting his greater faults, that they
may serve to extenuate his which are less. You (will he say) who so sharply
reprove me for my choler, have other faults as great as this, and therefore
you may do well to cure your self before you become another Physician. Yea
in this you would show you self no more innocent, if you had the like occasion
to show your anger. And howsoever you seem in your conversation sweet and
harmless, yet he that should taste you would not find you free from gaul,
he that should handle you somewhat roughly, would soon perceive by his own
smart that you have a sting, though you do not thurst it out being not
provoked. In a word, the angry man will never cry peccaui, unless afterward
with some confidence he may add miserere neither will he suffer his wounds
to be cured by such an one, who by his rough handling will more vex him, then
pleasure him by the cure.

And so much for the remedies and medicines which we are to use for the curing
of anger, The conclusion
either in our selves or others, which I would wish every one who find
themselves subject to this unruly passion, carefully to apply unto themselves:
for as it will not benefit a sick man to read his Physicians prescript, or to
carry the medicine in his pocket, unless he take and receive it according to
his direction: so will this Physic of the soul little avail for the curing
of anger, unless it be applied to the heart, and Conscience. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Phil. 2.13.
But seeing we are not able so much as once to think a good thought, as of
our selves, but it is God only which works in us both the will and the
deed: let us entreat the Lord who is the only true Physician, that he will
not only vouchsafe to annoint the blind eyes of our understanding with the
precious eye salve of his holy Spirit, that we may see the deformities of
this and all other disordered affections. And also that he will with the same
spirit enable us, to reform and renew them; that their violence and fury
being abated, and the corruption and filthynesse of them being purged, cleansed
and sanctified, they may become fit and serviceable for the setting forth of
his glory, the good of our brethren, and the furthering of our eternal
salvation. Which grace he vouchsafe unto us, who dyed for us, Jesus Christ the
righteous, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor
and glory, principality, power and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

