AVXILIIO DI VINO

SIC PARVIS MAGNA

Drake perorati novit quem terminus orbis,
Et quem bis mundi vtdit vterque Polus;
Si taceant homines, facient te Sidera notum,
Sol nescit comitis non memor esse sui.


THE WORLD Encompassed By Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, Being his next voyage to that to
Nombre de Dios formerly imprinted; Carefully collected out of the notes of
Master FRANCIS FLETCHER Preacher in this employment, and diverse others his
followers in the same: Offered now at last to public view, both for the
honor of the actor, but especially for the stirring up of heroic spirits, to
benefit their Country, and eternize their names by like noble attempts.



LONDON, Printed for NICHOLAS BOVRNE and are to be sold at his shop at the
Royal Exchange. 1628.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE ROBERT Earl of VVARVVICKE.
Right Honorable,
FAme and envy are both needless to the dead because unknown, sometimes
dangerous to the living when too well known: reason enough that I rather choose
to say nothing, then too little, in the praise of the deceased Author, or of
your Lordship my desired fautor. Columbus did neatly check his emulators, by
rearing an egg without assistance. Let the slighter of this voyage apply. If
your Lordship vouchsafe the acceptance, it is yours, if the The Epistle Reader
can pick out either use or content, it is his, and I am pleased. Example being
the public, and your Lordships favor the private aim, of

Your humbly devoted, FRANCIS DRAKE.

THE VOYAGE ABOUT the world, by Sir FRANCIS DRAKE.
EVer since Almighty God commanded Adam to subdue the earth, there have not
wanted in all ages, some heroical spirits, which in obedience to that high
mandate, either from manifest reason alluring them, or by secret instinct
enforcing them thereunto, have expended their wealth, employed their times, and
adventured their persons, to find out the true circuit thereof.

Of these, some have endeauored to effect this their purpose, by conclusion and
consequence, drawn from the proportion of the higher circles; to this
nethermost globe, being the center of the rest. Others not contented with
school points. and such demonstrations (for that a small error in the
beginning, grows in the progress to a great inconvenience) have added
thereunto their own history and experience. All of them in reason have
deserved great commendation of their own ages, and purchased a just renown
with all posterity. For if a surueyer of some few Lordships, whereof the bounds
and limits were before known, worthily deserve his reward, not only for his
travel, but for his skill also, in measuring the whole and every part
thereof: how much more, above comparison, are their famous trauells by all
means possible to be eternized, who have bestowed their studies and indeauor,
to survey and measure this globe almost unmeasurable? Neither is here that
difference to be objected, which in private possessions is of value: Whose Land
survey you? forasmuch as the maine Ocean by right is the Lords alone, and by
nature left free, for all men to deal withal, as very sufficient for all men's
use, and large enough for all men's industry.

And therefore that valiant enterprise, accompanied with happy success, which
that right rare and thrice worthy Captain Francis Drake atcheiued, in first
turning up a furrow about the whole world, does not only ouermatch the ancient
Argonautes, but also outreacheth in many respects, that noble mariner
Magellanus and by far surpasses his crowned victory. But hereof let
posterity judge.

It shall, for the present, be deemed a sufficient discharge of duty, to
register the true and whole history of that his voyage, with as great
indifferency of affection as a history does require, and with the plain
evidence of truth, as it was left recorded by some of the chief, and diverse
other actors in that action.

The said Captain Francis Drake, having in a former voyage, in the years 72.
and 73. (the description whereof is already imparted to the veiw of the world)
had a sight, and only a sight of the south Atlantik, and thereupon either
conceiving a new, or renewing a former desire, of sailing on the same, in an
English bottom; he so cherished thenceforward, this his noble desire and
resolution in himself, that notwithstanding he was hindered for some years,
partly be secret envy at home, and partly by public service for his Prince
and country abroad, (whereof Ireland under Walter Earl of Essex gives
honorable testimony) yet, against the year 1577. by gracious commission from
his sovereign, and with the help of diverse friends adventurers, he had fitted
himself with five ships.

1. The Pelican. admiral. burden 100. tonnes. Captain general. Francis
Drake.

2. The Elizabeth. vice admiral. burden 80. tonnes. Captain John Winter.

3. The Marigold. a bark of 30. tonnes. Captain John Thomas.

4. The Swanne. a fliboat of 50. tonnes. Captain John Chester.

A New and accurate Map of the World, drawn according to the best and latest
discoveries that have been made.



5. The Christopher. a pinnace of 15. tonnes. Captain. Thomas Moon.

These ships he mand with 164. able and sufficient men, and furnished them also
with such plentiful provision of all things necessary, as so long and
dangerous a voyage did seem to require: and amongst the rest, with certain
pinnaces ready framed, but carried aboard in pieces, to be new set up in
smoother water, when occasion served. Neither had he omitted, to make provision
also for ornament and delight, carrying to this purpose with him, expert
musicians, rich furniture (all the vessels for his table, yea many belonging
even to the Cooke-roome being of pure silver) and diverse shows of all sorts of
curious workmanship, whereby the civility and magnificence of his native
contrie, might, amongst all nations whithersoeuer he should come, be the more
admired.





Whence (having in few days supplied all defects) with happier sails we, once
more put to sea December. 13. 1577.

As soon as we were out of sight of land, our general gave us occasion to
conjecture in part, whither he intended, both by the directing of his course,
and appointing the Randeuous (if any should be severed from the fleet) to be
the Island Mogadore. And so sailing with favorable winds, the first land that
we had sight of, was Cape Cantine in Barbary December 25. Christmas day in
the morning. Mogadore the Island before named.

This Mogadore, lies under the dominion of the king of Fesse in 31. degrees. 40.
mi. about a mile off from the shore, by this means making a good harbor
between the land and it. It is uninhabited, of about a league in circuit, not
very high land, all ouergrowne with a kind of shrub breast high, not much
unlike our priuet, very full of Doves and therefore much frequented of
Goshaukes, and such like birds of prey, besides diverse sorts of sea-foule very
plenty. At the south side of this Island are three hollow rocks, under which
are great store of very wholesome but very ugly fish to look to. Lying here
about a mile from the maine, a boat was sent to sound the harbor, and finding
it safe, and in the very entrance on the north side about 5. or 6. fathom
water (but at the souther side it is very dangerous) we brought in our whole
fleet December 27. and continued there till the last day of the same month,
employing our leisure, the mean while, Moors were presently received, and one
man of ours, in exchange, left a land, as a pledge for their return.

They that came aboard were right courteously entertained, with a dainty
banquet, and such gifts as they seemed to be most glad of, that they might
thereby understand, that this fleet came in peace and friendship, offering to
traffic with them, for such commodities as their contrie yielded, to their
own content. This offer they seemed most gladly to accept, and promised, the
next day, to resort again, with such things as they had to exchange for ours.
It is a law amongst them to drink no wine, notwithstanding by stealth it
pleases them well to have it abundantly, as here was experience. At their
return ashoare, they quietly restored the pledge which they had stayed, and
the next day, at the hour appointed, returning again, brought with them
Camells, in show laden with wares to be exchanged for our commodities, and
calling for a boat in haste, had one sent them, according to order, which our
general (being at this present absent) had given before his departure to the
Island.

Our boat coming to the place of landing (which was among the rocks) one of
our men called John Fry, mistrusting no danger, nor fearing any harm pretended
by them, and therefore intending to become a pledge, according to the order
used the day before, readily stepped out of the boat and ran a land, which
opportunity (being that which the Moors did look for) they took the
advantage of, and not only they which were in sight, laid hands on him to
carry him away with them, but a number more, which lay secretly hidden, did
forth with break forth from behind the rocks, whither they had conveyed
themselves (as it seems the night before) forcing our men to leave the
rescuing of him that was taken as captive, and with speed to shift for
themselves.

The cause of this violence, was a desire which the king of Fesse had, to
understand what this fleet was, whether any forerunner of the kings of
Portugal or no, and what news of certainty the fleet might give him. And
therefore after that he was brought to the kings presence, and had reported
that they were Englishmen, bound for the straights, under the conduct of
general Drake, he was sent back again with a present to his Captain and
offer of great courtesy and freindship, if he would use his contry But in this
mean time, the general being grieved with this show of injury, and
intending, if he might, to recover or redeem his man, his pinnace being ready,
landed his company, and marched somewhat into the country, without any
resistance made against him: neither would the Moors, by any means come nigh
our men, to deal with them any way; wherefore having made provision of wood,
as also visited an old fort, built sometime by the king of Portugal, but now
ruined by the king of Fesse, we departed December 31. Cape Blanck, in such
sort, that when Fry returned, he found to his great grief, that the fleet was
gone: but yet, by the kings favor, he was sent home into England not long
after, in an English Merchants ship.

Shortly after our putting forth of this harbor, we were met with contrary
winds and foul weather, which continued till the fourth of January: yet we
still held on our course, and the third day after, De Guerre in 30. degrees. min.
where we lighted on 3. Spanish fishermen called Caunters, whom we took with
our new pinnace, and carried along with us, till we came to Rio Del Oro, Barbas,
where the Marigold took a caruell more, and so onward to cape Blanck till the
next day at night.

This cape lies in 20. degrees. 30. min. showing it self upright like the corner
of a wall, to them that come toward it from the North, having, between it and
cape Barbas, low, sandy, and very white land all the way. Here we observed the
south Guards, called the Crosiers 9. degrees. 30. min. above the horizon. Within
the cape, we took one spanish ship more riding at anchor (all her men being
fled ashoare in the boat save two) which, withal the rest we had formerly
taken, we carried into the harbor, 3. leagues within the cape.

Here our general determined, for certain days to make his abode, both for
that the place afforded plenty of fresh victuals, for the present refreshing
of our men, and for their future supply at sea (by reason of the infinite store
of diverse sorts of good fish, which are there easy to be taken, even within
the harbor, the like whereof, is hardly to be found again, in any part of the
world) as also, because it served very fitly, for the dispatching of some other
businesses that we had. During the time of our abode in this place, our
general being ashoare was visited by certain of the people of the country,
who brought down with them a woman a Moore (with her little babe hanging upon
her dry dugge, having scarce life in herself, much less milk to nourish her
child) to be sold as a horse, or a cow and calfe by her side, in which sort of
merchandise our general would not deal. But they had also Ambergris, with
certain gummes of some estimation, which they brought to exchange with our men
for water (whereof they have great want) so that coming with their Allforges
(they are leathern bags holding liquor) to buy water, they cared not at what
price they bought it, so they might have to quench their thirst. A very heavy
judgment of God upon that coast! The circumstances whereof considered, our
general would receive nothing of them for water, but freely gave it them that
came to him, yea and fed them also ordinarily with our victuals, in eating
whereof, their manner was not only uncivil, and unsightly to us, but even
inhumane and loathsome in it self.

And having washed and trimd our ships, and discharged all our spanish prises,
excepting one Caunter (for which we gave to the owner one of our own ships
viz. the Christopher) and one caruell formerly bound to Saint Iago, which we
caused to acompanie us hither, where she also was discharged: Verde, where (if
any where) we were of necessity to store our fleet with fresh water, for a long
time, for that our general intended from thence to run a long course (even
to the coast of Brasill) without touch of land. And now, having the wind
constant at North East and East North East, which is usual about those parts,
because it blows almost continually from the shore. January the 27. we
coasted Bonavista, and the next day after, we came to anchor under the Wester
part (toward Saint Iago) of the Island Maio,



For when we found the springs and wells which had been there (as appeared)
stopped up again, and no other water, to purpose, to be had to serve our
need, we marched up to seek some more convenient place to supply our want, or
at least to see whether the people would be dealt withal, to help us therein.
In this traveling, we found the soil to be very fruitful, having every where
plenty of figgetrees, with fruit upon most of them. But in the valleys and low
ground, where little low cottages were built, were pleasant vineyards planted,
bearing then, ripe and most pleasant grapes. There were also tall trees,
without any branch till the top, which bare the Coco nuts. There were also
great store of certain lower trees, with long and broad leaves, bearing the
fruit which they call Plantanes, in clusters together like puddings, a most
dainty and wholesome fruit. All of these trees were even laden with fruit, some
ready to be eaten, others coming forward, others ouer-ripe. Neither can this
seem strange, though about the midst of Winter with us, for that the Sun
does never withdraw himself farther off from them, but that with his lively
heat he quickens and strengthens the power of the soil and plant; neither
ever have they any such frost and cold, as thereby to loose their green hew
and appearance.

We found very good water in diverse places, but so far off from the road,
that we could not with any reasonable pains enjoy it. The people would by no
means be induced to have any conference with us, but keeping in the most sweet
and fruitful valleys among the hills, where their towns and places of dwelling
were, gave us leave without interruption to take our pleasure in suruewing the
Island, as they had some reason, not to endanger themselves, where they saw they
could reap nothing sooner then damage and shame, if they should have offered
violence to them which came in peace to do them no wrong at all.

This Island yields other great commodities, as wonderful herds of goats,
infinite store of wild hens, and salt without labor (only the gathering it
together excepted) which continually in a marvelous quantity is increased
upon the sands by the flowing of the sea, and the heat of the Sun kerning
the same. So that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic
with their neighbors in the other adjacent Islands.

Being departed from Maio, Iago, ten leagues West of Maio in the same latitude,
inhabited by the Portugals and Moors together. The cause whereof is said to
have been in the Portugals themselves, who (continuing long time Lords within
themselves, in the said Island) used that extreme and unreasonable cruelty
over their slaves, that (their bondage being intolerable) they were forced to
seek some means to help themselves, and to lighten that so heavy a burden;
and thereupon chose to fly into the most mountany parts of the Island: and at
last, by continual escapes, increasing to a great number, and growing to a set
strength, do now live, with that terror to their oppressors, that they now
endure no less bondage in mind then the Forcatos did before in body: besides
the damage that they daily suffer at their hands in their goods and cattle,
together with the abridging of their liberties in the use of diverse parts of
the fruitful soil of the said Island: which is very large, marvelous
fruitful (a refuge for all such ships as are bound toward Brasill, Ginny, the
East Indies, Binny, Calecut. etc.) and a place of rare force, if it were not
for the cause afore-recited, which has much abated the pride, and cooled the
courage of that people, who (under pretense of traffic and friendship) at
first making an entrance ceased not, practicing upon the poor Ilanders (the
ancient remainder of the first planters thereof, as it may seem from the coast
of Guinea) until they had excluded them from all government and liberty, yea
almost life.

On the South-west of this Island, we took a Portugal laden the best part with
wine, and much good cloth, both linen and woollen, besides other necessaries,
bound for Brasill, with many gentlemen and Merchants in her.

As we passed by with our fleet, in sight of 3. of their towns, they seemed
very joyful that we touched not with their coast; and seeing us depart
peaceably, in honor of our fleet and General, or rather to signify that they
were provided for an assault, shot off two great pieces into the sea, which
were answered by one given them again from us.

South west from Saint Iago in 14. degrees. 30. min. about twelve leagues distant,
yet, by reason of the height seeming not above three leagues lies another
Island, called of the Portugals Fogo, viz. the burning Island, or fiery furnace,
in which rises a steep upright hill, by conjecture at least six leagues, or
eighteen English miles from the upper part of the water: within the bowels
whereof, is a consuming fire, maintained by sulphury matter, seeming to be of a
marvelous depth, and also very wide. The fire shows it self but four times
in an hour, at which times it breaks our with such violence and force, and
in such maine abundance, that besides that it gives light like the Moon a
great way off, it seems, that it would not stay till it touch the heavens
themselves. Herein are engendered great store of pumice stones, which being in
the vehement heat of the fire carried up without the mouth of that fiery body,
fall down, with other gross and slimy matter upon the hill, to the continual
increasing of the same. And many times these stones falling down into the sea
are taken up and used, as we our selves had experience by sight of them
swimming on the water. The rest of the Island is fruitful notwithstanding, and
is inhabited by Portugals, who live very commodiously therein, as in the other
Islands thereabout.

Upon the South side, about two leagues off this Island of burning, lies a most
sweet and pleasant Island, the trees thereof are always green and fair to
look on, the soil almost full set with trees, in respect whereof its named the
Brave Island, being a storehouse of many fruits and commodities, as figs
always ripe, cocos, plantons, orenges, limons, cotton, etc. from the bancks
into the sea do run in many places the silver streams of sweet and wholesome
water, which with boats or pinnaces may easily be taken in. But there is no
convenient place or road for ships, neither any anchoring at all. For after
long trial, and often casting of leads, there could no ground be had at any
hand, neither was it ever known (as is reported) that any line would fetch
ground in any place about that Island. So that the top of Fogo burns not so
high in the air, but the root of Braua (so is the Island called) is buried and
quenched as low in the seas.

The only inhabitant of this Island is an Heremit, as we suppose, for we found
no other houses but one, built as it seemed for such a purpose; and he was so
delighted in his solitary living, that he would by no means abide our
coming, but fled, leaving behind him the relics of his false worship; to wit,
a cross, with a crucifix, an altar with his superaltar, and certain other
idols of wood of rude workmanship.

Here we dismissed the Portugals taken near Saint Iago, and gave to them in
exchange of their old ship, our new pinnace built at Mogadore:

Having thus visited, as is declared, the Islands of cape Verde, and provided
fresh water as we could, Febr. we departed thence, directing our course toward
the straights, so to pass into the South sea; in which course we sailed 63.
days without sight of land (passing the line equinoctial April following.

During which long passage on the vast gulf, where nothing but sea beneath us
and air above us was to be seen, as our eyes did behold the wonderful works
of God in his creatures, which he has made innumerable both small and great
beasts, in the great and wide seas: so did our mouths taste, and our natures
feed on, the goodness thereof in such fullness at all times, and in every
place, as if he had commanded and enjoined the most profitable and glorious
works of his hands to wait upon us, not alone for the relief of our
necessities, but also to give us delight in the contemplation of his
excellence, in beholding the variety and order of his providence, with a
particular taste of his fatherly care over us all the while.

The truth is, we often met with adverse winds, un welcome storms, and to us
(at that time) less welcome calmes, and being as it were in the bosom of the
burning zone, we felt the effects of sultring heat, not without the affrights
of flashing lightnings, and terrifyings of often claps of thunder; yet still
with the admixture of many comforts. For this we could not but take notice of,
that whereas we were but badly furnished (our case considered) of fresh water
(having never at all watered (to any purpose, or that we could say we were much
the better for it) from our first setting forth out of England till this time,
nor meeting with any place where we might conveniently water, till our coming
to the river of Plate, long after) continually, after once we were come within
four degrees of the line on this side, viz. after Feb. 10. and till we were
past the line as many degrees toward the South, viz. till Feb. 27. there was
no one day went over us but we received some rain, whereby our want of water
was much supplied.

This also was obseruable, that of our whole fleet, being now 6. in number,
notwithstanding the vncouthnes of the way, and what ever other difficulties, by
weather or otherwise we met withal, not any one, in all this space, lost
company of the rest; except only our Portugal prise for one day, who March
28. was severed from us, but the day following March 29. she found us again,
to both here own, and our no little comfort: she had in her 28. of our men,
and the best part of all our provision for drink; her short absence caused
much doubting and sorrow in the whole company, neither could she then have
been finally lost, without the overthrow of the whole voyage.

Among the many strange creatures which we saw, we took heedfull notice of
one, as strange as any; to wit, the flying fish, a fish of the bigness and
proportion, of a reasonable or middle sort of Pilchards: he has finnes, of
the length of his whole body, from the bulk to the top of the tail, bearing
the form, and supplying the like use to him, that wings do to other
creatures. By the help of these finnes, when he is chased of the Bonito, or
great mackrel (whom the Aurata or dolphin likewise pursues) and has not
strength to escape by swimming any longer, he lifts up himself above the
water, and flies a pretty height, sometimes lighting into boats or barks as
they sail along: The quills of their wings are so proportionable, and finely
set together, with a most thin and dainty filme, that they might seem to
serve, for a much longer and higher flight, but the drienes of them is such,
after some 10. or 12. strokes, that he must needs into the water again to
moisten them, which else would grow stiff and unfit for motion. The inrease of
this little and wonderful creature is in manner infinite, the fry whereof
lies upon the upper part of the waters, in the heat of the Sun, as dust upon
the face of the earth, which being in bigness of a wheat straw, and length an
inch more or less, do continually exercise themselves in both their faculties
of nature: wherein, if the Lord had not made them expert indeed, their
generation could not have continued, being so desired a prey to so many, which
greedily hunt after them, forcing them to escape in the air by flight, when
they cannot in the waters live in safety. Don or Spurkite, who feeding
chiefly, on such fish as he can come by at advantage, in their swimming in the
brim of the waters, or leaping above the same, presently cease upon them with
great violence, making great havoc, especially amongst these flying fishes,
though with small profit to himself.

There is another sort of fish, which likewise flies in the air, named a
Cuttill: its the same, whose bones the goldsmithes commonly use, or at least
not unlike that sort, a multitude of which, have at one time, in their flight,
fallen into our ship, amongst our men.

Passing thus, in beholding the most excellent works of the eternal God in the
seas, as if we had been in a garden of pleasure.

In the reports of Magellanes voyage, it is said, that this people pray to no
manner of thing, but live only according to the instinct of nature, which if it
were true, there should seem to be a wonderful alteration in them, since that
time, being fallen from a simple and natural creature, to make Gods of
Devils; But I am of the mind, that it was with them then, as now it is, only
they lacked then the like occasion, to put it in practice which now they have:
for then, they lived as a free people among themselves, but now, are in most
miserable bondage and slavery, both in body, goods, wife, and children, and
life it self to the Portugalls, whose hard and most cruel dealings against
them, forces them to fly, into the more unfruitful parts of their own land,
rather there to starve, or at least live miserably with liberty, then to abide
such intolerable bondage, as they lay upon them using the aforesaid practices
with devils, both for a revenge against their oppressors, and also for a
defense, that they have no further entrance into the country. And supposing
indeed, that no other had used travel by sea in ships, but their enemies
only, they therefore used the same at our coming: notwitstanding, our God
made their deuilish intent of none effect; For albeit there lacked not (within
the space of our falling with this coast) forcible storms and tempests, yet
did we sustain no damage, but only the seperating of our ships, out of sight
for a few days. Here our general would have gone ashore, but we could find
no harbor in many leagues. And therefore coasting along the land, toward the
south, April 7. Christopher (viz. the Caunter which we took at cape Blank,
in exchange for the Christopher, whose name she henceforward bore) from the
rest of the fleet.

After this, we kept on our course, sometime to the sea ward, sometimes toward
the shore, but always southward, as near as we could: Saint Mary, which lies
in 35. degrees. near the mouth of the river of Plate: and running within it about
6. or 7. leagues along by the maine, we came to anchor in a bay, under another
cape which our General afterward called cape Joy

Among other cares which our General took in this action, next the maine care
of effecting the voyage it self, these were the principal and chiefly
subordinate: to keep our whole fleet (as near as possible we could) together;
to get fresh water which is of continual use; and to refresh our men wearied
with long toils at sea, as often as we should find any opportunity of effecting
the same. And for these causes it was determined, and public notice thereof
given at our departure from the Islands of cape Verde; that the next Randeuous
both for the recollecting of our navy (if it should be despersed) as also for
watering, and the like, should be the river of Plate: whither we were all to
repair with all the convenient speed that could be made, and to stay one for
another, if it should happen that we could not arrive there all together; and
the effect we found answerable to our expectations, for here our severed ship
(as has been declared) found us again, and here we found those other helps
also so much desired. The country hereabout is of a temperate and most sweet
air, very fair and pleasant to behold, and besides the exceeding
fruitfulness of the soil, its stored with plenty of large and mighty dear.

Notwithstanding that in this first bay we found sweet and wholesome water even
at pleasure; yet the same day after the arrival of the Caunter,

April 20. we waighed again and sailed yet further up into the river, even
till we found but three fadome depth, and that we road with our ships in fresh
water; but we staid not there, nor in any other place of the river, because
that the winds being strong, the shoales many, and no safe harbor found, we
could not without our great danger so have done. Haling therefore to seaward
again,

May 8. by another storm the Caunter also was once more severed from us.

May 12. we had sight of land, in 47. degrees. where we were forced to come to
anchor in such road as we could find for the time. Nevertheless our General
named the place cape Hope; by reason of a bay discovered within the hedland,
which seemed to promise a good and commodious harbor. But by reason of many
rocks lying off from the place, we durst not adventure with our ships into it
without good and perfect discovery before hand made.

Our General, especially in matters of moment, was never wont to rely only
on other men's care, how trusty or skillful soever they might seem to be; but
always contemning danger and refusing no toil, he was wont himself to be one
whosoever was a second at every turn, where courage, skill, or industry was to
be employed; neither would he at this time entrust the discovery of these
dangers to another pains, but rather to his own experience in searching out
and sounding of them. May 13. rowed into the bay; and being now very nigh the
shore, one of the men of the country showed himself unto him seeming very
pleasant, singing and dancing, after the noise of a rattle which he shook in
his hand, expecting earnestly his landing.

But there was sudainly so great an alteration in the weather, into a thick and
misty fogge; together with an extreme storm and tempest, that our general,
being now 3. leagues from his ship, thought it better to return, then either
to land, or make any other stay: and yet the fogg thickened so mightily, that
the sight of the ships was bereft them, and if Captain Thomas (upon the
abundance of his love and service to his general) had not adventured, with his
ship to enter that bay, in this perplexity, where good advise would not suffer
our ships to bear in, while the winds were more tolerable, and the air
cleerer; we had sustained some great loss, or our general had been further
endangered, who was now quickly received abord his ship; out of which, being
within the bay, they let fall an anchor, and rode there (God be praised) in
safety: but our other ships, riding without, were so oppressed with the
extremity of the storm, that they were forced to run off to sea for their
own safeguard, being in good hope only of the good success of that ship,
which was gone in to releive our general; before this storm arose, our
Caunter, formerly lost, was come in the same day unto us into the road, but
was put to sea again, the same evening, with the rest of the fleet.

Swanne, lost long time before, and excepting our Portugal prise, called the
Mary; which waighing in this last storm, the night before, had now lost
company, and was not found again in a long time after.

In this place (the people being removed up into the country, belike for fear
of our coming) we found near unto the rocks, in houses made for that purpose,
as also in diverse other places, great store of Ostriches at least to the number
of 50. with much other foul; some dried and some in drying for their
provision, as it seemed, to carry with them to the place of their dwellings.
The Ostriches thighs were in bigness equal to reasonable legs of murton, They
cannot fly at all; but they run so swiftly, and take so long strides, that
it is not possible for a man in running by any means to take them, neither yet
to come so nigh them, as to have any shot at them either with bow or piece:
Whereof our men had often proof on other parts of that coast for all the
country is full of them; We found there the tools or instruments which the
people use in taking them.

Among other means they use in betraying these Ostriches, they have a great
and large plume of feathers, orderly compact together upon the end of a staff;
in the forepart bearing the likeness of the head, neck, and bulk of an
Ostrich; and in the hinder part, spreading it self out very large, sufficient
(being holden before him) to hide the most part of the body of a man: With this
it seems they staulke, driving them into some strait or neck of land close
to the sea side; where spreading long and strong nets, with their dogs which
they have in readiness at all times, they overthrow them, and make a common
quarry. The country is very pleasant, and seems to be a fruitful soil.

Being afterward driven to fall with this place again, we had great
acquaintance and familiarity with the people, who rejoiced greatly in our
coming, and in our friendship, in that we had done them no harm. But because
this place was no fit or convenient harbor for us, to do our necessary business;
neither yet to make provision, of such things as we wanted, as water, wood, and
such like, we departed thence the 15. of May.

At our departure hence, we held our course South and by West, and made about
9. leagues in 24. hours; bearing very little sail, that our fleet might the
easier get up with us, Which by reason of the contrary winds, were cast a
stern of us.

In 47. degrees. 30. min. we found a bay, which was fair, safe, and beneficial to
us, very necessary for our use; into which we haled, and anchored

The very first day of our arrival here, our general having set things in
some order, for the dispatch of our necessary business, being most careful for
his two ships which were wanting, sent forth to the southward, Captain Winter
in the Elizabeth viceadmiral; himself in the admiral, going forth northward,
into the sea, to see, if happily they might meet with either of them: at which
time, by the good providence of God, he himself met with the Swanne, formerly
lost at our departure from the river of Plate, and brought her into the same
harbor, the same day: where being afterward unloaded, and discharged of her
freight, she was cast off, and her iron work, and other necessaries being
saved, for the better provision of the rest; of the remainder was made fire
wood, and other implements which we wanted. But all this while, of the other
ship which we lost so lately, in our extremity, we could have no news.

While we were thus employed, after certain days of our stay in this place,
being on shore, in an Island, nigh unto the maine, where at low water was free
passage on foot, from the one to the other; the people of the country did show
themselves unto us, with leaping, dancing, and holding up their hands, and
making ourcries after their manner: but being then high water, we could not go
over to them on foot. Wherefore the General caused immediately a boat to be in
readiness, and sent unto them such things as he thought would delight them; as
knives, bells, bugles, etc. whereupon they being assembled together upon a
hill, half an English mile from the waters side; sent down two of their
company, running one after the other with a great grace, traversing their
ground as it seemed after the manner of their wars, by degrees descending
toward the waters side very swiftly. Notwithstanding drawing nigh unto it,
they made a stay, refusing to come near our men: which our men perceiving,
sent such things as they had tied with a string upon a rod, and stuck the same
up a reasonable distance from them, where they might see it. And as soon as our
men were departed from the place, they came and took those things, leaving
instead of them, as in recompense, such feathers as they use to wear about
their heads, with a bone made in manner of a toothpick, carved round about the
top, and in length about six inches, being very smoothly burnished. Whereupon
our General, with diverse of his gentlemen and company, at low water went over
to them to the maine.

Against his coming they remained still upon the hill, and set themselves in a
rank, one by one; appointing one of their company to run before them from
the one end of the rank to the other, and so back again, continually East
and West, with holding up his hands over his head, and yielding forward his
body in his running toward the rising and setting of the Sun: and at every
second or third turn at the most, erected his body, aginst the midst of the
rank of the people, lifting himself vaulting-wise from the ground toward the
Moon, being then over our heads: signifying thereby, as we conceived, that
they called the Sun and Moon (whom they serve for gods) to witness, that
they meant nothing toward us but peace. But when they perceived that we
ascended the hill apace, and drew nigh unto them, they seemed very fearful of
our coming.

Wherefore our General not willing, to give them any way any occasion to
mislike, or be discomfited, ^etyred his company; whereby they were so allured,
and did so therein confirm themselves of us, that we were no enemies, neither
meant them harm, that without al fear diverse came down with great speed after
us, presently entering into traffic with our men. Notwithstanding they would
receive nothing at our hands but the same must be first cast upon the ground,
using this word, Zussus, for exchange Toytt to cast upon the ground. And if
they misliked any thing, they cried Coroh. Coroh, speaking the same with
rattling in the throat. The wares we received from them were arrows of reeds,
feathers, and such bones as are before described.

This people go naked, except a skin of furre which they cast about their
shoulders, when they sit or lie in the cold: but having any thing to do, as
going or any other labor, they use it as a girdle about their loins. They
wear their hair very long, but lest it might trouble them in their travel,
they knit it up with a roll of Ostrich feathers, using the same rolls and hair
together for a quiver for their arrows, and for a store house, in which they
carry the most things which they carry about them. Some of them within these
rolls stick on either side of their heads (for a sign of honor in their
persons) a large and plain feather showing like horns afar off: So that
such a head upon a naked body (if devils do appear with horns) might very
nigh resemble devils.

Their whole bravery and setting out themselves stands in painting their
bodies with diverse colors, and such works as they can devise. Some wash their
faces with sulphur, or some such like substance: some paint their whole bodies
black, leaving only their necks behind and before White, much like our
damsels that wear their squares, their necks and breasts naked. Some paint
one shoulder black, another white* and their sides and legs interchangeably,
with the same colors, one still contrary to the other. The black part has set
upon it white moons, and the white part black Suns, being the marks and
characters of their gods, as is before noted.

They have some commodity by painting of their bodies, for the which cause they
use it so generally: and that I gather to be the defense it yields against
the piercing and nipping cold. For the colors being close laid on upon their
skin, or rather in their flesh, as by continual renewing of these iuyces
which are laid on, soakt into the inner part thereof, does fill up the pores
so close that no air or cold can enter, or make them once to shrink.

They have clean, comely, and strong bodies: they are swift of foot, and seem
very active. Neither is any thing more lamentable (in my judgment) then that
so goodly a people, and so lively creatures of God, should be ignorant of the
true and living God. And so much the more is this to be lamented, by how much
they are more tractable, and easy to be brought to the sheepfold of Christ:
having in truth a land sufficient to recompense any Christian Prince in the
world, for the whole travel and labor, cost and charges bestowed in that
behalf: with a wonderful enlarging of a kingdom, besides the glory of God by
increasing of the Church of Christ.

Its wonderful to hear, being never known to Christians before this time,
how familiar they became in short space with us; thinking themselves to be
joined with such a people, as they ought rather to serve, then offer any wrong
or injury unto. Presuming that they might be bold with our General as with a
Father, and with us as with brethren and their nearest friends; neither seemed
their love less toward us. One of the chiefest among them having on a time
received a cap of our Generals head, which he did daily wear, removing
himself but a little from us, with an arrow pierced his leg deeply, causing
the blood to stream out upon the ground: signifying thereby, how unfeignedly he
loved him, and giving therein a covenant of peace: The number of men which here
did frequent our company, were about fifty persons. Within, in the
Southermost part of this bay, there is a river of fresh water, with a great
many profitable Islands; of which, some have always such store of Seals or
sea-wosues as were able to maintain a huge army of men. Other Islands being
many and great, are so replenished with birds and foul, as if there were no
other victuals, a wonderful multitude of people might be nourished by the
increase of them for many posterities. Of these we killed some with shot, and
some with status, and took some with our hands, from men's heads and shoulders
upon which they lighted. We could not perceive that the people of the country
had any sort of boat or canowe, to come to these Islands. Their own provision
which they eat, for ought we could perceive, was commonly raw. For we should
sometimes find the remnants of Seals all bloody which they had gnawne with
their teeth like dogs: They go all of them armed, with a short bow of about an
ell in length in their hands, with arrows of reeds, and headed with a flint
stone, very cunningly cut and fastened.

This bay by reason of the plenty of Seals therein found (insomuch that we
killed two hundred in the space of one hour) we called Seal, bay. And having
now made sufficient provision of victuals and other necessaries, as also
happily finished all our businesses,



Here our general on good advise determined to alter his course; and turn his
stern to the Northward again, if happily God would grant we might find our
ship and friends whom we lost in the great storm, as is before said. Forasmuch
as (if we should enter the Straight without them in our company) it must needs
go hard with them; and we also in the mean time as well by their absence, as
by the uncertainty of their state, must needs receive no small discomfort.



Julian, we had our ship in sight: for which we gave God thanks with most
joyful minds. And forasmuch as the ship was far out of order, and very
leake, by reason of extremity of weather which she had endured, as well before
her loosing company as in her absence: our General thought good to bear into
Port Saint Julian with his fleet, because it was so nigh at hand, and so
convenient a place: intending there to refresh his wearied men, and cherish
them which had in their absence tasted such bitterness of discomfort, besides
the want of many things which they sustained.

Julian: which stands in 49. degrees. 30. min. and has on the South side of the
harbor picked rocks like towers, and within the harbor many Islands, which
you many ride hard aboard off, but in going in you must borrow of the North
shore.

Being now come to anchor, and all things fitted and made safe aboard, our
General with certain of his company, (viz. Thomas Drake his brother, John
Thomas, Robert Winter, Oliver the Master gunner, John Brewer, and Thomas Hood)
sea with us at our departure. Which work as it was of great necessity, and
therefore carefully to be performed; so did not he think himself discharged
of his duty, if he himself bestowed not the first travel therein, as his use
was at all times in all other things, belonging to the relieuing of our wants,
and the maintenance of our good estate, by the supply of what was needful.
Presently upon his landing he was visited by two of the inhabitants of the
place, whom Magellane named Patagous, or rather Pentagours from their huge
stature, and strength proportionable: These as they seemed greatly to rejoice
at his arrival, so did they show themselves very familiar, receiving at our
Generals hands whatsoever he gave them, and taking great pleasure in seeing
Master Oliver master gunner of the Admiral, to shoot an English arrow: trying
with him to shoot at length, but came nothing near him.

Not long after, came one more of the same last, but of a sowerer sort, for
he, misliking of the familiarity which his fellows had used, seemed very angry
with them, and strove earnestly to withdraw them, and to turn them to become
our enemies; Which our general with his men not suspecting in the^, used them
as before: and one Mr. Robert Winter, thinking of pleasure to shoot an arrow
at length, as Mr. Oliver had done before, that he which came last also might
have a sight thereof, the string of his bow brake; which, as before it was a
terror unto them, so now broken, it gave them great encouragement, and boldness,
and as they thought, great advantage in their treacherous intent and purpose;
not imagining that our calliuers, swords, and targets, were any munition or
weapon of war.

In which persuasion (as the general with his company were, quietly without
any suspicion of evil, going down toward his boat) they suddenly being
prepared, and gotten by stealth behind them, shot their arrows; and cheifely
at him which had the bow, not suffering him to string the same again, which
he was about to have done, as well as he could: but being wounded in the
shoulder at the first shot, and turning about, was sped with an arrow, which
peirced his lunges, yet he fell not. But the Mr. gunner being ready to shoot
of his calliuer, which took not fire in leuelling thereof, was presently
slain out right. In this extremity, if our general had not been both expert
in such affairs, able to judge, and give present direction in the danger
thereof, and had not valiantly thrust himself into the dance, against these
monsters, there had no one of our men, that there were landed, escaped with
life. He therefore, giving order that no man should keep any certain ground,
but shift from place to place, encroaching still upon the enemy, using their
targets, and other weapons for the defense of their bodies, and that they
should break so many arrows, as by any means they could come by, being shot
at them; wherein he himself was very diligent, and careful also in calling on
them, knowing that their arrows being once spent, they should have these
enemies at their devotion and pleasure, to kill or save, and this order being
accordingly taken, himself I say with a good courage and trust in the true and
living God, taking and shooting off, the same piece, which the gunner could not
make to take fire, dispatched the first beginner of the quarrel, the same man
which slew our Mr. gunner. For the piece being charged with a bullet, and
hail shot, and well aimed, tare out his belly and gutts, with great torment,
as it seemed by his cry, which was so hideous and horrible a roar, as if ten
bulls had joined together in roaring, wherewith the courage of his partners was
so abated, and their hearts appalled, that notwithstanding, diverse of their
fellows and countriemen appeared out of the woods, on each side: yet they were
glad, by flying away, to save themselves, quietly suffering our men either to
depart or stay. Our general chose rather to depart, then to take further
revenge of them, which now he might, by reason of his wounded man, whom for
many good parts he loved dearly; and therefore would rather have saved him,
then slain an hundred enemies, but being past recovery, he died the 2. day,
after his being brought aboard again.

That night our Mr. gunners body being left ashoare, for the speedier bringing
of the other aboard, our general himself the next day, with his boat well
appointed, turned to the shore, to fetch it likewise: which they found lying
where it was left, but stripped of his uppermost garment, and having an english
arrow stuck in his right eye.

Both of these dead bodies were laid together in one grave, with such
reverence, as was fit for the earthen tabernacles of immortal souls; and with
such commendable ceremonies, as belong unto soldiers of worth, in time of
war, which they most truly and rightfully deserved.

Magellane was not altogether deceived, in naming them Giants; for they
generally differ from the common sort of men, both in stature, bigness, and
strength of body, as also in the hideousness of their voice: but yet they are
nothing so monstrous, or giantlike as they were reported; there being some
English men, as tall, as the highest of any that we could see, but
peradventure, the Spaniards did not think, that ever, any English man would
come thither, to reprove them; and thereupon might presume the more boldly to
lie: the name Pentagones, Five cubits viz. 7. foot and half, describing the
full height (if not some what more) of the highest of them.

But this is certain, that the Spanish cruelties there used, have made them
more monstrous, in mind and manners, then they are in body; and more
inhospitable, to deal with any strangers, that shall come hereafter. For the
loss of their friends (the remembrance whereof is assigned and conueighed over
from one generation to another, among their posterity) breeds an old grudge,
which will not easily be forgotten, with so quarrellsome and revengefull a
people. Notwithstanding the terror which they had conceived of us, did
henceforward so quench their heat, and take down their edge, that they both
forgate revenge, and seeming by their countenance, to repent them of the wrong
they had offered us, that meant them no harm, suffered us to do what we
would, the whole space of two months after this, without any interruption or
molestation by them, and it may perhaps be a means, to breed a peace in that
people, toward all that may hereafter this, come that way.

To this evil, thus received at the hands of infidells, there was adjoined,
and grew another mischief, wrought and contrived closely amongst our selves,
as great, yea far greater, and of far more greiuous consequence then the
former: but that it was, by Gods providence, detected and prevented in time,
which else had extended it self, not only to the violent shedding of innocent
blood, by murdering our general and such others as were most firm and
faithful to him: but also to the final overthrow of the whole action
intended, and to diverse other most dangerous effects.

These plotts had been laid before the voyage began in England: the very
model of them was showed, and declared to our general in his garden at
Plimmouth, before his setting sail, which yet he either would not credit, as
true or likely, of a person whom he loved so dearly, and was persuaded of to
love him likewise unfeignedly, or thought by love and benefits, to remove and
remedy it, if there were any evil purposes conceived against him.

And therefore, he did not only continue (to this suspected and accused person)
al countenance, credit, and courtesies, which he was wont to show and give him,
but increased them, using him in a manner as another himself, and as his most
inmost friend: lodging him with himself; giving him the second place, in all
companies, in his presence; leaving in his hand, the state as it were of his
own person; in his absence; imparting unto him all his counsels; allowing him
free liberty in all things, that were reasonable; and bearing often, at his
hands great infirmities; yea despising, that any private injury, should break
so firm a friendship, as he meant toward him. And therefore, was he often
times not a little offended, even with those, who (upon conscience of their
duty, and knowledge that otherwise they should indeed offend) disclosed from
time to time unto him, how the fire increased, that theatned his own, together
with the destruction of the whole action.

But at length, perceiving that his lenity and favors did little good; in that
the heat of ambition was not yet allayed, nor could be quenched, as it seemed,
but by blood; and that the manifold practices grew daily more and more, even to
extremities; he thought it high time, to call these practices into question,
before it were too late, to call any question of them into hearing. And
therefore setting good watch over him, and assembling all his Captains, and
gentlemen of his comapany together; he propounded to them, the good parts which
were in the gentleman, the great good will, and inward affection, more then
brotherly, which he had ever, since his first acquaintance borne him, not
omitting the respect, which was had of him, among no mean personages in
England; and afterward delivered the letters, which were written to him, with
the particulars from time to time, which had been observed, not so much by
himself, as by his good friends; not only at sea, but even at Plimmouth; not
bare words but writings; not writings alone, but actions, tending to the
overthrow of the service in hand, and making away of his person.

Proofs were required and alleged, so many, and so evident, that the
gentleman himself, stricken with remorse of his inconsiderate and unkind
dealing, acknowledged himself to have deserved death, yea many deaths; for
that he conspired, not only the overthrow of the action, but of the principal
actor also, who was not a stranger or il-willer, but a dear and true friend
unto him: and therefore in a great assembly openly besought them, in whose
hands justice rested, to take some order for him; that he might not be
compelled, to enforce his own hands, against his owns bowels, or otherwise to
become his own executioner.

The admiration and astonishment hereat, in all the hearers even those which
were his nearest friends, and most affected him was great, yea in those, which
for many benefits received from him, had good cause to love him: but yet the
general was most of all distracted; and therefore withdrewe himself, as not
able to conceal his tender affection, requiring them, that had heard the whole
matter, to give their judgments, as they would another day answer it unto
their prince, and unto almighty God, judge of all the earth. Therefore they
all, above 40. in number, the chiefest of place and judgment in the whole
fleet, after they had discussed diversely of the case, and alleged whatsoever
came in their minds, or could be there produced by any of his other friends,
with their own hands, under seal, adjudged that: He had deserved death: And
that it stood, by no means with their safety, to let him live: And therefore,
they remitted the manner thereof, with the rest of the circumstances to the
general.

This judgment, and as it were assise, was held a land, in one of the Islands
of that port; which afterward, in memory hereof was called, the Island of True
justice and judgment.

Now after this verdict was thus returned unto our general (unto whom, for his
company, her majesty before his departure, had committed her sword, to use for
his safety, with this word: We do account that he which strikes at thee Drake
strikes at us) he called for the guilty party, and caused to be read unto him,
the several verdicts which were written, and pronounced of him, which being
acknowledged for the most part (for none had given heavier sentence against
him, then he had given against himself) our general proposed unto him this
choice: whether he would take, to be executed in this Island? or to be set
aland on the maine? or return into England, there to answer his deed before
the Lords of her majesty's Council?

He most humbly thanked the general for his clemency, extended toward him in
such ample sort: and craving some respit, to consult thereon, and so make his
choice advisedly: the next day he returned this answer, that: Albeit he had
yielded in his heart, to entertain so great a sin; as whereof now he was
justly condemned: yet he bad a care, and that excelling all other cares, to die
a christian man, that whatsoever did become of his clay body, he might yet
remain assured of an eternal inheritance, in a far better life. This he
feared, if he should be set a land among Infidels, how he should be able to
maintain this assurance, feeling in his own frailty, how mighty the
contagion is of lewd custom. And therefore he besought the general most
earnestly, that he would yet have a care, and regard of his soul; and never
jeopard it amongst heathen and savage Infidells. If he should return into
England, he must first have a ship, and men to conduct it, with sufficient
victuals: two of which though they were had, yet for the third, he thought no
man would accompany him, in so bad a message to so vile an issue, from so
honorable a service. But if that there were, which could induce their minds,
to return with him; yet the very shame of the return, would be as death, or
grieuouser if it were possible: hecause be should be so long a dying, and die
so often. Therefore he professed, that with all his heart, he did embrace the
first branch of the generals proffer; desiring only this favor, that they
might receive the holy communion, once again together before his death; and
that he might not die, other then a gentleman's death.

Though sundry reasons were used by many, to persuade him to take either of the
other ways: yet when he remained resolute in his former determination, both
parts of his last request were granted: and the next convenient day, a
communion was celebrated, by Mr. Francis Fletcher, preacher and pastor of the
fleet at that time. The general himself communicated in this Sacred
ordinance, with this condemned penitent gentleman; who showed great tokens of a
contrite and repentant heart, as who was more deeply displeased with his own
act, then any man else. And after this holy repast, they dined also at the same
table together, as cheerfully in sobriety, as ever in their lives they had
done aforetime: each cheering up the other, and taking their leave, by drinking
each to other, as if some journey only had been in hand.

After dinner, all things being brought in a readiness, by him that supplied the
room of the provost Marshall; without any dallying, or dolaying the time, he
came forth, and kneeled down, preparing at once, his neck for the axe, and
his spirit for heaven: which having done, without long ceremony, as who had
before digested this whole tragedy, he desired all the rest to pray for him,
and willed the executioner to do his office, not to fear nor spare.

Thus having by the worthy manner of his, death (being much more honorable by
it, then blameable for any other of his actions) fully blotted out, what ever
stain, his fault might seem to bring upon him; he left unto our fleet, a
lamentable example of a goodly gentleman, who in seeking advancement unfit for
him, cast away himself: and unto posterity a monument, of I know not what,
fatal calamity, incident to that Port, and such like actions, which might
happily afford a new pair of paralells, to be added to Plutarchs: in that the
same place, near about the same time of the year, witnessed the execution of
2. gentlemen, suffering both for the like cause, employed both in like service,
entertained both in great place, endued both with excellent qualities, the one
58. year after the other.

For on the maine, our men found a gibbet, fallen down, made of a spruce mast,
with men's bones underneath it, which they coniectured to be the same gibbet,
which Magellane commanded to be erected, in the year 1520. for the execution,
of John Carthagene the Bishop of Burgos cosen, who by the kings order, was
joined with Magellane in commission, and made his vice admiral.

In the Island, as we dug to bury this gentleman, we found a great grinding
stone, broken in two parts, which we took and set fast in the ground, the one
part at the head, the other at the feet, building up the middle space, with
other stones and turfes of earth, and engraued in the stones, the names of the
parties buried there, with the time of their departure, and a memorial of our
generals name in Latin, that it might the better be understood, of all that
should come after us.

These things thus ended, and set in order, our general discharging the Mary
viz. our Portugal prise, because she was leake and troublesome, defaced her;
and then left her ribs and keele upon the Island: where for two months together
we had pitched our tents. And so having wooded, watered, trimmed our ships,
dispatched all our other businesses, and brought our fleet into the smallest
number, even 3. only, besides our pinnaces, that we might the easier keep our
selves together, be the better furnished with necessaries, and be the stronger
mand, against what soever need should be, August 17. we departed out of this
port, and being now in great hope, of a happy issue to our enterprise, which
almighty god hitherto had so blessed and prospered, we set our course for the
Straights. Southwest.

August 20. we fell with the cape; near which lies the entrance into the
straight, called by the Spaniards Capo virgin Maria, appearing 4. leagues
before you come to it with high and steep gray cliffes, full of black
stars, against which the sea beating, shows as it were the spoutings of
Whales, having the highest of the cape, like cape vincent in Portugal: At this
cape, our general caused his fleet, in homage to our sovereign lady the
Queens majesty, to strike their top-sailes upon the bunt, as a token of his
willing and glad mind, to show his dutiful obedience to her highness, whom he
acknowledged to have full interest and right, in that new discovery; and
withal, in remembrance of his honorable friend and fauorer, Sir Christopher
Hatton, he changed the name of the ship, which himself went in, from the
Pelican to be called the golden Hind. Which ceremonies being ended, together
with a sermon, teaching true obedience, with prayers and giving of thanks for
her majesty, and most honorable counsel, with the whole body of the common
weal, and church of God, we continued our course on into the said frete, where
passing with land in fight on both sides, we shortly fell with so narrow a
strait, as carrying with it much wind, often turnings, and many dangers,
requires an expert judgment, in him that shall pass the same, it lies West
North West and East South East: but having left this strait a stern, we
seemed to be come out of a river of two leagues broad, into a large and maine
sea, having the night following, an Island in sight, which (being in height
nothing inferior to the Island Fogo, before spoken of) burns (like it aloft)
also in the air, in a wonderful sort, without intermission.

It has formerly been received as an undoubted truth, that the seas,
following the course of the first mouer, from East to West, have a continual
current through this strait, but our experience found the contrary: the
ebbings and flowings here, being as orderly (in which the water rises and falls
more then 5. fathomes, upright) as on other coasts.

The 24 of August being Bartholomew day, we fell with 3. Islands, bearing
triangle-wise one from another, one of them was very fair and large, and of a
fruitful soil, upon which being next unto us, and the weather very calm, our
general with his gentlemen, and certain of his mariners, then landed; taking
possession thereof in her Majesty's name, and to her use, and called the same
Elizabeth Island.

The other two, though they were not so large, nor so fair to the eye, yet
were they to us exceeding useful, for in them we found great store of strange
birds, which could not fly at all, nor yet run so fast, as that they could
escape us with their lives: in body they are less then a goose, and bigger
then a mallard, short and thick set together, having no feathers, but instead
thereof, a certain hard and matted down; their beakes are not much unlike the
bills of crows, they lodge and breed upon the land, where making earthes, as
the conies do, in the ground, they lay their eggs, and bring up their young;
their feeding and provision to live on, is in the sea, where they swimm in such
sort, as nature may seem to have granted them no small prerogative in
swiftness, both to prey upon others, and themselves to escape from any others
that seek to cease upon them, and such was the infinite resort of these birds
to these Islands, that in the space of 1. day, we killed no less then 3000. and
if the increase be according to the number, it is not to be thought, that the
world has brought forth, a greater blessing in one kind of creature in so
small a circuit, so necessarily and plentifully serving the use of man, they
are a very good and wholesome victual: our general named these Islands, the
one Bartholomew, according to the day; the other Saint Georges, in honor of
England, according to the ancient custom there observed.

In the Island of Saint George, we found the body of a man, so long dead before,
that his bones would not hold together, being moved out of the place whereon
they lay.

From these Islands, to the entrance into the South sea, the frete is very
crooked; having many turnings, and as it were shuttings up, as if there were no
passage at all, by means whereof, we were often troubled with contrary winds,
so that some of our ships, recovering a cape of land, entering another reach,
the rest were forced to alter their course, and come to anchor where they
might. It is true which Magellane reports of this passage: namely that there
be many fair harbors, and store of fresh water; but some ships, had need to
be fraughted with nothing else, besides anchors and cables, to find ground, in
most of them, to come to anchor; which when any extreme gusts, or contrary
winds do come (whereunto the place is altogether subject) is a great
hindrance to the passage and carries with it no small danger.

The land on both sides is very high and mountainous, having on the North and
West side the continent of America, and on the South and East part, nothing but
Islands: among which, lie innumerable fretes or passages into the South sea. The
mountains arise with such tops, and spires into the air, and of so rare a
height, as they may well be accounted amongst the wonders of the world;
environed as it were, with many regions of congealed clouds, and frozen
meteors, whereby they are continually fed and increased, both in height and
bigness, from time to time, retaining that which they have once received, being
little again diminished by the heat of the sun, as being so far from
reflection, and so nigh the cold and frozen region.

But notwithstanding all this, yet are the low and plain grounds very
fruitful, the grass green and natural; the herbs that are of very strange
sorts, good and many; the trees for the most part of them always green; the
air of the temperature of our country, the water most pleasant; and the soil
agreeing to any grain which we have growing in our country: a place no doubt,
that lacks nothing, but a people to use the same to the Creators glory, and
the increasing of the Church: the people inhabiting these parts, made fires as
we passed by in diverse places.

Drawing nigh the entrance of the South sea, we had such a shutting up to the
Northwards, and such large and open fretes toward the South, that it was
doubtful which way we should pass, without further discovery: for which
cause, our general having brought his fleet to anchor under an Island;
himself, with certain of his gentlemen, rowed in a boat to descrie the
passage; who having discovered a sufficient way toward the North, in their
return to their ships, met a cannowe under the same Island, where we rode then
at anchor, having in her diverse persons.

This cannowe or boat was made of the bark of diverse trees, having a prowe
and a stern standing up, and semicirclewise yielding inward, of one form and
fashion; the body whereof was a most dainty mould, bearing in it most comely
proportion, and excellent workmanship; in so much as to our general and us, it
seemed never to have been done, without the cunning and expert judgment of
art; and that not for the use of so rude and barborous a people, but for the
pleasure of some great and noble personage, yea of some Prince: It had no other
closing up or caulking in the seames, but the stitchin with thongs, made of
Seale-skins, or other such beast, and yet so close that it received very little
or no water at all.

The people are of a mean stature, but well set and compact, in all their
parts and limbs; they have great pleasure in painting their faces, as the
others have, of whom we have spoken before. Within the said Island they had a
house of mean building, of certain poles, and covered with skins of beast;
having therein fire, water, and such meat, as commonly they can come by: as
seals, mussels, and such like.

The vessels wherein they keep their water, and their cups in which they
drink, are made of barks of trees, as was their canow: and that with no less
skill (for the bigness of the thing) being of a very formal shape and good
fashion. Their working tools, which they use in cutting these things and such
other, are knives made of most huge and monstrous mussell shells (the like
whereof have not been seen or heard of lightly by any travelers; the meat
thereof being very sauourie and good in eating) which, after they have broken
off the thin and brittle substance of the edge, they rub and grind them upon
stones had for the purpose, till they have tempered and set such an edge upon
them, that no wood is so hard but they will cut it at pleasure with the same:
whereof we our selves had experience. Yea they cut therewith bones of a
marvelous hardness; making of them fisgies to kill fish, wherein they have a
most pleasant exercise with great dexterity.

Mare del zur: at the cape whereof, our General had determined with his whole
company to have gone ashore, and there after a Sermon to have left a monument
of her Majesty engraven in metal, for a perpetual remembrance; which he had
in a readiness for that end prepared: but neither was there any anchoring,
neither did the wind suffer us by any means to make a stay.

Only this by all our men's observations was concluded; that the entrance, by
which we came into this strait, was in 52. degrees. the midst in 53. degrees. 15. m
and the going out in 52. degrees. 30. m. being 150. leagues in length: At the very
entry, supposed also to be about 10. leagues in breadth. After we were entered
ten leagues within it, it was found not past a league in breadth: farther
within, in some places very large, in some very narrow, and in the end found to
be no strait at all, but all Islands.

Now when our General perceived that the nipping cold, under so cruel and
frowning a Winter, had empaired the health of some of his men; he meant to
have made the more have again toward the line, and not to sail any farther
toward the pole Antartick, lest being father from the Sun, and nearer the
cold, we might happily be overtaken with some greater danger of sickness. But
God giving men leave to purpose, reserueth to himself the disposition of all
things: making their intents of none effect, or changing their meanings often
times clean into the contrary, as may best serve for his own glory and their
profit.

Mare pacificum, but proving to us rather to be Mare furiosum.) God by a
contrary wind and intolerable tempest, seemed to set himself against us:
forcing us not only to alter our course and determination, but with great
trouble, long time, many dangers, hard escapes, and final separating of our
fleet, to yield ourselves unto his will. Yea such was the extremity of the
tempest, that it appeared to us as if he had pronounced a sentence, not to stay
his hand, nor to withdraw his judgment till he had* buried our bodies and
ships also, in the bottomless depth of the raging sea.

laid this burden upon our backs, had not mercifully borne it up with his
own shoulders, and vpheld us in it by his own power, beyond any possible
strength or skill of man. Neither indeed did we at all escape, but with the
feeling of great discomforts through the same.

For these violent and extraordinary flawes (such as seldom have been seen)
still continuing, or rather increasing, Marigold from us, in which was Captain
John Thomas, with many others of our dear friends: who by no means that we
could conceive could help themselves, but by spooming along before the sea.
With whom albeit we could never meet again, yet (our General having
aforehand given order, that if any of our fleet did loose company, the place of
resort to meet again should be in 30. degrees. or thereabouts, upon the coast of
Peru, toward the Equinoctial) we long time hoped (till experience showed our
hope was vain) that there we should joyfully meet with them: especially for
that they were well provided of victuals, and lackt no skillful and sufficient
men (besides their Captain) to bring forwards the ship to the place appointed.

From the seventh of September (in which the storm began) till the seventh of
october we could not by any means recover any land (having in the mean time
been driven so far South, Elizabeth: partly through the negligence of those
that had the charge of her, partly through a kind of desire that some in her
had to be out of these troubles, and to be at home again: which (as since is
known) they thence forward by all means assayed and performed.

So that now our Admiral if she had retained her old name of Pelican, which
she bare at our departure from our country, she might have been now indeed
said to be as a Pelican alone in the wilderness. For albeit our General
sought the rest of his fleet with great care, yet could we not have any sight
or certain ne was of them by any means.

From this bay of parting of friends, we were forcibly driven back again into
55. degrees. toward the pole Antarticke. In which height we ran in among the
Islands before mentioned, lying to the Southward of America, through which we
passed from one sea to the other, as has been declared. Where coming to
anchor, we found the waters there to have their indraught and free passage,
and that through no small guts, or narrow channels, but indeed through as large
frets or straights, as it has at the supposed streights of Magellane through
which we came.

Among these Islands, making our abode with some quietness for a very little
while,(viz. two days) and finding diverse good and wholesome herbs together
with fresh water; our men which before were weak, and much empaired in their
health, began to receive good comfort: especially by the drinking of one herb
(not much unlike that herb which we commonly call Pennylease) which purging
with great facility affoorded great help and refreshing to our wearied and
sickly bodies. But the winds returning to their old wont, and the seas raging
after their former manner, yea every thing as it were setting it self against
our peace and desired rest, here was no stay permitted us, neither any safety
to be looked for.

For such was the present danger by forcing and continual slawes, that we were
rather to look for present death then hope for any delivery, if God almighty
should not make the way for us. The winds were such as if the bowels of the
earth had set all at liberty; or as if all the clouds under heaven had been
called together, to lay their force upon that one place: The seas, which by
nature and of themselves are heavy, and of a weighty substance, were rolled
up from the depths, even from the roots of the rocks, as if it had been a
scroll of parchment, which by the extremity of heat runs together: and
being aloft were carried in most strange manner and abundance, as feathers or
drifts of snow, by the violence of the winds, to water the exceeding tops of
high and lofty mountains. Our anchors, as false friends in such a danger,
gave over their holdfast, and as if it had been with horror of the thing, did
shrink down to hide themselves in this miserable storm; committing the
distressed ship and helpelesse men to the uncertain and rolling seas, which
tossed them, like a ball in a racket. In this case, to let fall more anchors,
would avail us nothing; For being driven from our first place of anchoring, so
unmeasurable was the depth, that 500. fathom would fetch no ground: So that
the violent storm without intermission; the impossibility to come to anchor;
the want of opportunity to spread any sail, the most mad seas; the lee
shores; the dangerous rocks; the contrary and most intolerable winds; the
impossible passage out; the desperate tarrying there; and inevitable perils on
every side, did lay before us so small likelihood to escape present
destruction, that if the special providence of God himself had not supported
us, we could never have endured that woeful state: as being environed with most
terrible and most fearful judgments round about. For truly, it was more
likely that the mountains should have been rent in sunder, from the top to
the bottom, and cast headlong into the sea, by these unnatural winds; then
that, we, by any help or cunning of man, should free the life of any one
amongst us.

Notwithstanding the same God of mercy which delivered Jonas out of the Whales
belly, and hears all those that call upon him faithfully, in their distress;
looked down from heaven, beheld our tears, and heard our humble petitions,
joined with holy vows. Even God (whom not the winds and seas al one, but even
the devils themselves and powers of hell obey) did so wonderfully free us, and
make our way open before us, as it were by his holy Angels still guiding and
conduting us, that more then the affright and amaze of this estate, we received
no part of damage in all the things that belonged unto us.

But escaping from these straites and miseries, as it were through the needles
ey (that God might have the greater glory in our delivery) by the great and
effectual care and travel of our General, the Lords instrument therein; we
could now no longer forbear, but must needs find some place of refuge,
as well to provide water, wood, and other necessaries, as to comfort our men,
thus worn and tired out, by so many and so long intolerable toils: the like
whereof, its to be supposed, no traveler has felt, neither has there ever
been, such a tempest (that any records make mention of) so violent, and of
such continuance, since Noah's flood, for as has been said it lasted from
September 7. to October 28, full 52. days.

Not many leagues therefore to the Southwards of our former anchoring, we ran
in again among these Islands; where we had once more better likelihood to rest
in peace: and so much the rather, for that we found the people of the
country, traveling for their living, from one Island to another, in their
canowes, both men, women, and young infants wrapped in skins, and hanging at
their mothers backs; with whom we had traffic, for such things as they had,
as chains of certain shells and such other trifles; here the Lord gave us
three days to breath our selves, and to provide such things as we wanted,
albeit the same was with continual care, and troubles to avoid imminent
dangers, which the troubled seas and blustering winds, did every hour
threaten unto us.

But when we seemed to have stayed there too long, we were more rigorously
assaulted by the not formerly ended, but now more violently renewed storm; and
driven thence also with no small danger; leaving behind us the greater part of
our cable with the anchor; being chased along by the winds, and buffeted
incessantly in each quarter by the seas (which our General interpreted, as
though God had sent them of purpose to the end which ensued) till at length we
fell with the uttermost part of land toward the South pole, and had certainly
discovered how far the same does reach Southward, from the coast of America
aforenamed.

The uttermost cape or hedland of all these Islands, stands near in 56. degrees.
without which there is no maine, nor Island to be seen to the Southwards: but
that the Atlanticke Ocean, and the South sea, meet in a most large and free
scope.

It has been a dream through many ages, that these Islands have been a
maine, and that it has been terra incognita; wherein many strange monsters
lived. Indeed it might truly, before this time, be called incognota, for
howsouer the mappes and general descriptions of Cosmographers, either upon the
deceivable reports of other men, or the deceitful imaginations of themselves
(supposing never herein to be corrected) have set it down, yet it is true,
that before this time, it was never discovered, or certainly known by any
traveler, that we have heard of.

And here as in a fit place, it shall not be amiss, to remove that error in
opinion, which has been held by many, of the impossible return, out of Mar
Del Zur, into the West Ocean; by reason of the supposed Eastern current, and
leuant winds: which (say they) speedily carry any thither, but suffer no
return. They are herein likewise altogether deceived: for neither did we meet
with any such current, neither had we any such certain winds, with any such
speed to carry us through; but at all times, in our passage there, we found
more opportunity to return back again, into the West Ocean, then to go
forward into Mar Del zur, by means either of current, or winds to hinder us,
whereof we had experience more then we wished: being glad oftentimes, to alter
our course, and to fall asterne again, with francke wind (without any
impediment of any such surmised current) farther in one afternoon, then we
could fetch up, or recover again in a whole day, with a reasonable gale. And
in that they allege the narrownes of the frete, and want of sea-roome, to be
the cause of this violent current; they are herein no less deceived, then they
were in the other without reason: for besides, that it cannot be said, that
there is one only passage, but rather innumerable it is most certain, that a
sea-board all these Islands, there is one large and maine sea, wherein if any
will not be satisfied, nor believe the report of our experience and ey-sight,
he should be advised to suspend his judgment, till he have either tried it
himself, by his own travel, or shall understand, by other travelers, more
particulars to confirm his mind herein.

Now as we were fallen to the uttermost part of these Islands

At these Southerly parts we found the night, in the latter end of October, to
be but 2. hours long: the sun being yet above 7. degrees distant from the
Tropic: so that it seems, being in the Tropic, to leave very little, or no
night at all in that place.

There be few of all these Islands, but have some inhabitants, whose manners,
apparel, houses, canowes and means of living, is like unto those formerly
spoken of, a little before our departure out of the Straight. To all these
Islands, did our general give one name, to wit Elizabethides.

North west, to coast along the parts of Peru (for so the general mappes set
out the land to lie) both for that we might, with convenient speed, full with
the height of 30. degrees. being the place appointed, for the rest of our fleet to
re-assemble; as also, that no opportunity might be lost, in the mean time to
find them out, if it seemed good to God to direct them to us.

In this course, we chanced (the next day) with two Islands, being as it were
store houses, of most liberal provision of victuals for us, of birds;
yielding not only sufficient and plentiful store, for us who were present,
but enough, to have served all the rest also, which were absent.

Thence (having furnished our selves to our content) we continued our course
November 1. still Northwest, as we had formerly done, but in going on, we
soon espied, that we might easily have been deceived: and therefore casting
about, and steering upon another point, we found, that the general mappes did
err from the truth, in setting down the coast of Peru, for 12. degrees. at least
to the Northward, of the supposed strait; no less then is the Northwest point
of the compass, different from the Northeast, perceiving hereby, that no man,
had ever by travel, discovered any part of these 12. degrees. and therefore the
setters forth of such descriptions, are not to be trusted; much less honored,
in their false and fraudulent conjectures; which they use, not in this alone,
but in diverse other points of no small importance.

We found this part of Peru, all along to the height of Lima, which is 12.
degrees. South of the line, to be mountainous and very barren, without water or
wood, for the most part, except in certain places, inhabited by the Spaniards,
and few others, which are very fruitful and commodious.

After we were once again thus fallen with the land, we continually coasted
along, til we came to the height of 37. d. or thereabout: and finding no
convenient place of abode, nor likelihood to hear any news of our ships, we
ran off again with an Island, which lay in sight, named of the Spaniards
Mucho, by reason of the greatness and large circuit thereof.



Barricoes to the watering place, assigned the night before. Who having
peaceably past on one half of the way, were then with no small violence set
upon by those traitorous people, and suddenly slain: And to the end that our
General with the rest of his company should not only be stayed from rescuing
them, but also might fall (if it were possible) into their hands in like
manner, they had laid closely behind the rocks an ambushment of (as we
guessed) about 500. men, armed and well appointed for such a mischief. Who
suddenly attempting their purpose (the rocks being very dangerous for the
boat, and the sea-gate exceeding great) by shooting their arrows hurt and
wounded every one of our men, before they could free themselves, or come to die
use of there weapons to do any good. The General himself was shot in the face,
under his right eye, and close by his nose, the arrow piercing a marvelous way
in, under basis cerebri, with no small danger of his life; besides that, he was
grievously wounded in the head. The rest, being nine persons in the boat, were
deadly wounded in diverse parts of their bodies, if God almost miraculously had
not given cure to the same. For our chief Surgeon being dead, and the other
absent by the loss of our vice admiral, and having none left us but a boy,
whose good will was more then any skill he had, we were little better then
altogether destitute of such cunning and helps as so grievous a state of so
many wounded bodies did require. Notwithstanding God, by the good advice of our
General, and the diligent putting too of every man's help, did give such
speedy and wonderful cure, that we had all great comfort thereby, and yielded
God the glory thereof.

The cause of this force and injury by these Ilanders, was no other but the
deadly hatred which they bear against their cruel enemies the Spaniards, for
the bloody and most tirannous oppression which they had used toward them. And
therefore with purpose against them (suspecting us to be Spaniards indeed, and
that the rather, by occasion that though command was given to the contrary,
some of our men in demanding water, used the Spanish word Aqua)sought some part
of revenge against us.

Our General notwithstanding he might have revenged this wrong; with little
hazard or danger; yet being more desirous to preserve one of his own men
alive, then to destroy 100. of his enemies, committed the same to God: wishing
this only punishment to them, that they did but know whom they had wronged,
and that they had done this injury not to an enemy, but to a friend, not to a
Spaniard, but to an Englishman; who would rather have been a patron to defend
them, then any way an instrument of the least wrong that should have been done
unto them. The weapons which this people use in their wars, are arrows of
reeds, with heads of stone, very brittle and indented* but darts of a great
length, headed with iron or bone.

The same day that we received this dangerous affront, in the afternoon we set
sail from thence; and because we were now nigh the appointed height, wherein
our ships were to be looked for, as also the extremity and crasie state of our
hurt men aduising us to use expedition, to find sone convenient place of
repose, which might afford them some rest, and yield us necessary supply of
fresh victuals for their diet; we bent our course, as the wind would suffer us,
directly to run in with the maine. Philips Bay, in, 32. degrees. or thereabout,
Nouemb. 30. we came to anchor: and forthwith manned and sent our boat to
discover what likelihood the place would offer to afford us such things as we
stood in need of.

Our boat doing her uttermost endeavor in a diligent search, yet after long
travel could find no appearance of hope for relief, either of fresh victuals
or of fresh water: huge herds of wild buffes they might disecrne, but not so
much as any sign of any inhabitant thereabout. Yet in their return to us,
they descried within the bay, an Indian with his Canow as he was a fishing: him
they brought aboard our general, canow and all as he was in it. A comely
personage, and of a goodly stature; his apparel was a white garment, reaching
scarcely to his knees, his arms and legs were naked; his hair upon his head
very long; without a beard, as all the Indians for the most part are. He
seemed very gentle, of mild and humble nature, being very tractable to learn
the use of every thing, and most grateful for such things as our General
bestowed upon him. In him we might see a most lively pattern of the harmless
disposition of that people; and how grievous a thing it is that they should by
any means be so abused as all those are, whom the Spaniards have any command
or power over.

This man being courteously entertained, and his pains of coming double
required; after we had showed him, partly by signs, and partly by such things
as we had, what things we needed, and would gladly receive by his means, upon
exchange of such things as he would desire; we sent him away with our boat
and his own canow (which was made of reed straw) to land him where he would.
Who being landed, and willing our men to stay his return, was immediately met
with by two or three of his friends; to whom imparting his news, and showing
what gifts he had received, he gave so great content, that they willingly
furthered his purpose; so that, after certain hours of our men's abode there,
he with diverse others (among whom was their head or Captain) made their
return; bringing with them their loadings of such things as they thought would
do us good: as some hens, eggs, a fat hog, and such like. All which (that
our men might be without all suspicion of all evil to be meant or intended by
them) they sent in one of their canowes, a reasonable distance from off the
shore, to our boat, the sea-gate being at that present very great, and their
Captain having sent back his horse, would needs commit himself to the credit
of our men, though strangers, and come with them to our General, without any
of his own acquaintance or countriemen with him.

By his coming as we understood, that there was no mean or way, to have our
necessities relieved in this place; so he offered himself to be our pilote, to
a place and that a good harborough, not far back to the Southward again:
where, by way of traffic, we might have at pleasure, both water, and those
other things which we stood in need of. This offer our general very gladly
received, and so much the rather, for that the place intended, was near about
the place appointed, for the randenoues of our fleet. Omitting therefore our
purpose, of pursuing the buffes formerly spoken of, of which we had otherwise
determined, if possible to have killed some; this good news of better
provision, and more easy to come by, drew us away: and so the 5. day after our
arrival, viz.

This harbor the Spaniards call valperizo, and the town adjoining Saint James
of Chinli it stands in 35. degrees. 40. min. where albeit we neither met with our
ships, not heard of them, yet there was no good thing which the place afforded,
or which our necessities indeed for the present required, but we had the same
in great abundance: amongst other things we found in the town diverse
storehouses of the wines of Chilie; and in the harbor, a ship called the
Captain of Moriall, or the grand Captain of the South, Admiral to the Islands
of Solomon; laden for the most part, with the same kind of liquors: only
there was besides, a certain quantity of fine gold of Baldiuia and a great
cross of gold beset with Emeranlds, on which was nailed a God of the same
metal, we spent some time in refreshing our selves, and easing this ship of
so heavy a burden: and on the 8. day of the same month (having in the mean
time, sufficiently stored our selves with necessaries, as wine, bread, bacon
etc. for along season) we set sail, returning back toward the line; carrying
again our Indian pilote with us, whom our general bountifully rewarded, and
enriched with many good things, which pleased him exceedingly, and caused him,
by the way, to be landed in the place where he desired.

Our necessities being thus to our content relieved, our next care was the
regaining (if possible) of the company of our ships, so long severed from us:
neither would any thing have satisfied bur general, or us so well, as the
happy meeting, or good news of them, this way therefore (all other thoughts
for the present set apart) were all our studies and endeauours bent, how to fit
it so, as that no opportunity of meeting them might be passed over.

To this end, considering that we could not conveniently run in with our ship
(in search of them) to every place, where was likelihood of being a harbor;
and that our boat was too little, and unable to carry men enough, to encounter
the malice or treachery of the Spaniards (if we should by any chance meet with
any of them) who are used to show no mercy, where they may ouermaster; and
therefore meaning not to hazard our selves to their cruel courtesy; we
determined, as we coasted now toward the line, to search diligently for some
convenient place, where we might, in peace and safety, stay the trimming of our
ship, and the erecting of a pinnace, in which we might with better security,
then in our boat, and without endangering of our ship, by running into each
creek, leave no place untried, if happily we might so find again our friends
and countrymen.

For this cause December 19.

They could not come any way so closely, but God did open our eyes to see them,
before there was any extremity of danger, whereby our men being warned, had
reasonable time to shift themselves as they could; first from the maine, to a
rock within the sea; and from thence into their boat: which being ready to
receive them, conueighed them with expedition, out of the reach of the
Spaniards fury, without the hurt of any man.

Only one Richard Miniuy, being over bold and careless of his own safety,
would not be entreated by his friends, nor feared by the multitude of his
enemies, to take the present benefit of his own delivery: but chose either to
make 300. me^ by outbrauing of them to become afraid, or else himself to die
in the place; the latter of which indeed he did, whose dead body being drawn
by the Indians from the rock to the shore, was there manfully by the
Spaniards beheaded, the right hand cut off, the heart pluct out, all which they
carried away in our sight, and for the rest of his carcass, they caused the
Indians to shoot it full of arrows, made but the same day, of green wood,
and so left it to be devoured of the beasts and fowls but that we went
ashoare again and buried it: wherein as there appears a most extreme and
barbarous cruelty, so does it declare to the world, in what miserable fear the
Spaniard holds the government of those parts; living in continual dread of
foreign invasion by strangers, or secret cutting of their throats, by those
whom they kept under them in so shameful slavery, I mean the innocent and
harmless Indians. And therefore they make sure to murder what strangers
soever they can come by, and suffer the Indians by no means to have any weapon
longer then they be in present service: as appeared by their arrows cut from
the tree the same day, as also by the credible report of others who knew the
matter to be true. Yea they suppose they show the wretches great favor, when
they do not for their pleasures whip them with cords, and day by day drop their
naked bodies with burning bacon: which is one of the least cruelties, amongst
many, which they universally use against that Nation and people.

This being not the place we looked for, nor the entertainment such as we
desired; Cyppo, lying in 27. degrees. 55. win. South the line.

In this place we spent some time in trimming of our ship, and building of our
pinnace, as we desired: but still the grief for the absence of our friends
remained with us, for the finding of whom, our general having now fitted all
things to his mind, intended (leaving his ship the mean while at anchor in the
bay) with his pinnace and some chosen men, himself to return back to the
Southwards again; to see if happily he might either himself meet with them,
or find them in some harbor, or creek; or hear of them by any others, whom
he might meet with, with this resolution he set on, but after one days
sailing, the wind being contrary to his purpose, he was forced, whether he
would or no to return again.

within this bay, during our abode there, we had such abundance of fish, not
much unlike our Gurnard in England, as no place had ever afforded us the like
(Cape Blanck only upon the coast of Barbary excepted) since our first setting
forth of Plymmouth, until this time, the plenty whereof in this place was
such, that our gentlemen sporting themselves day by day, with 4. or 5. hooks
and lines, in 2. or 3. hours, would take sometimes 400. sometimes more at one
time.



As we sailed along, continually searching for fresh water; we came to a place
called Tarapaca, and landing there we lighted on a Spaniard who lay asleep,
and had lying by him 13. bars of silver, waighing in all, about 4000. Spanish
duccatts: we would not (could we have chosen) have awaked him of his nappe:
but seeing we, against our wills, did him that injury, we freed him of his
charge, which otherwise perhaps would have kept him waking, and so left him to
take out (if it pleased him) the other part of his sleep, in more security.

Our search for water still continuing, as we landed again not far from
thence, we met a Spaniard with an Indian boy, driving 8. Lambs or Peruvian
sheep: each sheep bare two leathren bags, and in each bag was 50. pound
weight of refined silver, in the whole 800. weight: we could not endure to see
a gentleman Spaniard turned carrier so; and therefore without entreaty, we
offered our service, and became drouers: only his directions were not so
perfect, that we could keep the way which he intended; for almost as soon as
he was parted from us, we with our new kind of carriges, were come unto our
boats.

Farther beyond this cape forementioned lie certain Indian towns, from whence
as we passed by, came many of the people in certain bawses made of Seals
skins; of which two being joined together of a just length, and side by side,
resemble in fashion or form a boat: they have in either of them a small gutt,
or some such thing blown full of wind; by reason whereof it floateth, and is
rowed very swiftly, carrying in it no small burden. In these upon sight of our
ship, they brought store of fish of diverse sorts, to traffic with us, for
any trifles we would give them: as knives, margarites, glasses, and such like,
whereof, men of 60. and 70. years old, were as glad as if they had received
some exceeding rich commodity; being a most simple and plain dealing people.
Their resort unto us was such, as considering the shortness of the time, was
wonderful to us to behold.

Not far from this, viz. in 22. degrees. 30. min. lay Mormorena, another great
town of the same people, over whom 2. Spaniards held the government, with these
our general thought meet to deal; or at least to try their courtesy, whether
they would, in way of traffic, give us such things as we needed or no, and
therefore for fear then for love) somewhat tractable, and received from them
by exchange many good things, very necessary for our uses.

Amongst other things which we had of them, the sheep of the country (viz.
such as we mentioned before bearing the leatherne bags) were most memorable.
Their height and length was equal to a pretty cow, and their strength fully
answerable, if not by much exceeding their size or stature. Upon one of their
backs did sit at one time three well grown and tall men, and one boy, no man's
foot touching the ground by a large foot in length, the beast nothing at all
complaining of his burden in the mean time. These sheep have necks like
camels; their heads bearing a reasonable resemblance of another sheep. The
Spaniards use them to great profit. Their wool is exceeding fine, their flesh
good meat, their increase ordinary, and besides they supply the room of
horses for burden or travel: yea they serve to carry, over the mountains,
marvelous loades, for 300. leagues together, where no other carriage can be
made but by them only. Hereabout, as also all along, and up into the country
throughout the Province of Cusko, the common ground wheresoever it be taken
up, in every hundred pound weight of earth, yields 25. s. of pure silver,
after the rate of a crown an ounce.

The next place likely to afford us any news of our ships (for in all this
way from the height where we builded our pinnace, there was no bay or harbor
at all for shipping) was the port of the town of Arica, standing in 20. degrees.
whither we arrived the 7. of February pounds) of which we took the burden on
our selves to ease them, and so departed toward Chowley; with which we fell
the second day following, Lima, we met with another bark at Ariquipa, which
had begun to load some silver and gold, but having had (as it seemed from
Arica by land) some notice of our coming, had unloaded the same again before
our arrival. Yet in this our passage we met another bark laden with linen:
some of which we thought might stand us in some stead, and therefore took it
with us.



Here albeit no good news of our ships could be had, yet got we the news of
some things that seemed to comfort, if not to counteruaile our trauells
thither, as namely, that in the ship of one Mighell Angel there, there were
1500. bars of plate, besides some other things (as silks, linen, and in one
a chest full of royals of plate) which might stand us in some stead in the
other ships; aboard whom we made somewhat bold to bid our selves welcome. Here
also we heard the report of some things that had befallen in and near Europe,
since our departure thence; In particular of the death of some great
personages: as, the king of Portugal, and both the kings of Morocco and Fesse,
dead all three in one day at one battle: The death of the king of France, and
the Pope of Rome: Whose abominations as they are in part cut off from some
Christian kingdoms, where his shame is manifest, so do his vassals and
accursed instruments labor by all means possible to repair that loss, by
spreading the same the further in these parts, where his devilish illusions
and damnable deceiuings are not known. And as his doctrine takes place any
where, so do the manners that necessarily accompany the same infinuate
themselves together with the doctrine. For as its true that in all the parts of
America, where the Spaniards have any government, the poisonous infection of
Popery has spread it self; so on the other side it is as true, that there is
no City, as Lima, Panama, Mexico, etc. no town or village, yea no house
almost in all these Provinces, wherein (amongst other the like Spanish virtues)
not only whoredom, but the filthiness of Sodom, not to be named among
Christians, is not common without reproof: the Popes pardons being more rife
in these parts then they be in any part of Europe, for these filthinesses
whereout he sucketh no small advantage. Notwithstanding the Indians, who are
nothing nearer the true knowledge of God then they were before, abhor this
most filthy and loathsome manner of living; Showing themselves in respect of
the Spaniards, as the Scythians did in respect of the Grecians: who in their
barbarous ignorance, yet in life and behavior, did so far excel the wise
and learned Greeks, as they were short of them in the gifts of learning and
knowledge.

But as the Pope and Antichristian Bishops labor by their wicked factors with
tooth and nail to deface the glory of God, and to shut up in darkness the
light of the Gospel; so God does not suffer his name and Religion to be
altogether without witness, to the reproving both of his false and damnable
doctrine, as also crying out against his unmeasurable and abominable
licentiounesse of the flesh, even in these parts. For in this City of Lima, not
two months before our coming thither, there were certain persons, to the
number of twelve apprehended, examined, and condemned for the profession of the
Gospel, and reproouing the doctrines of men, with the filthy manners used in
that City: Of which twelve, six were bound to one stake and burnt, the rest
remained yet in prison, to drink of the same cup within few days. Lastly,
here we had intelligence of a certain rich ship, which was laden with gold
and silver for Panama, that had set forth of this haven the second of February.

The very next day therefore in the morning (viz. the 16. of the said month
Cacafuego, the great glory of the South sea; which was gone from Lima 14. days
before us.

We fell with the port of Paita in 4. degrees. 4o. min. Hellen and the river and
port of Guiaquill, Francisco: where, about midday, we descried a sail a head
of us, with whom after once we had spoken with her, we lay still in the same
place about six days; to recover our breath again which we had almost spent
with hasty following, and to recall to mind what adventures had past us since
our late coming from Lima; but especially to do John de Anton a kindness, in
freeing him of the care of those things with which his ship was laden.

This ship we found to be the same of which we had heard, not only in the
Calao of Lima, but also by diverse occasions afterward (which now we are at
leisure to relate, viz. by a ship which we took between Lima and Paita: by
another which we took laden with wine in the port of Paita: by a third laden
with tackling and implements for ships (besides eighty pound weight in gold)
from Guiaquill. And lastly, by Gabriel Aluarez, with whom we talked somewhat
neearer the line) we found her to be indeed the Cacafuego: though before we
left her, she were new named by a boy of her own the Cacaplata. We found in
her some fruit, conserues, sugars, meal and other victuals, and (that which
was the especiallest cause of her heavy and slow sailing) a certain quantity
of jewels and precious stones, 13. chests of ryals of plate; 80. pound weight
in gold; 26. tun of uncoined silver; two very fair gilt silver drinking
boules, and the like trifles, valued in all at about 360000. pezoes. We gave
the master a little linen and the like, for these commodities; and at the end
of six days we bad farewell and parted. He hastening somewhat lighter then
before to Panama, we plying off to sea, that we might with more leisure
consider what course hence forward were fittest to be taken.

And considering that now we were come to the Northward of the line ( Cape
Francisco standing in the entrance of the bay of Panama, in 1. degrees. of North
latitude) and that there was no likelihood or hope that our ships should be
before us that way by any means: seeing that in running so many degrees from
the Southermost Ila^ds hitherto, we could not have any sign or notice of their
passage that way, notwithstanding that we had made so diligent search, and
careful inquiry after them, in every harbor or creek almost as we had done;
and considering also that the time of the year now drew on, wherein we must
attempt, or of necessity wholly give over that action which chiefly our
General had determined: namely, the discovery of what passage there was to be
found, about the Northern parts of America, from the South sea, into our own
Ocean (which being once discovered, and made known to be nauigable, we should
not only do our country a good and notable service, but we also our selves,
should have a nearer cut and passage home: where otherwise, we were to make a
very long and tedious voyage of it, which would hardly agree with our good
liking, we having been so long from home already, and so much of our strength
separated from us) which could not at all be done, if the opportunity of time
were now neglected: we therefore all of us willingly harkened, and consented to
our generals advice: which was, first to seek out some convenient place,
wherein to trim our ship, and store our selves with wood and water and other
provisions, as we could get: and thenceforward to hasten on our intended
journey, for the discovery of the said passage, through which we might with joy
return to our longed homes.

Caines, with which we fell March 16.



Notwithstanding, having notice that we should be troubled with often calmes,
and contrary winds, if we continued near the coast, and did not run of to
sea to fetch the wind; and that if we did so, we could not then fall with land
again when we would: our general thought it needful, that we should run in
with some place or other, before our departure from the coast; to see if
happily we could, by traffic, augment our provision of victuals, and other
necessaries: that being at sea, we might not be driven to any great want or
necessity albeit we had reasonable store of good things aboard us already.

The next harbor therefore which we chanced with,



Neither did this happen for the time only, or by some sudden accident, but
rather seems indeed, to proceed from some ordinary cause, against the which
the heat of the sun preuailes not, for it came to that extremity, in sailing
but 2. degrees. farther to the Northward in our course: that though seamen lack
not good stomaches, yet it seemed a question to many amongst us, whether their
hands should feed their mouths, or rather keep themselves within their
couerts, from the pinching cold that did benumme them. Neither could we impute
it to the tenderness of our bodies, though we came lately from the extremity
of heat, by reason whereof we might be more sensible of the present cold:
insomuch as the dead and senseless creatures, were as well affected with it as
our selves, our meat as soon as it was removed from the fire, would
presently in a manner be frozen up; and our ropes and tackling, in few days
were grown to that stiffenesse, that what 3. men before were able with them to
perform, now 6. men with their best strength, and uttermost endeavor, were
hardly able to accomplish: whereby a sudden and great discouragement seized
upon the minds of our men, and they were possessed with a great mislike, and
doubting of any good to be done that way, yet would not our general be
discouraged, but as well by comfortable speeches, of the divine providence, and
of Gods loving care over his children, out of the scriptures; as also by other
good and profitable persuasions, adding thereto his own cheerful example, he
so stirred them up, to put on a good courage, and to quite themselves like men,
to endure some short extremity, to have the speedier comfort, and a little
trouble, to obtain the greater glory; that every man was thoroughly armed with
willingness, and resolved to see the uttermost, if it were possible, of what
good was to be done that way.

The land in that part of America, bearing farther out into the West, then we
before imagined, we were nearer on it then we were aware; and yet the nearer
still we came unto it, the more extremity of cold did sease upon us. were
still at any time, immediately upon their intermission, there followed most
vile, thick, and stinking fogges; against which the sea prevailed nothing,
till the gusts of wind again removed them, which brought with them, such
extremity and violence when they came, that there was no dealing or resisting
against them.

In this place was no abiding for us; and to go further North, the extremity of
the cold (which had now utterly discouraged our men) would not permit us: and
the winds directly bent against us, having once gotten us under sail again,
commanded us to the Southward whether we would or no.

From the height of 48. degrees. in which now we were, to 38. we found the land by
coasting along it to be but low and reasonable plain: every hill (whereof
we saw many, but none very high) though it were in June, and the Sun in his
nearest approach unto them being covered with snow.



And here having so fit occasion,(notwithstanding it may seem to be besides
the purpose of writing the history of this our voyage) we will a little more
diligently inquire into the causes of the continuance of the extreme cold in
these parts: as also into the probabilities or vnlikelihoods of a passage to be
found that way. Neither was it (as has formerly been touched) the tenderness
of our bodies, coming so lately out of the heat, whereby the poores were
opened, that made us so sensible of the colds we here felt: in this respect, as
in many others, we found our God a provident father, and careful Physician for
us. We lacked no outward helps nor inward comforts, to restore and fortify
nature, had it been decayed or weakened in us; neither was there wanting to us
the great experience of our General, who had often himself proved the force
of the burning Zone; whose advice always prevailed much to the preserving of a
moderate temper in our constitutions: so that even after our departure from the
heat we always found our bodies not as sponges, but strong and hardened, more
able to bear out cold, though we came out of excess of heat, then a number
of chamber champions could have been, who lie on their feather-beds till they
go to sea, or rather whose teeth in a temperate air do beat in their heads,
at a cup of cold Sack and sugar by the fire.

And that it was not our tenderness, but the very extremity of the cold it
self, that caused this sensiblenes in us, may the rather appear in that the
natural inhabitants of the place (with whom we had for a long season familiar
intercourse, as is to be related) who had never been acquainted with such
heat; to whom the country, air, and climate was proper; and in whom custom
of cold was as it were a second nature: yet used to come shiuering to us in
their warm furs; crowding close together body to body, to receive heat one
of another, and sheltring themselves under a lee bancke, if it were possible,
and as often as they could, laboring to shroude themselves under our garments
also, to keep them warm. Besides how unhandsome and deformed appeared the
face of the earth it self showing trees without leaves, and the ground without
greennes in those months of June and July. The poor birds and fowls not
daring (as we had great experience to observe it) not daring so much as once to
arise from their nests, after the first egg laid, till it with all the rest
be hatched, and brought to some strength of nature, able to help it self.
Only this recompense has nature affoorded them, that the heat of their own
bodies being exceeding great, it perfecteth the creature with greater
expedition, and in shorter time then is to be found in many other places.

As for the causes of this extremity they seem not to be so deeply hidden, but
that they may at least in part be guessed at: The chiefest of which we conceive
to be the large spreading of the Asian and American continent, which (somewhat
Northward of these parts) if they be not fully joined, yet seem they to come
very near one to the other. From whose high and snow-couered mountains, the
North and North-west winds (the constant visitants of those coasts) send abroad
their frozen nymphs, to the infecting of the whole air with this insufferable
sharpness: not permitting the Sun, no not in the pride of his heat, to
dissolve that congealed matter and snow, which they have breathed out so nigh
the Sun, and so many degrees distant from themselves. And that the North and
North-west winds are here constant in June and July, as the North wind alone is
in August and September; we not only found it by our own experience, but were
fully confirmed in the opinion thereof, by the continued observations of the
Spaniards. Hence comes the general squalidnesse and barrenness of the
country; hence comes it, that in the midst of their Summer, the snow hardly
departs even from their very doors, but is never taken away from their hills
at all; hence come those thick mists and most stinking fogges, which increase
so much the more, by how much higher the pole is raised: wherein a blind pilot
is as good as the best director of a course. For the Sun striving to perform
his natural office, in eleuating the vapors out of these inferior bodies;
draws necessarily abundance of moisture out of the sea: bat the nipping cold
(from the former causes) meeting and opposing the Suns endeavor, forces him
to give over his work imperfect: and instead of higher elevation, to leave in
the lowest region, wandering upon the face of the earth and waters, as it were a
second sea: through which its own beams cannot possibly pierce, unless
sometimes when the sudden violence of the winds does help to scatter and
break through it; which thing happens very seldom, and when it happens is
of no continuance. Some of our mariners in this voyage had formerly been at
Wardhouse, in 72. degrees. of North latitude; who yet affirmed, that they felt no
such nipping cold there in the end of Summer, when they departed thence, as
they did here in those hottest months of June and July.

And also from these reasons we conjecture; that either there is no passage at
all through these Northern coasts (which is most likely) or if there be, that
yet it is vnnauigable. Add hereunto, that though we searched the coast
diligently, even unto the 48. degrees. yet found we not the land, to trend so much
as one point in any place toward the East, but rather running on continually
Northwest, as if it went directly to meet with Asia; and even in that height
when we had a frank wind, to have carried us through, had there been a
passage, yet we had a smooth and calm sea, with ordinary flowing and
reflowing, which could not have been, had there been a frete: of which we
rather infallibly concluded then coniectured, that there was none. But to
return.

clean and finely cut, and bearing in length an equal proportion one with
another; a special cognizance (as we afterward observed) which they that
guard their kings person, wear on their heads. With this also he brought a
little basket made of rushes, and filled with an herb which they called Tabah.
Both which being tied to a short rod, he cast into our boat. Our General
intended to have recompensed him immediately with many good things, he would
have bestowed upon him: but entering into the boat to deliver the same, he
could not be drawn to receive them by any means: save one hat, which being
cast into the water out of the ship, he took up (refusing utterly to meddle
with any other thing, though it were upon a board put off unto him) and so
presently made his return. After which time, our boat could row no way, but
wondering at us as at gods, they would follow, the same with admiration.

The 3. day following, viz. them their bows and arrows, they did as they were
directed, and so did all the rest, as they came more and more by companies unto
them, growing in a little while, to a great number both of men and women.

To the intent therefore, that this peace which they themselves so willingly
sought, might without any cause of the breach thereof, on our part given, be
continued; and that we might with more safety and expedition, end our
businesses in quiet; our General with all his company, used all means
possible, gently to entreat them, bestowing upon each of them liberally, good
and necessary things to cover their nakedness, withal signifying unto them,
we were no Gods but men, and had need of such things to cover our own shame;
teaching them to use them to the same ends: for which cause also we did eat
and drink in their presence, giving them to understand, that without that we
could not live, and therefore were but men as well as they.

Notwithstanding nothing could persuade them, nor remove that opinion, which
they had conceived of us, that we should be Gods.

In recompense of those things which they had received of us, as shirts linen
cloth, etc. they bestowed upon our general, and diverse of our company,
diverse things, as feathers, cawles of networke, the quiuers of their arrows,
made of fawne-skins, and the very skins of beasts that their women wore upon
their bodies. Having thus had their fill of this times visiting and beholding
of us, they departed with joy to their houses, which houses are dug round
within the earth, and have from the uppermost brimmes of the circle, clefts of
wood set up, and joined close together at the top, like our spires on the
steeple of a Church: which being covered with earth, suffer no water to enter,
and are very warm, the door in the most part of them, performs the office
also of a chimney, to let out the smoke: its made in bigness and fashion,
like to an ordinary scuttle in a ship, and standing slopewise: their beds are
the hard ground, only with rushes strewed upon it, and lying round about the
house, have their fire in the midst, which by reason that the house is but
low vaulted, round and close, gives a marvelous reflection to their bodies to
heat the same.

Their men for the most part go naked, the women take akinde of bulrushes, and
kembing it after the manner of hemp, make themselves thereof a loose garment,
which being knitte about their middles, hanges down about their hippes, and so
affordes to them a covering of that, which nature teaches should be hidden:
about their shoulders, they wear also the skin of a dear, with the hair upon
it. They are very obedient to their-husbands, and exceeding ready in all
services: yet of themselves offering to do nothing, without the consents, or
being called of the men.

As soon as they were returned to their houses, they began amongst themselves
a kind of most lamentable weeping and crying out; which they continued also a
great while together, in such sort, that in the place where they left us (being
near about 3. quarters of an English mile distant from them) we very plainly,
with wonder and admiration did hear the same: the women especially, extending
their voices, in a most miserable and doleful manner of shreeking.

Notwithstanding this humble manner of presenting themselves, and awful
demeanor used toward us, we thought it no wisedowe too far to trust them
(our experience of former Infidels dealing with us before, made us careful to
provide against an alteration of their affections, or breach of peace if it
should happen) and therefore with all expedition we set up our tents, and
entrenched our selves with walls of stone: that so being fortified within our
selves, we might be able to keep off the enemy (if they should so prove) from
coming amongst us without our good wills: this being quickly finished we went
the more cheerfully and securely afterward, about our other business.

Against the end of two days (during which time they had not again been with
us) there was gathered together a great assembly of men, women, and children
(invited by the report of them which first saw us, who as it seems, had in
that time, of purpose dispersed themselves into the country, to make known the
news) who came now the second time unto us, bringing with them as before had
been done, feathers and bags of Tobah for presents, or rather indeed for
sacrifices, upon this persuasion that we were Gods.

When they came to the top of the hill, at the bottom whereof we had built
our fort, they made a stand; where one (appointed as their chief speaker)
wearied both us his hearers, and himself too, with a long and tedious oration:
delivered with strange and violent gestures, his voice being extended to the
uttermost strength of nature, and his words falling so thick one in the neck
of another, that he could hardly fetch his breath again: as soon as he had
concluded, all the rest, with a reverend bowing of their bodies (in a dreaming
manner, and long producing of the same) cried Oh: thereby giving their
consents, that all was very true which he had spoken, and that they had uttered
their mind by his mouth unto us; which done, the men laying down their bows
upon the hill, and leaving their women and children behind them, came down
with their presents; in such sort, as if they had appeared before a God indeed:
thinking themselves happy, that they might have access unto our general, but
much more happy, when they saw that he would receive at their hands, those
things which they so willingly had presented: and no doubt, they thought
themselves nearest unto God, when they sat or stood next to him: In the mean
time the women, as if they had been desperate, used unnatural violence
against themselves, crying and shreeking piteously, tearing their flesh with
their nails from their cheeks, in a monstrous manner, the blood streaming
down along their breasts; besides despoiling the upper parts of their bodies,
of those single couerings they formerly had, and holding their hands above
their heads, that they might not rescue their breasts from harm, they would
with fury cast themselves upon the ground, never respecting whether it were
clean or soft, but dashed themselves in this manner on hard stones, knobby,
hillocks, stocks of wood, and pricking bushes, or what ever else lay in their
way, itterating the same course again and again: yea women great with child,
some nine or ten times each, and others holding out till 15. or 16. times (till
their strengths failed them) exercised this cruelty against themselves: A thing
more grievous for us to see, or suffer could we have help it, then trouble to
them (as it seemed) to do it.

This bloody sacrifie (against our wills) being thus performed, our General
with his company in the prefence of those strangers fell to prayers: and by
signs in lifting up our eyes and hands to heaven, signified unto them, that
that God whom we did serve, and whom they ought to worship, was above:
Beseeching God if it were his good pleasure to-open by some means their
blinded eyes; that they might in due time be called to the knowledge of him the
true and everliving God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, the salvation
of the Gentiles. In the time of which prayers, singing of Psalms, and reading
of certain Chapters in the Bible, they sat very attentively: and observing
the end at every pause, with one voice still cried, Oh, greatly rejoicing in
our exercises. Yea they took such pleasure in our singing of Psalms, that
whenever they resorted to us, their first request was commonly this, Gnaah,
by which they entreated that we would sing.

Our General having now bestowed upon them diverse things, at their departure
they restored them all again; none carrying with him any thing of whatsoever
he had received, thinking themselves sufficiently enriched and happy, that
they had found so free access to see us.

Against the end of three days more (the news having the while spread it self
farther, and as it seemed a great way up into the country) were assembled the
greatest number of people, which we could reasonably imagine, to dwell within
any convenient distance round about. Amongst the rest, the king himself, a man
of a goodly stature and comely personage attended with his guard, of about 100.
tall and warlike men, this day, viz.

Before his coming, were sent two Ambassadors or messengers to our General,
to signify that their Hioh, that is, their king was coming and at hand. They
in the delivery of their message, the one spoke with a soft and low voice,
prompting his fellow; the other pronounced the same word by word after him,
with a voice more audible: continuing their proclamation (for such it was)
about half an hour. Which being ended, they by signs made request to our
General, to send something by their hands to their Hioh or king, as a token
that his coming might be in peace. Our General willingly satisfied their
desire; and they, glad men, made speedy return to their Hioh: Neither was it
long before their king (making as princely a show as possibly he could) with
all his train came forward.

In their coming forwards they cried continually after a singing manner with a
lusty courage. And as they drew nearer and nearer toward us, so did they more
and more strive to behave themselves with a certain comeliness and gravity in
all their actions.

In the forefront came a man of a large body and goodly aspect bearing the
Septer or royal mace (made of a certain kind of black wood, and in length
about a yard and a half) before the king. Whereupon hanged two crowns, a
bigger and a less, with three chains of a marvelous length, and often
doubled; besides a bag of the herb Tabah. The crowns were made of
knitworke, wrought upon most curiously with feathers of diverse colors, very
artificially placed, and of a formal fashion: The chains seemed of a bony
substance: every link or part thereof being very little, thin, most finely
burnished, with a hole pierced through the midst. The number of linkes going
to make one chain, is in a manner infinite: but of such estimation it s
amongst them, that few be the persons that are admitted to wear the same: and
even they to whom its lawful to use them, yet are stinted what number they
shall use; as some ten, some twelve, some twenty, and as they exceed in number
of chains, so are they thereby known to be the more honorable personages.

Next unto him that bare his Scepter, was the king himself with his guard
about him: His attire upon his head was a cawle of knitworke, wrought upon
somewhat like the crowns, but differing much both in fashion and perfectness
of work; upon his shoulders he had on a coat of the skins of conies, reaching
to his wast: His guard also had each coats of the same shape, but of other
skins:some having cawles likewise stuck with feathers, or covered over with a
certain down, which grows up in the country upon an herb much like our
lectuce; which exceeds any other down in the world for finenesse, and being
laid upon their cawles by no winds can be removed: Of such estimation is this
herb amongst them, that the down thereof is not lawful to be worn, but of
such persons as are about the king (to whom also it is permitted to wear plume
of feathers on their heads, in sign of honor) and the seeds are not used but
only in sacrifice to their gods. After these in their order, did follow the
naked sort of common people; whose hair being long, was gathered into a bunch
behind, in which stuck plumes of feathers, but in the forepart only single
feathers like horns, every one pleasing himself in his own device.

This one thing was observed to be general amongst them all; that every one
had his face painted, some which white, some black, and some with other
colors, every man also bringing in his hand one thing or other for a gift or
present: Their train or last part of their company consisted of women and
children, each woman bearing against her breast a round basket or two, having
within them diverse things, as bags of Tobah, a root which they call Petah,
whereof they make a kind of meal, and either bake it into bread, or eat it
raw; broyled fishes like a pilchard; the seed and down aforenamed, with such
like:

Their baskets were made in fashion like a deep boale, and though the matter
were rushes, or such other kind of stuff, yet was it so cunningly handled,
that the most part of them would hold water; about the brimmes they were hanged
with pieces of the shells of pearls, and in some places with two or three
linkes at a place, of the chains forenamed: thereby signifying, that they were
vessels wholly dedicated to the only use of the gods they worshipped: and
besides this, they were wrought upon with the matted down of red feathers,
distinguished into diverse works and forms.

In the mean time our General having assembled his men together (as
forecasting the danger, and worst that might fall our) prepared himself to
stand upon sure ground, that we might at all times be ready in our own
defense, if any thing should chance otherwise then was looked for or expected.

Wherefore every man being in a warlike readiness, he marched within his
fenced place, making against their approach a most warlike show (as he did also
at all other times of their resort) whereby if they had been desperate
enemies, they could not have chosen but have conceived terror and fear, with
discouragement to attempt any thing against us, in beholding of the same.

When they were come somewhat near unto us, trooping togetehr, they gave us a
common or a general salutation: observing in the mean time a general
silence. Whereupon he who bare the Scepter before the king, being prompted by
another whom the king assigned to that office, pronounced with an audible and
manly voice, what the other spoke to him in secret: continuing, whether it were
his oration or proclamation, at the least half an hour. At the close whereof,
there was a common Amen, in sign of approbation given by every person: And the
king himself with the whole number of men and women (the little children only
remaining behind) came further down the hill, and as they came set themselves
again in their former order.

And being now come to the foot of the hill and near out fort, the Scepter
bearer with a composed countenance and stately carriage began a song, and
answerable thereunto, observed a kind of measures in a dance: whom the king
with his guard and every other sort of person following, did in like manner
sing and dance, saving only the women who danced but kept silence. As they
danced they still came on: and our General perceiving their plain and simple
meaning, gave order that they might freely enter without interruption within
our bulwark: Where after they had entered they yet continued their song and
dance a reasonable time: their women also following them with their wassaile
boales in their hands, their bodies bruised, their faces torn, their dugges,
breasts, and other parts bespotted with blood, trickling down from the wounds,
which with their nails they had made before their coming.

After that they had satisfied or rather tired themselves in this manner, they
made signs to our General to have him sit down; Unto whom both the king and
diverse others made several orations, or rather indeed if we, had understood
them, supplications, that he would take the Province and kingdom into his
hand, and become their king and patron: making signs that they would resign
unto him their right and title in the whole land, and become his vassals in
themselves and their posterities: Which that they might make us indeed believe
that it was their true meaning and intent; the king himself with all the rest
with one consent, and with great reverence, joyfully singing a song, set the
crown upon his head; enriched his neck with all their chains; and offering
unto him many other things, honored him by the name of Hyoh. Adding thereunto
(as it might seem) a song and dance of triumph: because they were not only
visited of the gods (for so they still judged us to be) but the great and
chief god was now become their god, their king and patron, and themselves were
become the only happy and blessed people in all the World.

These things being so freely offered, our General thought not meet to reject
or refuse the same: both for that he would not give them any cause of mistrust,
or disliking of him (that being the only place, wherein at this present, we
were of necessity enforced to seek relief of many things) and chiefly, for
that he knew not to what good end God had brought this to pass, or what honor
and profit it might bring to our country in time to come.

Wherefore in the name and to the use of her most excellent majesty, he took
the scepter crown and dignity, of the said country into his hand; wishing
nothing more, then that it had layen so fitly for her majesty to enjoy, as it
was now her proper own, and that the riches and treasures thereof (wherewith
in the vpland countries it abounds) might with as great conueniency be
transported, to the enriching of her kingdom here at home, as it is in plenty
to be attained there: and especially, that so tractable and loving a people, as
they showed themselves to be, might have means to have manifested their most
willing obedience the more unto her, and by her means, as a mother and nurse
of the Church of Christ, might by the preaching of the Gospel, be brought to
the right knowledge, and obedience of the true and everliving God.

The ceremonies of this resigning, and receiving of the kingdom being thus
performed, the common sort both of men and women, leaving the king and his
guard about him, with our general, dispersed themselves among our people,
taking a diligent view or survey of every man; and finding such as pleased
their fancies (which commonly were the youngest of us) they presently enclosing
them about, offered their sacrifices unto them, crying out with lamentable
shreekes and moanes, weeping, and scratching, and tearing their very flesh off
their faces with their nails, neither were it the women alone which did this,
but even old men, roaring and crying out, were as violent as the women were.

We groaned in spirit to see the power of Satan so far prevail, in seducing
these so harmless souls, and labored by all means, both by showing our
great dislike, and when that served not, by violent withholding of their hands
from that madness, directing them (by our eyes and hands lift up toward
heaven) to the living God whom they ought to serve: but so mad were they upon
their Idolatry, that forcible withholding them would not prevail (for as soon
as they could get liberty to their hands again, they would be as violent as
they were before) till such time, as they when they worshipped, were conveyed
from them into the tents, whom yet as men desides themselves, they would with
fury and outrage seek to have again.

After that time had a little qualified their madness, they then began to show
and make known unto us their griefs and diseases which they carried about
them, some of them having old aches, some shruncke sinews, some old soars and
canckred ulcers, some wounds more lately received, and the like, in most
lamentable manner craving help and cure thereof from us: making signs, that
if we did but blow upon their griefs, or but touched the diseased places,
they would be whole.

Their griefs we could not but take pity on them, and to our power desire to
help them: but that (if it pleased God to open their eyes) they might
understand we were but men and no gods, we used ordinary means, as lotions,
emplaisters, and unguents most fitly (as far as our skills could guess)
agreeing to the natures of their griefs, beseeching God, if it made for his
glory, to give cure to their diseases by these means. The like we did from
time to time as they resorted to us.

Few were the days, wherein they were absent from us, during the whole time of
our abode in that place: and ordinarily every third day, they brought their
sacrifices, till such time, as they certainly understood our meaning, that we
took no pleasure, but were displeased with them: whereupon their zeal abated,
and their sacrificing, for a season, to our good liking ceased;
not-withstanding they continued still to make their resort unto us in great
abundance, and in such sort, that they oft-times forgate, to provide meat for
their own sustenance; so that our general (of whom they made account as of a
father) was feign to perform the office of a father to them, relieuing them
with such victuals, as we had provided for our selves, as, Muscles, Scales,
and such like, wherein they took exceeding much content; and seeing that their
sacrifices were displeasing to us, yet (hating ingratitude) they sought to
recompense us, with such things as they had, which they willingly enforced upon
us, though it were never so necessary or needful for themselves to keep.

They are a people of a tractable, free, and loving nature, without guile or
treachery; they bows and arrows (their only weapons, and almost all their
wealth) they use very skillfully, but yet not to do any great harm with them,
being by reason of their weakness, more fit for children then for men,
sending the arrow neither far off, nor with any great force: and yet are the
men commonly so strong of body, that that, which 2. or 3. of our men could
hardly bear, one of them would take upon his back, and without grudging
carry it easily away, up hill and down hill an English mile together: they
are also exceeding swift in running, and of long continuance; the use whereof
is so familiar with them, that they seldom go, but for the most part run.
One thing we observed in them with admiration: that if at any time, they
chanced to see a fish, so near the shore, that they might reach the place
without swimming, they would never, or very seldom miss to take it.

After that our necessary businesses were well dispatched, our general with
his gentlemen, and many of his company, made a journey up into the land, to see
the manner of their dwelling, and to be the better acquainted, with the nature
and commodities of the country. Their houses were all such as we have formerly
described, and being many of them in one place, made several villages here and
there. The inland we found to be far different from the shore, a goodly
country, and fruitful soil, stored with many blessings fit for the use of
man: infinite was the company of very large and fat Dear, which there we saw
by thousands, as we supposed, in a heard: besides a multitude of a strange
kind of Conies, by far exceeding them in number: their heads and bodies, in
which they resemble other Conies, are but small; his tail like the tail of a
Rat, exceeding long;and his feet like the paws of a Want or Moale; under his
chinne, on either side, he has a bag, into which he gathers his meat,
when he has filled his belly abroad, that he may with it, either feed his
young, or feed himself, when he lists not to travail from his borough: the
people eat their bodies, and make great account of their skins, for their
kings holidaies coat was made of them.

This country our general named Albion, and that for two causes; the one in
respect of the white bancks and cliffes, which lie toward the sea: the other,
that it might have some affinity, even in name also, with our own country,
which was sometime so called.

Before we went from thence, our general caused to be set up, a monument of
our being there; as also of her majesty's, and successors right and title to
that kingdom, namely, a plate of brass, fast nailed to a great and firm
post; whereon is engraven her graces name, and the day and year of our
arrival there, and of the free giving up, of the province and kingdom, both
by the king and people, into her majesty's hands: together with her highness
picture, and arms in a piece of sixpence current English money, showing it
self by a hole made of purpose through the plate: underneath was likewise
engraven the name of our general etc.

The Spaniards never had any dealing, or so much as set a foot in this
country; the utmost of their discoueries, reaching only to many degrees
Southward of this place.

And now, as the time of our departure was perceived by them to draw nigh, so
did the sorrows and miseries of this people, seem to themselves to increase
upon them; and the more certain they were of our going away, the more
doubtful they showed themselves, what they might do; so that we might easily
judge that that joy (being exceeding great) wherewith they received us at our
first arrival, was clean drowned in their excessive sorrow for our departing:
For they did not only loose on a sudden all mirth, joy, glad countenance,
pleasant speeches, agility of body, familiar rejoicing one with another, and
all pleasure what ever flesh and blood might be delighted in, but with sighs
and sorrowings, with heavy hearts and grieved minds, they powered out woeful
complaints and moanes, with bitter tears and wringing of their hands,
tormenting themselves. And as men refusing all comfort, they only accounted
themselves as cast-awayes, and those whom the gods were about to forsake: So
that nothing we could say or do, was able to ease them of their so heavy a
burden, or to deliver them from so desperate a strait, as our leaving of them
did seem to them that it would cast them into.

Howbeit seeing they could not still enjoy our presence, they (supposing us to
be gods indeed) thought it their duties to entreat us that being absent, we
would yet be mindful of them, and making signs of their desires, that in time
to come we would see them again, they stole upon us a sacrifice, and set it
on fire err we were aware; burning therein a chain and a bunch of feathers.
We labored by all means possible to withhold or withdraw them but could not
prevail, till at last we fell to prayers and singing of Psalms, whereby they
were allured immediately to forget their folly, and leave their sacrifice
unconsumed, suffering the fire to go out, and imitating us in all our actions;
they fell a lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven as they saw us do.



Not far without this harborough did lie certain Islands (we called them the
Islands of Saint James) having on than plentiful and great store of Seals and
birds, with one of which we fell

From these Islands present'y upon the discovery of us, came a great number of
canowes, having each of them in some four, in some six, in some fourteen or
fifteen men, bringing with them Coques, fish, Potatos, and certain fruits to
small purpose.

Their canowes were made after the fashion, that the canowes of all the rest of
the Islands of Moluccas for the most part are: That is of one tree, hollowed
within with great art and cunning, being made so smooth both within and
without, that they bore a gloss, as if it were a harness most finely
burnished: A prowe and stern they had of one fashion, yielding inward in
manner of a semicircle, of a great height, and hanged full of certain white
and glistering s^^^ls for bravery: One each side of their canows, lay out two
pieces of timber about a yard and half long, more or less according to the
capacity of their boat. At the ends whereof was fastened crossewise a great
cane, the use whereof was to keep their canowes from overthrowing, and that
they might be equally borne up on each side.

The people themselves have the nether parts of their ears cut round or
circlewise, hanging down very low upon their cheeks, wherein they hang things
of a reasonable weight: the nails on the fingers of some of them, were at
least an inch long, and their teeth as black as pitch; the color whereof they
use to renew by often eating of an herb, with a kind of powder, which in a
cane they carry about them to the same purpose. The first sort and company of
those canowes being come to our ship (which then by reason of a scant wind
made little way) very subtly and against their natures, began in peace to
traffic with us, giving us one thing for another very orderly, intending (as
we perceived) hereby to work a greater mischief to us: Entreating us by
signs most earnestly to draw nearer toward the shore, that they might (if
possible) make the easier prey both of the ship and us. But these passing away,
and others continually resorting, we were quickly able to guess at them what
they were: For if they received any thing once into their hands, they would
neither give recompense nor restitution of it, but thought what ever they could
finger to be their own: Expecting always with brows of brass to receive
more, but would part with nothing: Yea being rejected for their bad dealing, as
those with whom we would have no more to do, using us so euilly, they could not
be satisfied till they had given the attempt to revenge themselves, because we
would not give them whatsoever they would have for nothing: And having stones
good store in their canowes, let fly a maine of them against us. It was far
from our Generals meaning to requite their malice by like injury. Yet that
they might know that be had power to do them harm (if he had listed) he
caused a great piece to be shot off not to hurt them but to affright them.
Which wrought the desired effect amongst them, for at the noise thereof, they
every one leaped out of his canow into the water, and diuing under the keele of
their boats, stayed them from going any way till our ship was gone a good way
from them. Then they all lightly recovered into their canowes, and got them
with speed toward the shore.

Notwithstanding other new companies (but all of the same mind) continually
made resort unto us. And seeing that there was no good to be got by violence,
they put on a show of seeming honesty, and offering in show to deal with us
by way of exchange; under that pretense they cunningly fell a filching of what
they could, and one of them pulled a dagger and knives from one of our men's
girdles, and being required to restore it again, he rather used what means he
could to catch at more. Neither could we at all be to rid of this ungracious
company, till we made some of them feel some smart as well as terror: and so
we left that place by all passengers to be known hereafter by the name of the
Island of Thieves.

Talao in 3. degrees. 40. min. we saw to the Northward of it three or four other
Islands, Teda, Saeln Saran, (three Islands so named to us by an Indian) the
middle whereof stands in 3. degrees. we past the last save one of these* and Suaro
in 1. degrees. 50. min, and

These are four high piked Islands, their names, Tirenate, Tidore, Matchan,
Baetchan, all of them very fruitful, and yielding abundance of cloves, whereof
we furnished our selves of as much as we desired at a very cheap rate. At the
East of them lies a very great Island called Gillola.

We directed our course to have gone to Tidore but in coasting along a little
Island belonging to the king of Terenate, Terenate, not with Tidore, assuring
him that his king would be wondrous glad of his coming, and be ready to do for
him what he could, and what our General in reason should require: For which
purpose he himself would that night be with his king to carry him the news:
with whom if he once dealt, he should find, that as he was a king so his word
should stand; whereas if he dealt with the Portingals (who had the command of
Tidore) he should find in them nothing but deceit and treachery. And besides
that if he went to Tidore before he came to Terenate, than would his king have
nothing to do with us, for he held the Portingall as an enemy. On these
persuasions our General resolved to run with Terenate, where the next day
very early in the morning we came to anchor: And presently, our General sent a
messenger to the king with a velvet cloak, for a present and token that his
coming should be in peace: and that he required no other thing at his hands,
but that (his victuals being spent in so long a voyage) he might have supply
from him by way of traffic and exchange of merchandise (whereof he had store
of diverse sorts) of such things as he wanted. Which he thought he might be the
bolder to require at his hands, both for that the thing was lawful, and that
he offered him no prejudice or wrong therein, as also because he was entreated
to repair to that place by his Viceroy at Mutir, who assured him of necessary
provision in such manner as now he required the same.

Before this, the Viceroy according to his promise had been with the king,
signifying unto him what a mighty Prince and kingdom we belonged unto, what
good things the king might receive from us, not only now, but for hereafter by
way of traffic: yea what honor and benefit it might be to him, to be in
league and friendship with so noble and famous a Prince as we served: And
farther what a discouragement it would be to the Portugals his enemies to hear
and see it: In hearing whereof the king was so presently moved to the well
liking of the matter, that before our messenger could come half the way, he
had sent the Viceroy with diverse others of his Nobles and Counselors to our
General, with special message that he should not only have what things he
needed, or would require with peace and friendship, but that be would willingly
entertain amity with so famous and renowned a Princes as was ours, and that
if it seemed good in her eyes to accept of it, he would sequester the
commodities and traffic of his whole Island from others, especially from his
enemies the Portugals (from whom he had nothing but by the sword) and reserve
it to the intercourse of our Nation, if we would embrace it: In token whereof
he had now sent to our General his signet, and would within short time after,
come in his own person with his brethren and Nobles with boats or canowes into
our ship, and be a means of bringing her into a safer harbor.

While they were delivering their message to us, our messenger was come unto
the Court, who being met by the way by certain noble personages, was with
great solemnity conveyed into the kings presence: at whose hands he was most
friendly and graciously entertained, and having delivered his errand together
with his present unto the king, the king seemed to him to judge himself
blameworthy, that he had not sooner hasted in person to present himself to
our General, who came so far and from so great a Prince; And presently with
all expedition, he made ready himself with the chiefest of all his States and
Counselors to make repair unto us.

The manner of his coming as it was princely, so truly it seemed to us very
strange and marvelous: serving at the present not so much to set out his own
royal and kingly state (which was great) as to do honor to her highness to
whom we belonged; wherein how willingly he employed himself, the sequel will
make manifest.

First therefore, before his coming, did he send off 3. great and large
Canowes; in each whereof, were certain of the greatest personages that were
about him, attired all of them in white Lawne, or cloth of Calecut, having over
their heads, from one end of the Canow to the other, a covering of thin and
fine mats, borne up by a frame made of reeds, under which every man sat in
order according to his dignity; the hoary heads, of many of them, set forth the
greater reverence due to their persons, and manifestly showed, that the king
used the advice of a grave and prudent Counsel, in his affairs. Besides
these, were diverse others, young and comely men, a great number attired in
white as were the other, but with manifest differences: having their places
also under the same covering, but in inferior order, as their calling required.

The rest of the men were soldiers, who stood in comely order round about on
both sides; on the outside of whom, again did sit the rowers in certain
galleries, which being 3. on each side all along the Canow, did lie off from
the side thereof, some 3. or 4. yards, one being orderly builded lower then the
other: in every of which galleries was an equal number of banckes, whereon did
sit the rowers, about the number of fourescoure in one Canow: In the forepart
of each Canow, sat two men, the one holding a Tabret, the other a piece of
brass, whereon they both at once stroke; and observing a due time and
reasonable space between each stroke by the sound thereof, directed the
rowers to keep their stroke with their oars; as on the contrary, the rowers
ending their stroke with a song, gave warning to the others to strike again;
and so continued they their way with marvelous swiftness: neither were their
Canowes naked or unfurnished of warlike munition, they had each of the^, at
least one small cast piece of about a yard in length mounted upon a stock,
which was set upright; besides every man except the rowers, had his sword,
dagger, and target, and some of them some other weapons, as, lances, calliuers,
bows, arrows, and many darts.

These Canowes coming near our ship in order, rowed round about us one after
another; and the men as they pass by us, did us a kind of homage with great
solemnity, the greatest personages beginning first, with reverend countenance
and behavior, to bow their bodies even to the ground: which done, they put our
own messenger aboard us again, and signified to us, that their king (who
himself was coming) had sent them before him, to conduct our ship into a
better road, desiring a halser to be given them forth, that they might employ
their service as their king commanded, in towing our ship therewith to the
place assigned.

The king himself was not far behind, but he also with 6. grave and ancient
fathers in his Canow approaching, did at once together with them, yield us a
reverend kind of obeisance in far more humble manner, then was to be
expected; he was of a tall stature, very corpulent and well set together, of a
very princely and gracious countenance; his respect amongst his own was such,
that neither his Viceroy of Mutir aforenamed, nor any other of his counselors,
durst speak unto him but upon their knees, not rising again till they were
licenced.

Whose coming as it was to our general, no small cause of goodliking, so was
he received in the best manner we could, answerable unto his state: our
ordinance thundered, which we mixed with great store of small shot, among which
sounding our trumpets, and other instruments of music, both of still and loud
noise, where with he was so much delighted, that requesting our music to come
into the boat, he joined his Canow to the same, and was towed at least a
whole hour together, with the boat at the stern of our ship: Besides this,
our general sent him such presents, as he thought, might both requite his
curtesy already received, and work a farther confirmation, of that goodliking
and friendship already begun.

The king being thus in musical paradise, and enjoying that wherewith he was
so highly pleased; his brother named Moro with no less bravery, then any of
the rest, accompanied also with a great number of gallant followers, made the
like repair, and gave us like respect; and his homage done he fell asterne of
us, till we came to anchor: neither did our general leave his courtesy
unrewarded, but bountifully pleased him also before we parted.

The king as soon as we were come to anchor, craved pardon to be gone, and so
took leave, promising us, that the next day he would come aboard, and in the
mean time would prepare and send such victuals, as were requisite and
necessary for our provision.

Accordingly the same night, and the morrow following, we received what was
there to be had, by way of traffic, to wir, rice in pretty quantity, hens,
sugar canes, imperfect and liquid sugar, a fruit which they call Figo
(Magellane calls it a fig of a span long, but is no other then that which the
Spaniards and Portingalls have named Plantanes) Cocoes and a kind of meal
which they call Sago, made of the tops of certain trees, tasting in the
mouth like sour curdes, but meltes away like sugar; whereof they make a kind
of cake which will keep good at least 10. years; of this last we made the
greatest quantity of our provision: for a few cloves we did also traffic,
whereof for, a small matter, we might have had greater store, then we could
well tell where to bestow: but our generals care was, that the ship should not
be too much pestered or annoyed therewith.

At the time appointed, our general (having set all things in order to receive
him) looked for the kings return, who failing both in time and promise, sent
his brother to make his excuse, and to entreat our general to come on shore;
his brother being the while to remain aboard, as a pawn for his safe
restoring: our general could willingly have consented, if the king himself had
not first broke his word: the consideration whereof, bred an utter disliking in
the whole company, who by no means would give consent, he should hazard
himself, especially, for that the kings brother had uttered certain words, in
secret conference with our general aboard his cabin, which bred no small
suspicion of ill intent; our general being thus resolved not to go ashoare at
that time, reserved the Viceroy for a pledge, and so sent certain of his
gentlemen to the court, both to accompany the kings brother, and also with
special message to the king himself.

They being come somewhat near unto the castle, were received by another
brother of the kings, and certain others of the greatest states, and conducted
with great honor toward the castle, where being brought into a large and
fair house, they saw gathered together a great multitude of people, by
supposition at least 1000. the chief whereof, were placed round about the
house, according as it seemed to their degrees and calling, the rest remained
without.

The house was in form four square, covered all over with cloth of diverse
colors, not much unlike our usual pentadoes borne upon a frame of reeds, the
sides being open from the groundsell to the covering, and furnished with seats
round about: it seems it was there councell-house and not commonly employed to
any other use.

At the side of this house, next unto the castle was seated the chair of
state, having directly over it, and extending very largely every way, a very
fair and rich canopy, as the ground also for some 10. or 12. pases compass,
was covered with cloth of Arras.

Whilst our gentlemen attended in this place the coming of the king, which
was about the space of half an hour, they had the better opportunity to
observe these things; as also that before the kings coming, there were already
set threescore noble grave and ancient personages, all of them reported to be
of the kings privy Council: at the nether end of the house were placed a
great company of young men, comely personage and attire. With out the house on
the right side, stood four ancient comely hoare-headed men, clothed all in
red down to the ground, but attired on their heads not much unlike the Turks;
these they called Romans, or strangers, who lay as lidgiers there to keep
continual traffic with this people: there were also two Turks one Italian
as lidgiers: and last of all one Spaniard, who being freed by the kings out of
the hands of the Portugals, in the recovering of the Island, served him now in
stead of a soldier.

The king at last coming from the castle, with 8. or 10. more grave Senators
following him, had a very rich canopy (adorned in the midst with embossings
of gold) borne over him, and was guarded with 12. lances the points turned
downward: our men (accompanied with Moro the kings brother) arose to meet him,
and he very graciously did welcome and entertain them.

He was for person, such as we have before described him, of low voice,
temperate in speech, of kingly demeanor, and a Moore by nation. His attire was
after the fashion of the rest of his country, but far more sumptuous, as his
condition and state required: from the wast to the ground, was all cloth of
gold, and that very rich; his legs bare, but on his feet a pair of shoes of
cordiuant died red: in the attire of his head, were finely wreathed in diverse
rings of plated gold, of an inch, or an inch and half in breadth, which made a
fair and princely show, somewhat resembling a crown in form; about his neck
he had a chain of perfect gold, the linkes very great and onefold double; on
his left hand was a Diamond, an Emerald, a Ruby, and a Turkey, 4, very fair and
perfect jewels, on his right hand in one ring, a big and perfect Turkey, and in
another ring many Diamonds of a smaller size, very artificially set and couched
together.

As thus he sat in his chair of State, at his right side there stood a page
with a very costly fan (richly embrodered and beset with Saphires) breathing
and gathering the air to refresh the king, the place very hot, both by reason
of the sun, and the assembly of so great a multitude. After a while our
gentlemen men having delivered their message, and received answer, were
licenced to depart, and were safely conducted back again, by one of the
chief of the kings Council, who had charge from the king himself to perform
the same.

Our gentlemen observing the castle as well as they could, could not couceiue
it to be a place of any great force: two only canons they there saw, and those
at that present vntrauersable because vnmounted. These with all other furniture
of like sort which they have, they have gotten them from the Portingals, by
whom the castle it self was also builded, whiles they inhabited that place and
Island. Who seeking to settle a tyrannous government (as in other places so)
over this people, and not contenting themselves with a better estate then they
deserved (except they might (as they thought) make sure work by leaving none
of the royal blood alive, who should make challenge to the kingdom) cruelly
murdered the king himself (father to him who now reigns) and intended the
like to all his sons. Which cauelty instead of establishing, brought such a
shaking on their usurped estate, that they were feign, without couenanting to
carry away goods, munition, or any thing else to quitte the place and the
whole Island to save their lives.

For the present king with his brethren in revenge of their fathers murder, so
bestirred themselves, that the Portingall was wholly driven from that Island,
and glad that he yet keeps footing in Tidore. These four years this king
has been increasing, and was (as was affirmed) at that present, Lord of an
hundred Islands thereabout; and was even now preparing his forces to hazard a
chance with the Portingals for Tidore it self.

The people are Moors, whose Religion consists much in certain superstitious
observations of new Moons, and certain seasons, with a rigid and strickt kind
of fasting. We had experience hereof in the Viceroy and his retinue, who lay
aboard us all the time for the most part during our abode in this place: who
during their perscribed time, would neither eat not drink, not so much as a
cup of cold water in the day (so zealous are they in their self devised
worship) but yet in the night would eat threetimes, and that very largely.
This Terenate stands in 27. min. North latitude.

While we rode at anchor in the harbor at Terenate, besides the natives there
came aboard us another, a goodly gentleman, very well accompanied with his
interpreter, to view our ship, and to confer with our General: he was
apparelled much after our manner, most neat and Courtlike: his carriage the
most respective, and full of discreet behavior that ever we had seen; He
told us that he was himself but a stranger in those Islands, being a natural
of the Province of Paghia in China; his name, Pausaos of the family of Hombu:
of which family there had 11. reigned in continual succession these two
hundred years, and king Bonog by the death of his elder brother (who dyed by a
fall from his horse) the rightful heir of all China, is the twelfth of this
race: he is of 22. years of age: his mother yet living: he has a wife, and by
her son: he is well beloved, and highly honored of all his subjects, and
lives in great peace from any fear of foreign invasion: but it was not this
man's fortune to enjoy his part of this happiness both of his king and
country, as he most desired.

For being accused of a capital crime whereof (through free) yet he could not
evidently make his innocence appear, and knowing the peremptory justice of
China, to be irreuocable, if he should expect the sentence of the Judges; he
before hand made suite to his king, that it would please him to commit his
trial to Gods providence and judgment, and to that end to permit him to
travel on this condition, that if the brought not home some worthy
intelligence, such as his Majesty had never had before, and were most fit to
be known, and most honorable for China, he should for ever live an exile, or
else dye for daring to set foot again in his own country: for he was assured
that the God of heaven had care of innocence.

The king granted his suite, and now he had been three years abroad, and at
this present came from Tidore (where he had remained two months) to see the
English General, of whom he heard such strange things, and from him (if it
pleased God to afford it) to learn some such intelligence as might make way
for his return into his country: and therefore he earnestly entreated our
General, to make relation to him of the occasion, way, and manner of his
coming so far from England thither, with the manifold occurrences that had
happened to him by the way.

Our General gave ample satisfaction to each part of his request: the stranger
hearkened with great attention and delight to his discourse, and as he
naturally excelled in memory (besides his help of art to better the same) so
he firmly printed it in his mind, and with great reverence thanked God, who
had so unexpectedly brought him, to the notice of such admirable things. Then
fell he to entreat our General with many most earnest and vehement
persuasions, that be would be content to see his country before his departure
any farther Westward, that it should be a most pleasant, most honorable, and
most profitable thing for him that he should gain hereby the notice, and
carry home the description of one of the most ancient, mightiest and richest
kingdoms in the world. Hereupon he took occasion to relate the number and
greatness of the Provinces, with the rare commodities and good things they
yielded: the number, stateliness, and riches of their Cities, with what
abundance of men, victuals, munition, and all manner of necessaries and
delightful things they were stored with: In particular, touching ordnance and
great gunnes (the late invention of a scab-shind F^^er amongst us in Europe) he
related that in Suntien (by some called Quinzai) which is the chiefest City of
all China, they had brass ordnance of all sorts (much easier to be trauersed
then ours were, and so perfectly made that they would hit a shillng) above
2000. years ago. With many other worthy things which our Generals own
experience (if it would please him to make trial) would (better then his
relation) assure him of. The brize would shortly serve very fitly to carry him
thither, and he himself would accompany him all the way. He accounted
himself a happy man, that he had but seen and spoken with us; the relation
of it might perhaps serve him to recover favor in his country: but if he
could prevail with our General himself to go thither, he doubted not but it
would be a means of his great advancement, and increase of honor with his
king: Notwithstanding our General could not on such persuasions be induced,
and to the stranger parted sorry, that he could not prevail in his request,
yet exceeding glad of the intelligence he had learned.



Celebes standing in 1. degrees. 40, min. toward the pole antarticke: which being
without inhabitants, gave us the better hope of quiet abode. We anchored and
finding the place convenient for our purposes (there wanting nothing here which
we stood in need of, but only water which we were feign to fetch from another
Island somewhat farther to the South) made our abode herefor 26. whole days
together.

The first thing we did, we pitched our tents and entrenched ourselves as
strongly as we could upon the shore, lest at any time perhaps we might have
been disturbed by the inhabitants of the greater Island which lay not far to
the Westward of us; after we had provided thus for our security, we landed our
goods, and had a Smiths forge set up, both for the making of some necessary
shipworke, and for the repairing of some ironhooped caskes, without which they
could not long have served our use: and for that our Smiths coals were all
spent long before this time; there was order given and followed for the burning
of charcoale, by which that want might be supplied.

We trimd our ship, and performed our other businesses to our content. The
place affording us not only all necessaries (which we had not of our own
before) thereunto, but also wonderful refreshing to our wearied bodies, by the
comfortable relief and excellent provision that here we found, whereby of
sickely, weak, and decayed (as many of us seemed to be before our coming
hither) we in short space grew all of us to be strong, lusty, and healthful
persons. Besides this, we had rare experience of Gods wonderful wisdom in
many rare and admirable creatures which here we saw.

The whole Island is a through grown wood, the trees for the most part are of
large and high stature, very straight and clean without bows, save only in
the very top. The leaves whereof are nor much unlike our broomes in England:
Among these trees, night by night did show themselves an infinite smarme of
fierie-seeming-wormes flying in the air, whose bodies (no bigger then an
ordinary fly) did make a show, and give such light as if every twigge on every
tree had been a lighted candle: or as if that place had been the starry
sphere. To these we may add the relation of another almost as strange a
creature, which here we saw, and that was an innumerable multitude of huge Bats
or reare-mice, equalling or rather exceeding a good Hen in bigness. They
fly with marvelous swiftness, but their flight is very short; and when they
light, they hang only by the bows with their backs downward.

Neither may we without ingratitude (by reason of the special use we made of
them) omit to speak of the huge multitude, of a certain kind of Crayfish, of
such a size, that one was sufficient to satisfy four hungry men at a dinner,
being a very good and restoratiue meat; the especial mean (as we conceived
it) of our increase of health.

They are as far as we could perceive, utter strangers to the sea, living
always on the land, where they work themselves earths, as do the conies, or
rather they dig great and huge caves, under the roots of the most huge and
monstrous trees, where they lodge themselves by companies together. Of the same
sort and kind, we found in other places, about the Island Celebes some that for
want of other refuge, when we came to take them, did clime up into trees to
hide themselves, whether we were enforced to clime after them, if we would have
them, which we would not stick to do rather then to be without them: this
Island we called Crab-iland.

All necessary causes of our staying longer in this place being at last
finished, our general prepared to be in a readiness, to take the first
advantage of the coming of the brize or wind which we expected; and having
the day before, furnished our selves with fresh water from the other Island, and
taken in provision of wood and the like: Celebes or Silebis, but having a bad
wind, and being entangled among many Islands, encumbered also with many other
difficulties, and some dangers, and at last meeting with a deep bay, out of
which we could not in three days turn out agnine, we could not by any means
recover the North of Silebis, or continue on our course farther West, but were
enforced to alter the same toward the South; finding that course also to be
both difficult and very dangerous, by reason of many shoales, which lay far
off, here and there among the Islands, insomuch, that in all our passages from
England hitherto, we had never more care to keep our selves afloate,

When lo on a sudden, when we least suspected no show or suspicion of danger
appearing to us, and we were now sailing onward with full sails, in the
beginning of the first watch of the said day at night, even in a moment our
ship was laid up fast upon a desperate shoale, with no other likelihood in
appearance, but that we with her must there presently perish: there being no
probability how any thing could be saved, or any person escape alive.

The unexpectedness of so extreme a danger, presently roused us up to look
about us, but the more we looked, the less hope we had of getting clear of it
again, so that nothing now presenting it self to our minds, but the ghastly
appearance of instant death, affording no respit or time of pausing, called
upon us to turn our thoughts another way, to renounce the world to deny our
selves, and to commend our selves into the merciful hands of our most gracious
God: to this purpose we presently fell prostrate, and with joined prayers sent
up unto the throne of grace, humbly besought almighty God, to extend his mercy
unto us in his son Christ Jesus; and so preparing as it were our necks unto
the block, we every minute expected the small stroke to be given unto us.

Notwithstanding that we expected nothing but imminent death, yet (that we
might not seem to tempt God, by leaving any second means unattempted which he
afforded) presently as soon as prayers were ended our general (exhorting us
to have the especiallest care of the better part, to wit, the soul, and adding
many comfortable speeches, of the joys of that other life, which we now alone
looked for) encouraged us all to bestirre our selves, showing us the way
thereto by his own example; and first of all the pump being well plied, and
the ship freed of water, we found our leaks to be nothing increased, which
thought it gave us no hope of deliverance, yet it gave us some hope of respit,
insomuch, as it assured us that the bulk was sound, which truly we
acknowledged to be an immediate providence of God alone, insomuch, as no
strength of wood and iron could have possibly borne so hard and violent a
shocke, as our ship did, dashing herself under full sail against the rocks,
except the extraordinary hand of God, had supported the same.

Our next assay was for good ground and anchor-hold, to sea, ward of us
(whereon to hale) by which means if by any, our general put us in comfort,
that there was yet left some hope to clear our selves: in his own person, he
therefore undertook the charge of sounding, and but even a boats length from
the ship, he found that the bottom could not by any length of line be reached
unto: so that the beginnings of hope, which we were willing to have conceived
before, were by this means quite dashed again; yea our misery seemed to be
increased, for whereas at first we could look for nothing but a present end,
that expectation was now turned, into the awaiting for a lingering death, of the
two, the far more fearful to be chosen: one thing fell out happily for us,
that the most of our men did not conceive this thing, which had they done, they
would in all likelihood have been so much discouraged, that their sorrow would
the more disable them, to have sought the remedy: our general with those few
others, that could judge of the event wisely, dissembling the same, and giving
in the mean time cheerful speeches, and good encouragements unto the rest.

For whiles it seemed to be a clear case, that our ship was so fast moared,
that she could not stir; it necessary followed, that either we were there to
remain on the place with her; or else leaving her to commit our selves in most
poor end helpless state, to seek some other place of stay and refuge, the
better of which two choices, did carry with it the appearance of worse then
1000. deaths.

As touching our ship, this was the comfort that she could give us, that she
her self lying there confined already upon the hard and pinching rocks, did
tell us plain, that she continually expected her speedy dispatch, as soon as
the sea and winds should come, to be the severe executioners of that heavy
judgment, by the appointment of the eternal judge already given upon her, who
had committed her there to Adamantine bonds in a most narrow prison, against
their coming for that purpose: so that if we would stay with her, we must
perish with her; or if any by any yet vnperceiueable means, should chance to
be delivered, his escape must needs be a perpetual misery, it being far
better to have perished together, then with the loss and absence of his
friends, to live in a strange land: whether a solitary life (the better choice)
among wild beasts, as a bird on the mountains without all comfort, or among
the barbarous people of the heathen, in intolerable bondage both of body and
mind.

And put the case that her day of destruction should be deferred, longer then
either reason could persuade us, or in any likelihood could seem possible (it
being not in the power of earthly things, to endure what she had suffered
already) yet could our abode there profit us nothing, but increase our
wretchedness, and enlarge our sorrows, for as her store and victuals were not
much (sufficient to sustain us only some few days, without hope of having
any increase, no not so much as of a cup of cold water) so must it ineuitably
come to pass, that we (as children in the mothers womb) should be driven even
to eat the flesh from of our own arms, she being no longer able to sustain
us; and how horrible a thing this would have proved, is easy by any one to be
perceived.

And whither (had we departed from her) should we have received any comfort;
nay the very impossibility of going, appeared to be no less, then those other
before mentioned: our boat was by no means able at once, to carry above 20.
persons with any safety, and we were 58. in all, the nearest land was six
leagues from us, and the wind from the shore directly bent against us: or
should we have thought of setting some ashoare, and after that to have fetched
the rest, there being no place thereabout without inhabitants, the first that
had landed must first have fallen into the hand of the enemy, and so the rest
in order, and though perhaps we might escape the sword, yet would our life have
been worse then death, not alone in respect of our woeful captivity, and
bodily mifseries, but most of all in respectt of our Christian liberty, being
to be deprived of all public means of serving the true God, and continually
grieved with the horrible impieties and devilish idolatries of the heathen.

Our misery being thus manifest, the very consideration whereof must needs
have shaken flesh and blood, if faith in Gods promises had not mightily
sustained us, we past the night with earnest longings that the day would once
appear, the mean time we spent in often prayers, and other godly exercises,
thereby comforting our selves; and refreshing our hearts, striving to bring our
selves to an humble submission under the hand of God, and to a referring our
selves wholly to his good will and pleasure.

The day therefore at length appearing, and it being almost full sea about that
time, after we had given thanks to God for his forbearing of us hitherto, and
had with tears called upon him to bless our labors; we again renewed our
travel, to see if we could now possibly find any anchor-hold, which we had
formerly sought in vain. But this second attempt proved as fruitless as the
former, and left us nothing to trust to, but prayers and tears, seeing it
appeared impossible that ever the forecast counsel, policy, or power of man
could ever effect the delivery of our ship, except the Lord only miraculously
should do the same.

It was therefore presently motioned, and by general voice determined to
commend our case to God alone, leaving our selves wholly in his hand; to spill
or save us as seem best to his gracious wisdom. And that our faith might be
the better strengthened, and the comfortable apprehension of Gods mercy in
Christ, be more clearly felt; we had a Sermon and the Sacrament of the body
and blood of our Savior celebrated.

After this sweet repast was thus received, and other holy exercises adjoined
were ended, lest we should seem guilty in any respect for not using all
lawful means we could invent; we fell to one other practice yet unassayed, to
wit, to unloading of our ship by casting some of her goods into the sea: which
thing as it was attempted most willingly, so was it dispatched in very short
time. So that even those things which we before this time, nor any other in our
case could be without, did now seem as things only worthy to be despised, yea
we were herein so forward, that neither our munition for defense, nor the very
meal for sustentation of our lives could find favor with us, but every thing
as it first came to hand went ouerboard assuring our selves of this, that if it
pleased God once to deliver us out of that most desperate strait wherein we
were, he would fight for us against our enemies, neither would he suffer us to
perish for want of bread. But when all was done, it was not any of our
endeavors, but Gods only hand that wrought our delivery; it was he alone that
brought us even under the very stroke of death; it was he alone that said unto
us, Return again ye sons of men; it was he alone that set us at liberty
again, that made us safe and free, after that we had remained in the former
miserable condition, the full space of twenty hours, to his glorious name be
the everlasting praise.

The manner of our delivery (for the relation of it will especially be
expected) was only this. The place whereon we sat so fast, was a firm rock
in a cleft, whereof it was we stuck on the larbord side' at low water there
was not above six foot depth in all on the starbord, within little distance
as you have heard no bottom to be found, the brize during the whole time that
we thus were stayed, blew somewhat stiff directly against out broad side, and
so perforce kept the ship upright: It pleased God in the beginning of the tide,
while the water was yet almost at lowest, to slack the stiffenesse of the
wind; and now out ship who required thirteen foot water to make her fleet, and
had not at that time on the one side above seven at most, wanting her prop on
the other side, which had too long already kept her up, fell a heeling toward
the deep water, and by that means freed her keele and made us glad men.

This shoale is at least three or four leagues in length, it lies in 2. degrees.
lacking three or four minutes South latitude. The day of this deliverance was
the tenth of January.

Of all the dangers that in our whole voyage we met with, this was the
greatest, but it was not the last as may appear by what ensues. Neither could
we indeed for a long season free our selves from the continual care and fear
of them; nor could we ever come to any convenient anchoring, but were
continually for the most pare tossed amongst the many Islands and shoales (which
lie in infinite number round about on the South parts of Celebes) till the
eight day of the following month.

Sillebis, thought best to bear with Timor. The Southermost cape of Sillebis
stands in 5. degrees. that side the line.

But of this coast of Sillebis we could not so easily clear our selves. upon)
wrought our present delivery, by whose unspeakable mercy our men and boat
also were unexpectedly, yet safely, restored unto us.

We gate off from this place as well as we could, and continued on our course
till the 26. day,



Baratiua it stands in 7. degrees. 13. min. South the line.

The people are Gentiles of handsome body, and comely statute, of civil
demeanor, very just in dealing, and courteous to strangers, of all which we
had evident proof, they showing themselves most glad of our coming and
cheerfully ready to relieve our wants, with whatsoever their country could
afford. The men go all naked save their heads and secret parts, every one
having one thing or other hanging at his ears. Their women are covered from
the middle to the foot, weating upon their naked arms bracelets, and that in
no small number, some having nine at least upon each arm, made for the most
part of horn or brass, whereof the lightest (by our estimation) would weigh
2. ounces.

With this people linen cloth (whereof they make roles for their heads, and
girdles to wear about their loins) is the best merchandise and of greatest
estimation: They are also much delighted with Margaretas (which in their
language they call Saleta) and such other like trifles.

Their Island is both rich and fruitful, rich in gold, silver, copper, tin,
sulpher, etc. neither are they only expert to try those mettalls, but very
skillfull also in working of them artificially, into diverse forms and shapes,
as pleases them best. Their fruits are diverse likewise and plentiful, as,
nutmegges, ginger, long pepper, limons, cucumbers, cocoes, figoes, sagu, with
diverse other sorts, whereof we had one in reasonable quantity, in bigness
form and husk, much like a bay-berry, hard in substance, but pleasant in
taste, which being sod becomes soft, and is a most profitable and nourishing
meat: of each of these we received of them, whatsoever we desired for our
need; insomuch that (such was Gods gracious goodness to us) the old proverb
was verified with us, After a storm comes a calm, after war peace, after
scarcity follows plenty;) so that in all our voyage ( Terenate only
excepted) from our departure out of our own country hitherto, we found not
any where greater comfort and refreshing, then we did at this time in this
place; in refreshing and furnishing our selves, here we spent 2. days, and
departed hence February 10.

When we were come into the height of 8. degrees. 4. min,





After this, we past on to the Westward without stay or any thing to be taken
notice of,

Iaua, the middle whereof stands in 7. degrees. and 30. min. beyond the equator.



In this Island there is one chief, but many vnder-gouernors, or petty kings,
whom they call Raias, who live in great familiarity and friendship one with
another. and on their return had as it seems related what they found, Raia
Donan the chief king of the whole land bringing victuals with him for our
relief: he also the next day after came aboard us. Few were the days that one
or more of these kings did miss to visit us, insomuch that we grew acquainted
with the names of many of them, as of Raia Pataiara, Raia Cabocapalla, Raia
Mangbango, Ria Bocabarra, Raia Timbanton: whom our General always entertained
with the best cheer that we could make, and showed them all the commodities
of our ship, with our ordnance and other arms and weapons, and the several
furnitures belonging to each, and the uses for which they served. His music
also and all things else whereby he might do them pleasure, wherein they took
exceeding great delight with admiration.

Raia Donan coming aboard us, in requital of our music which was made to
him, presented our general with his country music, which though it were of a
very strange kind, yet the sound was pleasant and delightful: the same day, he
caused an ox also to be brought to the waters side, and delivered to us, for
which he was to his content rewarded by our General, with diverse sorts of
very costly silks which he held in great esteem.

Though our often giving entertainment in this manner, did hinder us much in
the speedy dispatching of our businesses, and made us spend the more days
about them, yet here we found all such convenient helps, that to our contents
we at last ended them: the matter of greatest importance which we did (besides
victualing) was the new trimming and washing of our ship, which by reason of
our long voyage was so ouergrowne with a kind of shellfish sticking fast unto
her, that it hindered her exceedingly, and was a great trouble to her sailing.

The people (as are their kings) are a loving, a very true, and a just dealing
people. We traffiqued with them for hens, goats, cocoes, plantons, and other
kinds of victuals, which they offered us in such plenty that we might have
laden our ship if we had needed.

Bon Esperance, and continued without touch of ought, but air and water,
Africa) in some places very high, under the latitude of 31. degrees. and half.



Rio de Sesto, where we saw many negroes in their boats a fishing, whereof 2.
came very near us but we cared not to stay, nor had any talk or dealing with
them.

Sierra Leona, and spent two days for watering in the mouth of Tagoine, and
then put to sea again

Cancer August 15. having the wind at Northeast, and we 50. leagues off from
the nearest land.

The 22. day we were in the height of the Canaries.

Soli rerum maximarum Effectori,
Soli totius mundi Gubernatori,
Soli suorum Conseruatori,
Soli Deo sit semper G^^ria.
FINIS.

