THE COVENANT OF GRACE OR AN EXPOSITION UPON LVKE 1.73.74.75.

By GEORGE DOWNAME Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Dery.

GENESIS 22.16.18. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, that in thy seed all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed.

Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of Stationers, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. Anno Dom. 1631.

ILLVSTRISSIMIS DVVM VIRIS PRO-REGIBVS SIVE SVMMIS SERENISSIMI REGIS CAROLI PRO
REGIMINE TOTIVS HIBERNIAE IVSTITIARIIS D. ADAMO VICE COMITI LOFTVS DE ELY
DIGNISSIMO EIVSDEM REGNI CANCELLARIO, ET HONORATISSIMO D. RICHARDO BOIL COMITI
CORCAGIAE, DOMINIS SVIS COLENDISSIMIS, GEORGIUS DOWNAME EPISCOPVS DERENSIS
DIATRIBAS HASCE DE FOEDERE GRATIAE DEQ PERSEVERANTIA SANCTORVM QVALES CVNQ
TANQVAM LEVIDENSE MVNVS, IN PERPETVVM SVMMAE OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM L.M.D.D.

In this Treatise upon Luke 1.73.74.75. are handled, the Context or coherence,
with a brief Analysis of the hymn of Zachary called benedictus. Cap. 1. Text,
wherein we consider, the Parties between who^ this covenant was made, viz. The
God of Israel. Cap. 2 Abraham our father. Cap. 2
Tenor of the oath it self. cap. 3 containing a twofold gift. Cap. 4. viz.
Redemption. Cap. 5. The fruit of our redemption, which is our new obedience.
whereof are set down the Parts viz. Holiness. Cap. 6. Righteousness. Cap. 6.
Properties Spiritual security. Cap. 7.8.9. Uprightnes. Cap. 10.11.
Perseverance. Cap. 12.






THE COVENANT OF GRACE: OR AN EXPOSITION UPON LVK. 1.73.74.75
The Text. Luke 1.73.74.75. The Oath, which he swear to our Father Abraham,
that he would give us; that we being delivered from the hand of our enemies,
should worship him without fear, in holiness, and righteousness, before him all
the days of our life.


CHAPTER. I. The context or coherence of the Text.
THESE words are the sum and substance of the Covenant of grace, The
coherence of the text, and a brief Analysis of the Psalm. or hymn of Zachary.
which the Lord made with Abraham the Father of the faithful, and the very
abridgement of the Gospel (for God, when he made this Covenant with Abraham,
Gal. 3.^.
(...), he preached before hand the Gospel unto him) and therefore are most
worthy both to be handled with much diligence, and to be heard with great
attention and reverence. They are part of that heavenly hymn, which Zacharias
the father of John Baptist pronounced at the circumcision of his Son, For
such was both the goodness of God toward him, that he did not only restore
unto him his speech and hearing, the use whereof for a time he had lost through
his incredulity; but also bestowed upon him the spirit of Prophecy: And such
also was his thankefulnes to God, that no sooner had he recovered his speech,
but he employed it to the glory of God.

Now both these, I mean, the miraculous both loss and recovery of his speech
happened By singular dispensation.
(...), as Theophylact has well observed: that it might win credit to the
extraordinary ministry of John the Baptist, who was to be the forerunner of
(...).
Christ, that he being to bear witness of CHRIST, might be worthy of all
credit.

In this Psalm Zachary prophecieth, first, of the Son of God our Savior
CHRIST, to the end of the 75. verse, and after, of his own son, at the 76.
verse to the end of the Psalm.

His prophecy concerning CHRIST, is a prophetical thanksgiving, wherein he
blesses God for his unspeakable mercy to the Israel of God, in sending his
own, and his only begotten Son to work our redemption and salvation. For
although our Savior was not as yet borne, and much less had paid the price
of our redemption; yet he knew him to be incarnate, and conceived in the womb
of the blessed Virgin; Wherefore knowing, that now the work of redemption was
already begun by the incarnation of CHRIST; he speaks of our redemption,
after the manner of other Prophets, as of a thing already done, and prayseth
God therefore.

His prophecy concerning his own son, is a prophetical gratulation,
congratulating the great ^avour of God vouchsafed unto him; whom the Lord had
ordained to be the Prophet of the most high, and the (...) or forerunner of
our blessed Savior, and consequently to be more then a Prophet, then whom
there had not risen a greater among the sons of women. Math. 11.11.

But to return to the former prophecy (which I called a prophetical
thanksgiving) out of which my Text is taken: the benefit or blessing for which
Zachary blesses God, is first propounded in these words verse. 68. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, who has visited his people; and afterward twice
expounded. First, more briefly in the end of v. 68. and the two verses
following; and then more largely at the 71. v. to the end of my Text. The (...)
or more brief exposition is in these words, has visited, that is, has
redeemed his people, by raising up a horn of salvation for us, (that is a
mighty Savior, as Psalm. 18.3.) in the house and lineage of his servant David
(whose son according to the flesh the Messiah was to be) as he spoke by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been of old. For God is said to visit
men, when he does to them, as he had foretold, whether in the better part, by
way of promise; or in the worse, by way of threatening. And thus, in the better
part, Moses teaches us to expound this phrase Genes. 21.1. The Lord visited
Sara, that is, he did to Sara as he had promised. Upon which words Tremelius
and Iunius have this note: hence are we to take the explication of this usual
phrase; for to visit is to put in execution the good promised or the evil
denounced. So Genesis 50.24. God (says So Ex. 13.19.
Joseph) will surely visit you, that is, will bring you out of this land, unto
the land of promise, as he swear to Abraham, Isaak and Jacob. And accordingly
when God did send Moses and Aaron to deliver his people out of Egypt, as he
had promised, he is said to have visited Exodus 3.16.4.31.
them. In like manner, when God sent his own Son to redeem us, as he had
formerly promised: he is said to have visited, that is, to have redeemed his
people, as he had spoken by his Prophets in former times.

The latter and more large exposition, or (...) begins at verse. 71. for the
man of God being ravished with the consideration of this unestimable benefit,
does as it were dwell (...)
upon it, being not content to have propounded it, and once to have expounded
the same, but again, by way of exultation, he amplifieth it in other words,
after the manner of the godly in their songs of deliverance; as you may see in
that song of Moses Exodus 15. which was his (...) or song of victory, which the
Israelites had over Pharaoh and the Egyptians; as this is Zacharies (...) or
song of victory, which the Israel of God has over the spiritual Pharaoh, and
all the enemies of our salvation.

But I come to the words of the exposition. Salvation, where we may out of the
words going before repeat the verb (...) or (...), as if he had said, who I
say, has wrought or raised salvation, that is, saved us from our enemies, and
from the hand, that is, the power of all that hate us. verse. 72. That he might
work mercy with our forefathers, that is, that he might perform his merciful
promises made to our fathers, and remember, that is, show himself mindful of
his holy Covenant, then verse. 73. The oath, which is either to be read by
apposition, if with Theophylact we read (...), to wit the oath, or to be
referred to the verb (...) or (...), that he might perform or remember the
oath which he swear to our father Abraham. In this latter exposition as the
words are multiplied, and the phrases varyed, so the affection of the argument
is also changed. For whereas in the former exposition it was said, he visited,
that is, redeemed his people as he had graciously promised; here it is said,
he visited, that is redeemed or saved us, that he might perform his promise.
Where the keeping of his promise is made the end of his sending Christ to
redeem us: to let us understand, that as God was most gracious in promising
our redemption, so most faithful and just in the performance. So that the
former part of this Psalm, from the beginning thereof to the end of my Text,
is but one sentence or Axiom, wherein there is relation of consequence; the
sum whereof is this: Because the Lord has visited, that is, has redeemed
his people, according to his promise, and has saved us, that he might keep
his promise, and perform his oath, he is therefore to be blessed, that is,
magnified and praised.

This Analysis I have the rather propounded, because we repeating this Psalm
daily in our Liturgy, might, as David Psalm. 47.^.
exhorts, sing with understanding: as also because my Text, being but a part
of the sentence, is not complete in it self, but must be perfected by
repetition of that which goes before; after this manner: The Lord God of
Israel is therefore to be blessed, because he has visited, that is, has sent
his Son to redeem us, as he had promised; and to save us, that he might
keep his promise, and perform his oath, which he swear to Abraham, The
tenor whereof was this, that he would give us, etc. And this is the coherence
of my text. Out of which we may gather these three observations.

First, where it is said, that God did therefore send his Son to redeem us,
that he might keep his promise, and perform his oath; we observe the
immutable truth and fidelity of God in performing his promises; For in Christ
2. Corint. 1.20.
all the promises of God are yea, and amen. If therefore the truth of God be
such, that rather then he would go back from his word, he did send his own
Son to suffer death for our redemption: Yea, if his fidelity were such, as
that therefore he sent his son that he might perform his promise, then can
we not doubt of the performance of any other promise of God; this being the
most difficult of all, either for God to grant, or for us to believe. When the
world was to be made, the Lord did speak the word, and it was created. But
when it was to be redeemed; he gave his Son to be a price of ransom for us.
And who would ever have thought (but that the Lord has revealed this his
unspeakable mercy in his word*) that God, being of infinite Majesty and
glory, and enjoying all selfe-contented happiness, would give his only begotten
Son to die for his enemies. If therefore to make good this promise, he gave
his son to die for us, how shall he Romans 8.32.
not with him give us all other good things which he has promised? Such is
the truth of God, that every faithful man may say with the Apostle, 2. Tim.
1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am sure that what he has promised shall in
due time be performed. For as he is omnipotent, and therefore able, so he is
the God Psalm. 31.5.
of truth, yea truth Deuteronomy. 32.4.
it self, and therefore willing; he is Jehovah, Exodus 6.3.
one that gives being to his word; who though he can do all things, yet he
cannot lie, Tit. 1.^.
nor deny 2. Tim. 2.15.
himself. Wherefore, as the faithful; who lived before the incarnation of
CHRIST, did faithfully and comfortably wait for the performance of that
promise, as being the consolation Luc. ^.25.
of Israel, though between the making of it, and the performance, there did
intercede four thousand years: So whereas the Lord has promised his second
coming for our full redemption; though it may seem to be delayed, we are
with comfort to wait for it, with earnestnes to long for it, and with
undoubted certainetie to expect it.

Secondly, whereas Zachary praises the Lord for performing his promise
concerning our redemption by CHRIST, we learn, what is our duty; namely to
praise and magnify the name of the Lord, as for all other his mercies, so
especially for the work of our redemption; according to that. Psalm. 107.^.
Let them praise the Lord, whom he has redeemed, and delivered from the hand
of the enemy. But of this more hereafter.

Thirdly, whereas Zachary gives thanks to God for a benefit not as yet
received; for as yet CHRIST was not borne, and much less had he as yet
redeemed us; We learn, that we are to give thanks, not only for the
benefits already received, but for such also as are promised. For this is a
notable fruit of a lively faith, setting forth also most notably the truth of
God in his promises; when a man in the assurance of faith, which is Hebr. 11.1.
the substance of things hoped for; gives thanks for th^se benefits and
blessings, which as yet he has not, as though he had already received them. It
is the commendation of the faithful, Heb. 11.13. Who having not received the
promises, but having seen them a far off (as Abraham John. 8.56.
saw the day of Christ) believed them, embraced them, and rejoiced in them. For
if he, who prayseth God for benefits received, Psalm. 5^.23.
does glorify God: then much more does he glorify him, and magnify his
truth, who prayseth him for benefits, which he has only promised: because
this is a fruit of a greater faith. Thus David showed himself thankful to
God for the favors which he had promised by Nathan, 2. Sam. 7. and thus ought
we to be thankful for the promises of a better life. So much of the context.

CHAP. II. The text resolved into his parts, the first whereof are the parties
between whom this Covenant was made.
The Analysis of the Text.
NOw I come to the Text it self: the contents whereof as you see, is an Oath
wherein we are to consider both the parties between whom it was made, and
also the tenor of the Oath it self. The parties, as well him that swears,
viz. the Lord GOD of Israel; as he, to whom the oath was made, viz. Abraham
our Father. Concerning the tenor, we are to know, that whereas some oaths
are assertory, wherein some truth is avouched; others promissory, wherein some
promise is made: this is of the latter sort, containing the promise of a gift.
For so he says, that he would give us. This gift is twofold: viz. redemption,
in those words that we should be delivered from the hand of our enemies; and
the fruit and end of our redemption, which is the true worship of God; in
those words, that we should worship him, etc. which worship of God is set
forth, both by the parts and properties thereof. The parts are two, Holiness,
and Righteousness; For by holiness, we are to understand the duties of the first
Table, which we owe unto God* and by Righteousness, the duties of the second
Table, which we owe unto man. The properties are three; The first, respecting
our enemies, from whom we are delivered, in the word (...), without fear of
them; the second, respecting God, in the words before him, the third,
respecting the continuance, all the days of our life. The first of these is
(...), or spiritual security; the second, is uprightnes and sincerity: the
third, is constancy or perseverance. Of these in order.

Concerning the party which did swear, The party who did swear.
we are to consider these three things. 1. By whom he swear. 2. How, or after
what manner. 3. To what end. For the first; it is the manner of men in their
oaths to swear by a greater. But the Lord, when he made this Covenant with
Abraham, because he could not swear by a greater, he swear by himself, Heb.
6.13. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, etc. Genes. 22.16.

Concerning the manner: we may gather by that, which the Lord requires in our
oaths, what he performed in his own, Ierem. ^.2. There are three properties
required in an Oath, Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness. Truth, opposed to
falsehood or perjury: Judgment, to rash and common swearing; Righteousness, to
unjust and unlawful Oaths.

For the first: that the Lord did swear in truth, it is most certain; because
it is impossible, that the Lord in his promise, and in his oath should lie,
Heb. 6.18. and therefore we may be assured of that, wherewith Micah. 7.20
Micah concludes his prophecy, that the Lord will undoubtedly perform his
mercy, which by oath he promised to Abraham. From whence we may learn this
most profitable instruction. That seeing the oath of the Lord, whereby he
promises to give to all them that are delivered from the hand of their
spiritual enemies (that is to all that are redeemed by CHRIST) grace to
worship him in holiness and righteousness, is infallible, we should therefore
be careful to bring forth these fruits of our redemption; otherwise, we can
have no assurance, that we are the redeemed of the LORD. Yea, on the contrary,
it may be verified of us; that if we do live in sin, and do not, at the
least, desire and endeavor to serve God in the duties of holiness and
righteousness: it is as certain as the Oath of God is true, that as yet we
have no part in the redemption wrought by CHRIST. And the reason hereof is
evident, for to be a servant of sin, and to be redeemed from the bondage of
sin; are things repugnant, and imply a contradiction. For whom Christ the
Son of God makes free they are free indeed. John. 8.3^. But he, that is a
servant of sin, is not freed indeed. Now every one that commits sin, as
habituated in sin, that is, in whom sin reigns, he is the servant both
of sin, Ioh. 8.^4. and of Satan, 1. John. 3.8.

Secondly, in Judgment, a man is said to swear in judgment, when he
swears advisedly, upon just and necessary occasion. For oaths are then only
good, when they are necessary. This necessity of the Lords oath arises from
our weakness and infidelity, who will not believe the Lord without an oath.
And therefore the Lord, in great mercy to relieve our infirmity, has
confirmed his promise, which in it self needs no confirmation, as being
truth it self (...) Heb. 6.1^. more abundantly then otherwise needed, by an
oath, which as it argues our great corruption; So it ought to be a remedy for
the same. It is great infidelity, not to believe the word and promise of God;
but greater, not to believe his oath. In not believing his promise, thou make
him a liar. 1. John. ^.10. in denying credit to his Oath, do thou make him
any better then a perjured person? And yet this is the estate and condition of
many professing the name of Christ, God has sworn, and will not repent, that
to those, whom he redeemeth, grace shall be given to worship him in holiness
and righteousness. These men do not so much as desire, care or endeavor to
worship God in holiness and righteousness; but live in sin, and go on in
sin, without repentance: and yet for all this, they will needs persuade
themselves, that they are the redeemed of the Lord, contrary to the express
Oath of God.

Thirdly, in Righteousness: Men are said to swear in righteousness, when that,
which they promise by Oath, is lawful and good. And this goodness is measured
by the reference which it has to the glory of God, and good of man. Neither
does the Lord Oath want this property. For what could be either more glorious
to himself, or more profitable unto us; then that which by this Oath is
promised? For as touching the glory of God: among all the works, which God ever
wrought, there is not any that sets forth more the glory both of his mercy
and of his justice, then the work of our redemption with the fruits thereof.
For hereby appears his mercy to be such, as that rather then he would suffer
us most miserable sinners to perish in our sins, he gave his own, and his
only begotten Son to die for us. His justice such, that rather then he
would suffer the sins of his own elect children to go unpunished, he has
punished them in the death and sufferings of his only begotten Son.

And if you consider our profit, it is evident that (as hereafter you shall
hear) in the things promised by this Oath, our happiness does consist. Neither
doubt I to affirm, that by the things promised in this oath, our estate
becomes better, then that which we lost in Adam. Adam, though he were just,
stood righteous before God, but in his own righteousness; but we being redeemed
by CHRIST, stand righteous before God in the righteousness of CHRIST, which
far surpasses the righteousness both of men and Angels. Adam was created
good, but changeable, and therefore, being tempted, he fell; but we, being
once redeemed by CHRIST and sanctified by his spirit, shall never fall away;
but 1. Pet. 1.5.
by the power of God through ^aith we are kept safe unto salvation. The
happiness, which Adam enjoyed, was in an earthly paradise but the happiness,
which CHRIST has purchased for us, is in Heaven. Thus much of the manner.

Now are we to consider the end for which the Lord did swear: which is
plainly and fully set down Hebr* 6.17.18 that he might more abundantly show
unto the heirs of promise, the stablenes of his counsel: that by two
immutable things (that is his word, and his Oath) they might have strong
consolation. For howsoever they might doubt of their perseverance unto
salvation, in regard both of their own frailty, and also of the strength of
their enemies: yet they know, that the foundation of God abides sure, 2. Tim.
2.19. and that the word and oath of the Lord is immutable; and that, howsoever
heaven and earth shall pass away; yet not one jote, or title of the oath of
God shall fall to the ground. And therefore have just cause with David, Psalm
40.2. to profess their confidence, and with Paul Romans 8.38.39. to rest
assured, that nothing shall be able to separate them from Gods love in CHRIST
JESUS our Lord. For the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, that he will
give us, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, to worship him without
fear, in holiness, and righteousness, before him, all the days of our life. If
therefore the oath of an honest man be, or ought to be (...) the end of
controversy, Hebr. 6.16. how much more ought the oath of the Lord to be an end
unto us of doubting and distrust?

The use, which we are to make of that, which has been said, concerning the
Lord his taking of an Oath; is that, whereunto we are so often exhorted in the
Scriptures, Be you holy, as I am holy, says the Lord* that is, in this
particular duty of holiness (for sweating is required in the first Table) we
are to imitate the Lord, both in respect of the action it self, and also in
regard of the object, the manner, and the end.

As touching the action it self, where the Lord is said to have sworn, we
are taught, that to swear, is in a self a thing lawful and good, though the
Anabaptists deny it in all Christians, and the Papists in them, who in their
conceit, are perfect; and yet in the Scriptures we see it by the holy Angels,
by the blessed Apostle in diverse places of his Epistles, in the penning whereof
he was free, as from erring, so also from sinning, and lastly by God himself,
in this, and many other places. Neither is it only commended as lawful, and
good, as Psalm. 6^.11. but also commanded as necessary, and as a thing which
not only may be done, but also which must be done, Deuteronomy. 6.13.10.20. as being
a duty both of holiness to God, and of righteousness and charity to man. For
being rightly performed, it serves greatly to set forth the glory of God, by
ascribing unto him omniscience and omnipresence, the knowledge of secrets,
justice, the patronage of truth, the punishing of falsehood. Of charity and
righteousness to men, as being profitable and necessary for the manifestation of
a necessary truth, for appeasing controversies among men, for the discharge of
our duty, and sometimes for clearing our own innocence. And therefore being
a duty so necessary in respect both of God and man; God himself has sworn
it should be practiced in the new Testament, Es. 45.23. But I shall not need
to prove the lawfulnes of swearing in these times, when there are more that
swear, Eccles. 9.^.
then that do fear an Oath. Let us rather consider, how we are to imitate
the Lord in swearing, in respect of the object, the manner, and the end.

First therefore, as the Lord did swear by the true God only, that is,
himself: so we are to swear by no other, for what we swear by, that we
Deifie; and therefore to swear by any other, is ^o forsake God Ierem. 5.7.

And as touching the manner, we are to swear in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness, Ierem. 4.2. for not to swear in truth is perjury; which is
forbidden, condemned, and punished as a detestable sin, and as an horrible
profanation of the name of God. Lev. 19.12. Ierem. 5.2. Zach. 5.4. wherein
besides falsehood and lying, which destroy the soul, and exclude out of heaven,
Apoc. 22.15. and besides deceit, (and that under the religion of an Oath,)
whereof God is the avenger, 1. These. 4.6. Ps. 5.7. there do also concur two
other abominations. The one an horrible indignity offered to the Majesty of
God, whereby as if he were a patron of falsehood, they call upon him, as a
witness, to second their untruth. The other in that they tempt God, and date
him, as it were, to his face, to execute his vengeance upon them, if they
avouch an untruth; when they themselves know, that they swear falsely.

Secondly, in judgment: for to swear rashly and commonly in our ordinary
talk, is to make common, that is, to pollute the holy name of GOD; and to
turn the Sanctuary of verity, into a common house of vanity. As the Name of
GOD is holy and and reverend, so ought it to be used holily, and reverendly;
And as an Oath is not simply good, but upon necessity; so ought it not to be
used, but when it is necessary. For bonum necessarium extra terminos
necessitatis non est bonum. Our Savior therefore forbids us to swear at
all in our ordinary talk, Mat. ^.34.37. and S. James wishes us above all
things to take heed, that we swear not, lest we fall into condemnation, Iam.
5.12. and wholesome to this purpose is the counsel of the Son of Syrach,
Eccl. 23.9.10.11.12.13.

Thirdly, in Righteousness: for by oath to promise that, which is unlawful,
besides that it argues a full purpose, and resolution to do evil, which is
to sin with a high hand: it does also offer an horrible indignity unto God,
when a man calls upon him to be, as it were his surety for the doing of that
evil, which he promises.

There remains the end: for so we are to swear, that by testifying a
necessary truth, which cannot by other means be manifested; God may be
glorified (according to that form of adjuration, Give glory to God, Ios.
^.19.) ou^ brethren satisfied, controversies ended, our duty discharged, our
own innocence cleared. Vain are the Oaths, which are not referred to these,
or such like ends; and by them also the holy name of GOD is taken in vain. So
usually do they swear, that swear usually; having no respect, either to the
glory of God, the good of their brethren, or discharge of their duty; but rap
out Oaths, sometimes in choler, sometimes in pride and vainglory, sometimes
in deceit, to color their falsehood: sometimes in a vain conceit to win
credit to their speeches wherein notwithstanding they are miserably deceived,
for he that swears much, sometimes for-sweareth: and he that makes no
conscience of polluting the holy and dreadful name of GOD by common swearing;
will learn to make no conscience of swearing falsely. So much of the party
that did swear.

Now we are to speak of the party to whom this Oath was made: who is here
described by his name Abraham, and by his relation to us, Our Father. Abraham
was so called by GOD himself, Genes. 17. because he made him Ab^hamon, the
father of many nations, that is to say, of the faithful in all Nations. Now,
whereas I showed before, that the Lord would not have taken an Oath, unless it
had been necessary, in respect of our weakness and incredulity, who will not
believe him without an Oath: It appears, that Abraham himself needed to have
the promises of God confirmed to him by Oath: From whence we learn this
profitable lesson, that the faith of the best of us has its imperfections, and
is mingled with unbelief. For if Abraham, the Father of the faithful, the
most worthy pattern of a lively and a strong faith, had need to have his
infirmities relieved, as it is plain that he had: not only (as in this place)
by an Oath, but also Genes. 15. by a sign Genes. 17. by the Sacrament of
Circumcision, which was unto him a seal of that righteousness which is by
faith: and almost in every Chapter of his story, by the often repeating and
renewing of the promises unto him: Romans 4.1^.
What are we to think of our selves, who are by many degrees inferior to
Abraham? Surely we are to beware, both of the proud fantasy of those, who
dream of perfection in this life; and also of the careless practice of
others, who thinking they have proceeded far enough, sit still, not seeking
to go forward in the way of Christianity; and therefore are not likely to come
to the end of their way, which is the salvation of their souls. But we, in the
humble acknowledgement of our imperfections, must with the Apostles, Luke 17.5.
pray unto the Lord to increase our faith, and using all good means, to proceed
from faith to faith, until we come to a perfect man in CHRIST, we must with
the Apostle, as not having attained, Phil. 3.12.13. forget those things which
are behind, and reach forth to those things which are before, pressing forward
toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST, Phil.
3.14. and if the Apostle, and those who are perfect, that is, adulti, grown
men in CHRIST, are to be of this mind, as the Apostle says in the next verse:
much more those, which are not so good proficients, ought to be so minded,
remembering that religion is compared to a way, wherein we are still to go on,
until we come to the end of our way, which will not be before the end of our
life.

And whereas Zachary calls Abraham our father, this is not to be understood,
either of all the Jews, or of the Jews alone, but of all the faithful,
whether they be Jews or Gentiles. For Abraham is the father of all the
faithful, Romans 4.11. and all, which are of the faith, are the children of
Abraham, Galat. 3.7. In this sense, Zacheus the Publicane receiving our Savior
by faith, became the son of Abraham, Luke 19.9. As for those, who were of
Abraham's seed, according to the flesh, and not according to his faith, they are
not accounted the seed of Abraham. For as the Apostle says, Romans 9.6.7. All
they are not Israel, which are of Israel, neither are they all children,
because they are the seed of Abraham, but in Isaak shall thy seed be called,
that is, says the Apostle, verse. 8. they, which are the children of the flesh,
are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are accounted for
the seed. So our Savior, Ioh. 8. although he grant, that the Jews, to whom
he spoke, were, according to the flesh, the seed of Abraham verse. 37. Yet he
concludes against them, that they were not Abraham's sons indeed, because they
did not the works of Abraham verse. 39.40. This must teach those, who come of
faithful parents, or are nobly descended from famous and worthy ancestors,
not to rely too much upon their parentage, but to show themselves to be their
children by imitating their faith, and their godly conversation. For otherwise,
though their parents were the children of God, they may notwithstanding be the
Children of the Devil, as our Savior tells the unbelieving Jews, John.
8.44. And therefore John the Baptist warns the Jews, not to stand so much
upon this, that they had Abraham to their father; but wills them to bring
forth fruits worthy of repentance, Matthew. 3.9. If therefore we would be able,
with Zachary, to call Abraham Our father, we must follow the faith of Abraham,
Gal. 3.7. and imitate his works, Ioh. 8.39.

Again, from hence we observe; that, what is spoken in this Oath concerning us
that he would give us, that we being delivered, etc. is not to be understood of
all men, but of us, who have Abraham to our Father, that is to say, of the
faithful, who only are the sons of Abraham, the heirs of the promise.

CHAP. III. The Tenor of the Oath.
NOw I come to the Tenor of the Oath it self, in these words: That he would
give us, that we being delivered, etc. But here some man will say, there is no
such Oath as this, recorded in the Scriptures of the old Testament, which God
did swear to Abraham.

Whereunto I answer; that it is not always the custom of the holy Ghost, in
the New Testament, when he alleges testimonies out of the old, to recite the
very same words, and syllables; but sometimes, as being the best interpreter of
himself, in stead of words, he sets down the true sense, and meaning
thereof: so in this place. For whereas Moses Genesis 22.16.18. records this oath
in these words, by my self have I sworn, says the Lord, that in thy seed all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed: Zachary Verse. 67.
here being filled with the holy Ghost, expounds what this blessedness is,
which was promised in Christ the promised seed, viz. that the Lord, would give
us, that we being delivered from the hand of our enemies, should worship him
without fear, etc. That this is the oath, which Zachary means, it is most
certain* because he gives thanks to God, for the performanc^ of his oath, which
he swear to Abraham, concerning the redemption of his people the Israel of God,
by the Messiah or promised seed; which can be no other then that wc^ I named, In
thy seed all the nations; (that is the faithful in all nations) shall be
blessed. Peter Act. 3.25. speaks of the same Covenant, which God made with
our fathers, saying to Abraham, and in thy seed, shall all the kinreds of the
earth be blessed.

And surely great cause there was, that in the beginning of the promulgation of
the Gospel, it should be explaned, what this blessedness is, which was promised
by the Messiah. 1. First, for confutation of the erroneous and pernicious
conceit of the Jews, who thinking that the Messiah should be a temporal
Monarch, expected only temporal blessings from him: But if our hope in CHRIST
were only in respect of this life, then were we of all men most miserable, 1.
Cor. 15.19.

Secondly, For preve^tion of a most dangerous scandal, which otherwise would have
ensued upon that erroneous co^ceipt. For it being a received opinion among the
Jews, from which the Disciples Mat. 20.21. Act. 1.6.
of Christ were not free, that the Messiah should be a te^porall Monarch, who
should restore the kingdom unto Israel and make his followers happy with
external and temporal blessings: If this opinion had been nourished in them,
it could not have been avoided, but that they would have taken offense at
Christ's mean and poor estate, when in stead of honors, riches, greatness and
glory in this world, which they expected from the Messiah, all things should
happen contrary to their expectation. Our Savior therefore pronounces the^
blessed, who are not offended at him in respect of his mean condition, and
poor estate, Mat. 11.6

Thirdly, For rectifying our judgment in that most weighty point concerning
our happiness. For the very foundation of a Christian conversation, is the right
belief concerning happiness. For all men desire happiness, as the supreme end.
And such as is the end, or happiness which they propound unto themselves; such
are the means which they use, such are their studies and endeavors. As for
example, if men place their happiness in pleasure, their whole course of life is
voluptuous; if in riches, covetous; if in honor, ambitions, etc.

For these causes, as I said, it was necessary that it should be declared, what
this blessedness is Our Savior therefore in the beginning of his gracious
Sermon upon the Mount shows, that the happiness which by him they were to
expect, did consist in spiritual grace, and eternal glory. Mat. ^.3.
Blessed are the poor or beggars in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven, and so in the rest, in every whereof two degrees of happiness are noted:
the one, set down, as the Schoolmen speak, per modum meriti, which I called
grace: the other, per modum praemij, which I called glory: the one being
beatitudo viae, or our happiness in this life: the other, beatitudo patriae, or
our happiness in the life to come. S. Paul likewise Ephesians. 1.3. expounds the
happiness, which we have by CHRIST, to be spiritual. Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be God (says he) who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in CHRIST. Thus S. Peter, speaking of this Covenant, which God
made with Abraham, and applying it to the Jews, expounds this blessedness to
be their turning, and consequently their freedom from sin. Ye are (says
he) Act. 3.25.26. the children of the Covenant, which God made with our
fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the families of the
earth be blessed: unto you first, God having raised up his Son JESUS, sent
him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your iniquities. In
like manner the Apostle Paul, Galat. 3. expounds this blessedness of
justification by faith, redemption from the curse of the law, and receiving the
promise of the spirit Those which are of faith, says he, verse. 7.8.9. are the
sons of Abraham, and the Scripture (that is the holy Ghost who speaks in
the Scripture) foreseeing, that God would justify the Gentiles through faith,
preached the Gospel before to Abraham, saying: in thee, that is, in thy seed
shall all So Genesis 12.2.3 chap. 13.15.17.15.18.
nations be blessed. So then, they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham. Again verse. 13.14. CHRIST has redeemed us from the curse
of the law being made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come
on the Gentiles through JESUS CHRIST, that we might receive the promise of the
spirit. But most chiefly in this place, where the holy Ghost does, as it were,
ex professo expound, what this blessedness is, viz. that he would give us, that
we being delivered from the hand of our enemies, should worship him without
fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

Now, that this is a most true and perfect exposition, I will prove by these
two reasons. And first, for the truth of it. For whereas there are two degrees
of our happiness; the one, begun in this life, which is called beatitudo viae:
the other, complete in the life to come, which is beatitudo patriae: that is to
be accounted our happiness in this life, whereby, as by degrees, we attain to
eternal happiness in the world to come. Now the degrees of salvation, which the
sons of Abraham, faithful, and therefore called, obtain in this life, are
justification, and sanctification; justification, by which we are entitled to
the kingdom of heaven, and with it concur redemption, reconciliation, and
adoption, being all in substance the same, differing only in some relation or
respect. For when God does forgive our sins by imputation of CHRIST'S
righteousness, he does both redeem and reconcile, and justify, and adopt us:
but with this distinction. First, that when forgiving our sins, by which we
are bound over to death and damnation, and held captives of sin and Satan,
he freeth us from this bondage, he is said to redeem us, Ephesians. 1.7. Col.
1.14. Secondly, when forgiving our sins, whereby we are the children of
wrath, and enemies against God, he receives us into his love, and favor in
CHRIST, he is said to reconcile us, 2. Cor. 5.19. Thirdly, when forgiving our
sins, which exclude us from heaven, and make us guilty of damnation, he does
absolve and acquitte us from the guilt, and does accept of us in CHRIST as
righteous, and as heirs of salvation, he is said to justify us, Romans
3.24.25.4.6.7.8. Fourthly, when forgiving our sins, which made us the
children of the Devil, he does in CHRIST take us to be his children, he is
said to adopt us. The second degree is sanctification, by which we are prepared
and made fit for Gods kingdom. Now these two are the two parts of the gift,
which God by oath in this place promised to give to the faithful the sons of
Abraham; viz. deliverance from the hand of our spiritual enemies, namely the
law, sin, death, and the devil, which is our redemption or justification:
and grace to worship God without fear in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life, which is our sanctification.

2 And that it is a full and perfect exposition, it is easily proved: because
not only to the whole gift here promised, but to every part and parcel
thereof happiness is ascribed in the word of God. As first, to redemption; for
what is it to be redeemed by CHRIST, but to have remission of sins by him?
Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. By him we have redemption, even the remission of our
sins. But to the remission of sins the holy Ghost ascribes blessedness,
Psalm. 32. i. 2. Romans 4.6.7. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity.

2 Secondly to a godly life: which is here termed the worship of God in holiness
and righteousness, in which keeping of the law does consist. For when a woman
out of the crowd cried unto our Savior, blessed is the womb that bare thee,
and the pappes that gave thee suck, Our Savior returned this answer, Luke
11.28. Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. The
same has Solomon, Prove. 29.18. and who knows not that, which the Apostle
teaches 1. Tim. 4.8. Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, and consequently of the happiness both of this life, and
of the other life.

3 To the parts of Gods worship; as namely to holiness. Apoc. 20.6. Blessed and
holy is the man, who has his part in the first resurrection. Which testimony
yields unto us a double proof. First, because he uses the terms of Blessed
and holy promiscuously; implying, that whosoever is blessed, is holy; and that
whosoever is holy, is blessed. Secondly, because he says, they are blessed,
who have their part in the first resurrection, whereby the souls of the
faithful do rise from the grave of sin to holiness of life. And not only to
holiness in general, but to the several branches thereof is blessedness
ascribed; as to saving knowledge. Pro. 3.13. Ioh. 17.3. to faith Luke 1.45.
Ioh. 20.29. to affiance, Psalm. 2.12.34.8.40.4.84.12. hope Psalm. 146.5. Es.
30.18. Ier. 17.7. to obedience Apoc. 22.14. to the fear of God, Psalm.
112.1.128.1.4. to humility Mat. 5.3. Ioh. ^3.17. to patience, Iam. 1.12.5.11.

4 To righteousness, Psalm. 106.3. Es. 56.1.2. and not only to righteousness it
self, but also to the true desire of it Matthew. 5.6. Yea and to the several
branches of it, as to mercifulnes Matthew. 5.7. Psalm. 40.1.2. Prove. 14.21. to
meekenes Matthew. 5.4. to peacemaking Matthew. 5.9.

And not only to the parts of Gods worship, but also to the properties.
Fifthly therefore to the worship of God without fear of our enemies, that is in
confidence Psalm. 146.5. Whither you understand it without cause of fear,
because there is no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS, Romans 8.1. or
without servile fear, in expectation of eternal happiness, Tit. 2.13. for this
indeed is the top of our happiness in this life, to worship God, as without
fear of damnation; so in a sownd expectation of eternal life. And this
seems to be employed in the Hebrew word Hithbaracu, which being of a
reciprocal signification, signifies, that in Abraham's seed all Nations should
not only be blessed, but also should bless themselves, that is esteem and
accoumpt themselves blessed.

Sixthly, To uprightnes and integrity, or to the worshipping of God in holiness
and righteousness as before him. Psalm. 119.^.
Blessed are the upright in the way, that is who walk uprightly; So Psalm.
84.11. and not only the upright themselves, but their children also after them
are pronounced blessed, Prove. 20.7.

Seventhly, To perseverance or worshipping of God all the days of our life.
For he that continues to the end shall be saved, Matthew. 10.22. Mark. 13.13.

If therefore blessedness be ascribed, first of all to redemption or deliverance
from our enemies; secondly, to the true worship of God in general, thirdly, to
holiness, fourthly, to righteousness, fifthly, to the worship of God without
fear, sixthly, to integrity, or to the worship of God as before him,
seaventhly, to perseverance, or to the worship of God all the days of our
life: Then seven times happy is that man, who being delivered from the hand of
his enemies, has grace given unto him to worship God without fear, in holiness
and righteousness before him all the days of his life.

By this conference of places we learn, what the happiness of a Christian is
in this life; not to abound in wealth, not to attain to great honors, not to
wallow in pleasures, wherein many repose their felicity, nor in any temporal
or worldly thing whatsoever; but in our redemption and the fruit thereof,
which is a godly life, or (to express the same in other terms) in our
justification and sanctification, which must teach us in our judgments to
esteem, in our affections to desire, in our endeavors to labor for these
spiritual graces above all the things in this world (for what is our happiness,
that is our chief good) esteeming all worldly things as dross and dung, yea
as loss in comparison thereof, Phil. 3.8.9. For as without these spiritual
graces all worldly things are vain and unprofitable yea, to them that set
their hearts on them, hurtful and pernicious; So having sought and obtained
these graces, all temporal blessings shall be added unto us: or if we seem to
want any of them, our seeming want thereof shall not hinder our happiness. And
therefore our Savior pronounces the faithful, though living in poverty,
hunger, sorrow, and persecution, happy and blessed, Luke ^.20.21.22.

CHAP. IIII. Of the gift promised by this Oath in general, and of the two
parts thereof jointly.
THus much of Zacharies exposition of Gods Oath, now we come to the words
thereof, that he would give us, etc. This thing then promised in this Oath is a
gift: Of this gift we are to speak; first in general, and then in particular.
In general, we may observe, first, the maine difference between the Covenant
of works, made with all mankind: and the Covenant of Grace, made with Abraham
and his seed, the heirs of promise. In the former, the Lord requires perfect
obedience to be performed by our selves to our justification, and salvation;
and denounces his fearful curse against those, that do not continue in a
total and perfect obedience. In the latter, the Lord, in stead of requiring
perfect obedience to be performed of us to our justification and salvation;
promises to those, which believe, redemption and justification without works;
and being redeemed and justified by faith, he promises to give them grace to
walk in new obedience, as being an unseparable fruit of our redemption and
justification, and as the highway wherein we are to walk toward our
glorification. Of this new Covenant the holy Ghost prophecieth by Jeremy Chap.
31. verse. 31.32.33. Behold the days come says the Lord that I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according to
the covenant which I made with their fathers, when I brought them out of Egypt
(which was the covenant of works:) but this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with them, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, etc. Which is the covenant of grace recited by the Apostle, Hebr. 8. v.
8.9.10. of which, being a better covenant, CHRIST is the mediator, v. 6.
according to that Ioh. 1.17. The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by JESUS CHRIST. The same Covenant repeated by Ezechiel Chap. 36.26.27.
The Gospel therefore or Covenant of Grace is not a new law, nor CHRIST a new
lawgiver (as the Papists absurdly teach, confounding the law and the Gospel;
saving that they teach, that the Gospel requires more perfect obedience to be
performed by our selves, then the law it self does prescribe unto
justification) but to them that are redeemed and justified by faith, it
promises grace to walk in new obedience. How be it this is true, that men
deprive themselves of what was promised in the Old Covenant by disobedience: So
if men do live in sin without faith, and without repentance, not so much as
desiring, caring, and endeavoring to worship God in holiness and
righteousness: they can have no assurance that they are within the covenant of
grace, made only with those that truly believe: God having promised to those,
which are redeemed and justified by faith, to give them grace to worship him,
in holiness and righteousness.

Secondly we note, that our justification and sanctification are both the free
gifts of God, for it is he that redeemeth and justifies, and it is he also
that sanctifies, which point needs no proof, seeing God does swear they
are both his gifts. The use whereof in a word is, that both they, which want
these benefits, being neither freed from the guilt of their sins, nor purged
from their corruptions, may know where to seek them: and also those that have
them may be thankful to God the giver of them: which is the thing, whereunto
the holy Ghost by Zachary exciteth us in this Psalm.

Now this gift promised by Oath (that I may come to the parts thereof) is
twofold; our redemption or justification (for to be redeemed is to have our
sins remitted Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. and to have our sins remitted is to be
justified) and the fruit or end of our redemption, which is our
sanctification, consisting in the faithful, sincere, and constant service of
God in holiness and righteousness.

Of these I am to speak, First, jointly of both together; and then of either
of them severally. In the joint consideration, we are to observe both the
order, and conjunction of them. The order is plainly expressed by the
Participle (...) that being delivered from the hand of our enemies we should
worship him, etc. For the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that God would give us,
both that we should be redeemed and delivered from the hand of our enemies; and
also that we should worship him; But to note the order, he has expressed the
former part, which is the benefit of redemption, by the Participle, that being
delivered from the hand of our enemies we should worship him, etc. which
teaches us, that before we can worship God aright, we must be delivered from
the bondage of our spiritual enemies, and that for two reasons. For first,
naturally we are the servants of sin, and of Satan. Being servants of sin,
we are in two respects utterly disabled from serving God, until we be
delivered out of this bondage, for first, being servants of sin, we are free
from righteousness, Romans 6.20. in respect of that privative corruption, which is
in us all derived from our first parents; being a privation of Romans 7.18.
all spiritual goodness, not only in respect of the act, but also in respect of
the habit and power (as blindness is of sight) being a mere impotencie to that
which is spiritually good, in so much that not only we do not think, nor
will, nor do that which is good; but also we are not able thereunto, Of our
selves we cannot so much as think a good thought, 2. Corinthians. 3, 5. The
natural man does not understand spiritual things, neither can he understand
them, 1, Corin. 2.14. Fulgentius, Do incarnat. and gratia. c. 13.
says well, that Adam by his sin wholly lost the faculty of thinking those
things which appertain to God, Homo per peccatum facultatem bonae cogitationis
perdidis and bonae voluntatis.
and also of willing that which is good, and much more of doing that which is
good; for will may be present when performance is wanting Romans 7.18. But it is
God that works in us both to will, and to do, Phil. 2.13. In so much that the
faithful themselves, if they think, or will, or do any thing that is good,
may truly say every of them, 1. Cor. 15.10.
not I, but the grace of God which is with me. For the carnal mind, or the
disposition of our corrupt nature is not subject to the law of God, neither can
it be, Romans 8.7. Augustine truly says, that man by his fall lost bonum
possibilitatis, and our Savior professes, that without him, or not being in
him, we can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. Does not the holy Ghost elsewhere ^each the
same, when he affirms that we are naturally dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1.5. and
therefore, as a dead man cannot perform the actions of the natural life; no
more can he, that is dead in sin, perform the actions of the life
spiritual, likewise, when he calls our recovery from sin, sometimes, the
first resurrection, whereby the soul, which before was dead, is raised as it
were from the grave of sin; sometimes, regeneration, whereby we being before
dead, are quickened, and begotten a new unto God: Sometimes, new creation, by
which we are made new creatures created unto good works. For as the first
creation was a motion from nothing to those things which are; so the new
Chrysostom. Ephesians ^^ 10. (...). etc.
creation is a motion from our not being of grace, and spiritual goodness, to a
being thereof, which serves notably to confute the erroneous conceits of the
patrones of freewill, the Pelagians, Papists; Arminians, and our new
Anabaptists.

Secondly, being servants of sin, sin reigns in us, as a Tyrant, without
resistance, imposing upon us a necessity of sinning. In respect whereof it may
truly be said, that naturally we do nothing but sin, neither can we do
otherwise, but sin. Our free will by nature having (as Augustine says) Nihil
vale^ nisi ad peccandum. De spiritu and lit cap. 3.
no ability but to sin. For as the same Augustine says Ad Bonifacium
contr. 2. epist. Pelag. libr. 3. cap. 8.
liberum arbitrium captivitatum non nisi ad peccandum valet: ad justitia^ vero
nisi divinitus liberatu^ adjutum non valet. The frame of a man's thoughts and
imaginations which the Apostle calls (...), is evil, and only evil, and
that continually, Genes. 6.5.8.21. and therefore of the same the Apostle Romans
8.7.
affirms, that it is not only (...), but (...), not an enemy only, but
also enmity against God. And for the same cause, our Savior when Peter gave
him carnal counsel, called him Satan; and the reason, why he so called him,
was, (...), (...) is mind and affect, the things which are of men Matthew.
16.23. And S. James affirms, that that wisdom which is earthly, and
carnal, is also (...) devilish, Iam. 3.15. As therefore it was well said of
Augustine, De natura and gratia contra Pelag.
that man by his fall did loose bonum possibilitatis; so as truly he did deny,
that he retayneth possibilitatem non peccandi. And this is the estate of all
men in their pure naturalls, which the Philosophers do magnify as good, and
the Papists qualify as not evil. In regard whereof notwithstanding we may
truly be said, besides the guiltines of Adams heinous transgressio^, to have
but 2. faults; the one, that there is in us no goodness spiritual, nor
possibility of our selves, but a mere impotency to that which is good. The
other, that there is in us naturally an evil disposition, and pronenesse unto
all manner of sin, which does so domineere in us, that it imposes a necessity
of sinning, so that by nature, as we do no good, neither can we think, or
will, or do that which is good; so do we nothing but sin, neither can we
do any thing but sin. And as we are naturally the servants of sin; so by
sin we are also the servants of the devil, who is the Prince, Ioh. 12.31.
and God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. under whose subjection the whole world of
the wicked lies, 1 John 5.19. who is the powerful Prince of the air, working
effectually in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. carrying them away
captive to do his will. 2. Tim. 2.26.

This servitude to sin and Satan, the mystery of our redemption does
presuppose. For if we were not captives, we needed not to be redeemed. And he
does therefore redeem us, that we might serve him; and therefore before he
does actually redeem us, we cannot serve him in holiness and righteousness.

Secondly, we are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and enemies, yea
rebels against GOD. And therefore until we be reconciled unto him by the
death of Christ, and justified by faith through the redemption wrought by
Christ; we cannot do any thing which may be acceptable to God. for they that
are in the flesh cannot please God Romans 8 8. The person must be accepted,
before his actions can be accepted; And without faith it is impossible to
please God. Heb. 11.6.

Now if this be so, that we cannot serve God, or do any thing that shall be
accepted of him, unless we be first redeemed, justified, and reconciled to
him: how does it behove every one, that has not yet obtained these graces, to
labor for them above all the things in this world? for until then, he does
nothing but sin, and by multiplying sins he does hoard up wrath against the
day of wrath.

The means on Gods part, is the preaching of the Gospel, which is therefore
called the ministry of reconciliation, which God has committed to the
Preachers thereof, by who^, as his Ambassadors in Christ's steed, he entreats
you to be reconciled unto God. 2. Cor. 5.18.20.

The means on our part, are faith prayer, and repentance. For if thou do
truly, and by a lively faith effectually believe, that JESUS CHRIST is the
Son of God, and Savior of all that believe in him; thou art bound to believe
also (or else thou make God a liar) that he is thy Savior, and so believing
thou art justified, and being justified by faith, thou shall have peace with
GOD.

Secondly, if the Lord who is the party offended, and needs not thy
friendship, desires thee to be reconciled unto him* wilt not thou* who^^ the
offendour, who also without his favor, shall perish eternally; wilt not thou
(I say) by hearty and earnest prayer desire him to be reconciled unto thee? Now
if thou do by the prayer of faith desire God to be reconciled unto thee; what
should hinder thy reconciliatio^, when thou desire that of God, which God by
his Ministers desires of thee?

3. But unto these two we must add the duty of repentance. For if we continue
in sin without repentance, and please our selves in displeasing God; how can
we persuade our selves, that we desire to be reconciled unto him? and if we do
not desire to be reconciled, then are we the professed enemies of God, for whom
remains the fearful Heb. 10.1^
expectation of that judgment which shall destroy the adversaries of God. So
much of the order.

Now we are to speak of the concurrence of these two graces. For when the Lord
swears, that to those whom he redeemeth and justifies, he will give grace to
worship him in holiness and righteousness; from hence we do necessarily
collect, that sanctification is an unseparable companion of justification; and
that no man can have assurance, that he is justified, unless he be in some
measure sanctified. Let no man therefore deceive Iam. 2.14
himself with a vain profession of an idle and dead faith, for unless thou
do, at the least, desire and endeavor to worship God in holiness and
righteousness; it is as certain. as the oath of the Lord is true, that as yet
thou art not justified, nor actually made partaker of the redemption wrought by
Christ. It is true, that our Savior Christ in the days of his flesh, did
redeem us meri^oriously, paying a ransom sufficient for all that should
believe in him: but none are actually made partakers of this Redemption, but
they to whom it is applied; and it is applied only to those that truly
believe; and true faith purifieth Acts 15.9
the heart, and works Gal. ^.6
by love, and is to be demonst^ated Iam. ^ 18
by good works. The same is elsewhere taught in the Scriptures, 2. Cor. 5.17.
Whosoever is in Christ, as all they are, that truly believe in him, is a new
creature, Gal. 5.24. Those that are Christ's, as all they are that are actually
1 Cor. 15.19.20
redeemed by him, have crucified the flesh, with the passions and lusts
thereof. Rom 8.1. They who are in Christ, walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit. The reason hereof is evident. For 1. they who are engraffed into
CHRIST by faith, as all those are which truly believe in him, in them CHRIST
dwells by his spirit (for Romans ^.9
they are not his, who have not his spirit) applying unto them not only the
merit of his death, to their redemption, and the benefit of his resurrection to
Romans 4.25
their justification, but also the virtue Phil. 3.8.9
and efficacy of his death to mortify their sins, and of his resurrection to
raise them to newnes of life; so that for whose sins CHRIST died, they die to
their sin; and for whose justification he arose, they also rise to newnes of
life The Apostle* Romans 6.3.4. affirms, that those who have been baptized
into CHRIST, were baptized into his death, and resurrection; that as CHRIST did
die and rise again; so they also die to sin, and rise to newnes of life.

2. CHRIST was given unto us by his Father, not only to be our justification
and redemption; but also our sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30. Neither did he come
with blood alone, or with water 1 John 5:^
alone, but as Saint John in his Gospel carefully observes, as a thing most
remarkable. John 19.34.35. he came both with water and with blood; with the
blood of redemption, to expiate the guilt of our sins, and with the water of
ablution, or sanctification, to cleanse us from the corruption, 1. Ioh. 5.6.
And in respect of both, his blood does cleanse us from all our sins, 1. Ioh.
1.7 from the guilt, perfectly, in our justification, from the corruption, in
part, and by degrees in our sanctification. See Hebr. 9.14.

3. Whosoever are the sons of God by adoption, as all those are John. 1.12.13.
that truly believe; they also are his by regeneration.

4. The same is employed in the benefit of Redemption, whereby CHRIST our
blessed Savior does not only redeem us from the guilt of sin, which
binds men over to damnation, but also from the bondage of sin, that
howsoever sin does remain in the faithful, yet it shall not reign Romans
6.14.
in them, nor have dominion over them. For they that practice sin, are the
servants of sin, Ioh. 8.34. and of Satan, 1. Ioh. 3.8, in them sin
reigns; and therefore they are not by CHRIST redeemed from the bondage of
sin. For whom the son makes free, they are free indeed, Ioh. 8.36.

5. The same is proved by the nature and properties of a true faith. For faith
is a grace of regeneration, which the spirit of God, when he does regenerate
us, ingenerateth in us: whereby, as we are justified alone, because no other
grace does concur with it to the act of justification: So are we sanctified
in part, together with other graces; and therefore is never severed from the
grace of regeneration, or from other sanctifying and saving graces, and further
it is the property of faith having justified us, inwardly to purify the heart*
Act. 15.9 and outwardly to work by love, Galat. 5.6. Therefore, though to the
act of justification, neither outward obedience, nor inward graces do concur
with faith, as any cause thereof: Yet in the subject, that is, in the party
justified, they must, and do concur, as necessary fruits of a true and
lively faith, without which it is dead. ^^m. 2.20.
And therefore a true, lively justifying faith, is also a sanctifying faith.

Now, both from the order, and conjunction of these graces, we may infer a
singular cons^lation to all the true Children of God. For if there be such a
conjunction between these two graces of justification and sanctification, that
whosoever has the one, has also the other, and who has not both has
neither: then it follows necessarily, that, as he that is justified, is also
sanctified; So he that is sanctified, is also justified, and if the order
between them be such, that a man cannot serve God in the duties of
sanctification, until he be justified, nor cannot worship God aright, until
he be redeemed from his spiritual enemies: then it follows necessarily, that
they who are in any true measure sanctified, are also justified; that they who
sincerely desire, and endeavor to walk in the obedience of Gods holy will,
making conscience of their ways, are redeemed from the hand of their
spiritual enemies. And not only may we from our sanctification come to the
certain knowledge of our justification: but also we may thereby make our
calling and our election sure. For do thou, professing the true faith,
endeavor to keep a good conscience and to walk uprightly before God; then it
is certain, that thou art justified by a true faith; art thou justified? then
it is certain, that thou art effectually called art thou called according to
Gods purpose? then without doubt thou are elected art thou elected? then
undoubtedly thou shall be saved. Seeing then such singular comfort arises from
the leading of a godly and upright life, as that thereby we may make our
calling and election sure, hereby we should all of us be excited to the study
of godliness, and practice of piety: for the greatest comfort that we can have
in this life, is to be assured of our election and salvation. But to the
knowledge of our election, we cannot come a priori, by any thing going before,
as the cause thereof, but a posteriori by the effects. The series or cha^ne of
the degrees of salvation, may not unfitly be compared to Jacobs ladder, which
reached from the earth to heaven, the lowest step whereof in this life is our
sanctification, whereon, if we can set our foot, we may from thence arise to
our justification, and from thence to our effectual calling, and from thence
to our election. But if we will without ascending by these degrees, take upon
us to conclude the certainty of our election, we shall be like him, that being
to go up a ladder, would strive at the first, to set his foot on the highest
step of the ladder, neglecting the lower degrees.

CHAP. V. Of the parts of the gift severally, and first of Redemption.
NOw we are to speak of the parts severally; and first, of Redemption, in
these words, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, where we
are to note 3. things. 1. The parties that are redeemed. 2. The party, by
who^, and after what manner. 3. The parties from whom, our enemies.


1. The parties redeemed are We, who have Abraham to our father; that is to
say, the faithful: not all men, but those only that believe. For so God loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3.16. thus he is said
to have saved his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. to lay down his life
for his sheep, Ioh. 10.15. to have given himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5.25
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might purify to himself a
peculiar people, Tit. ^.14. The Prophet Esaias testifies that Christ by his
knowledge (that is by the acknowledgment of him, which is faith) shall justify
many; Esaias 53.11, 12
for he shall bear their iniquities; and that he bare the sin of many, and
our Savior himself Matthew. 26.18. that his blood was shed for many for
remission of sins. It is true, that CHRIST his death is a sufficient price of
ransom for the sins of the whole world: Yea of more worlds, if there were
more then one, for his blood and his sufferings, whereby he redeemed us, were
the blood Act. 20.28,
and sufferings of him that was and is God* but yet they are effectual only
to those that do believe. For if CHRIST had redeemed all men, then all should
be saved. For all that are redeemed are also justified, and all that are
justified shall be glorified For, for whom CHRIST died, for them he has
satisfied the justice of his father, so that there is no condemnation to them,
whom CHRIST has redeemed. For whom CHRIST died, them by his death he
reconciled to God, now they, who when they were enemies Romans 5.10.
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled
shall be saved by his life: Neither may we think, that CHRIST would die for
them, for whom he would not pray. But for the world says he, John 17.^.
that is for the company of the wicked and reprobates I pray not* but for them
whom thou have given me out of the world. But if the Oath of an honest man,
ought to be the end of controversy, much more ought the Oath of God in this
place end this controversy concerning universal redemption. For God has
sworn, that to so many as he redeemeth, he will give them to worship him in
holmes and righteousness. But the greater part of mankind have never the grace
to worship God in holiness and righteousness, and therefore to them the benefit
of redemption does not belong.

Now, when we do profess our selves to be the redeemed of the Lord, we do
withal confess, that in our selves we are bondmen, and servants, whom CHRIST
came to redeem out of this bondage. But howsoever all will challenge to
themselves the benefit of Redemption, yet how few, in comparison, do
acknowledge their bondage? But like the unbelieving Jews, when our Savior
promised them liberty, profess, that they never were in servitude, Ioh. 8.33.
and so bewray themselves not to be redeemed. But this humble conceit of our
selves before our justification is necessary for us, if either we would seek
to CHRIST, or have him to respect us. For if by nature we be not in bondage,
what need we a redeemer? If not lost, what need we a Savior? Mat. 9.12.
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick, CHRIST came Mat.
9.13
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance, to preach Luke 41 81
redemption to the Captives, and to save that which was lost. He was given unto
us of his father, to be our wisdom, our ustification, our redemption, our
sanctification, our life, our salvation. If therefore we would be made
partakers of these benefits, we must acknowledge our selves to be fools in
spiritual things, that in him we may become wise* guilty of death, and
damnation, that in and by him we may be absolved and justified: defiled and
polluted with sin, that by him we may be sanctified: ^ead in sin, that in
him we may be quickened and revived lost, that in him we may be saved: c^ptives
and bondmen, that by him we may be redeemed.

2. As touching the party by whom we are redeemed; the text says; he would
give us that we should be redeemed: which, in the beginning of this Psalm is
more plainly expressed: Blessed be ^he Lord God of Israel, who has visited,
and redeemed his people, or as the words are has wrought redemption to his
people. how? by raising an borne of salvation, that is, a mighty savior for
us, who according to the flesh was the Son of David. The father therefore
redeemeth us by giving his son for us: the son redeemeth us, by giving
himself to be a price of redemption for us. 1. Tim. 2.6. The holy ghost also
redeemeth us, when working in us the grace of faith, he applies unto us the
benefit of redemption. The father redeemeth, as the gracious author and Donour;
the Son as the meritorious worker, the Holy Ghost, as the effectual applier.
The goodwill and love of God the Father is the (...) or antecedent moving
cause, the death and obedience of Christ is the (...) or meritorious cause; the
application of the Holy Ghost is the (...) or effectual cause, by which we are
made actually partakers of redemption, which is the grace wrought by Christ,
proceeding from the love of the father, 2. Cor. 13.14.
applied unto us by the communion or the Holy Ghost.

Now, here are diverse things to be observed, 1. The infinite and unspeakeable
love of God the father, in giving his only begotten Son, and of God the
Son in giving himself for us; and of God the Holy Ghost the spirit of grace,
in communicating unto us the mercy and love of God, and the merit and virtue
of all that Christ did or suffered for us.

For the first herein is love, says the beloved Apostle, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins. 1. John 4.10. So God loved the world, so infinitely, so unspeakably, so
beyond all comparison; that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. John 3.16. And
again, Romans 8.32. that he spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all. But herein especially God commends his love toward us, that whilst
we were sinners, and by sin enemies, Christ died for us. Romans 5.8.10.

If this love of God Romans 5.5.
be shed abroad in our hearts by his holy spirit, that is, if by the Holy Ghost
working in us faith, we are truly persuaded and assured of it, these effects
will follow, 1. that we shall love God again, the beams of his love inflaming
our hearts, and reflecting back some heat of love. For therefore do we love
God, because he loved us first. 1. Ioh. 4.19. Magnes amoris amor: Love is the
loadstane of love. The woman in the Gospel, who had many sins remitted, did
therefore love much. Luke 7.47. If it be demanded, why, and how we should love
God, I answer with Bernard, Lib. de dilig. Deum ini^^^.
Causa diligendi Deum Deus est Lib. de dilig. Deum ini^^^.
modus, sine modo diligere. God is good without measure, and without measure he
has loved us, therefore without measure, if it were possible, we ought to love
him with all our heart, with (...). Mat. 22.37.
all our soul, and with all our might. Or if we cannot do so by reason of the
flesh, yet at the least with an upright soul, and a sincere heart, to the
uttermost of our power. And this our love we must express Ioh 14.15. E^ed.
20.6,
by keeping his commandments, and that willingly. For this, says S. John, is
the love of God, ^ Ioh. 5.3
that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous.

2. We shall love our neighbor for the Lords sake, it is the use which S. John
makes in the place even now cited, 1. John 4.10.11 Herein is love, not that we
loved God but that he loved us* and sent his son to be the propitiation for
our sins. Beloved (says he) if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another.

3. The persuasion of this love of God affords unto us singular comfort, in
diverse respects. As first in afflictions. For therefore do we glory Romans 5, 3,
4.5
in afflictions, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto us
that is, because by faith wrought in us by the holy Ghost, we are persuaded of
the love of God in Christ, which love God commends toward us, in that, when
we were sinners, Christ died for us.

The second comfort. If God did so love us, when we were his enemies; much more
when by Christ we are become his friends. For if when we were enemies Romans
5.10.
we were reconcilea unto God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled we shall be sav^d by his life.

The third comfort. If God so loved us, that he spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shallbe not then with him also freely give us
all things. Romans 8.32. all things that be expedient for us.

2. The love also of God the Son exceeds all knowledge. Ephesians. 3.19. who so
loved the Church, that he gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. who so loved us,
that he washed us from our sins in his own blood. Apoc. 1.5. Greater l^ve
has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ioh.
15.13. But Christ our sweet savior, being not only man, but God also; gave
himself not for his friends, but for his enemies; and that, not to a common
and ordinary death, but to the most painful, most shameful and most accursed
death of the cross, and not only to suffer a corporal death, but also in his
soul to undergo the wrath of God in our steed; the fear whereof, when he was
in that grievous agony, caused him to sweat great dropps of blood, Luke 22.44.
and the sense thereof on the cross, being in his own sense as a man forsaken
of God, made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.6.

The acknowledgment of this wonderful love of CHRIST, ought first to work in
us a love in some measure answerable to his; that as he gave himself for us an
offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 5.2. so we
should present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto him,
which is our reasonable service, Romans 12.1. And as he gave himself for us, so
should we be willing and ready, if occasion serve, to lay down our lives for
him, the rather because he has promised, that whosoever shall loose his life
for his sake; and the Gospells, shall save it, Marc. 8.35. We owe our selves
unto CHRIST in a double or treble respect: first, for that in our creation he
gave us to our selves: secondly, because in our redemption, when we were lost,
he restored us to our selves: thirdly, when in restoring us, he gave himself
for us. For our selves given and restored, we may and ought to give and render
our selves; but what retribution shall we make him for himself? For though we
should give and render our selves to him, or for him a thousand times, yet what
are we to him? as Bernard Lib. de dilig. Deo.
sweetly argues.

Secondly, we are to imitate our blessed Savior, as the Apostle exhorts us
in respect of his love, showing it self in his wonderful humiliation and
obedience for us. Phil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you which was in Christ
Jesus, who being God coequall with his Father, for our sakes abased himself to
become man: and being man, humbled himself, not only to all active obedience,
performing all righteousness, as being made subject to the Law for us; but also
to the passive obedience, being obedient to death, even the death of the
Cross; and all this for us men, and for our salvation.

Thus you have heard the love of the Father, in giving his Son, and the love
of the Son, in giving himself for us; whereunto we may add the love both of
the Father and the Son, in sending the holy Spirit, the spirit of love to
accomplish our redemption, and also of the Holy Ghost, who furnishes with his
graces, and furnished, sends forth the Ambassadors and Ministers of God,
committing unto them the means of our salvation; in and by which, he having
united us to CHRIST, and made us partakers of him, he works effectually in
the hearts of Gods chosen, all those saving and sanctifying graces, whereby
they are not only entitled unto Gods Kingdom, but also fitted and prepared
for the same.

But as in the work of our Redemption we have observed the wonderful love of
God: so in the second place we are to observe his infinite justice manifested
in the same. For such is the justice of God, that rather then he would suffer
the sins of his own elect children to go unpunished, he has punished them
in the death of his only begotten Son. The consideration whereof ought to
strike a terror in them, that do not believe, nor repent. For if God punished
the sins of the faithful in CHRIST, what shall become of them, who have no
part in CHRIST? undoubtedly every sin, as it deserves death, so is it
punished with death; either with the death of CHRIST in the behalf of them
that believe, or with the death of the parties themselves, who are not in
CHRIST. And as it ministers terror to the wicked; so it affords singular
comfort to the faithful, who are in CHRIST. For they may from the
consideration of this justice of God, safely conclude; that to them, being in
CHRIST, there is not only no condemnation, but not so much as any punishments
so properly called, which in order of justice is inflicted by way of vengeance
to satisfy the justice of God. For CHRIST having fully satisfied the justice of
his Father in the behalf of all them that believe; it cannot stand with the
justice of God to punish the same sins in the party, which he has already
punished in CHRIST. The children of God are indeed subject to manifold
afflictions, which are mala poena, but unto them the nature of them is changed,
so that they be not punishments to them, but either fatherly chastisements, (
for when 1 Cor. 11.32
we are judged, that is, afflicted for our sins, we are chastised of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world) or else trialls for their
good.

Thirdly, we observe how heinous, and how detestable our sins are in the
sight of GOD: the guilt whereof could not be expiated, no^ the justice of GOD
satisfied, no^ his wrath for them appeased, by any other means, but by the
most precious blood of the eternal Son of GOD. That both in respect of our
sins past we should be touched with remorse, when we consider that by our
sins we nailed our Savior to the cross, (to which end we are to pray, that
the Lord would pour upon us Zach: 12, 10
the spirit of grace and supplication, that when we lock upon him, whom we
have pierced we might lament and mourn, as a father mourns for his only
son:) and also in respect of the time to come, we should not be animated to
commit any sin, as being small; seeing there is none so small, but the price
of it was the precious blood of CHRIST: none so light, but that if we be not
eased from the burden of it by the merits of CHRIST, it is of sufficient
weight to press us down to hell.

The third thing to be considered in the doctrine of redemption, are the
enemies from whom we are delivered; which are not carnal, as the Jews
imagine, dreaming that their Messiah should be a temporal Monarch, who having
subdued their enemies, which held them in subjection, should restore the
Kingdom to Israel, but spiritual. And these are the law, sin, death, and
the devil; the law being the strength of sin, sin the sting of death, and
death the power of the devil, from the hand, that is, from the power of all
which our Savior CHRIST has delivered us.

If it be demanded, why among the enemies I do not reckon the world. I
answer, if by World, be meant worldly desires, as 1. Ioh. 2.15.16. they are
comprehended under the title of sin: if wicked worldlings, they are but the
seed of the serpent, and the instruments of the Devil. And in both senses, not
only our Savior has overcome the world for us, John 16.33. but the faithful
also in and by him. 1. John 4.4.5.4.5.

The law by reason of our transgression is an enemy unto us; whether we
consider the yoke of the ceremonial law, or the bondage wherein the moral law
did hold us. From the yoke of the ceremonial laws, ^
which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear; our Savior CHRIST
delivered us, blotting out or cancelling the handwriting of ordinances that
was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nayling
it to his cross, Col 2.14 and abolishing in his (...) the enmity, even the law
of the commandments consisting in ordinances. Ephesians. 2.15.

And as touching the moral law, our Savior has delivered us, first from the
curse of the law, and consequently from all punishments of sin whether
temporal or eternal, himself being made a curse for us. Gal. 3.13. and not
only so, but has also made us partakers of the blessedness promised in him to
Abraham, and to his seed, that is, to all the ^a^^hfull, who are the heirs of
promise.

2. From the rigor and exaction of the law, exacting of us perfect
righteousness, inherent in us, and perfect obedience to be performed by us to
our justificatio^, by performing perfect righteousness in his own portion for
us, by which righteousness being apprehended by faith; we are justified before
GOD, without the works of the law, that is, without respect of any
righteousness inherent in us, or obedience performed by us. Romans 3.28. Now this
twofold bondage was most miserable; to be subject to the fearful curse of God,
if we did break the law, when we could do nothing else but break it: and to
be excluded from justification and salvation, if we did not perfectly fulfill
the law, which by reason of the flesh is impossible unto us* Romans 8.3.

3. From the terror, and coaction of the law working servile fear in those,
who are under the law, forcing them by fear of punishment, as bondslaves by
the wh^p; to the outward, though unwilling performance of it. From this spirit
of 2 Timothy 1.7.
fearfullnes, which is also called the spirit Romans 8.15.
of bondage, CHRIST has freed us, that as a voluntary people Ps. 110.3. Zelou^
of good works Tit. 2.14. we may worshipp God (...), as it follows in my text,
without servile fear, with upright hearts and willing minds 1. Chron. 28.9.
as not being under the law, but under grace.

4. From the irritation of the law, in regard whereof especially it is called
the strength of sin. 1. Cor. 15.56. whereunto our own corruptions did make
us subject, as unto Rom 7.15.
an husband, begetting foul issue by us tending to death. For such is the
corruption of our untamed nature, until we be renewed by the spirit of GOD,
that when the law, which is holy and good, forbids sin, and seeks to
bridle our sinful affections; like an untamed colt it rebelleth so much the
more; and that it might appear exceedingly sinnfull, takes occasion by the
law forbidding sin, to work in us all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7.8.13.
But when we being adopted in CHRIST are also regenerated by the spirit, and so
made dead to (...); we are mortified to the law, and the law to us, in
respect of this irritation accidentally caused by our corruption, always prone
to that which is forbidden: and consequently are delivered from the bondage of
the law, Romans 7.2. etc.
as of a former husband being dead.

Secondly we are by CHRIST freed from death, both from the first death, as it
is a punishment, and from the second. For as of all other afflictions, so of
death the nature is changed in respect of the faithful, to whom it is not a
punishment or curse, the sting of it (which is sin) being taken away; but
rather a blessing; no loss, but advantage, because to them it is the end of
sin, and consequently of all misery, the beginning of happiness, a passage
from the vale of tears to the kingdom of glory, the end of a mortal life, and
the beginning of a life immortal

Likewise from the second death, for he has delivered us from the wrath that
is to come. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. so that to them that are in Christ, there is no
condemnation Romans 8 1 this being the maine promise of the Gospel, that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Ioh.
3.15.16.18.

Thirdly from the power of the devil: that howsoever he may assault us, yet he
shall not hurt ^s. Because he that is in us, being greater then he that is in
the world. 1. Ioh. 5.18. has overcome this strong man. Luke 11.22. and has
bound him, as being stronger then he. For by his death he has overthrown him
that had the power of death, that is the devil, delivering them who through
fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. 2.14.15. and
having spoiled principalities and powers (meaning the devil and his angels)
he has made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them on the cross. Col.
2.15.

4. But the most pernicious enemy is that which we carry in our own bosom;
and that is sin, from which if we ^e freed, we are delivered from all the
rest. For if we be delivered from sin, then are we freed from the curse of
the law, from the evil of death having lost his stinge, from the danger of
damnation being abs^lved from the guilt of sin, from the malice of satan,
who, if we be freed from sin, has nothing to object against us. For who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that does justify,
who shall condemn? CHRIST having dyed and being risen again sits at the
right hand of his father making intercession for us. Romans 8.33.34. Therefore in
the scriptures the whole benefit of our redemption is expressed sometimes by
deliverance from sin as Ephesians. 1.7 Col. 1.14. By Christ we have redemption,
viz. remission of sins. For therefore Christ gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity. Tit. 2.14. 1. Pet. 1.18. Act. 3.25.26. Now,
from sin he does deliver us; first, in respect of the guilt thereof by
justifying us, and reconciling us unto God, Act. 13.38.39. 2. Cor. 5.19.

Secondly, in respect of the corruption of si^ne* (which he mortifieth in us by
degrees,) he freeth us from the bondage and dominion of sin, that howsoever*
it remains in the children of God, yet it shall no more reign in them Romans
6.14.

The use of this doctrine concerning our redemption is.

First, seeing CHRIST our savior has redeemed us from our enemies, that
therefore we should not stand in fear of them, according to that Esaias. 43.1.
fear not, for I have redeemed thee, but as we are taught in the next words, we
should all the days of our life worship him without fear and in the end of
our days co^me^d our souls into the hand of God, saying with David Ps 3^.^
Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me Lord God of truth.

2. When we have sinned against God, the remembrance of our rede^ptio^ should
encourage us to return unto him by unfeigned repentance, as himself exhorts.
Es. 44.22 These things, says St. John, I write unto you, that you sin not
but if any man do sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiatio^ for our sins. 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.

3. Seeing our savior has redeemed and bought us with ^o great a price,
therefore we ought to acknowledge him to be our Lord in the right of rede^^tio^
and our selves not to be our own men, but his servants. For therefore Christ
died and rose again to life, that he might be the Lord both of the quick and
of the dead. Rom 14.9. And if we acknowledge him to be our Lord, we must be
careful to do his will, otherwise in vain do we call him so. Why do you
call me Lord, and do not the things that I command you? Luke 6.46. Not every
one that says, Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that
does the will of my father which is in heaven. Mat. 7.22. Again, being bought
with a price, we are not our own men, but his that bought us: and therefore
ought not to seek our selves, or the satisfying of our own lusts; but to
glorify God both in our bodies and in our spirit, which are not ours but Gods.
1. Cor. 6.19.20. That body is not thine to spend in sin, but is to be offered
unto God, as an holy and acceptable sacrifice* That tongue is not thine own,
as the wicked say of theirs. Ps. 12 4. to use or rather abuse at thy pleasure,
but to be used to the glory of God. That heart is not thine to be addicted to
wordly vanities, but to be give^ to God. In a word, Christ died for all, that
they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which
died for them, and rose again. 2. Cor. 4 15.

4. Seeing CHRIST has given himself for us to free us from our enemies, let
us stand fast in that liberty which Christ at so dear a price purchased for
us; and not suffer our selves to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
Gal. 5.1. For what can be, either more dishonorable to our Redeemer, then that
we should revolt from him to serve sin and Satan, or more pernicious to our
selves; for then our latter end should be worse then our beginning. 2. Pet.
2.20. Remember the Israelites, who being redeemed out of Egypt, for desiring to
return, perished in the wilderness. Remember Luke 17.^^.
Lots wife, who, being delivered out of Sodom, for looking back was turned
into a ^illar of salt. The which I speak not as though I thought, that a man
who is once truly justified, and redeemed, can either totally or finally fall
away from saving grace: but to admonish those, who think 1 Cor. 10*12.
they stand, to take heed that they do not fall For if any professing himself
to be redeemed, shall fall away, his example will not prove, that a man may
fall from saving grace: but his falling away will evidently prove, that he was
never in the state of grace. 1 Ioh. 2.19.3, 9.

5. For as much as Christ our Passover 1 Cor. 5.8.
is sacrificed for us, we should purge out the old leaven, and keep a
perpetual feast of unleavened bread (signified by the 7 days of that feast,)
not with the leaven of hypocrisy, ^or with the old leaven of naughtines, but
with the unleavensd graces of sincerity and truth: but especially when we
celebrate the memory of our redemption on the Lords day, or in any of our Lords
feasts, or at the celebrating of the holy Communion, which is the antitype to
the Passover.

6 Lastly, we are to be heartily thankful unto God, for this inestimable
benefit, whereby we, being utterly lost by sin, and therefore in our selves
worse then nothing (for better were it not to be, then being lost, not to be
redeemed) are restored to a better estate then we lost in Adam. And this our
thankfulness we are to express, partly by thanksgiving, whereunto we are
excited in this Psame, according to that before cited, Ps. 107.2. Let them give
thanks whom the Lord has redeem^d, and delivered from the hand of the enemy.
For therefore has our Savior redeemed us, that he might make us Priests, Apoc.
1.5.6. or as S. Peter speaks; an holy Priesthood, to offer the spiritual
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to God; and pattly, by seeking to glorify
God, who has been so gracious to us, by bringing forth the fruit, and
performing the end of our ^edemption, which is the faithful and sincere
worship of God in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Of which
I am now to speak.

CHAP. VI. The fruit and end of our redemption, viz. the true worship of God
in holiness and righteousness.
THe second part of the gift promised by oath, is, (...), to worship or serve
him, etc. which is both the end and fruit of our redemption. The consideration
of which end is of great importance. For if we know not to use aright any of
the least gifts or creatures of God, unless we know the true end thereof (for
to the end the right use is referred:) it is more then probable, that he shall
abuse this great benefit of redemption, if we have not respect to the end
thereof; which is our sanctification. For else what can be the cause of such
dissolute living, as is every where to be seen among those who profess
themselves redeemed by CHRIST, but a foolish opinion, that CHRIST having freed
them from their sins, they may sin the more freely* and that he having dyed
for their sins, they need not to die to them, and so abuse the grace Jude 4.
of God unto wanto^nes. For if our sanctification be the end of our redemption
then do we abuse this great benefit of GOD, if we do not refer it to this
end. yea rather, we deceive and abuse our selves with a vain opinion of our
redemption. For if this be the end of our redemption, then those that live in
sin as the servants of sin, either are not redeemed (for who^ Christ the
son makes free, they are free indeed) or else they are redeemed in vain, for
that is in vain which is frustrate of the end.

Now that sanctification is the end of our redemption, it may be proved by the
testimonies of holy scripture, and also by sound reasons drawn from thence.
Tit. 2.14. Christ has given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and that he might purify or sanctify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. Ephesians. 5.25.26.27. Christ loved his church and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water
by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish. Col. 1.21.22. You that were enemies Christ has reconciled in the body
of his flesh through death to present you holy and unblameable in his sight. 1.
Pet. 2.^4 Christ himself bare our sins in his own body, on the tree, that
we, being dead to sin should live unto righteousness.

The reason is evident. For that which is the end of all Gods blessings in this
life, both spiritual and temporal, must needs be the end of our Redemption.
But our sanctification is the end of all Gods blessings in this life. 1 Thessalonians.
4.3. This is the will of God even your sanctification; this is that which God
wills, and intends in bestowing his benefits upon us. He has elected us,
that we might be holy. Ephesians. 1.4. he created us after his own image, that we
might worship him in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. he has called us to
holiness 1 Thessalonians 4.7 and we are called to be Saints, or Saints by calling, Romans
1.7. 1. Cor. 1.2. he does regenerate us to the same end. For we are the
workmanship of God created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10. To the same end he
has planted us in his Church* that we might be called trees of righteousness,
bringing forth fruit to his glory, Es 61.3. and finally to the same end he
bestows his temporal benefits upon us. The Psalmist having in the 105 Psalm
recounted the manifold blessings of God bestowed upon the Israelites, in the
last verse he concludes this to be the end of all, that they might observe his
statutes and keep his laws.

And as it is the end, so also the fruit of our redemption; as it is plainly
delivered in this text, that he would give us, that we being delivered from the
hand of our enemies, should worship him without fear in holiness and
righteousness. More plainly, Romans 6.22. Being made free from sin, and become
servants to God, we have our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.
And to these, we may add Heb. 9* 13.^4. For if the blood of bulls and goats,
and the ashes of an heyfer sprinckling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge our consciences
from dead works to serve the living God. And Tit. 2.11.12. The saving grace of
God has appeared to all (namely both by deed and by word: ^n deed by sending
CHRIST to redeem us. 2. Tim. 1.9.10. 1. John ^.9 10. by word in publishing
this benefit of redemption by the preaching of the Gospel,) the fruit whereof
is this, teaching us, that we renouncing all ungodlines, and worldly lusts,
should live soberly and justly, and holily in this present world, expecting the
happy hope, that is, the happiness hoped for etc.

Seeing then that holiness of life is both the end and fruit of our redemption,
and of all other the gifts of God, let us labor to attain to this end, and to
bring forth this fruit so shall we show our selves thankful unto God for
this and all other his benefits, and shall also make, not only out
justification and redemption, but also our calling and election sure 2. Pet.
1.10.

But on the contrary, if professing our selves redeemed by CHRIST, we live in
sin, as the servants of sin, then are we most unthankful unto God, this
being the end of our redemption, and the only fruit, which he expects in
lieu of this and all other his benefits: and most injurious to our selves, not
only depriving our selves of all assurance of our salvation, but also drawing
upon our selves most deserved damnation. And let us know, that the foundation
of GOD which is sure, has this seal^: let every one that names the name of
CHRIST, depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.19.

But let us come to the words: whereof there may be some doubt, how they are to
be translated; whether that we might, or that we should worship him? Both are
included: the words are (...), that he would give us to worship him: including
both to can and to will, and also to do. But we must remember that our new
obedience, which is the fruit of our redemption, stands in the study of
piety, that is, in the truth of our desires, uprightnes of our will, and
purpose, sincerity of our care and endeavors, rather then in the perfect
performance, the Lord in his children accepting the will for the deed By which
desire, will, and endeavor, though we do not perfectly fulfill the law, yet
we may be truly said to keep it. And if we have this unfeigned desire, sincere
purpose, and upright endeavor to please God in the duties of piety and
charity; we shall be accepted of God, according to the covenant of grace, as
true worshippers of God in holiness and righteousness. This caution is carefully
to be remembered; otherwise, the greatest part of true Christians might seem to
be excluded out of the covenant of grace, and out of the number of them that
are redeemed by CHRIST.

CHAP. VI. The worship of God in holiness and righteousness.
NOw this worship of God, which is the fruit and end of our redemption, is
here notably described, by the parts and properties thereof. The parts are
holiness and righteousness. For by holiness, you are to understand the duties of
the first Table, viz. of piety and religion toward God by righteousness, the
duties of the second table, which we owe unto men, And of these we are to
speak, first, jointly, of them both together, and then of either of them
severally.

Holiness and righteousness, as they are here joined together by the holy Ghost,
so in practice they may not be severed. Those that are in Christ are new 2 Cor.
5.17
creatures, renewed according to the image of God in Ephesians. 4.24.
true holiness and righteousness. And in this place the Lord has promised to
give to those that are redeemed, to worship him, not in holiness alone, nor in
righteousness alone but in holiness and righteousness. And therefore those things,
which God has conjoined, let no man sever. for these two are so conjoined by
God, that whosoever has the one* has the other: and whosoever has not both,
has neither of them in deed and in truth. He that loves God, loves his
neighbor also. 1. Ioh. 4.21 neither can a man love God in truth, that loves
not his brother also, as St. John argues. If any man say I love God, and
hates his brother, he is a liar, for he that loves not his brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 1. John. 4.20. for
true is the old saying, (...), of seeing comes loving.

Neither can a man love his neighbor as he ought, but he will love God much
more, For our brother is to be loved in the Lord; and for the Lord. And it was
well said of Bernard licet aliquid diligere preter Deu^, modo id diligamus
propter Deum. Now it is a rule in Philosophy. (...) for what any thing is, that
is much more. Therefore if we love our brother for Gods sake, then do we love
God much more.

Here therefore two sorts of men are to be reproved. The former is of those,
who would seem to be forward professors of religion and piety toward God, that
are very backward in the duties of cha^ity and righteousness to their brethren*
such were the Phatisies, whom our savior calls hypocrites, bidding us to
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy for says he
unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees,
you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5.20.

These men are wont to discover their hypocrisy, partly by their words, and
partly by their works. By their words, being evil speakers detracters, and
depravers of their brethren: who with the same tongue bless God, and curse
man, who is made after the similitude of God Iam. 3.9. But the said St. James
chapter 1.26. has given his censure of these men.

For says he, if any man among you seem to be religious and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain: By their
works: cloaking under the show of religion hard dealing and deceit; having
Jacobs voice, and Esau's hands; scandalizing the profession of religion by
their hypocrisy. The holy Ghost therefore to discover such hypocrites, when he
would set down the marks and notes of men truly religious, describes them
commonly by the duties which they perform to their brethren: making them the
touchstone, as it were, of their piety and religion toward GOD. Psalm. 15. and
24. Iam. 1.27.

The other sort is of those, who professing themselves to be christians are but
civil honest men, void of piety, and religion toward GOD. I speak not
against civil honesty, which is very commendable and necessary; in so much as
they who want it are worse then some of the hearthen that know not God. For
many of the heathen were of a civil and honest conversation, yea some of the^
excelled in moral virtues But I would not have a Christian to rest, in a fair
outward civil conversation among men, as though no more were required of him.
For if a man, pro^essing himself a Christian, shall have no more in him then
the Paganes who knew not GOD: can such a one be esteemed a sownd Christian? Our
love of men must proceed from the love of God; the streams of our justice and
charity toward men, must be detived from the fountain of piety toward God.
without Heb. 11 6.
faith it is impossible to please God. without faith, without piety, without
the fear of God, without repentance, the best actions of civil honest men,
are but splendida peccata. The chiefest care of a Christian must be to worship
God, first in the duties of piety and religion; and secundarily in the duties
of righteousness and charity toward men.

But the mere civil honest man neither worshippeth, God in the duties of
piety, nor yet in the duties of righteousness; which he performs as a mere
natural man, without any respect or relation had unto God* and therefore cannot
be said in doing those duties to serve God in righteousness, as not performing
them in obedience to God, or for Gods sake.

Now if they which want either of these are not to be deemed sownd Christians,
what shall we say of those which have neither; yea that not so much as seem to
have either? profane and wicked men, who professing themselves Christians, that
is to say men redeemed by CHRIST, turn Iud. 4.
the grace of GOD into wanto^nes being in name Christians, in deed Atheists.
professing themselves to know GOD, but Tit. 1.16.
in deed denying him, being abominable and disobedient and to every good work
reprobate.

Now we are to speak of either of them severally; but bri^fly, and in a word.
For if I should treat of them at large; under the title of holiness, I should
discourse of all the duties required in the first table of the decalogue; in
all which we must think our selves bound to worship God, if we will worship him
in holiness. And under the name of righteousness I should treat of all the
duties of the second table, all which we must endeavor to perform to our
neighbor in obedience to God, if we would be thought to worshipp or to serve
him in righteousness.

But first, we are to speak of holiness; because that is the first and the great
commandment. Mat. 22.38.

That holiness is a fruit of our redemption, the holy Ghost does plainly
testify Romans 6.22. Being freed from sin and made servants to God, you have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. And that it is also the
end of our redemption, St. Paul witnesses Ephesians. 5.27. Col. 1.22. And as it is
the fruit and end of our redemption and justification in part* so is it also a
necessary forerunner of glorification. And therefore if we shall truly worship
the Lord in holiness, we may be assured, that the Lord has redeemed us* and
consequently, as we have the fruit of our redemption in holiness; so shall we
have the end thereof, which is the salvation of our souls. Romans 6.22. Apoc.
20.6. But contrary wise, if our conversation be unholy and unpure, as we want
the fruit of our redemption, so shall we never attain to the end thereof,
which is everlasting life. For as the holy Ghost witnesses Heb. 12.14. without
holiness no man shall see God.

Righteousness also, as has been said, is in part the fruit and end of our
redemption* for being freed from sin we become the servants of righteousness,
Romans 6.18. and therefore did our savior in his own body on the tree bear our
sins, that we dying ^^ sin might live unto righteousness. 1. Pet. 2.24.

But here some may object; if righteousness contain the duties which we owe to
man, whither our brethren or our selves; how is it here f^nd, that we are to
worship or serve God in righteousness? Answ. This teaches us, that the duties
which we owe to man, are to be performed in obedience to God, and for his sake,
seeking and intending his glory therein. And being so done, he esteems them
as done to himself, and accordingly does he reward them. vis mereri Deu^ says
one Hugo de 5. victore tom. 3. de sacram. l. ^. part. 13. c. 11.
would thou in thy duties to man indeere thy service to God, fac quod facis
propter Deum. Do what thou do for GODS sake. Now if our duties to man be
done in obedience to God, then in performing them we serve God. If we do them
for his sake, then in serving our brethren by love, we serve him much more. If
seeking and intending his glory therein as the supreme end, we do thereby
glorify him, and cause him to be glorified by others; If he esteem them as
done to himself, then in the duties of love whereby we serve one an other
(Gal. 5.13) we do service to God and such a service, as is more acceptable to
him, then the outward du^t^e o^ his own worship or service. For when the
Prophet Micah was demanded this question: wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, and bow my self before the high GOD? shall I come before him with br^^^t
offerings, with calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased rings with
calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or
with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? The Prophet
makes answer, he has showed thee O man what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to (...) mercy, and to humble thy self
to walk with thy God? Mic. 6.6.7.8. The fast which God accepts, is to fast
from the sins of unrighteousnes and oppression, and to perform the duties of
charity and justice. Es. 58.6.7. Their Religion also God does approve as pure
and undefiled, who exercise the works of mercy and charity to those that are
in misery, I am. 1.27. and such will he pronounce blessed at the last day, who
have approved their faith and piety by doing the works of Mat. 25.34.40.
mercy and charity to the poor members of CHRIST, which he esteems as done
to himself. And let me add this for the comfort of true Christians, who walk
uprightly in a lawful calling, though it be never so mean, that by doing the
works of their calling justly in obedience to God, seeking Gods glory in the
good of their brethren, they worship God in righteousness. And let them assure
themselves, that their lawful and honest calling is that station, wherein the
Lord has placed them to serve him in righteousness. But they must remember
withal, that they who so serve him in righteousness, must also, and that
principally, be careful to worship him in holiness. And this is to be
understood of civil callings. But as touching the Ministers of Gods word, this
may further be added for their comfort, that so many of them as with good
conscience take pains in their function, whether in their private studies, or
in their public ministry, seeking to glorify God in the edificatio^ of the
Church, or the members thereof: they do worship God both in holiness and in
righteousness.

By this which has been said it plainly appears, that howsoever we are freed
from the curse the rigor, the terror, and irritation of the law; yet we are
not freed from the obedience of the law moral. For freedom from obedience,
and righteousness, is the servitude of sin. But we are freed from the bondage
of sin, that we may be enabled with upright hearts and willing minds to
worship the Lord in holiness and in righteousness. And therefore, howsoever
carnal gospellers and libertines, abuse the liberty which CHRIST has
purchased as an occasion to the flesh, turning the grace of God into wantonness,
to their own perdition: Yet devilish is the sclander of the Papists, who
calumniate the doctrine of the Gospel, as if we taught thereby, that Bellarm.
de justif. lib. 4. c. 5.
men are freed from obedience to all laws whatsoever of God, and man, yea from
the decalogue it self. But this needs no answer, it being evident to all
the world, that we do urge the obedience of the law moral as well as they
do, and by better arguments and reasons, then they do. For their chief
reasons are taken from the falsely supposed benefits of good works, that they
satisfy for sin, justify before GOD, and merit eternal life. but by these
reasons they teach men to mar good works, and not to do them. for a good
work done with the the opinion, of satisfaction, justification, or merit, is
so far from being a good work, that it is odious and abominable in the sight
of GOD; as being derogatory to the most perfect satisfaction, and
all-sufficient merit of CHRIST our savior.

But we among other arguments, take some from this text: Because our new
obedience or practice of good works is the fruit and end of our redemption. 2.
because it is an unseparable companion of our redemption and justification. 3.
because God has sworn, that he will give the^ that are redeemed grace to
worship him in holiness and righteousness, and therefore that works in them that
are redeemed or justified, do follow necessarily by necessity of
infallibility. And therefore it is impossible, the oath of the Lord being true
(which cannot possibly be untrue) that a man should be actually redeemed or
justified, and yet have no care to practice good works, that is to say, to
perform the duties of holiness and righteousness. But in other respects also,
we do urge the necessity of good works, which we prove to be necessary also
necessitate praecepti, and so by necessity of Duty, which we owe 1. unto God,
to show our selves obedient and thankful unto him and studious of his glory 2.
to our neighbor, and 3. to our selves, likewise necessitate signi, not only
as they are the testimonies and tokens whereby we are to make our calling and
election sure: but also, as they are the evidence according to which our
savior will judge us at the last day. and lastly necessitate medij: for
although we are not justified by the^, nor saved for the^, yet they are the way
wherein we are to walk toward our heavenly country; as Bernard well said, that
they be via regni the way to the kingdom, though not causa regnandi, the cause
of obtaining the kingdom. For as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.10.
we are the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has before ordained that we should walk in them, as in the way which
leads to eternal life. This is the way, let us walk in it. Es. 30.21.

CHAP. VIII. The properties of Gods worship, and first of the worshipping of
God without fear.
THus much of the parts of Gods worship: now follow the properties. For it is
not sufficient to do that which is good, but we must be careful of the manner
also, that it be well done. It is not sufficient to worship God in the parts of
his worship; unless they be performed in that manner, which God has prescribed.

Our new obedience has three properties: for therein we are to worship and
serve God without fear. before him. all the days of our life


The first respecting our enemies, (...), without fear of them. The second
respecting God. (...), before him. The third respecting the time. all the days
of our life.


The first is (...) or spiritual security, noted in the word (...), without
fear. For without doubt this adverbe is to be adjoined in construction to the
verb (...), and not to the participle (...). For neither was the deliverer
without fear, Heb. 5.7. Mark. 14.33. Luke 22.43.44. nor the delivered. Heb.
2.15.

The second, uprightnes or integrity noted in the words before him.

The third, constancy or perseverance, noted in these words, all the days of
our life.

As touching the 1. we must in the 1. place endeavor to explane the true sense
and meaning of the words. For at the first sight it may seem not well to agree
with other places of the scripture, wherein fear is highly co^me^ded.

For 1. the fear of God is the beginning Ps. 111.10* Pro 9.10. Job. 28.28.
or chief point of wisdom, that is of true piety; By it, as a bridle, men
are restrained from evil, ( for the fear of God is to depart from evil Pro.
8.13.) which bridle being cast off, men run headlong into sin; see Genesis
20.11. how then can this be promised as an especial blessing to worship God
without fear?

2. St. Peter. 1. Epist. 1.17.18. says, We are therefore to pass the time of
our pilgrimage in fear, because we know that we are redeemed by the blood of
Christ. Here the Lord promises, that he will give us, that we being redeemed
by the blood of CHRIST shall worship him without fear; so Es. 43.1. Fear not,
for I have redeemed thee.

3. Solomon Pro. 28.14. pronounces him blessed who fears always: here
Zachary expounding the blessedness, which was promised in Abraham's seed, says,
it is to worship God without fear.

4. St. Paul exhorts us, because we have such promises, that to us being
redeemed by Christ, God will be our father etc. to perfect our sanctification
in the fear of God 2. Cor. 7.1. and elsewhere he admonishes the redeemed,
whose salvation was already begun, to work out their salvation with fear
and trembling. Phil. 2.12. here the Lord promises the redeemed, that they
shall worship him without fear.

5. Ps. 2.11. and 5.7. God is to be worshipped with fear.

6. Carnal security, which is the want of fear, is as it were the cradle of
the devil, wherein he rocketh men asleep to their perdition; and it is a brand
or mark of the wicked, not to have the fear of God before their eyes. Romans
3.18. how the^ can the want of fear be promised as a blessing?

For answer to this objection, we are to distinguish, both of fear, and of
the want of fear or security. Fear is to be distinguished, both in respect of
the object, and of the subject: The object, that is the party or the thing
feared: the subject, that is, the person who fears.

1. First in respect of the party feared. For there is a fear of God, and
there is a fear of our enemies. God has delivered us from the hand of our
enemies. that we should worship him without fear, not of him, but of them. For
as he has redeemed us from the service of our enemies, that we might serve
him, so he has freed us from the fear of them, that we may fear him alone
and hereunto p^rtayneth that place of Esaias. c. 43.1. fear not (to wit thine
enemies) for I have redeemed thee.

But this (...) or want of fear in respect of our enemies, which is a
doubtful fear, may be understood, either metonymically, without cause of
fear, or properly without fear it self. And so there are two degrees of this
(...) or want of fear; the former, implying the certainty of the object: the
latter, of the subject; the former pertaining to all true believers, though but
incipients, whose salvation is certain and sure (which I call the certainty of
the object) though they perhaps be not as yet, nor at all times certain, nor
sure of it. The other, belonging to proficients, or grown Christians. Of the
former, you may with Theophylact understand the word (...) without fear, as
signifying (...) without danger or cause of fear. so are they said to be
secure or without fear, who are in safety and out of danger, as all the
faithful are, being kept safe by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. (...)
1. Pet. 1.5 Of the latter Beza understands the word (...), as signifying
(...) in confidence or assurance. Ephesians. 3.12. or as the Apostle speaks Tit.
2.13. in assured expectation of salvation. which (...) or fearlesnes, is a
consequent of the former, that being the foundation of this, when we know our
selves to believe For if we believe that we are out of danger, we will also be
without fear, and according to the measure of this belief, is the measure of
this security, or want of fear* and this degree seems to be employed in the
hebrew verb hithbaracu, Genesis 12.18.
as I noted before.

And this I called the certainty of the subject.

This place therefore is to be understood of the fear of our enemies, that we
are to worship God without fear of them; and not of the true fear God. of
which all those places, which were objected as commanding fear, did speak of
which true fear of God this (...) in not fearing our enemies is a fruit and
effect. For he that fears God truly needs not to fear any thing else,
according to that. Pro. 14.26. in the fear of the Lord is strong confidence

2. In respect of the thing feared, fear is either of the evil of punishment,
or of the evil of sin. But this distinction is the same in effect, with that
distinction of fear in respect of the subject, whereof I am now to speak.

3. in respect of the subject, that is, the persons fearing. Fear is either of
Bondservants who are under the law, which is a servile or slavish fear.
Sons, who are not under the law, but undergrace, which is a sonne-like or
filial fear.


The former is properly called metus, whose effect is metuere ab aliquo, to be
afraid of the object, that is feared. The other is timor (of (...)) whose
effect is to fear or to reverence the object feared. The former is a fearful
expectation of some evil from the party feared: the other is an awful
reverence of the party feared, not to offend him by doing evil* so that the
formal object of the former is malum poenae, the evil of punishment, in
regard whereof they are afraid of God: of the other, malum culpae, the evil of
sin, in regard whereof they fear to offend or displease God. The former is
rather metus poenae, then timor Dei, fear of punishment, rather then of God.
For if there were no punishment, they that have but this fear, would not fear
to offend God.

O derunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
The other out of the love of God and of goodness, though there were no
punishment to be feared, fears to offend.

O derunt peccare boni virtutis amore.
The former being (...) the spirit of bondage Ro^ 8.15 and (...) the spirit of
fearfulnes. 2. Tim. 1.7. is a fruit and effect of the law forceing and
co^pelling those that are under it to yield some outward obedience for fear of
punishment. The other is a fruit of the Gospel, and of faith; when a man being
persuaded of Gods mercy and goodness toward him in Christ, fears to offend so
gracious a God, and merciful father, according to that Ps. 130.4. There is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared.

Of this son like fear, there is no question, but that we are to worship God
therewith. Ps. 2.11.5.7. Nay, we cannot worship God aright without it. Deuteronomy.
6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him: this being one of the
chiefest things required in his service, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Eccl. 12.13. and is
therefore called caput sapientia, the very chief point of wisdom, that is of
true piety and godnnes Ps. 111.10. Pro. 9 10. Of the other, there may be a
question; whether God has promised to those that are redeemed, that they shall
worship him without all servile fear, seeing that it is profitable, that men
should be restrained from sin by fear of punishment. And to that end, does the
Lord threaten judgments and punishments to terrify and to deter men from
sin.

To this I answer, as I delivered before in the doctrine of redemption, that
our savior in delivering us from the terror and coaction of the law, does
free us also from servile fear, But we are to consider quatenus, how far
forth. For such as is our redemption (I speak of it passively, as it is in the
redeemed) such is our freedom from servile fear; to wit, inchoated or begun
in this life, and increasing by degrees; complete, and perfect in the life to
come, which is called our full redemption* which being not total in this life,
does not free us totally from this servile fear. Full and perfect charity in
deed casts out this fear, and he that thus fears, is not perfected in
charity, 1 John. 4.18. But whiles the relics of sin, or rather the body of
sin remains in us, whiles we are in part flesh, as well as spirit, we have
not perfect charity.

And therefore so far forth, as we are flesh, we are subject to servile fear:
yea so far as we are carnal, we are servants, Romans 7.14.23. but so far
forth as we are spirit, we are freed from that fear* as not being under the
law, but under grace. yet because concupiscence and the corruptions of the
flesh, still abide in us; it was expedient for the subduing and mortifying of
the flesh, that we should in some part be obnoxious to this fear. To which end
the rest also of our spiritual enemies, though they be overcome, and we
delivered out of their power, are still left to encounter us: that we standing
upon our guard, and exercising and maintayning a spiritual warfare against
them, may at length triumph over them, and receive the crown promised to those
that overcome.

In the mean time we are freed from this servile fear by degrees from the
time of our justification to our glorification, as our faith hope and charity
do increase by increase whereof we are more and more enabled to worship God, as
without fear, so also with willing and cheerful minds. And therefore we are to
be stirred up to labor for the increase or these graces in us, that our fear
may be diminished and our assurance increased; wherein our happiness in this
life does consist.

Security likewise is twofold.

Carnal. Spiritual.
The carnal security is, when a man being void of grace and of the true fear
of God, and destitute of faith hope, and charity, goes on carelessly in his
sins without repentance, presuming of GODS favor, and his own salvation.

The spiritual security, as I distinguished before, is either of the object,
signifying the spiritual safety of the faithful, because there is no
condemnation to the^ that be in CHRIST. In regard whereof they worship GOD
securely or without fear, that is (...) or (...) without danger or cause of
fear. The spiritual security, in respect of the subject is, when a man being
justified before God by faith, and assured in some measure of his favor, as
knowing himself to have received grace to believe, and having peace of
conscience worshippeth God in assured expectation of everlasting life. And of
this (...) or spiritual security the holy Ghost speaks in this place.

The sum of that which has been said by the way of exposition, is this: that
GOD has promised to give the faithful being redeemed by CHRIST, to worship
him without fear, not without the true fear of GOD (for that is a chief part
of his worship) but without fear of their spiritual enemies; and namely
without fear of damnation: and that in two degrees, so that they may worship
him without fear, that is without cause of fear, securely and safely without
danger, because their salvation is certain and sure, there being no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

Secondly without fear it self, namely of their enemies, from whose power
they believe themselves to be redeemed, and consequently from the servile fear
of God, performing a worship unto him, not of bondslaves (who are under the
dominion of the law) forced and extorted from them by servile fear, but the
service of sons yielding voluntary obedience. Not that we are delivered from
servile fear altogether, and at once in this life, but by degrees, according
to the measure of our faith, hope, and charity, wherewith we being endued in
some good measure, shall worship the Lord securely, or in security, not
carnal, but spiritual and consequently not in fear of damnation, but in
expectation of everlasting happiness.

Now this being the principal point in this whole text, and the chief thing
wherein the happiness promised in CHRIST the promised seed does consist in this
life; viz. to worship the Lord without fear: therefore as I have stood the
longer in explaining the words; so I will endeavor to set down the doctrines
and uses, which are to be made of this point.

CHAP. VIII. The first doctrine concerning the certain^y of salvation.
THe first doctrine: that there is a twofold certainty of salvation of all
those that truly believe in CHRIST. The former is called the certainty of the
object, in regard whereof the salvation of all that truly believe is sure and
certain, though they perhapps be not assured thereof. For this is the maine
promise of the Gospel, that whosoever does truly believe in Christ shall not
perish, but have life everlasting. John. 3.16. To my sheep (says our savior)
that is, to all the faithful, I will give eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any be able to pluck the^ out of my hands. John. 10.28.
St. Peter testifies. 1. Epist. 1.5. that the faithful are kept safe by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. And the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.1. that
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

And in this place the Lord by oath assures the^, that they shall worship him
without fear, that is, without cause of ^ea^e at the least, all the days of
their life* yea, such is the certainty of their salvation, who truly believe,
that the holy Ghost doubts not to affirm, that they have eternal life.
John. 6.47.54. 1. John. 5.11.12. and that they are passed from death to life.
John. 5.24. and that whom the Lord has justified, he has also glorified. Romans
8.30.

The latter is the certainty of the subject, when a faithful man, sowndly
applying the promises of the Gospel to himself, is persuaded and in some
measure assured of his salvation, for he that knows himself to believe, may
apply the promise to himself, and by application be assured of that which is
promised.

This certainty of persuasion, or assurance some call special faith. special
I say, first, in respect of the object, which is Christ, and is therefore called
sometimes the faith of Jesus Christ. Romans 3.22.26. Gal. 2.16.20.3.22. Phil. 3
9. sometimes faith in Christ. Acts. 20.21.24.24.26.18. Gal. 3.26. faith in his
blood. Romans 3.25. For although by that faith, which does justify, we do
believe all the articles of faith, and the whole word of God and every part and
parcel thereof containing threatenings as well as promises; yet the object of
it, quatenus justificat, is CHRIST. For it justifies, as it is the instrument
to receive CHRIST, who is our righteousness. Secondly, and more especially it
is called special, in regard of the effect, which is, specially to apply
CHRIST unto our selves. And this special Faith is a degree of that assurance,
which the Grecians call (...), in some more, in some less, which some Divines,
both Protestants and Papists, not curious See Chanier. Paustrat ^. 3. l. 13. c.
11. n. 4.
to speak so distinctly and properly as they might, have called fiduciam, or
assensum fiducialem: affirming this special Faith to be affiance: when in deed
fiducia is not Faith, but a necessary and unseparable fruit thereof. So
unseparable, that sometimes it seems to be employed in the phrase of believing
in Christ. For to believe in Christ impl^eth 3 things: first, to believe that
Christ is the Savior of all that believe in him; 2ly, to believe that he is my
Savior, which is the special faith; and from this follows the third, as a
necessary fruit and effect; that because I believe he is my Savior, therefore I
put my trust and affiance in him for my salvation. But though it be an
unseparable fruit of faith, yet it is not to be confownded with it. For faith
is the cause, affiance the effect. For by faith we have affiance Ephesians. 3.12.
upon which place Beza notes, that they are deceived, who confownd faith and
affiance. Faith, is a persuasion or assurance of the mind, though working upon
the heart: affiance, is an affection of the heart, though proceeding from the
assurance of the mind. The seat therefore of faith is the mind, or
intellectual part; of affiance, the heart, which is the seat of the
affections. And as in subject they differ, so also in the object; the object of
faith, being verum: of affiance, bonum* there being little difference betwixt it
and hope in respect of the time to come, which are often in the Scriptures
confounded, the same word Batach being translated sometimes to trust, and
sometimes to hope. Notwithstanding in the behalf of some of our Divines it may
be said, that when they call this special faith fiduciam or fiduciall assent*
they mean nothing else but a certain persuasion or assurance of that which is
believed.

This special Faith the Papists abhor, and scorn; and yet cannot deny, but
that true Christians ought to labor for assurance, namely the assurance, not
of faith but of hope. They must have a kind of hope, that their sins be
remitted, and that they shall be saved, but they may not believe the remission of
their sins, or eternal life, as belonging to themselves. Howbeit all their
assurance is merely conjecturall and uncertain: Neither can they have any
sownd assurance of hope, unless first they had assurance of Faith. for Faith
is the foundation of hope, and the (...), Hebr. 11.1.
the substance of things hoped for. But howsoever the Papists do scorn the
special Faith; yet it is a certain truth, that there is not any grace, either
more profitable to the faithful, or more necessary. For as all other saving
graces in the faithful proceed from Faith, first apprehending, and after
applying CHRIST unto themselves, in so much, that without it there is no other
saving grace; so according to the measure of it, such is the measure of all
other saving graces.

That special Faith, which the Holy Ghost works in us, by Romans 5.5. Faith
produces other graces.
shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts, (that is by persuading our
souls of the love of GOD toward us in CHRIST) produces the love of GOD, (for
therefore do we love 1. John. 4.19.
God, because we are by Faith persuaded that God loves us first) and
consequently, the love of our brother for Gods sake. Charity, which is the end
of the 1 Timothy 1.5:
commandment, proceeding from faith unfeigned. It works in us affiance. For
when we believe that CHRIST is our Savior, we rest upon him for salvation. It
works in us hope; for when we believe, that the promises belong unto us, we
expect the performance. Faith having begotten affiance and hope, and working by
love, begets zeal, peace of conscience, Romans 5.1. rejoicing in God, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, thankfulness, voluntary and cheerful obedience, patience, No
other saving grace without faith.
and comfort in afflictions, etc. And in deed how can a man love his neighbor
for Gods sake, who loves not God much more? how can a man love God as he
ought, who is not persuaded of Gods love toward him in CHRIST? which
persuasion is this special Faith. And if he cannot love God without Faith,
much less can he have the zeal of God: for zeal is the fervency of love. How
can a man have affiance in CHRIST, and rest upon him for salvation, who is not
by Faith persuaded, and in some measure assured, that he is his Savior? How
can he hope and wait for the performance of the promises, that does not
believe that they belong unto him? Faith being the substance of things hoped
for. How can a man have true peace of conscience, who is not persuaded, that
God is reconciled to him? How can a man rejoice in God, who is not assured of
Gods favor toward him? How can a man trust in God, that is not persuaded of
Gods goodness toward him? How can a man be thankful unto God, who is not
persuaded of Gods love and bownty toward him? How shall they fear God as
sons, that is, fearing to offend so merciful a Father, who are not persuaded
that he is their Father in CHRIST? or when they have sinned, how shall they be
encouraged to return unto him, if they be not persuaded of his fatherly
respect to them? how shall they perform voluntary and cheerful obedience,
who are not persuaded that their endeavors are accepted of him? How shall they
pray, who do not believe they shall be heard? Or as the Apostle speaks, how
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14. How shall
they patiently and comfortably bear afflictions, who are not persuaded they be
fatherly chastisements or trials proceeding from Gods love, and tending to
their good? Finally, with what heart can men worship God, who are not
persuaded, that their service is accepted of him?

And as it works all other graces (...) us; so according to the measure of
our Faith, such (as I said) is the measure of all other graces. According to
the measure of faith, is the measure of all other graces,
For the more a man is persuaded of Gods love and favor toward him in CHRIST,
(that is, by how much the greater is a man's special Faith) so much the more he
loves God, and his neighbor for Gods sake; so much the more is he inflamed
with the zeal of God: so much the more confidently does he rest upon CHRIST
for salvation: so much the more he hops for, and expects the good things
promised: so much the more he rejoices, and glories in God: so much the more
he is thankful to God for his goodness: so much the more he trusts in GOD, so
much the more he fears to offend so gracious a GOD, and so merciful a
Father: or having offended, he will so much the sooner return unto GOD: so
much the more patiently and comfortably he bears afflictions, saying with Job
1^.13.
Job: though he kill me, yet will I put my trust in him: so much the more
willingly and cheerfully will he obey and serve the Lord.

Wherefore it is evident, that they which renounce this Faith, as the Papists
do, discover themselves to be void of all saving graces, and to have no truth
nor power of religion in them. But whatsoever they think or speak of special
Faith, let us know and acknowledge these three things. First, that it is the
duty of every true Christian, that does truly assent to the doctrine of the
Gospel, to apply also by special Faith the promises of the Gospel unto
himself. For this is most profitable, most comfortable, most necessary.
Profitable, because from this application of Faith, all other graces do
proceed, as has been said. Comfortable, because by this application, we grow
to assurance, as shall be showed. Necessary; first, because that belief or
assent is not lively and effectual (as you shall hear) which is not joined
with a desire to apply CHRIST to thy self, and with a resolution to
acknowledge him to be thy Savior, and to rest upon him for salvation, For
although he, which at the first believes only by assent, does not yet
actually apply the promises of the Gospel to himself; yet that assent, if it
be lively and effectual, works both an earnest desire, and settled resolution
of application. 2. he that knows himself to believe by a true assen^, and
refuses to apply the promises to himself, he makes GOD a liar, as shall be
showed. 3. where this application is not at least in desire, resolution, and
endeavor, there is no other saving grace, as I have proved.

The second thing, which we are to take notice of, is, that it is the chiefest
comfort, and in deed happiness of a Christian in this life, by special faith to
be assured of the eternal love and favor of GOD in CHRIST. For so Zachary in
this place expounds our blessedness to be this, being redeemed by Christ to
worship God without fear. etc.

The third, that seeing it is a thing so profitable, so necessary, and so
comfortable that our happiness is to be reposed therein: it is therefore our
duty to do our best endeavor, to attain unto the assurance of salvation, and
to this special faith: or as the Apostle Peter exhorts in other words to
give diligence to make our calling and election sure. 2. Peter. 1.10. or as the
Apostle Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 6.19. to lay up in store, a good foundation
against the time to come, that we may lay hold upon eternal life. For though
the Apostle in that place does by this argument exhort them that be rich to
works of charity: yet his meaning is not, that those works are the fowndation;
but that we by doing of them, may gather assurance to our selves of our
justifycation and salvation, as by testimonies and evidences of our faith.
which assurance of special faith is so sure a fowndation against the day of
trial, as they who have built thereon, cannot by any temptation be removed,
but like mount Sion stand fast for ever, or like to threesquare or triangular
bodies, which, howsoever they be tossed and turned, keep always their
positure, which is undique sursum.

Now you must not think, that full assurance is obtained at the first, or at
once; but we must attain unto it by diverse degrees. The first Step is humility.


And first we are to know, that the ordinary way to exaltation by sound comfort
and assurance, is humiliation* according to that general rule given by our
Savior, after he had reported the notable humiliation of the penitent
Publicane (which rule is also delivered in diverse other places of scripture)
that, whosoever exalts himself shall be abased: but he that humbles himself,
shall be exalted Luke 18.14. Matthew 23.12.
St. Peter therefore having signified, that the Lord resists the proud, but
gives grace to the humble, infers this exhortation: humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. 1.
Pet 5.5.6.

This work of humiliation, the Holy Ghost ordinarily works in Gods children
by the ministry of the law, whereby he reveals unto us our miserable estate
in our selves, in respect both of our sins, ( for Romans 3.29.
by the law comes the knowledge of sin) and also of the punishment,
denouncing the fearful plagues of God for sin, both in this life and in the
world to come. Thus when Peter had declared to the Jews their heinous sin in
crucifying Christ; they were pricked in their hearts, and said to the Apostles,
men and brethren what shall we do? Act. 2.23.36.37. When the Prophet Nathan
had by a Parable, which he applied to David the King, aggravated his sin,
saying, thou art the man: David both privately testified his humiliation to the
Prophet, saying, 1. Sam. 12.7.13.
I have sinned against the Lord; and also publicly professed the same, Psalm.
51. But of humiliation for sin* the Publicane is propounded as a notable
pattern Luk 18.13.
for imitation. And as for humiliation wrought by denunciation of judgments,
consider the example of Josias, 2. Kings 22.11.13.19. Of the Ninivites, Ion.
3.5.6. In like manner ought we to be humbled before GOD, when we consider
that our sins are so heinous and detestable in the sight of GOD, that nothing
could satisfy the justice of GOD, or appease his wrath for them, or expiate the
guilt of them, but the death and sufferings of the Eternal and only begotten
Son of GOD. Of which death of CHRIST the blame is to be laid upon our sins,
as the meritorious cause, rather then upon those, who were but the instruments
of his death. For by our sins we nailed CHRIST upon the Cross; by our sins
we pierced the precious body of JESUS CHRIST: we are the men that crucified our
blessed Savior. Let us therefore pray to GOD, that he would power upon us the
spirit of grace and supplication, Zach. 12.1^.
that looking upon him whom we have pierced, we may mourn for him (being put
to death for our sins) as a man mourns for his only son. And if the
denunciation of GODS temporal judgments ought ^o humble us before GOD: how
much more ought we to be humbled at the consideration, both of the temporal
plagues denounced in this world, and also of eternal torments in hell?

But when these ordinary means of humiliation, by the ministry of the Law
will not prevail; it pleases God sometimes by means extraordinary, or at the
least, not so ordinary, to draw men unto him, as it were, by a strong hand,
adding to the ministry of the word, sometimes afflictions and crosses, and,
sometimes terrors and anguish of conscience. By afflictions Joseph's brethren
were brought to acknowledge their sin. Genesis 42.21. Manasses when he was in
affliction, greatly humbled himself before God, 2. Chro. 33.12. so did the
prodigal son, Luke 15.18. according to that, Es. 26.16. Hos. 5.15

By terrors also sometimes men are humbled, as Peter, Luke 5.8.9. being
affrighted, when by the miraculous draught of fishes he was brought to
acknowledge the divinity of our Savior CHRIST: much more the Iaylour, Act.
16.27.29. And most of all S. Paul, Act. 9.6.9.

But here we must beware of an erroneous and dangerous conceit of some, who
run into contrary extremes. For as they imagine none to believe, who have
not full assurance; so they think none to be humbled as they ought, or
effectually called, who are not drawn, either by grievous afflictions, or by
the terrors of their conscience to the brinke of despair, as though there were
no hope of salvation for them. In deed it is good for a man to be much humbled
in himself, and as Job 42.6.
Job speaks, to abhor himself repenting in dust and ashes, and to
acknowledge that in him self, or by his own means, there is no hope of
salvation. But it is either great ignorance or forgetfulness of CHRIST, to
acknowledge no means whereby to be saved; or if a man acknowledge CHRIST, it
is great infidelity to think that his sins, which are but finite (though
many and great,) are more and greater then the mercies of God, and merits of
CHRIST, which are infinite. Therefore so to be humbled is a fearful sin,
and perhaps a greater sin, then any for which he is humbled. Notwithstanding
this may be said for the comfort and profit of those whom God does draw by a
strong hand, that is, by grievous afflictions, either outward, or inward,
(which are in deed the most grievous; for a wounded Pro. 19.14. The spirit of a
man will sustain his infirmity but a wounded spirit who can bear?
conscience who shall bear) I say, first, for their comfort, that the Lord
does sometimes so cast down those whom he purposes most of all to exalt; and
that they sometimes do prove the most zealous Professors of Religion, and the
worthyest instruments of Gods glory: as you see in the example of Paul.

For their profit: they are to be advised, that when they are afflicted either
outwardly, or inwardly, they would first acknowledge the hand of God, by what
means soever the affliction does happen unto them, and not to seek to remove
the hand of God afflicting them; if outwardly, by indirect or unlawful means;
if inwardly, by worldly and carnal delights; but to labor, that the end which
God propounds in afflicting the^, may be achieved. 2. that they would humble
themselves under the mighty hand of God, whom they have provoked to anger
against them; laboring to call to mind their sins, whereby they have
offended God; to confess them particularly, to bewail them, and to be sorry
for them, because by them they have displeased God, and pierced our Savior:
earnestly and heartily to pray to God for the remission of their sins, for
CHRIST his sake, to promise, purpose, and vow amendment for the time to come.
Thus confessing their sins, and forsaking them, they shall be sure to find
mercy; (...), 28.13.
and humbling themselves, they shall be exalted.

But, as I said, ordinarily the Lord works humiliation by the ministry of
the law. Now, that we may be humbled thereby, we are not only to believe the
sentence of the law, denouncing the terrible curse of God against Gal. ^.10.
every one that does not continue in all the things which are written in the
look of the law to do them, to be true, but also to apply it to our selves;
after this manner; seeing this is most true, as being the undoubted word of God,
that every man in himself is subject to the fearful curse of God both in
this life, and in the world to come, who does not perform the three degrees of
obedience contained in this sentence; that is, to Do the things commanded, to
do them all, and to continue in doing all; therefore it cannot be denied, but
that in my self I am most accursed; who to the not performing of these three
degrees of obedience, have added the three contrary degrees of disobedience.
For I have not only not done the things commanded, but also I haued done the
things forbidden: I have not only not kept all Gods commandments, but also I
have broken them all: I have not only not continued in perpetual obedience,
but I have also continued in a perpetual course of disobedience. O therefore
wretched man that I am, and in my self thrice accursed! O that I were
delivered from the fearful curse! O that I were freed from this woeful state
of damnation!

Thus by applying the sentence of the law of themselves, men come to see and
acknowledge their own damnable estate in themselves; whereby they are forced
to seek for salvation out of themselves in CHRIST; especially, if to the
application of the sentence of the law, they adioyne a serious consideration of
the day of judgment (which the Apostle calls ^ Cor. 5.10.11.
the terror of the Lord*) at which time all of us shall appear before the
judgment seat of God, to receive according to those things which we have done
in the flesh. But without this application, men not seeing not feeling their
own misery, neglect the promises of the Gospel, not caring to apply them to
themselves: but most ungraciously suffering the most precious blood of CHRIST,
as much as in them lies, to be spilt in vain; as it is in vain to them, unto
whom it is not applied. But when by the paedagogie of the law, which is a
schoolmaster Gal. 3.^4
unto CHRIST, men are brought to see and to feel their misery: O then how
beautiful are the feet of those who bring glad tidings of salvation* how
acceptable is the promise of deliverance, to them that are captives, of
justification, to them that in themselves are accursed* of salvation, to them
that are lost! In respect of these, the Kingdom of God is said to suffer
violence, and these are they which with violence take it to them selves. Mat.
11.12.

Thus then being schooled by the law, by which the Holy Ghost works in us
legal faith, which is a preparative to the Evangelicall, we become fit
auditors of the Gospel, by which the Holy Spirit works in us the grace of
justifying faith. And therefore in the next place we must be diligent and
attentive hearers of the Gospel, by the hearing whereof Being preparedly the
(...) and other leg^ll meane^, we must attend to the Gospe^l.
comes faith. In which regard as the Gospel is called the Word of faith: so
also the Preachers of it are not only termed ministers, by whom you believe, 1.
Cor. 3.5. but also are said to justify ^an. 1^.9.
men, and to 1 Timothy 4.16. 1 Cor. ^.35. By which the Holy Ghost works in us
faith and that in 2 degrees, the first ass it
save them, as being instruments of the Holy Ghost working in us the grace of
says, Ro^. 10.8.15.
by which we are justified and saved.

By the Ministry of the Gospel, the Holy Ghost works in us the grace of
faith in two degrees; The former is of assent, the other of application. As
touching the former: the Holy Ghost having prepared us by the law, does in the
ministry of the Gospel, first, reveal unto us the mercies of God in CHRIST,
Secondly he sti^reth us up by the ministers of reconciliation 2 Cor. 3 18.20.
to embrace Gods mercies, and to be reconciled to him, and thirdly* having thus
knocked, as it were, at the door of our hearts, Apoc. 3.20.
he himself does open our hearts, as he did the heart Act. 16.14.
of Lydia, not only to attend, but as the word (...).
also signifies to assent unto, or to believe the Gospel. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that by that phrase is meant, that the Holy Ghost did work in her
the grace of faith.

And as touching the latter; the Holy Ghost having opened our hearts to receive
CHRIST, by a true, willing, and lively assent (which is the condition of the
promise:) he teaches us to apply the promise unto our selves, as belonging to
us.

Here therefore three things are to be done. 1. we are to believe in CHRIST by
a lively assent to the promise of the Gospel. 2. so believing in CHRIST, we
are to apply the promises of the Gospel to our selves. 3. having by
application attained to some assurance, we must give all diligence that this
assurance may more and more be increased.

As touching the first: we must be very careful, that our assent to the
doctrine of the Gospel, promising salvation to all that believe in CHRIST, be
willing, true, lively, and effectual. otherwise, though we may believe, that
JESUS the son of the blessed Virgin Mary is the Son of GOD, and Savior of
all that shall be saved (which not only hypocrites, and wicked men, but the
devils themselves also after a sort believe) yet we cannot truly be said to
believe in CHRIST. First therefore it must be a willing assent, and therefore
approving what we believe; not forced, as that of the devils, and of some
wicked men; who being convicted with the evidence of the truth, do, whether
they will or no, know and believe the truth of the Gospel, and with horror
Iam. 2.19. Mat. 8 19.
acknowledge it. Secondly, it must be true, lively, and effectual. For as
there is a twofold knowledge, the one literal, swimming in the brain,
informing the judgment, but not reforming the heart, and the conversation,
serving only to purchase the more stripes; Luke 1^.47.
the other spiritual, not only informing the judgment, but also reforming the
heart, and conforming our lives to the practice of that which we know (which
in Divinity is accounted the only true knowledge, 1. John 2.3.4. for the
other, though in regard of the object it is true, because it is the knowledge
of the truth; yet it is not true formally, and in respect of the efficacy, or
of the effect:) so faith, which sometimes goes under the name of knowledge or
acknowledgment, may be distinguished. For there is a counterfeit, idle, and
dead faith; which, having neither root, nor fruit, is uneffectuall, either to
justification or to sanctification: which is the faith of hypocrites, and of
all carnal and worldly Professors, which the Papists them selves call fidem
informem. And there is a true, lively, and effectual faith, (which the
Schoolmen call formatam, and not amiss, saving that they hold charity, which
as I have showed, is a fruit and effect of faith, 1. Tim. 1.5.
to be the form thereof,) by which we receiving CHRIST, and being rooted in
him, or engraffed John, 15.9. Col. ^.^. Gal. 2.20.
into him, do receive from him spiritual life. For having by faith union with
CHRIST, we have also communion with him, both in his merits to our
justification, and in the Romans 6.3.4. etc. Phil 3.9.10.
virtue of his death and resurrection, to our sanctification. Now this assent
is effectual to justification, when by it we receive CHRIST, who is our
righteousness. For when this belief is willing, lively, and effectual, we do
receive CHRIST not only Chamier, pa^strat. l. 22. c. 2.1^. s.q 24. Dicimus
Paulo banc fuisse mentem, iustificari peccator^ simul a^que intellectu credens
in Christh eiusque beneficia cr^dulitate arripiens in ^undem fertur sincero
cord, atque inte^^^ volunta^^.
in our judgments, by this true and lively assent; but also this lively assent
working both on the heart and the will, we receive him in our hearts by an
earnest desire, that he may be appl^ed unto us, and we made partakers of him;
(which desire we express in hearty prayer) and in our will, by resolving to
acknowledge him, to be our Savior, and to rest upon him for our salvation. For
can a man truly and effectually believe, that in himself, and without CHRIST
he is accursed, according to the sentence of the law, and that in CHRIST, if he
believe in him, he shall be happy and blessed, according to the doctrine of the
Gospel: and not desire both to be freed from that damnable estate, and to be
made partaker of happiness, in and through CHRIST? can a man truly and
effectually believe, that being in himself accursed, he shall notwithstanding
the curse of the law, notwithstanding the testimony of his own accusing
conscience, notwithstanding the accusations of Satan, become happy and blessed
in CHRIST, if he shall believe in him; and not resolve with himself, that,
whatsoever the law, his own conscience, or the devil can object to the
contrary, he will acknowledge CHRIST to be his Savior, and rest upon him for
salvation? For as the understanding, when it conceives any thing to be true,
not by evidence of reason, but by the authority of God, speaking in his word,
as in matters of faith, has the concurrence of the will, acted by the Spirit
of God, willingly to assent thereunto: so when the understanding, enlightened by
the Holy Ghost, conceives and judges any thing to be good, it c^mmaundeth the
will to embrace it, the will ordinarily following the judgment of the practick
understanding.

To sanctification it is effectual, as it is a grace 1 Ioh. 5 1.
of regeneration, Act. 15.9.
purifying the heart, and Gal. 5.6.
working by love, and transforming a man into a conversation answerable to that
which he does believe, and therefore is ever joined with repentance, which the
Holy Ghost regenerating us, with it, and by it works in us: and therefore a
lively faith is never severed from repentance, nor repentance from it; for as
we cannot truly repent, unless we believe; so we cannot truly know that we
believe, unless we repent.

This assent being true, willing, lively, and effectual, as I have said, is
the very condition required in the promise of the Gospel, and the first degree
of justifying faith; which if we have obtained, we may and ought to apply the
promise of the Gospel to our selves. This being a matter of excellent comfort,
and of singular use, I will prove by plain testimonies of Scripture, and by
evident reasons: the rather, because I know, to some it will seem a paradox.

1. The testimonies of the Scripture are these. For first, This is the Faith
for which our Savior pronounces Simon Peter blessed. Mat. 16.16.17. Mat.
16.16.17.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. The like profession is made by the
Apostle. John 6.69. and by Martha. John 11.27.

2. John 20.31. These are written, that you might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, and that believing, you may have life through his Name.

3. Act. 8.37.38. Here is water, says the Eunuch, what does hinder me to be
baptized? Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. And
he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

4. Romans 10.9.10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made to salvation.

5. This is the Faith, without which it is impossible to please God. For he
that comes to God, must believe that he is* and that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him. Heb. 11.6.

6. 1. John. 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God.

7. 1. John. 5.5. Who is he that overcommeth the world, but he that believes
that Jesus is the Son of God?

1. The reasons. 1. The justifying and saying Faith many times goes under the
name of (...), acknowledgme^t, which is all one with assent, 1. Tim. 2.4 2.
Pet. 1.2.3. of knowledge, ^ph^s. 4.13* Ti^ 1.1. 1. Io. 2.3.^
meaning acknowledgme^t, as John. 17.3. Esaias, 53.11. My righteous servant
(meaning Christ) agnitione sui, by the acknowledgment of himself, that is by
faith in him shall justify many.

2. To receive Christ, is to believe in him, John. 1.12. By this lively assent,
we receive Christ, as has been said, in our minds, in our hearts, in our
wills.

If any man therefore object that justifying faith consists not in assent, but
in application of the promises;

3. I answer, that there are two degrees of justifying says. the one, being
a lively assent to the promise of the Gospel; the other, a sound application
thereof to our selves By the former, as being the condition of the promise, we
are justified in foro coelesti, in the court of heaven: by the latter, in the
court of our own conscience By the former, we are justified before God; by the
latter* we are persuaded in our conscience, and in some measure assured of our
justification.

4. By the second degree of faith, which some call special faith, the promises
of the Gospel are to be applied. But they cannot be applied to any aright, but
only to those, who have the condition of the promise, which is the justifying
faith.

For the Gospel does not promise justification and salvation to all, but to
those only who have a justifying faith.

Therefore a man must be endued with justifying faith, before he can or ought to
apply the promises of the Gospel to himself. For as salvation is promised to
the^ that believe, Mark 16.16. John 5.16.18.
so damnation is denounced to them that believe not.

5. It is a very erroneous opinion to think, that we are justified, or do
obtain remission of sins, by being assured, and much more by being fully
assured of the forgivenes of our sins: or that we are to believe, that they
are forgiven, to the end that they may be forgiven. For justification and
remission of sins is promised only to those that believe by a justifying
faith, (I speak of those who are adulti, and are come to the years of
discretion, not of infants, who are justified sometimes, before they actually
believe) therefore a man must have justifying faith before he has remission of
sins, ( for by faith we obtain remission of sins Act. 26.18.13 38.39. Rom^
28.
and by faith we are justified: and therefore have we Gal. 2.16.
believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ) A man's
sins must be forgiven, before he can be assured that they be forgiven and it is
absurd to imagine that the assurance that our sins be forgiven goes before
the forgivenes of them.

For if a man must believe or be assured of the forgivenes of sins before
they be forgiven, then he is bownd to believe that which is false* And lastly a
man must ascend by diverse degrees of assurance growing or proceeding from Romans
1.^^*
faith to faith before he can attain to full assurance. And here I hold it
expedient briefly to touch a certain discourse of the learned Chamiers:
Paustrat. c. 3. lib. 1^ c. (...) 18. page 484,
that it may evidently appear, that they who do not acknowledge this
distinction of justifying faith, must of necessity be forced to it. For whereas
Vasques objecteth against us, that we teach, that we ought to believe that our
sins are remitted, to the end that we may be justified, and may obtain
remission of sins; he answeareth, that it is a mere sclander, For says he,
quid monstri est, credere sibi remissa peccata ut remittantur? sic enim
constituitur fides remissionis prior reapse ipsa remissione: quod omnem
absurditatem superat. Enim vero si prius remissa credimus, quam sint remissa,
^alsum nos oportet credere Quid plura? Nobi^ potius est persuasissimum, remissa
esse peccata antequ^ credimus* etc. It is a monster, that a man should believe,
that his sins be forgiven, to the end that they may be forgiven, for so the
faith that our sins be forgiven should go before the forgivenes it self*
which surpasses all absurdity: Surely if we are to believe that our sins be
forgiven before they be remitted, then must we believe that which is false*
what should I say more? we rather are fully persuaded, that our sins be
forgiven before we-doe believe. etc.

But say I, if no other justifying faith be acknowledged, but the special
faith whereby we are assured of the remission of our sins: and if this also
be true (which the Scripture teaches) that by faith we are to obtain
remission of sins; that absurdity will necessarily follow, which he so much
disclaimeth. For to hold that the sins of those who are adulti, or come to
years of discretion, be forgiven before they do believe, is as great an
absurdity as the other; because by faith we obtain remission of sins,
neither is remission promised to any, who are of years, but only to those
that believe.

Of necessity therefore we must hold this distinction of faith, viz: that there
is one degree of justifying faith, which in order of nature, goes before
remission of sins, by which we obtain forgivenes of sins, and by which we
are justified before God: and that there is an other degree of justifying
faith, which follows after justification and remission of sins: whereby we
being persuaded, and in some measure assured of the remission of our sins,
are justified in the court of our own conscience. And of this indeed it is
true, that our sins be forgiven, before we believe or be assured that they be
forgiven.

6. For the further clearing of this distinction of Faith, let us distinctly
consider the differences between the two degrees; for 1. by the former, as I
have said, we are justified before God in the Court of Heaven, by the latter,
we are justified in the Court of our own conscience: by the former, we are
justified properly; by the latter we are assured of our justification. 2. Of
the justification, which we have by the first degree, (which properly is
called justification) there are no degrees; but of that which we have by the
second degree, which properly is not justification before GOD, but the
assurance of it in our own consciences, there are degrees according to the
measure of our Faith.

3. The first degree goes before the remission of sins, the second follows
after.

4. Every man is bound upon pain of damnation to have the first degree of
Faith, which is truly, and firmly to believe, that JESUS the Son of the
blessed Virgin, is the Eternal Son of GOD, and Savior of all that truly
believe in him; but no man ought to have the second, who has not the first*
for a man must first have justifying Faith, which is the condition of the
promise, before he ought to believe, that the promise of remission of sins,
or of salvation belongs to him.

5. The former degree seems more properly to be the work of the spirit
regenerating us, 1. John. 5.1. the latter of the same spirit, as it is the
spirit of adoption, sealing us after we have believed. Ephesians. 1.13.4.30. Romans
8.15.16.17.

6. The former is begotten ordinarily by the ministry of the Gospel* and not
by the ministry of the Sacraments, which notwithstanding were ordained of
purpose, as I shall show hereafter, that they who have the first degree, might
attain to the second. For to him that believes truly, according to the first
degree, the Sacrament is a seal of the righteousness which is by Faith, and a
pledge to assure him, that so certainly as the sign, so also the thing
signified, which is CHRIST with all his merits are communicated to him.

7. The former, as hereafter I will make plain, is fides princip^orum; the
latter, of conclusions deduced from thence by application, and by necessary
consequence.

8. Of the former, the four first notes of happiness Mat. 5. are the signs and
fruits: of the second, the four latter. For though the Papists make of them
eight beatitudes; yet there is but one beatitude in this life, whereof CHRIST
is the foundation, and Faith is the instrument, whereby we receive and apply
CHRIST unto our selves; of which those eight are so many notes. For these (...)
or pronunciations of blessedness, the Lord Jesus directs to his Disciples,
Mat. 5.1.2.3.
and in them to all the faithful, saying: Blessed are you poor, etc. Luke
6.20. The four first Beatitudes, as I said, are the Notes of the former
degree. For those that have the first, are not at the first happy in their own
sense, and apprehension, but rather the contrary; being poor Mat. 5.3.^.^.
beggars in spirit, Mat. 5.3.^.^.
mourning for their wants, subdued by the sense thereof unto Mat. 5.3.^.^.
meeknes, Mat. 5.3.^.^.
hungring and thirsting after righteousness, which they find themselves to
want, and yet our Savior pronounces them blessed. which proves, that they
are justified before God, though not assured thereof in their own conscience.
The four latter are marks of the second degree. For when we are in some
measure assured of Gods mercy toward us, we become merciful Mat. 5.^. Ephesians 4
32.
to others for Gods sake, when we have assurance of salvation, we endeavor to
purify Mat. 5.8. 1. Ioh 3.3.
our selves, as he is pure; when being justified by Faith we have peace with
GOD, we become Mat. 5.^.
peacemakers among men. When we have obtained the assurance of Faith, to them
v. 10.
it is given not only to believe in CHRIST, Phil. 1.2^.
but also to suffer for him.

2. Thus much of assent, which being lively and effectual, is the very
condition of the Evangelicall promise. Now I come to application, whereby we
do attain to assurance. And that we may soundly apply the promise to our
selves, we must first be assured that we have the condition of the promise,
which is the first degree of justifying Faith, whereof I have spoken, that is a
true, lively, and effectual assent; which we may know our selves to have, if
our belief be effectual, as before I said, both to justification, as it is
when by it we receive CHRIST, who is our righteousness, not only in our
judgments, but also in our hearts, and in our wills: and also to
sanctification, as it is, when it produces the duties of repentance.

Having therefore the condition of the promise* and knowing that thou have it,
thou art bound in conscience, whatsoever the Papist says to the contrary, to
apply the promise to thy self* as belonging to thee. Do thou therefore truly
believe that CHRIST is the Savior of all those that truly believe in him; then
thou art bound to believe that he is thy Savior, that he died for thy sins,
and rose again for thy justification, that by him thou have remission of
sins, and that by him thou shall be saved. Otherwise, if thou know thy
self to have the condition of the promise, and wilt not apply it to thy self;
that is, if knowing thy self truly to believe, that CHRIST is the Savior,
thou will not believe that he is thy Savior, thou 1. Ioh* ^.10.
make God a liar, says Saint John, in not believing the record which God
gave of his son. v. 11.
And this is the record that God has given to us (that believe in CHRIST)
eternal life, and that this life is in his Son. v. 12.
He that has the Son (as every true believer has) has life; and he that
has not the Son, has not life. These things v. 13.
(says he) I have written to you that believe on the name of the Son of
GOD, that you may know that you have eternal life, and that you may believe on
the Name of the Son of GOD. The meaning of which last words seems to be
this. I have written to you that believe on the Name of CHRIST. by a true and
lively assent, but have not perhaps as yet attained to any ^ound assurance;
that you applying the promises of the Gospel to your selves, and gathering
testimonies to your selves, that they belong to you by such marks as I in this
Epistle have set down; may attain to assurance, and so proceed from Faith to
Faith. For without absurdity, the Words cannot be understood of the same degree
of Faith. I have written to you that already believe in CHRIST, that you may
believe in him* what? no otherwise then already they do believe? yes no doubt,
that they which believed in a lower degree without assurance, might know that
they have eternal life; and that so attayning to a higher degree of Faith,
might thereby be assured of salvation by CHRIST.

Now, this application is made by a practical syllogism* the proposition
whereof (which some call (...)) is the undoubted Word of God.

Whosoever truly believes in Christ, he shall be saved. The assumption is the
testimony of our own spirit, which is therefore called (...).

But I through Gods mercy do truly believe in Christ. For the Holy Ghost
having opened my heart, Act. 1^.14.
as he did the heart of Lydia, to assent unto, or to believe the Gospel I do
receive CHRIST, not only in my judgment, by a firm, willing, and unfayned
assent, but also in mine heart by an earnest desire to be made partaker of him
(which is the desire of application) and in my will by a settled resolution,
(whatsoever the law, mine own conscience, or the devil, can object to the
contrary) to acknowledge him to be my Savior, and to rest upon him for
salvation, which is the resolved purpose of application.

The conclusion which is called (...), is the verdict or testimony of the Holy
Spirit, testifying with our spirits in the assumption, according to the word in
the proposition.

Therefore I through Gods mercy shall be saved. which is the voice of special
Faith.

The consequence of this, and all other former syllogismes is such, that the
conclusion can not be false, if the premises be true. Otherwise a
contradiction would be implied, that is, contradictories would be true
together, which is impossible: For if this conclusion should be false, then
either the Proposition is not true; that whosoever truly believes in Christ,
shall be saved: or the assumption, that I truly believe in Christ.

Of the proposition of this syllogism, there can be no doubt, it being the
undoubted word of God, and the maine promise of the Gospel.

Against the assumption, two things may be objected: the one, our of the
doctrine of our Divines: the other, out of the doctrine of the Papists. For
some of our Divines, define faith to be a full assurance of the love of God
concerning the remission of our sins, and eternal salvation by CHRIST: or in
other words to the like effect. But the faith mentioned in the assumption is no
such assurance.

I answer, that our Divines, defining the special Faith, are not to be blamed
for defining it according to the perfection thereof; for so every virtue and
grace ought to be defined; that so we may learn not to content our selves with
that imperfect measure whereunto we have already attained, but may aspire
toward perfection. But if any shall hereupon infer, that no man does truly
believe, who has not that full assurance (as some unadvisedly have done) he
shall give occasion to the greatest part of believers, either to despair, that
they have not Faith, because they have not full assurance; or because they
would not be thought without Faith to presume that they have a full assurance:
which notwithstanding men do not attain unto at the first, nor at once, but
by diverse degrees, after much practice of piety, and long experience of Gods
goodness toward them; and never is so fully obtained before the end of this
life, but that somewhat still may, and ought to be added to it.

The objection of the Papist against the assumption is, that a man does not
know, that he does believe; and therefore not being assured, that he does
believe, he can have no assurance of salvation. This is in deed the thing which
they must stand unto, if they will deny, as they do, the certainty of
salvation. For if a man may be assured, that he does truly believe, he may also
be assured that he shall be saved.

But that the faithful may know, that they believe, I prove,

1. Because every believer is taught to say, I believe in God the Father, I
believe in God the Son, I believe in God the Holy Ghost. This profession of
Faith every true Christian is bound to make with confidence; therefore every
true Christian is bound to know that he does believe. The father of the
demoniack, though endued but with a weak faith, when our Savior told him,
that the cure of his son was possible, if he could believe, returned this
present answer, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. Mark. 9.23.24. The
Eunuch, though a new convert, when Philip told him, he might be baptized, if he
did believe with all his heart, answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God. Act. 8.37. we believe and know that thou art that Christ the
Son of the living God. John. 6.69 so John 11.26.27. This is that which
Augustine Aug. ep. 112. c. 3.
affirms. Videt (fidelis) ipsam fidem suam, qua se credere sine cunctatione
respondet. The faithful man sees his own faith, whereby that he does
believe, he answers without delay.

Ob. Yea, but many recite the Creed, saying, I believe etc who notwithstanding
do not believe, and much less know it.

Ans. The question is not, what hypocrites and un^ound Christians do, or can
do. of whom there is no question, but that seeing they do not believe, they
cannot know themselves to believe. But every faithful and ^ound Christian,
whom the Scriptures call (...), when he professes, that he does believe, does
not only believe in deed, but also knows that he does believe, and he which
does not know that he does believe, has just cause to suspect himself, that
he is not (...), a sound and approved Christian. But for this there is an
evident proof. 2. Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith,
(...) try your selves whether you be (...) or not. Know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be (...), that is, not
sound, nor approved Christians.

Those that are commanded to try themselves, whether they be in the Faith, may
upon trial know it. Those that may know that CHRIST is in them, may know they
do believe, because CHRIST is in us by Faith. and if they be (...), unsound,
who do not know that CHRIST is in them, then all that are (...), that is,
sound, approved Christians do know it. And whereas some Papists take acception,
that the Apostle speaks of the true doctrine, which is called the Catholic
faith, I answer, first, that a man cannot know, that he is in the catholic
faith, unless he also know that he does believe it. 2. the Apostle speaks of
that faith, whereby Christ dwells in us, which is not the doctrine, but the
grace of Faith. 3. The Apostle vindicateth and proves his calling by theirs:
as we prove the truth of our Church, and of our Ministry against our
separatists, who before their separation, seemed very forward Christians. try,
whether you have a true Faith, and if you have, acknowledge that to have been
a true Ministry, by which it was wrought. For how can they believe in him, of
whom they have not heard, and how can they hear without a Preacher, and how
can they preach, unless they be sent? Romans 10.14.

3. These things says S. John, have I written to you, that believe on the Name
of the Son of GOD, 1 John 5.13.
that you may know that you have eternal life: which they could not know,
unless they knew themselves to believe.

4. At that day, viz: after the sending of the Holy Ghost, you shall know that
I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you, says our Savior. John 14.20.

5. The mind is not ignorant of its own actions Aug. ^pl. 112 ad Paulinum.
and 2. Mentis intuit^ vides, vita^, voluntate^, cogitationem, memoriam
cognition^, intelligentiam, scientiam, fidem tuam.
when it understands, it knows it self to understand, when it discourses,
it knows it self to discourse. so when it assenteth, it knows it self to
assent; when it desires any thing it knows that it does desire it; when it
purposes, or resolves, it knows that it does purpose, or resolve. much more
being helped by the Spirit of GOD, whom we have received from GOD, that we
might know the things which are given unto us of GOD. 1. Cor. 2.12.

6. How should any man glory in the testimony of his own conscience, that he
does believe, or that he does walk uprightly before GOD (which is the chiefest
2. Cor. 1.12. Esaias. 38.3.
comfort of all sound Christians) who is not conscious to himself, that he
does believe, and walk uprightly before GOD. Est ergo quidam modus in
conscientia gloriandi, ut noveris fidem tuam esse sinceram, noveris esse spem
tuam certam, nover is charitatem tuam esse sine simulatione, In Ps. 149.
says Augustine. And again, suam de Trinit. li. 1^. c 2, s^nt 3 dift. 23. b
quisque fidem apud seipsum videt. c. 1. fidem videt quisque in cord suo esse,
si credit non sicut corpora. Non sic videtur fides in cord in quo est, ab eo
cuius est, sed eam tenet certissima scientia, clamat que conscientia. And
again, though we see not the things which we do believe* ipsam tamen fidem
quando inest in nobis videmus in nobis. Ephesians. 112. c. 4. Menti nostra fides
nostra conspicua est.

So much of the assumption.

Upon these premises necessarily follows the conclusion, which is the (...)
or verdict of special Faith, concluding the certainty of salvation, by
application of the promises to him that has the first degree of of faith.
Which in my poor opinion is a most comfortable doctrine.

But against special Faith so proved, the Papists still object diverts things.

1. That it cannot be truly termed faith, and that for three reasons. For 1.
verae fidei falsum subesse non potest, the object of true faith cannot be that
which is false. but of this, the object may be false, because a man may be
deceived in the application.

I answer: as there is a double knowledge, the one of principles manifest in
themselves, called (...), the other, of conclusion (not manifest in themselves,
but manifested by discourse) called (...) so there is a twofold Faith, the one
of principles contained in the word of God; the other, of conclusions deduced
from thence: which conclusions though they are not absolutely necessary, yet
the premises being true, they cannot be false. But the premises of this
practical syllogism made by a faithful man, are true; therefore the
conclusion cannot be false. Indeed if the syllogism be made by an hypocrite,
or unsound, or ungrounded Christian, the conclusion is not necessary; because
the assumption is false, or at the least, uncertain: false, if he do not
believe; uncertain, if he do not know himself to believe; and then the
assumption at the most, is but this; but I do suppose that I do believe; and
the conclusion must be answerable, therefore I suppose that I shall be saved. But
the (...), the faithful and sound Christian, who does not only believe, but
knows himself to believe; as he assumeth, I do know, and I am sure that I
do believe; so he concludes, therefore I know and am sure that I shall be saved.

2. True Faith is grounded upon the Word, the special Faith that this man or
that man shall be saved, is not grounded on the Word. ergo, it is not a true
Faith.

Resp. Particulars are included in the general, and quod omnibus promittitur,
singulis promittitur; therefore if it be true, that all believers shall be
saved, then it is as true, that this or that believer shall be saved; and this
the Apostle teaches, Romans 10.9. If though etc.

3. Because Faith mentioned in the Scripture, is the Faith of assent, and not
of application.

I answer, that as there are many places which speak properly of assent, some
whereof I before cited; so there are many which mention or mean the special
Faith. As namely all those places, which are very many, and almost innumerable,
wherein the faithful do apply, and as it were appropriate those things which
are spoken of God Ps 3.7.4.1.2.7.1.3.13.16.^.1^.1.2.46, 19.14*12
1.1*17.1.9.38.21.2^.43*4.5.51 14. etc. Heb. 3.28 Luke 1.47. John. 20.1^. etc.
to themselves. As my God, my Lord, my Savior, the God of my salvation, etc.

So Gal. 2, 20. Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me.

Likewise in those places where the faithful profess their assurance of
justification and salvation. as Job. 13.18.19.25.26.27. Psalm. 103.3. who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, Psalm. 32.5. Romans 8.35.38. 2. Tim. 1.12.

Secondly, upon the Patrons of special Faith, the Papists do press diverse
inconveniences and absurdities.

As 1. If every man be bound to believe in particular his own salvation, then
it would follow, that every man shall be saved; because no man is bound to
believe an untruth but the consequent is false, therefore the antecedent.

Answ. I have showed before, that every man is bound upon pain of damnation to
have the first degree of Faith, which is to give a firm assent to the promise
of the Gospel, assuring salvation to all those that believe in CHRIST; but the
second degree none ought to have, but they only who have the first. no man
ought to apply the promise of the Gospel to him self, who has not the
condition of the promise, unless he will p^rniciously deceive himself. For
Mark. 16.16.
as he that believes shall be saved: so he that believes not, shall be
condemned. If thou do truly believe that CHRIST is the Savior, thou art
bound to believe, that he is thy Savior. And so believing in CHRIST, and
receiving him both by assent, and application, thou shall undoubtedly be saved.

2. Those that have this special Faith ought not to ask the forgivenes of
sins, The second absurdity.
which notwithstanding our Savior teaches his own Apostles to ask. For they
that have full assurance of the forgivenes of all their sins, ought not to
ask forgivenes, unless they will dally with God, for no thing desires that
which it has.

I answer. 1. that not all believers have full assurance some are incipients,
some proficients, some perfect or grown men in CHRIST. Those that are
incipients, pray both that their sins may be forgiven, and that they may
have some assurance thereof: proficients, and those that be grown men, pray
both that their sins may be remitted, and their assurance augmented, for
none are so perfect, but that their assurance may be increased.

2. As we daily sin, so we must daily ask forgivenes, prayer being the
means that GOD has ordained to that end.

Ob. Yea but says the Papist; ye forsooth have already full assurance, of the
remission of all your sins, not only past, but also to come.

Answ. It is absurd to imagine, that sins be remitted before they be
committed, and much more that we be assured they are remitted, before they be
either remitted or committed; that in deed were a doctrine to animate, and to
encourage men to sin.

But howsoever the Pope sometimes forgiveth sins to ^ome, yet God does not
when God justifies a man, he gives him remission of sins past. Romans 3.25. As
for time to come, we teach, that although Christ has merited, and God has
promised remission of sins of all the faithful unto the end of the world:
Notwithstanding, remission of sins is not actually obtained, and much less
by special faith believed, until men do actually believe and repent, and by
humble and faithful prayer renew their faith and repentance. For as God has
promised to the faithful all good things; but how? ^at 7.7.8
to them that ask, that seek, that knock: so also remission of sins.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that remission of sin, though merited by
CHRIST, though promised by GOD, though sealed unto us in the Sacrament of
Baptism, is obtained by the effectual prayer of those that believe and
repent, for whom CHRIST has merited it, and to whom GOD has promised it in
his Word, and sealed it by the Sacrament. even as the obtaining of the rain,
which GOD had promised, Kings 1^.1.^1
, and the Prophet Elias had foretold, is ascribed Iam. 5.16, 18.
to the effectual prayer of Elias.

3. The third absurdity which the Papists put upon the doctrine of special
Faith, is, that by it men are animated to commit all manner of sin. As if it
were no matter, how many, or how great sins a man does commit, so long as he
is assured by special Faith, that all his sins past, present, and to come,
are remitted.

Answ. That which they say of sin to come, is a malicious sclander, as I
noted before; but I answer: the practice of sin (especially of any crime)
and going on in the same without repentance, cannot possibly stand with the
assurance of Faith. Neither can a man be assured of the forgivenes of any
sin, whereof he does not repent: and much less can he be assured before
hand of the forgivenes of that sin which presumptuously he does purpose to
commit.

As for the doctrine of special Faith, I do confidently profess, that there
is scarce any one doctrine in all Divinity, of greater force and efficacy,
either to encourage men to well doing, or to preserve them from evil. For as I
have showed before, the more a man is assured of GODS love toward him in
CHRIST, in forgiving his sins, and giving unto him eternal life; the more
will his heart be inflamed with love toward GOD, and toward his neighbor for
GODS sake; the more zealous will he be of GODS glory, the more thankful for his
mercies, the more desirous to please, the more fearful to displease, the more
careful to obey him, the more ready when he has offended to return unto him.
etc. and therefore not without cause, chasidim* the favorites of GOD, who have
experience and assurance of GODS special favor toward them, are every where
almost translated (...), that is, godly.

3. Having thus by application of the promises to our selves (as having the
condition thereof) attained to some measure of assurance, we are to be careful
to use all other means, which GOD has ordained, for the confirming of this
assurance.

The first means is prayer, both for the spirit of adoption, and for the
increase of our Faith.

As touching the former: forasmuch as special Faith is the work of the Holy
Ghost, shedding abroad the love of GOD in our hearts; we are therefore to
entreat the Lord that he would give us his Spirit (which he has promised to
give to those that ask him Luke 11.13.) the spirit of adoption, crying* that
is, by whom we cry in our hearts Abba Father. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15. testifying
with our spirits that we are the sons of GOD; and if sons, then also
heirs, heirs of God, and coheyres with Christ. Romans 8.16.17. by who^ we are
sealed to the^ day of our full redemption, who also is the earnest of our
inheritance, 2. Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13.14.4.30.

And as for the other: because full assurance is the highest degree of special
faith, unto which we do never so fully attain, but that still more and more
may and ought to be added; therefore we are to pray continually for the increase
thereof, saying with the father of the Daemoniack Mark. 9.24. I believe Lord,
but help thou my unbelief, and with the Apostles, Luke 17.5. O Lord increase
our faith. For as Augustine De (...) ^n Do. ser^. 36.
says, fides fundit orationem, fusa oration fidei impetrat firmitatem.

2. Unto prayer we are to adjoyne repentance, for our sins; without which
neither is our faith lively nor our prayers effectual; the rather, because to
it, and to the several duties of it, as proper notes and evidences of a true
faith, the promise of forgivenes is made; as namely to confession of our sins,
to contrition in being displeased with our selves, and grieved for them, to
deprecation in craving pardon for them, to an unfeigned desire and purpose to
forsake them, and to practice the contrary duties. Yea if a man shall as truly
desire to confess his sins, to bewail them, and to forsake the^, as he does
desire the forgivenes of them; such an one may undoubtedly be assured of the
remission of them. For most gracious are the promises of God made unto penitent
sinners, as Pro. 28.13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall
have mercy. so Ierem. 3.12.13. Levit. 26.40.41. Hos. 14.1.2.3.4. 2. Chron. 7.14.

More particularly, as I said, to confession. 1. John. 1. 9. Job. 33.27.28.
Psalm. 32.5. Luke 15.21.

To contrition. Mat. 5.4. Ps, 34.18.51.17. Esaias 57.15.61.1.2.3.6^.2.

To humble deprecation, Zach. 12.10. Luke 18.1^. Hos. 1.4.2.

To conversion unto God, and forsaking of sin. Deuteronomy. 4.30.31.30.2.10. Es.
1.16.17.18. Ierem. 3.1. 22.18.8. Ezech. 18.27.28.30.31.32.33.11. Joel. 2. 12.
Zach. 1.3. Mal. 3.7.

3. To prayer and repentance we must add the diligent and conscionable hearing
of the Word, by which Faith Romans 10.17.
, as it is at the first begotten, so it is nourished and increased. 1. Pet. 2.2.

4. Because Faith begotten by the Word, consists at the first in assent,
without actual application, therefore to the hearing of the word is to be
adjoined the worthy receiving of the Sacraments, which were ordained to this
very end, that those who have the first degree of Faith, may proceed to the
second, and go on therein. Do thou therefore truly believe, that Christ is the
Savior of all those that believe in him? the Sacrament, which thou receivest,
is a pledge unto thee, and an assurance that he is thy Savior; a pledge I say,
communicated to the receivers severally, to assure every one that believes
truly according to the first degree of faith, that as certainly as he receives
the Sacrament; so he is made partaker also of the thing signified, which is the
participation of Christ, and all his merits to his justification and salvation.

5. To these we are to add reading, meditation, conference. etc.

6. The practice of piety, or leading of a godly life, making conscience of all
our ways, and walking uprightly before God. For hereby especially we are to
make out calling and our election sure. ^. Pet. 1.10. for be that does these
things shall never be removed. Ps. 15.5. And this is confirmed by the order and
conjunction of justification and sanctification mentioned before (...) ^7.
More specially by brotherly love, 1. John 3.14^ and the fruits thereof in
giving alms, Mat. 25.35. 1. Tim. 6.28.19. and forgiving the offense of others,
Mat 6.14. and therefore our Savior teaches us to use this argument in our
prayer for the confirmation of our faith, Mat. 6.12. but more plainly, Luke
11.4.

So much of the first doctrine.

CHAP. IX. Two other uses of this property.
NOw follows the second doctrine. For if we be enabled to worship the Lord
without fervile fear, as being freed from the terror and coaction of the law;
then it follows, that we are to worship the Lord with willing minds, a^
David exhorts his son Solomon. 1. Chron. 28.9. and promises for himself,
Ps. 119.32. I will run the way of thy commandments when my heart is set as
liberty. For therefore has the Lord freed us from the servitude of sin* and
bondage of the law, that we might serve him with free and willing minds. The
people redeemed by CHRIST, become a voluntary people, Psalm. 110.3. or, as Paul
speaks, his peculiar people, zealous, or studious of good works* Tit. 2.14.

Thus the d^^^ies both of piety toward GOD, and charity to our brethren, are
to be performed with willing minds and cheerful hearts. In the duties of
piety we are to serve the Lord with gladness. Ps. 100.2. I rejoiced (says
David. Ps. 122.1) when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the
Lord. More particularly.

The Word of God is to be preached (...), willingly, 1. Pet. 5.2. that we may
say with the Apostle, Romans 1.15. (...), as much as lies in me I am willing to
preach the Gospel, for it must be done in love to CHRIST, and zeal to GODS
glory, John 21.15.16.17. Act. 20.28. in love and zeal of our brethrens
salvation. 2 Cor. 11.2. It is to be heard with willingness; after the example of
the Beraeans, Act. 17.11. who received the Word (...), with all readiness of
mind. desiring 1. Pet. 2.2. and longing after it Ps. 119.131. To be conversant
therein should be our delight, Ps. 1^^. the Word ought to be sweet unto us even
as the honey, and the honey comb. Ps. 19.11^ 109.1^3. and we should rejoice i^
it, as in all manner of riches. This affection toward Gods Word David
expresses* Ps. 129.14^1^.1^.24.47.72.111.1^7.143.162.

We must give our selves to prayer, as devoted there, unto. Ps. 109.^. taking
delight to confer with GOD i^ prayer; and offering up our prayers and
thanksgivings, as a willing sacrifice Ps. 119.108.

We must praise God with joyfulnes, and give thank^ (...) cheerfulnes. Ps*
9^^*95*1*2. 63.5. for as (...) which is thanks, comes of (...), to rejoice;
so it must be (...), that is, with ^oy, Phil. 1.3.4. we must esteem it a
blessed thing, wherein we resemble the bles^^ (...) angels (...) Heaven. Ps.
84.^.

We must call the sabbath our delight Esaias, 58.^3. And we must esteem one day
spent in the house of God as better then a thousand. Ps. 84.10. Ps.
2^.8.27.4.84.1.2.3.4.10.

The duetyes of charity are also cheerfully to be performed Romans 12.8. he that
shows mercy let him do it with cheerfulnes. drawing forth his soul to the
hungry and afflicted Esaias, Trem. and I^^.
58.10. id est, ex animo liberaliter hi^ lariterque communicans ejus
necessitatibus. For the Lord loves a cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 9.7.

Finally in doing the will of God, we are to imitate the holy Angels,
according to our daily prayer, that we may do the will of God upon earth, as
it is done in heaven, that is willingly, readily, cheerfully; following also
the example of all examples, our blessed Savior, whose delight it was Ps.
40.8. and whose mea^ it was to do the will of his heavenly father. Ioh. 4.34.

As for that obedience, or service, which is extorted from men by servile
fear, because it is forced, it is but ^omentany, For no violent thing is of
continuance, and being momentany, it is but counterfeit. whereas true piety is
constant and permanent, Such is the (...) and repentance of hypo^^^^e^ wh^ when
they are affrighted will GODS judgments, o^ a^^^icted with his heavy hand
pr^t^nd repentance, and promise amendment: but when the hand of God is removed
from them, they (...) to their former courses, and^^^ so far from learning
(...)ence by that which they have suffered, or feared, that like anviles with
often striking they are more and more hardened. according to that Ps. 8.^. why
should you ^e strike^ any more, you will add^^^velt* ^ ^otable example hereof
we have in Pharaoh, who* as upon the inflicting of the several judgments,
promised obedience; Exodus 8.8.25.9.27.10.16.12.31. so upon the removing of the
plagues, he returned to his former obstinacy, Ex 8.15.32.9.34.10.20.14.5. Yea
in the Israelites themselves; who, when God slew some of them, they sought him,
and they returned, and enquired early after GOD, etc. Nevertheless they did
but flatter, him with their mouth, and with their tongues they lied unto him,
for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
covenant, Ps. 78.34 36.37. This therefore ought to teach men not to put off
their repentance to the time of sickness or old age, or to the hour of death;
lest the repentance which then they hope to perform, prove counterfeit. Now,
that our obedience may be voluntary and cheerful, and our service of GOD
without servile fear* we are to be adorned with the three Theological
Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity: for according to the measure of these three
graces, is the measure of our spiritual security and assurance, which is the
ground of our cheerefulnes. Faith; for no man can worship the Lord with a
willing mind, and cheerful heart, that is not by Faith persuaded, that his
service is accepted of him. The persuasion, of GODS love shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Spirit, that is to say, Faith, makes us to love him again,
and in love to serve him willingly to whom Luke 7.47.
much is forgiven, they love much. That charity whereby the whole Law is
fulfilled, proceeds from Faith unfeigned 1. Tim. 1.5. and without Faith it is
impossible to please GOD Heb. ^1.6. Hope; for they that have fastened their
anchor of hope in Heaven, perform the duties of piety and righteousness with a
comfortable expectation of everlasting happiness. The hope whereof makes them
easily to swallow all the difficulties and troubles of this life, for the joy
that is set before them, and with cheerefulnes to serve the Lord, and to finish
their course with joy* Act. 20.24. whiles we hold fast this hope, nothing
shall be able to discourage, or to withdraw us from the voluntary worship of
GOD. Not the desires of this world, which to him that has this hope seem more
vanities in comparison of the happiness hoped for. Not the terrors or
bugg-beares of this world, which are not worthy ^
of the glory expected. Consider the example of Moses, who, when he was ^ome
to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of CHRIST (in his members) greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt. the reason of all which was this, for he^
had respect to the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.24* 25.26.

1. John 4.18.
Charity, which expelling fearefulnes, causes cheerfulnes. To him that loves,
the commandments of God, are not grievous, 1. John. 5.3. nor the yoke of
CHRIST tedious. Nothing is hard to him that loves. Jacobs 7 years of hard
service for the love of Rachel seemed to him but a few days. Genesis 29.20.

The third use, is a singular comfort, which from hence arises to the
Faithful. For whereas the Lord in other places, when he would comfort his
servants, bids them not to fear, as Esaias 43.1. fear not, for I have
redeemed thee. Luke 12.32. fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom: Here in this covenant of grace, he promises,
and that by oath, that he will give us to worship him without fear, or at
least without cause of fear. so Esaias 54.14. which must needs be a singular
consolation unto us, whether we respect our condition by nature, or by grace.
For by Nature we are obnoxious to our enemies, subject to the terror of the
law, and to the fear Heb. ^.15.
of death and damnation; And though we be in the state of grace, yet are we
infirm and weak, not able by our own strength to resist our enemies; The
ground therefore of this our being without fear, is not any confidence of our
own strength: but first of all, the truth of God, Heb. 6. ^^.18
who by oath has promised that we shall worship him without fear.

2. Secondly, the power of God, whereby he is able to make good his promise. 2.
Tim. 1.12 1. Pet. 1.5.

3. Thirdly, his fidelity, in regard whereof he is also willing to perform his
oath, 1. Cor. 10.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.24.

4. Fourthly, his Fatherly providence. Es. 54.17. Romans 8.28. and protection.
Ps. 91.

5. Fifthly, CHRIST'S protection of us as our King, who having vanquished all the
enemies of our salvation, and delivered us out of their hand, none shall be able
to hurt us. Es. 54.14.17. and much less to pluck us out of his hand John
10.28.

6. Sixthly, his intercession for us, as our Priest, Romans ^.34. 1. John 2.2.

7. Seventhly, his union with us as our Head, with whom our life is hid in God.
Col. 3.3. Now as whiles the head (as they say) is above the water, the members
cannot be drowned; so whiles our Head is in glory, sitting at the right hand of
his Father, none of his members can perish; but as himself has promised,
because I live, you shall live also, Ioh. 14.19. wherefore we are to think of
our selves, as of the members of CHRIST, who^ the Lord has quickened together
with CHRIST, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in CHRIST JESUS. Ephesians. 2.5.6.

8. Eighthly, the testimony of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who shedding Romans
5.5.
abroad the love of God in our hearts, and testifying with Romans 8.16
our spirits, that we are the sons of God, becomes the earnest 2. Cor.
1.22.5.5
of salvation, sealing us Ephesians. 1.13.14.
until the day of our full redemption. and not only freeth us from the spirit
of bondage and of fear, as being the spirit of adoption, by whom we cry Gal.
4.6. Romans 8.15.
in our hearts Abba father; but also works in us peace of conscience, Rom
5.1.5.14.17.
and joy in the Holy Ghost, which S. Peter calls unspeakable and glorious. 1.
Pet. 1.8.

CHAP. X. Of uprightnes, and of the worshipping of God in holiness before him.
THe second property of our new obedience is uprightnes, signified in these
words (...) before him. whereby is meant, that we are to serve God in holiness
and righteousness, not as before men in eye-services as men-pleasers; but as
before God, in sincerity and truth And so the Lord himself seems to expound
this phrase Genesis 17.1. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be
upright. For to walk before God, or to walk with God (both which phrases are
used in the Scriptures, sometimes jointly, as 1. Kings 3.6. sometimes severally
with God, as did ^inoch, Gen* 5.22.24* and Noah, Genesis 6.9. and as we are
required to do, Mich. 6.8. before God, Es. 57.2. as did Abraham, Genesis 24.40.
and Isaac Genesis 48.15. David, Ps. 116.9. Iotham, who prepared his ways before
the Lord, 2. Chro. 27.6.) it is to behave our selves as in the sight and
presence of God, setting God before our eyes, admitting him to be the beholder,
witness, and judge of our actions; that is, to demean our selves uprightly. And
this property is required, not only in the duties of piety, which we
perform directly to God; but also in the duties of righteousness, which we owe
unto men: for so it is here said, that we should worship him in holiness and
righteousness before him; in which two, being sincere and upright, the image of
God renewed in us does consist, Ephesians. 4.24. in righteousness and holiness of
truth, that is in true, sincere, upright, and unfeigned righteousness and
holiness. But first we are to speak of worshipping GOD in holiness before him,
or of uprightnes, as it has relation to GOD. In which sense it is opposed to
hypocrisy; and so what is upright, is said to be (...), without hypocrisy, or
unfayned.

Now what this uprightnes is, what uprightnes is.
we may gather by those diverse words and phrases, whereby it is expressed,
both in the Old Testament, and in the New.

As first by the word josher Ps. 2^.3^.
, which signifies uprightnes, and jashar, which signifies right or upright,
as Ps. 37.37. Job 1.1.8.2.3. but more plainly and fully, when it is joined with
some other word, as right in heart, signifying the inward disposition; or right
in the way, signifying the conversation. for so the upright are called recti
cord, right or upright in heart, as Psalm. 7.^0.38.14.36.10.64.10.94.15.125.4.
and vprightnes rectitudo cordis. 1. King. 3.6. Ps. 119.7. they are also called
recti via Ps. 37.14. upright of way. Ps. 119.1. or perfecti via; ambulans
integer. Ps. 15.2. whose way is vprightnes. Integer vitae, Horat.
Es. 26.7. their way being made straight by God. both which do concur in the
upright for he is properly integer, who is both outwardly straight, that is
rectus via and inwardly sound, that is rectus cord. Both must concur 2.
Chron. 25.2.

2. By the word Zmeth, which signifies truth, for as there is truth in words,
opposed to lying so also in deeds, opposed to dissembling and hypocrisy, which
is vprightnes. as Ios. 24.14. Ps. 51.6. Es. 38.3. Ps. 145.18. and as there is a
saying, 2 Chronicles. 11.20
so also a doing of the truth. John, 3.21. 1. John. 1.6. and walking in truth.
2. John. 4. and 3 John, 3. hence to walk uprightly, is to walk before God in
truth. 1. King. 2.4. and 1. King. 3.6. in truth and righteousness and vprightnes
of heart. 2. King. 20.3. in truth with a perfect heart. and to worship God
uprightly, is to worship him in spirit and in truth. Ioh. 4.23.24. or as Samuel
exhorts, in truth with all our hearts. 1. Sam. 12.24.

3. The most usual word to signify, either the upright is Tham, or Thamim,
which commonly is translated perfect, as Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy. 18.13. Ps.
15.2.37.37.119.1. or vprightnes, is Thom or thamim, which usually is translated
perfection* whereby not legal perfection is meant (which is absolute and
complete, not only in respect of the parts, but also of degrees) but
evangelicall, according to the covenant of grace; which is nothing else (the
Lord 2. Cor. 2.1^. Gen 22.16 ^. Sam. 7.^. etc.
accepting in his children the will for the deed) but integrity or vprightnes;
and is so expounded Ps. 25.21. Ios. 24.14. Job. 1.1.^.2.3. Ps. 27.^7. For very
many in the scriptures have this perfection attributed to them, who
notwithstanding had their imperfections. as Noah, Genesis 6.9. Job. 1.1.8.2.3.
Jacob, Genesis 25.27. etc. of Asa it is said 2. Chro. 15.17. that his heart was
perfect all his days: and yet in the next Chapter there are recorded three
foul sins, which he committed. 2. Chron. 16.7.10.12.

4. By the word Shalem, which in the Greek is translated, sometimes (...)
perfect, sometimes (...); true, and sometimes (...) full or complete* examples
of the first. 1. King. 8.61.11.4.15.3.14. 2. King. 20.3. 1. Chron. 28.9. 2.
Chro. 18.17. of the second Es. 38.3.

Of the last 1. Chron. 29.9.16.9.19.9.25.2. And in this sense, they that are
upright are said to have fulfilled after the Lord. that is fully or entirely to
have followed him, Number. 14.24.32.11.12. Deuteronomy. 1.36. Ios. 14.8.9.14. as contrary
wise of those who are not upright, but have a name that they live, and yet are
dead; it is said, that their works are not (...) full or perfect before God.
Apoc. 3.2.3. but dimidiata, worshipping and obeying God by the halfes, not
fulfilling after him* Number. 32, 11.

5. By the whole heart, being not legally, but evangelically understood, as
when duties are to be performed with the whole heart, or with all the heart,
and with all the soul, as Deuteronomy 4, 29.26.16.30.2. 1* Sam. 12.14. 2. Kings 23.3.
Ps. 119.2.10.34.69. Joel 2.12. which being legally understood, import a greater
perfection, then is incident to any man since the fall: but being evangelically
understood, according to the covenant of grace, nothing else is meant thereby,
but that they are to be performed with an entire or upright heart, or as David
speaks, Psalm. 119.7. with uprightnes of heart.

6. Not with an heart, and an heart (after the manner of hypocrites, who are
(...) Iam. 1.8.4.8.) Ps. 12.2. 1. Chro. 12.33.38.

7. Without guile, that is hypocrisy. Ps. 17.1*32.2.

8. As the upright are called recti cord, so also puri cord, ^ure in heart.
Ps. 24.4.73.1.

Whereby is not meant, that they are wholly pure or free from sin: for who
can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Pro. 20.9. or if
any shall say so, in him there is no truth. 1. John, 1.8. But they are pure in
heart, who are sincere and upright, purified from the leaven of hypocrisy. Iam.
4.8. in whose heart there is no guile. Ps. 32.2. who being endued with faith
unfeigned, which purifieth their hearts, Act. ^5.9. as the instrument
apprehending the blood of CHRIST, which does purge our hearts from sin, 1.
Ioh. 1.7. and purifieth our consciences from dead works to serve the living
God. Heb 9.14 and being also endued with this hope that they shall be like unto
Christ in glory, will 1. John. 3.3.
purify themselves, even as he is pure. but this is puritas inchoa^^, not
perfecta.

In the new testament uprightnes is expressed, some times by this phrase (...)
before God* as not only in this, but also in other places; where we a^^
taught, to speak, as before God in Christ 2* Cor. 12.1^. to preach, as before
God in Christ, 2. Cor. 2.17. commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God. 2. Corinthians. 4.^^. and to take care for the people of God, as
in his sight, ^. Cor. 7.12. to hear as before God* Act^ 10.53* Thus, both
those persons which be upright, are said to be righteous before God Luke (...)
and those (...), whose heart^ (...) not right before God, Act. ^*21* and those
actions and duties, which are upright, are said to be acceptable, pleasing and
vn^^proveable before God. 1. Tim. 2.3.5.4. Heb. 13.21. 1. Ioh. 3.22. Col. 1.22.

2. Sometimes by the word truth. John. 4.23.^4. 1. Cor. 5.8. 1. John, 3.18.
Phil. ^.18. Ephesians. 4.24. hence an upright heart is called (...) a true heart.
Heb. 10.22.

3. Sometimes by the word (...) that is sincerity as 1. Cor. 5.8. 2. Cor. 2.17.
and 2. Cor. 1.^^. when it is called the sincerity of God, that is, godly
sincerity for that is (...) which is sincere, or without mixture as bread
without leaven, 1. Cor. 5.8. without the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy, Luke 12.1. o^ as honey without wa^^ (as the word sincere does
signify) or as ^esych^^s expounds it, (...), pure, sincere, or without
deceit, and true. This since, (...) the ^^^d required of the I^^^^^nes, by
forbidding diverse sorts of mixture: as to plant their vineyards, o^ to sow
their fields ^nhidivers (...) to plowe with an (...) and ^n (...) together, to
wear a garment of diverse stu^fes, as of woollen and (...) her, Deuteronomy* ^^.9.1^.
(...) Levit. 19.^^.

(...) upright ma^^ is signified by the word (...) sound, or an approved
Christian; such (...) ^^^kers, but do^rs also of God^ wo^d; who are no^ only
in the church visible, but also (...) John, ^.1^. who are sh^epe in Ch^ists
(...) ^ot go^^es; wheat in Gods floor, and not (...) Gods field, and ^ot
t^^es, child^^n Gods family, and not bondservants, Ioh. 8.34.35. (...)
contrariwise, those who are (...) Christians are called (...) 1. Cor. 9.27. 2.
Cor, 15.6. 2. Tim. 3.8.
which does not signify reprobate, as opposed to the elect; but reprovable, as
opposite to (...) that is, approved. 1. Cor. 11.19. there must be heresies,
that those who are (...) sound and approved may be known. Iam. 1.12. Blessed
is the man who indureth temptation* for when by trial he shall be found (...),
that is, ^ sound and approved Christian, he shall receive the crown of life.
For temptations and trialls are (...) pro^^ations, by enduring and overcomming
whereof the ^pright or (...) (who have the privilege of perseverance) are
discerned and known. Sometimes the word is used with some addition as (...)
approved in CHRIST, that is an approved Christian, Romans 16.10. (...) approved
of GOD. 2. Tim. 2.15. for not he who commends him self is (...), but he whom
God commends. 2. Cor. 10.12. (...), acceptable o^ well pleasing to GOD, and
approved of men. Romans ^4.18.

5. That which is upright and sincere is sometimes signified by the word (...),
(for who upright is not to be an hypocri^^) (...). 12.9. ^. Cor. 6.6. ^. Pet.
^.22. 1. Tim. 1.5. 2. Tim. 1.5. Iam. ^.27. and some (...) by the word (...).
Pet. ^ (...) guile. And they are said to be upright, in whose spirit there is
(...) gui^e, that is hypocrys^^. Ps. 32^^. (...) Israelites, in whom th(...).
Ioh. 1.48. for such fools (...) hypocrites, (...) ^et) go about with (...)
pretenses to deceive God. Ps. 7^.36.

6. As in the old testament, so also in the new, the upright (...) and the
up^^^ ^eart is called a (...) 2.22. 1. Pet. 1.22.

7. Lastly, to walk uprightly is (...) to go with a right foore Gal. 2.14.
neither treading awry by dissimulation, nor halting, as the Israelites did,
betwixt God and Baal. 1. King. 1^. ^or declining to the right ^^nd or to the
left. Deuteronomy. 5.32.28.14. 2. Chro. 34.2. or as the Apostle speaks Heb. 12.13.
to make straight or right paths to our feet. according to the exhortation of
Solomon, Pro. 4.26. as it is rendered by the 72. (...) make right paths to thy
feet, and order right thy ways, decline v. ^^.
not to the right hand nor to the left. and a^ he exhorts in the same place
v. 25. let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eye liddes look straight
before thee. would you know then, what it is to worship God in holiness before
him? it is to walk with God, or before God without hypocrisy, in sincerity and
truth, with perfect, with pure, with ourwhole hearts, that is to say, with envy
or upright hearts, walking in the way of religion and godliness with a right
foot, looking right before us, declining neither to the right hand, nor to the
left, neither treading awry by dissimulatio^, not halting downright, either as
neuters in religion betwixt CHRIST and Antichrist, or as worldlings between
GOD and Mammon; nor worshipping or obaying GOD by halves; but approving our
selves to be (...) entire and sound Christians, to him that tries and
searches the heart and the ioynes, s^^ting God always before our eyes, and
behaving our selves as in his sight and presence, doing that which is right in
his sight.

Now that we may be moved to labor for this integrity and uprightnes of heart,
Argument to move us (...) integrity.
I will use the 3 usual argument of commendation, viz. the excellency, the
profit, and the necessity of it, as it were a triple chain.

The excellency
1. The excellency of it is such: that first it goes under the name of
perfection; and those things which are done (though with great weakness and much
imperfection) with an upright heart, that is to say with a sincere desire,
unfeigned purpose, and upright endeavor to please God, are accepted of God as
done with a perfect heart.

2. Vprightnes is the inward bewty of Christ's spouse, in regard whereof, though
she be outwardly despicable in the eyes of the world; yet she is glorious
within, Ps. 45.13. like to the Tabernacle, which was a type of the church,
which though outwardly covered with Ra^mes skins and Badgers skins Ex.
36.19. which made but a homely show; was nevertheless most beautiful and
glorious within. Or as the spouse in the Canucles c. 1.5. says I am black,
but co^ely; black without, at the tent^ of Kedar, who were sce^i^^ having tents
of sackcloth* comely within, as the hangings of Solomon within his house, as
the li^ing thereof.

3. Integrity is of all things most pleasing to God, Ps. 51.6. Behold, thou art
delighted with truth in the inward parts. I know also my God; that thou (...)
the heart, and have pleasure in uprightnes. 1. Chron. 29.17. Yea, I may say
more, that to be upright, is not only pleasing to God, but also the pleasing
of him, Pt. 11.20. the upright in the way are Gods delight. The Hebrewe word
ja^^er which signifies right, is translated (...) pleasing, and the verb
which signifies to be right, signifies also to please (...), and is
oftentimes so translated, as the ^onne, Exo. 15.26. Deuteronomy. 6 18.12.^5.13.18.21.^
the verb Iud. 14.3.7^ the young woman of Ti^nah was right in Samsons eyes,
that is, she pleased him well. so, 1. King. 9.12. 2. Chro. 30.4. Ier. 18.4.
Dan. 4.24. but most plainly Number. 23.27. perhaps it will seem right in the eyes
of God; that is, as we also translate it, peradventure it will please God.

In like manner the phrase of walking with God or before God is every where by
the 72 translated by the verb (...), that is, to please God. As Genesis 5.22 24.
where it is said, that Henoch walked with God, they read (...), he pleased God:
so Genesis 6.9.17. 1.24.40.48.15. Ps. 116.9 the son of Syrach speaking of
Henoch, observes the same translation Eccl. 44 16. so does the author of the
book of Wisdom, chapter 4.10. and so does the Apostle himself, Heb. 11.5. Henoch
before his translation had this testimony, (...), that he pleased God.

4. The excellency of uprightnes is such, as that it is that virtue which God
chiefly requires. Genesis 17.1. Mich. 6.8. 1. Sam. 12.24. which he most highly
esteems Genesis 5.22.24. which has always been the chief commendation of the
faithful, as of Enoch, Noah, Job etc. 1. Kings 3.6. The chief thing wherein
the faithful are to rejoice in time of prosperity. 2. Cor. 1.12. and their
chiefest stay and comfort in distress. Es. 38.3 Act. 23.1.

2. But come we to the profit, The profit.
by which most men Ps. 4.6.
are drawn. In general it is said, that God is good to those that are of a
clean heart. Ps. 73.1. according to David's prayer Ps. 125.4. more particularly.
Ps. 84.11. the Lord is a sun and shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and
no good thing will he withhold from the^ that walk in uprightnes. He is a sun,
that is, the author of all comfortable blessings, which are signified by light,
according to that Ps. 112.4. to the upright there arises light in darkness,
that is to say, comfort in afflictions; yea, to them that are upright, the
conscience of their own integrity does minister singular comfort. It was
Ezechias his stay and comfort, when he had received the sentence of death. Es
38 3. and this was Paul his rejoicing, the testimony of his conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity he had had his conversation in the world 2. Cor.
1.12. Act. 23.1. For God to him that is good before him, that is upright,
gives joy, Eccles 2.26. yea to them, all true joy, and praising of God with
joy and gladness is appropriated. Ps 32.11.33.1.64.10. For light is sown for
the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Ps. 97.11.

And as the life of the upright is comfortable, his upright conscience being
unto him as a continual Pro. 1.15.
feast; so his end is happy Ps. 37.37. Observe the perfect man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. so ^say 57.2. which is further
proved; because uprightnes is evermore attended with perseverance to the end,
as hereafter shall fully be proved in the Treatise of perseverance. For the
integrity of the upright does guide and preserve them. Pro 11.3. Ps. 25.21. the
upright man who is not only a hearer, but also a doer of Gods word, is like
the wise man, which built his house upon the rock, which could not be
overthrown. Mat. 7.24.25. wherefore the upright shall never be moved, but his
righteousness endures for ever. Ps. 112.3.6.

The Lord is also a shield to them that walk uprightly Pro. 2.7. For the eyes
of the Lord ^erlustrate the whole earth, to show himself strong in their
behalf, whose heart is perfect or upright toward him. 2. Chro. 16 9. which
David applyng to himself, says Ps. 7, 10. God is my shield, who saves the
upright in heart.

He gives also grace and glory; grace in this life, and glory in the life to
come, Grace: for uprightnes being the soundnes of all graces, God has
therefore laid up in store for the upright Tushijah, whatsoever is sound and
truly good, as Solomon says, Pro. 2.7. And such is the concatenation of all
saving graces, that where any of them be in truth, (as they are in the upright)
there is a concurrence of them all in some measure: some goeing before, as
causes producing the rest, others following and presupposing the former. As for
example, where is faith unfeigned, there is also hope and charity; and where
these are in truth, no other saving grace can be wanting; and therefore God may
truly be said to give all manner of graces to the upright, as saving knowledge,
and true wisdom, Eccles. 2.26. which David found by his own experience. Ps.
119.98.99.100. and so of the rest. And upon this soundnes of grace follows
the increase of grace, peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 2. Cor
1.12. Eccles. 2.26. affiance and confidence. Pro. 28.1. when fear surpriseth
the hypocrites. Es 33.14. patience, constancy, and perseverance, Luke 8.15. by
which the upright and sound Christians are known, when contrary wise the
double minded man (that is the hypocrite) is inconstant in all his ways Iam.
1.8. and his heart being not right with God, neither is he steadfast in his
covenant. Ps. 78.37: but is subject to defection, 1. John. 2.19. as having
built upon the sand. Mat. 7.26.

The Lord also gives glory to the upright; for whosoever walks uprightly
shall be saved. P^o. 28.18. they shall dwell in the presence of God Ps. 140.13.
in the mountain of his holiness, Ps. 15.12. Ps 24.3.4. the pure in heart shall
see God (in which vision of God, our eternal happiness does consist:) and
therefore they are blessed. Mat. 5.8. Ps. 119 1. and not only them selves are
blessed, but their children also after them Pro. 20.7. Ps. 112.2. Of this
happiness we have a notable example in Henoch; whom, because he walked with God,
the Lord translated into the kingdom of glory. Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5. to let us
understand by this precedent, as being the first mentioned in this kind, what
account he makes of uprightnes. Now, if the Lord do grant them glory in his
own kingdom, it may not be thought, that he will Ps. 84.11.
withold any thing from them that is good. Luke 12.32. any good thing, I say,
which they shall ask at his hands. for the prayers of the upright are accepted
of God. Pro. 15.8. and he is near to all that call upon him in truth. Ps.
145.18. insomuch that whatsoever they do ask they do receive, because they
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. 1. John. 3.22.

The necessity.
3. But if neither the golden chain of excellency will allure, nor the silver
chain of profit draw us; then must the iron chain of necessity compel us to
uprightnes.

The necessity may be showed by these consideratio^s.

1. As with uprightnes the smallest graces, and the weakest measure of
obedience are accepted with God: so without it, the best graces which we may
seem to have, are but cou^terfeit; and the best worship that we perform
without it, is but hypocrisy. For the soundnes of all grace, and of all worship
stands in uprightnes. Our faith therefore must be (...) unfeigned. 1. Tim.
1.5. 2. Tim. 1.5. or else it is no true faith, our charity also must be
unfeigned, Romans 12.9. 2. Cor. 6.6. 1. Pet. 1.22. that is we must love indeed and
in truth, and not in word only, and from the teeth outward 1. John. 3.18. Iam.
2.15.16. Our wisdom likewise must be (...). Iam. 3.17. not that mixta
prudentia of our Politicians, which is mingled with disguising and deceit, for
such is earthly, carnal and deuillish. Iam. 3.15. Our repentance also must be
unfeigned, and from the bottom of our hearts Joel. 2.12.13. not like that of
the Israelites, when the hand of God was upon them, who made show of
repentance, but their heart was not upright with God. Ps. 78.34.36.37.

Likewise our obdience must be from the heart Ro^. 6.17. Yea it must be
performed with our whole heart, Deuteronomy. 26.16.30.2. 2. King. 23.3. Ps. 119.34.69.
If with Amasiah we do that which is right before God, but not with a perfect,
that is, upright heart; we may fall away from God, as he did. 2. Chro. 25.2.14.
for when men's hearts are not upright with God, neither are they steadfast in his
covenant. Ps. 78.37. If therefore without uprightnes our faith be dead, our
love fained, our wisdom devilish, our repentance unsound, our obedience
counterfeit, and so of all other graces; then is uprightnes as necessary, I say
not, as any one grace, but as all of them put together: uprightnes being the
truth and soundnes of them all, without which they are not (...) indeed and in
truth; for ens et verum convertuntur. and therefore that which is not a true
faith is not faith in deed, and so of the rest, And as the graces, which we
seem to have without uprightnes are but counterfeit; so all our worship and
service of God, without it is mere hypocrisy. Our worship therefore of God
must be in spirit and in truth, Ioh. 4.23.24. we must seek the Lord with our
whole heart, (whereby seeking, we are to understand the whole worship and
service of God) Deuteronomy. 4.29. Ps. 119.2. Thus David sought the Lord Ps. 119.10.
Thus Asa and his subjects did make a covenant to seek the Lord with all their
hearts. 2 Chro. 15.2. Thus Iehosaphat, 2. Chro. 22.9.

It is not our bodily exercise. 1. Tim. 4.8. but our reasonable and spiritual
service that is acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. It is the heart that the Lord
requires, Pro. 23.26. and that he respects. 1. Sam 16.7. If therefore we
draw near to God with our mouths, and honor him with our lips, but remove
our hearts far from him; Es. 29.13: we must expect the reward of hypocrites.

Necessary to Invocation.
But let us descend to the parts of Gods worship, and first, to prayer and
thanksgiving, which are the two sorts of invocation. To prayer.
If we would have our prayer accepted of God, both we our selves must be
upright, and our prayers also, we; for the Lord delights in the prayer of the
upright, Pro. 15.8. but abhors the prayer of the hypocrites, Pro. 28.9. Es.
29.13. If therefore we regard wickedness in our hearts (as hypocrites use to do)
we must make our account with David, that the Lord will not hear us; Ps.
66.18. Our prayer must also be upright, when we are to pray, we must prepare
our hearts to seek the Lord; 2. Chro. 30.19. we must pray in spirit. Ephesians.
6.18. in truth. Ps. 145.18. Our prayer must be the lifting up of our souls to
God. Ps. 25.1.86.4. a lifting up of our hearts with our hands unto God in the
heavens. Lam. 3.41. a pouring forth of our souls before the Lord. 1. ^am. 1.15.
Ps. 62.8. we must pray out of a pure and upright heart, 2, Tim. 2 22. with our
whole heart. Ps. 119.145. with lips unfeigned. Ps. 17.1. And to this manner of
praying is the promise of hearing our prayers restrained. Ps. 145.18.

But if we pray with fained lips, if in our prayers we speak with an heart and
an heart, Ps. 12.2. if we ask with our mouth that which we do not desire in
our hearts; if in our prayers we pretend that which we do not intend; if we
promise that which we do not mean to perform; if we draw near unto GOD
with our mouths, and remove our hearts from him, as hypocrises use to do, we
shall offer a great abuse to the Majesty of GOD. For fained lips are as the
Psalmist calls the^. Ps. 17.1. lips of deceit, whereby hypocrites in their
prayers lying unto GOD. Hos. 7.13.14. go about to deceive him.

The like is to be said of praise and thanksgiving; To Thanksgiving.
which if we would have accepted of GOD, both we our selves must be upright,
(for praise is comely for the upright. Ps. 33.1. for they only can rejoice in
GOD: and therefore they alone can praise him aright. Ps. 32.11.145.10) and our
praises also and thanksgiving must be uprightly performed. First therefore we
must prepare our hearts, Ps. 57.7.108 1. and stir up our souls to praise God.
Ps. 103.1.2.104.1.146.1. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy Name* then must we sing and praise him with grace Col. 3.16
that is, with thankfulness, and with gladness in our hearts, with our whole
hearts, Ps. 91.86.12.111.1.138.1. that is with uprightnes of heart. Ps. 119.7.
Otherwise we shall make but bad music in the ears of the Lord if there be a
discord between our hearts and our tongues.

Let us come to the ministry of the word, To Preaching.
which must uprightly be both preached and heard. The Preacher must not
adulterate the Word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God he must speak in CHRIST, 2. Cor. 2.17.4.2. not seeking to please men Gal.
1.10. but studying to show himself approved to God who tries our hearts, 1 Thessalonians 2.4. 2. Tim. 2.15. neither seeking his own praise or profit; but seeking
only the glory of God in the salvation of the hearers. And as the word is to be
preached with integrity, so is it also to be heard with uprightnes. And to that
end, before we come into the house of God, we ought to look to our feet, that
is to our affections, Eccles. 5.1. and to put off the foul shoes Exodus 3.5.
Ios 5.15.
of our feet, that is, our corrupt affections Iam. 1.21. 1. Pet. 2.1. that we
may receive the word into honest and good, that is, upright hearts, Luk 8.15.
And when we are come into the asse^bly the place of Gods presence, we are to
set our selves in the presence of God. that we may say with Cornelius Act.
10.33. we are here present before God, to hear what shall be delivered out of
his word. And as the minister must preach, as he that delivers the oracles of
God. 1. Pet. 4.11. so we must hear (...) the word preached, not as the word of
man, but as it is indeed the word of God 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. with earnest
attentio^, hanging as it were upon the mouth of the preacher, Luke 19 48. and
so desiring to hear God, as we desire to be heard of God. (for without
attention, being present in body, we are absent in mind,) with a sincere
desire 1 Pet. ^.2:
to profit by it, and an unfeigned purpose to practice it. For if we be hearers,
and not doers of the word like Ezechiels hearers. Ezech. 33.31.32. as we shall
play the hypocrites to deceive other^ so we shall prove sophisters to beguile our
selves Iam. 1.22 (...). To the Sacraments.


There remain the Sacraments. For as in the old Testament the Circumcision of
the flesh was of no value Romans ^18.29.
, without the circumcision of the heart; so is it to little purpose to have the
body washed 1. Pet. 3.21.
with outward Baptism, unless our hearts be cleansed with the blood of CHRIST
apprehended by faith unfeigned. For what will it avail us, if without
uprightnes of heart we do with Simon Magus profess our selves to believe, and
to be baptized? For if our heart be not right before God, we have, for all our
baptism and profession, no part in CHRIST: but do remain as he did, in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Act. 8.21.

And as in celebrating the Passover, the Jews were to use unleavened bread*
so must we receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which is the antitype to
the Passover) not with the leaven of hypocrisy, but with the azymes or
unleavened graces of sincerity and truth, 1. Cor. 5.8. For what will it avail
us, if with Judas Iscariot, we shall receive the Sacrament, and carry our
selves so smoothly, as he did, that when our Savior told his Apostles, that
one of them should betray him; all of them were as ready to suspect themselves,
as him? for if our hearts be not upright, but false, as his was, well may we
receive, as Augustine says of him, panem Domini, the sacramental bread, but
we shall not receive panem Dominum, the Lord, who is the bread of GOD which
came down from heaven. John. 6.33.

But if when we are to receive the sacrament, we prepare ^. Chro. 10.19
our hearts to seek the Lord, and come with upright hearts void of hypocrisy;
though we have many imperfections and wants, and though the graces required in
a worthy receiver be very small and weak in us; yet if they be in truth, we
shall in Christ be accepted, as worthy receivers. But without uprightnes of
heart, the most glorious show that can be made, either in our preparation, or
in the receiving of the sacrament, is but hypocrisy.

2. Secondly the necessity of uprightnes is proved by the authority of God
speaking in the scriptures as 1 By the commandment of God imposing a
necessity of duty Deuteronomy. 18.13. Ios. 24.14. who so requires it as a maine and
principal duty Genesis 17.1. 1. Sam 12 24. Mich. 6.8. which in all duties is,
as it were, all in all, and without which all is nothing Act. 24.16. For this
cause Israel was called Ieshurun. Deuteronomy. 32.15.33.5.26. Es. 44.2. because this
was the thing which the Lord required cheifely in every Israelite, this is the
true Israelite, John, 1 47. Romans 2.29. This is Jacob, Ps. 24.6. or this is the
generation of Jacob (who was ish Tam. perfectus or integer Genesis 25.27.) this,
the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16. 2ly by the testimony of our Savior Mat. 5.20.
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees
(whose righteousness consisted in outward appearance, not in inward truth, they
being soured with the leaven of hypocrisy) you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. If therefore we have a form (...)
of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2. ^im. 3.5. if we have lamps
without oil Mat. 25.3. grene blades without root. Luke 8.13. grene leaves
without fruit. Mat. 21.19. we cannot please God* And thirdly, by the oath of
God in this place inferring a necessity of infallibility, that those, who are
the redeemed of the Lord shall worship him in holiness, and righteousness before
him.

3. Thirdly if we be not upright, then are we hypocrites, for not to be upright
is to be an hypocrite. But hypocrisy is a sin most odious unto God, and most
pernicious to the hypocrite. For as the upright are the Lords delight: so they
that be of a perverse heart, that is to say the hypocrites, are an abomination
to him, Pro. 11.20. And so pernicious it is to him that is infected therewith,
that as there is no assurance of his salvation, (for what hope has the
hypocrite; when GOD shall take away his soul Job. 27.8:) so there is great
certainty of their damnation, unless they repent: whereof there is less hope
in an hypocrite, then in an open sinner. For which cause our Savior CHRIST
tells the Matt. 11.31
pharisaicall hypocrites, that publicanes and harlots enter into the Kingdom
of heaven before them. And such is the certainty of their damnation, that our
Savior Christ, when he would signify, that the wicked servant, of whom he
speaks Mat. 24.48. should certainly be damned: he says, he should have his
portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. v. 51.

Seeing therefore uprightnes is a grace so excellent, that it goes under the
name of perfection, that it is the inward bew^y of the spouse of Christ,
wherein especially he is delighted, that it is not only pleasing to GOD, but
also the pleasing of him: so profitable, that all good things are promised to
the upright, and no good thing kept back from them; so necessary, that in it
consists the soundnes of all saving graces, and of all religious worship, in
so much that without it the best graces are counterfeit, and all our best
worship but h^pocrisie; so necessary as that without it men can have no
assurance that they are redeemed of the Lord, or that they shall be saved: but
that as without it they being no better then hypocrites; have no sound hope
that they shall be saved, so there is a certainty and assurance that they shall be
condemned: it behooveth us by all meanees to labor for this virtue, which is
so excellent in it self, so pleasing to God, so profitable, and so necessary
to us.

And first, Other mean^^ to uprightnes.
for as much as it is the gift of God, from who^ every good and perfect gift
does Iam. 1.17.
come, for it is he that makes our way perfect. Ps. 18.32. it is he that
swears in this place, that he will give those that are redeemed. to worship
him in holiness and righteousness before him we are therefore to beg this grace
at the hands of God by hearty and faithful prayer, after the example of David.
Ps. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within
me. and Ps. 119 80. let my heart be sownd or tha^im
upright in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

2. To our prayer let us join our endeavor, to keep a watch over our heart,
and as Solomon exhorts Pro. 4.^3.
above all keeping to keep our hearts, for out of it are the issues of life,
that is, as it is the fountain of life, so of living well or ill, from whence
all our saying and doing do stream. The good man out of the good treasure of
his heart, brings forth good things, and the evil man out of the evil
treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things, for out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks. Luke 6.45. and accordingly the hand works,
wherefore in reforming our lives, our first and chief care must be of purging
the heart; for that is the foundation of a godly life, without which there is
no sownd reformation.

First (says our Savior CHRIST) Mat. 23.26. cleanse the inside of the cup
and platter, that the outside may be clean also, In vain do we go about to
clear the streams, whilst the fountain is corrupt: In vain do we go about
to stop the streams, whiles the wellspring flows in his full course, In
vain shall we like the su^mer fruit be fair and mellow on the outside if we
be rotten at the core: in vain have men a name that they live, when they are
dead. Apoc. 3.1.

And the rather we are to take care of our hearts, because GOD himself does
especially look unto the heart, 1. Sam. 16, 7. and according to the quality
and disposition of the heart, he judges of the man. If the heart burn with
lust, the man is an adulterer before GOD; if the heart be fraught with
covetousnes, the man is a thief before God, as Judas was. John. 12.6. If the
heart boil with hatred and malice, the man is a murderer before GOD, 1. Ioh.
3, 15. If the heart be removed from GOD, and set upon the world, and the things
that are therein, then is the man a spiritual adulterer, that is, an idolater
before GOD. Iam. 4.4.

And finally, the heart is to be kept above all keepings, because it is
deceiptfull above all things, Ier. 17.9.

3. Thirdly, that we may learn to walk with God, and to behave our selves as
in his sight, and in his presence, it is necessary, that we should effectually
acknowledge, believe and remember, and upon all occasions meditate of the
omniscience and omnipresence of God, after the example of David, who was in
respect of his integrity and uprightnes, a man according to Gods own heart Ps.
139. the first 12. verses. For if we do powerfully acknowledge, and
effectually believe and remember, 1. that the eye of the Lord is in every Pro.
15.3.11.
place, beholding the just and unjust, and that he knows all things, even
those which are most hidden and secret, and namely that he knows the heart,
and searches the reins, that he knows Ps 1393*
our thoughts before we think them, and that no thoughts Job 42 2.
can be hidden from him: we shall thereby be moved to behave our selves as in
the sight of God, laboring to approve, not only our words and deeds, but also
our inward thoughts and affections to God, who not only knows the heart, but
especially looks to the heart. It is the argument, which David uses to move
Solomon to uprightnes. 1. Chron. 28.9. And thou my son Solomon (says he)
Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with an upright heart, and
willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all
imaginations of the thoughts.

2. And if we would meditate of the omnipresence of God, that God is at all
times in all places present with us, and that we cannot Is. 139.7.
possibly avoid out of his presence, that would make us behave our selves as
in the presence of God. Inferior; when they are in the sight and presence of
their superiors, are very careful of their behavior. He were an ungracious
son, or a lewd servant, that would misdemeane him self, in the sight and
presence of his father, and of his Lord. she were a very lewd and impudent
wife, that in the sight and presence of her husband would prostitute her sellfe
to an other man. This is our case: God is our father, we are his children he is
our Lord, and we are his servants; he is our husband, we are his spouse, and we
always are in his sight and presence. If therefore we could truly and
effectually believe, and remember this, (which is a most certain and undoubted
truth, and no less certain then that there is a God, which of all truths is
the most certain truth) we would abstain from sin, neither would we be so
shameless, as in his sight, and in his presence to sin against him, see Job.
31.4.34.21. Ps. 119.168. Pro. 5.21. To this purpose, Seneca Epist, 1^.
admonishes his friend Lucilius, that he would set before him Cato or Lalius,
or some other grave and reverend person, that so he might behave him self as
in their presence: for magnapars (says he) peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis
testis assistet. a great part of sins would be prevented, if when we are
about to sin there were some witness present with us. How much more would
the presence of almighty God restrain us from sin, if we had the eye of
Moses, the eye of faith, to see him Heb. 11.27.
who is invisibly present with us always, and in all places.

4. To the meditation of Gods omniscience and omnipresence, let us join the
consideration of his all sufficiency. For this is the argument, which not only
the prophet Hanani used to Asa, 2. Chro 16.9. the eyes of the Lord perlustrate
the whole earth, to show him self strong in their behalf, whose heart is
upright toward him; but also which God himself used to Abraham Genesis 17.1. I
am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be upright. For what is the reason,
why men do play the hypocrites? Is it not because they desire to please men,
and to approve them selves to them rather then to God? And why do they seek
to please men, rather then God? is it not because they fear men, more then
God, or trust in men more then in God? But if we did effectually acknowledge
Gods all sufficiency, we would learn to fear him, and to trust in him above
all; knowing that no creature is able, either to do us good, unless God use
him as his instrument for our good: or to hurt us, unless God use him as his
rod to scourge us, and therefore as we would fear him, and trust in him
rather then in his instruments; so would we labor to please him above all.

5. Let us meditate of Gods bownty toward us, whereby he has showed him self
all-sufficient to us, Deuteronomy. ^3.26.
and for our good which argument is used both by Samuel 1. Sam. 12.24. and by
Joshua c. 24.14. where having recounted Gods blessings toward them, even from
Terah Abrahames father, he infers this use, Now therefore fear the Lord and
serve him in uprightnes and in truth. But chiefly we are to meditate of his
spiritual blessings and of the end for which he has bestowed them. For why
did he elect us? was is not that we should be holy and blameless before him?
Ephesians. 1.4. that is to say, upright? why did he he redeem us? was it not that we
should serve him in holiness and righteousness before him? has he not reconciled
us unto God, that we should be holy and blameless before him? Col. 1.22. has
he not regenerated us according to Gods image, that we should worship him in
holiness and righteousness of truth, that is true and upright holiness and
righteousness. Ephesians. 4.24. In vain therefore do men profess them selves to be
elected in Christ, redeemed by him, reconciled unto God, regenerated by his
spirit, if they be not upright. For the end which God propounds to himself
cannot be frustrated.

6. Finally, if the consideration of Gods benefits will not move us, let us
consider the terror of the Lord, as the Apostle calls it, 2. Cor. 5.11. Let
us set before our eyes our Savior Christ, sitting in judgment at the last day,
at which time he shall judge the secrets of men Ro^. 2.16. Eccl. 12.14. that so
we may endeavor in the mean time to walk uprightly before him, and approve our
selves to him, that judges secrets; that when he shall appear, we may have
confidence, Ioh. 2.28.
and not be ashamed (...) that is, not depart ashamed from him, as hypocrites
shall, flying from the face of the lamb, and desiring that the hills Apoc.
6.16.
would fall upon them, and hide them from the face of him that sits on the
throne, and from the wrath of the lamb* For horrible will thy shame and
confusion be, if having professed religion, and made show of Christianity
before men, thou shall then before all the world, not only be discovered and
convicted to have been an egregious hypocrit, but also be condemned to have thy
portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. But on the
other side, if we shall walk uprightly in GODS Tabernacle, Ps. 16.12.
we shall rest in the mountain of his holiness* if we be sownd and upright
members of the church militant, we shall be inheritors of glory in the church
triu^phant; if we be sheep in Christ flock and not goats, we shall be set
at his right hand, and receive that blessed sentence; Come ye blessed of my
father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Mat. 25.

Now, The (...) of uprightnes
forasmuch as the Lord has promised to all the sons of Abraham, the heirs
of promise, that is to say, to all the faithful, that being redeemed from the
hand of our spiritual enimyes, he will give us to worship him in holiness
before him; it behooves us seriously to try and examine our selves, whether we
be upright Deuteronomy. 18.1^*
with the Lord our God or not. For if we be hypocrites and unsownd Christians,
we can have no assurance, that we are the redeemed of the Lord. God having
sworn, that to those whom he redeemeth, he will give grace to worship him in
holiness and righteousness before him. And to the same purpose* and with the same
labor, we are also to try our selves whether we be hypocrites, or not. For
such is the immediate opposition between uprightnes and hypocrisy; that if we
be not hypocrites, then are we upright, and contrariwise.

But here it will be said, that hypocrisy is in all men, either more or less,
and that as all men are subject to lying, so also to hypocrisy. This, the
Papists whose profession notwithstanding of Christianity (being for the most
part a mere formality of religion denying the power thereof) is mere
hypocrisy, will hardly grant; namely, that the sin of hypocrisy is in all.
For they teach, that a man who is justified, as every one of them is, who
either in his infancy is baptized, or absolved by a priest, when he is come to
years, is without sin; and that there is nothing in him that God hates,
nothing that properly can be called sin, until he draw upon him the guilt of
some mortal sin. Thus, saying that they have no s^nne, they are convinced to
have no truth ^. I^^. 1.^.
in them, But we confess, that original sin, which is equally in all men by
nature, ^ not only a privation of all spiritual goodness, but also an evil
disposition and pronen^s to all manner of sinne^ as to infidelity, pride,
self-love, hardness of heart, ca^^all security, hatred, uncleanness,
covetousnes, ambition, lying, and hypocrisy, etc. and that these sinful
corruptions, being so many habitual sins, remain in all men both regenerate
and unregenerate; but with this difference, that in the unregenerate they
remain in their full strength, and for the most part with increase, as the
incrementa of original sin, unless perhaps abated or restrained by the
contrary sins, which contrary vices being from evil dispositions, grown to
wicked habits, are said to reign in carnal men. But in the regenerate, these
corruptions remain only as the reliqu^^ of original sin, in some measure
mortified in them, some more, some less. All which are the infirmities of the
^aithfull, but especially those which are less mortified.

All which, like the scattered forces of rebels vanquished, but not utterly
destroyed, still remain ad agonem, to encounter with us upon all advantages.
So that in the best of us there remains a spice, as of infidelity, pride,
self-love, hardness of heart, carnal security, hatred, uncleanness,
covetousnes, ambition, lying, so also of hypocrisy. But so long as a man sees,
and detesteth this corruption, and labors to mortify it, so long as he is
careful to avoid it, and jelous over himself, lest his profession or other
his good endeavors be contaminated or taynted therewith; though there be some
matter of hypocrisy remaining in him, yet he is not formally an hypocrite, but
is reputed upright. For as it is said both of the faithful themselves in
general, though partly spirit, and partly flesh, that they are men spiritual
and regenerate, having their denomination from the better part; and also of
their actions performed in obedience, though taynted with the flesh, that they
are good works; so is it in this particular, even as a wedge of gold, in which
there is much dross, is notwithstanding a wedge of gold, though not of pure
gold; and as an heap of corn, wherein is store of chafe, is called an heap
of corn, though not of pure grain: so the faithful, though some dross of
hypocrisy, and as the Prophet calls it tin, Is. 1.25.
remain in them, (...) notwithstanding upright.

Therefore though hypocrisy be in all men, yet all (...) not hypocrites; but
they in whom this corruption reigns without resistance. Yea but in baptism
original sin withal his branches is taken away, I answer with Augustine:
De Nuptiis et Concup. l. 1. ^. 25.
it is taken away, first, in respect of the guilt, non ut peccatum non sit, sed
ut in peccatum non imputetur, not that it should not be at all, but that it
should not be imputed to them that believe, Secondly in respect of the
dominion; for it is taken away, not that it should not remain at all, but that
it should not Romans 6.14.
reygne in the faithful* wherefore as I said, though hypocrisy be in all men,
yet none of the faithful are hypocrites. Who is in hypoc^^^^*


For an hypocrite is he, who being inwardly void of grace, and full of
wickedness, makes an outward show of Christianity, and piety, dissembling that
evil which is in him, and making semblance of that goodness which he has not:
having as even now with the Apostle I said of the Papists, (...) an outward ^
Tim. ^.^
formality of religion, but denying the power thereof: Being, as our Savior
says, like to whited sepulchers which in deed appear beautiful outward, but
are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Mat. 23.27. like
to those summer pears, which being fair and mellow without, are rotten at the
core.

Now, hypocrites are of two sorts, for as of notspeaking the truth, that is
lying, there are two degrees the one is mentiri (which is contra mentem ire*
wittingly to lie, and to avouch for a truth that which him self knows, or at
lest thinks to be an untruth,) the other mendacium (...), to tell an untruth,
unwittingly, supposing it to be a truth: so of not walking in the truth, that
is of hypocrisy there are 2 degrees. viz. of such as be hypocrites, either
wittingly, or unwittingly. Both are deceivers; the former, knowing himself to
be an hypocrite, goes about to deceive others, yea God himself with his fair
shows; the other, not knowing him self to be an hypocrite, but being deceived
by the devil, and his own deceiptfull Ier. 17.10.
heart, deceives himself, as St. James says. chapter 1.22. Be ye doers of the
word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves, v. 26. If any among
you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, this man's religion is in vain, and likewise S. Paul Gal. 6.3. If a man
think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself. Both
of them are (...), that is unfound, being not inwardly and in truth, that which
in profession and outward show they would seem to be, to both of them the
description of an hypocrite does agree, they have ^ formality of religion, but
deny the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3.5.

The former, is the gross and notorious hypocrite, who does best deserve the
name. for (...) an hypocrite, in the greek tongue, signifies a stage player,
whose profession it is to take upon him the person of another man, the other,
is the close and the most ordinary hypocrite, who being not the man, which he
professes or takes himself to be, acts also an other person, as well as
the other, though not so grossly, and as it were upon the stage seeming to
himself, and desirous to be reputed of others, that which in deed he is not a
good Christian, having a name that he lives, but is d^^d, Apoc. 3.^.

The former is a damned hypocrite, damned in his own conscience, the other is
a selfe-pleasing and a selfe-deceiving hypocrite, pleasing himself, by reason
of his profession, in his pride and self-love, in his vain presumption and
carnal security, in his infidelity and impenitency, professing himself to be
a true Christian, and yet being a meet worldling, a carnal Gospeller, a
temporizing and temporary professor. Of which sort, by how much the greater is
the number, for the world is full of such; by so much the greater must our
desire and care be, that we may be tried, and proved, and upon trial found to
be sound and upright Christians. Our desire we must express in prayer to God,
that we may be proved, and upon trial approved (for until we be tried we know
not our selves) saying with David. Ps. 139.23.24. Ps. 26.8*
search me O LORD and know my heart, that is, make it known unto me, try me
and know my thoughts and see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead
me in the way everlasting, that is, in the way which leads to everlasting
life. Now GOD does try both the upright and the hypocrite, though in a
different manner. The upright he tries, both by proving them himself, and
that for Deuteronomy. 8.16.
their good, and by suffering them to be tempted by others; and that, either to
manifest his graces in them, to his own glory, their comfort, and good example
of others: (thus herryed Abraham Genesis 22.12. Job. and all the martyrs:) or to
discover unto them their own weakness, that they may be humbled, and be made
the more circu^spect for the time to come. And to that end, he does not only
suffer them to be tempted unto evil, but also sometimes (when he leaves them
for a time unto them selves) to take a foil. Thus God for a time left
Ezechias, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, 2. Chro.
32.31. and therefore those who come Eccl ^.^.
to serve the Lord, must prepare their souls for temptation, But howsoever the
Lord suffers them to be tempted, yet he does not lead them into temptation;
and though he permits them sometimes to fall, yet he does not suffer them to
fall away from him.

The Lord also tries the hypocrites, that their hypocrisy may be discovered.
Therefore our Savior advises his disciples Luke 12.1.2. to beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy* and his reason is, because nothing
is covered, which shall not be discovered. And thus he does, not only by
suffering them to be tempted, and leaving them to them selves; but also
sometimes for a punishment of their former wickedness and hypocrisy, he leads
them into temptation, giving them over to their own lusts, and to the
temptations of Satan, not only to fall into sin but also to fall away from
God; which falling away is an evident sign of hypocrisy. 1. Ioh. 2.19.
wherefore as the son of Syrach well admonishes c. 1.28.29.30. Come not to
the Lord with a double heart, be not an hypocrite in the sight of men, and take
good heed, what thou speak. Exalt not thy self, lest thou fall, and bring
dishonor upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down
in the midst of the congregation; because thou came not in truth to the fear
of the LORD, but thy heart is full of deceit.

Our Care we must show by trying our selves, as the Apostle exhorts. 2. Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith. (...), that is, prove
your selves whether you be (...), sownd and upright.

Here therefore we are to set down the notes both of the upright, and also of
the hypocrites. The knowledge whereof, as it will be comfortable to so many as
a^e true Christians; so it will be profitable to the rest.

These notes are either more general. special.


General notes of ^pright^^s.
The first general note is set down in the place eve^ now cited, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you
unless you be (...), that is, not sownd or approved Christians, but
hypocrites* for the word (...) (which commonly is translated reprobate) does
not signify a reprobate opposed to elect, but to (...) to him that is
approved. see verse. 6.7.

But how shall we know, that CHRIST is in us, s^^ing he is in Heaven* and we
upon earth? we may kn^^ it by his spirit, 1. Ioh. 3.24. which dwells in us.
Romans 8.9.11. and in all his members, which by reason of the union which is
betwixt them and their Head, are said to be in Christ, and Christ in them, for
even as in the nat^rall body, the feet are united to the head by the same
soul, which being principally seated in the Head, is also in all the members:
so in the mystical body of CHRIST, the lowest members which are upon earth,
are united to their Head by the same spirit, which being p^incipally in the
head, is also in all the members. But how shall we know that the spirit of
CHRIST is in us? if we be led Romans ^.^4. ^al. 5.18.
by the spirit, that is, if we live not after the flesh, but aft^r the spirit.
And how shall we know that? by the fruits of the spirit, and of the flesh,
which the Apostle has set down Gal. 5.19.22. The works of the flesh, says
he, are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred or emnityes, contentions,
emulations, indignations, strife, seditions or divisions, heresies or sects,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings: (...), comessationes, expressed
elsewhere by the word (...) crapula, which is translated surfettings, Luke
21-34. both of them having their name from their effects. for (...) dicitur
(...), because it troubles the head by excess of eating and drinking. so
(...) because it causes (...), that is, drowsines, or the drowsy evil (or
rather ryotings, as it is translated Romans 13.13. and so ought to be, when it is
joined with drunkenness; the French fitly translate it, gourmandises, and it
signifies excess of belly cheer in ryotous feasts and compotations, and such
like) of the which I foretell you, as I have foretold you heretofore, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Now as in setting
forth the works of the flesh, the Apostle mentions chiefly the offenses of
the second ^able, so in setting down the fruits of the spirit, he reckons up
the duties of the second table opposed to the offenses thereof formerly
mentioned; and not the virtues of the first table, wherein our piety, which is
to be tried, does consist. For this cause the Apostle mentions, not (...) her
faith in CHRIST or love of GOD, (...) hope of salvation, or affiance in GOD, or
the fear of GOD, and such like, which are the principal fruits of the spirit;
because these are not the notes of trial, but the things to be tried; for ^^e
trial whereof, as namely whether we have true faith, the true love and fear
of God, etc. the Holy Ghost commonly propounds such notes, as express those
duties which we owe to men. as Ps. 15. and 24. Esaias 33.14.15.

1. The fruit therefore of the spirit, is charity, says the Apostle, that is
the love of our neighbor, opposed to hatred, with the fruits thereof. 1. John.
3.14.

2. Joy, opposed to envy and emulation, whereby the carnal man repineth at the
welfare of his neighbor, in which the spiritual man rejoices.

3. Peace, opposed to contentions, strife, divisions and factions.

4. Long-suffering and patience, opposed to wrath and indignation.

5. Gentleness or kindness (...), a fruit of charity, 1 Cor. 13.4. (...): which
the Apostle has fully expressed, Ephesians 4.31.32. Col. 3.12.13.
Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put
away from you, with all malice, and be you (...), kind one to an other,
forgiving one an other, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

6. Goodness, whereby we are free from desire to hurt any body, and are ready to
do good to all, Gal. 6.10. even to those that deserve ill o^ us, overcomming
ill with goodness Romans 12.21. opposed to hatred and murder.

7. Faith, that is, fidelity or faithfulnes^, a^ the word elsewhere is used,
Ti^. 2^10. and is one of the weighty points of the law, Mat. 23.25. A faithful
man is he, who is both true in his words, and firm in his promises, both which
are tokens of the upright* Ps. 15.2.4.

8. Meeknes, or the spirit of meeknes, so called 1. Cor. 4.23. Gal. 6.1.
because in the faithful it is a fruit of the spirit, called also 1. Pet. 3.4 2 Timothy 2.24.25 Tit. 3.^.
mildnes and lenity. Which being a moral virtue proceeding from humility,
charity, patience or long suffering, with which it is joined in the Scriptures
(with love 1. Cor. 4.21.13.4.5.7. with humility Ephesians. 4.2. Mat. 5.3.5.11.29.
Pro. 16.19. with long suffering and patience, Col. 3.12. 1. Tim. 6.11.)
moderateth and restrayneth anger and grief, with all the fruits thereof, which
are called the ira^cible (...)
passions and perturbations of the soul, such as be impatience, desire of
revenge, and all insolent, cruel, bitter, fierce, harsh, contentious,
clamorous, and turbulent disposition toward our neighbor: with which virtue
whosoever is endued, is by Solomon preferred before the men of might. Pro.
16.32. for howsoever it be despised in the world, as a sign of fools and
mecockes; yet it is of especial account with God. 1. Pet. 3.4. as being the
most proper, and if I may so speak characteristicall mark of Christ's sheep.
Whereby as they best resemble the Lamb Esaias 53.7.
of God, who was meek in spirit, and humble in heart, Mat. 11.29. so are they
best discerned from those, who being of an insolent, a fierce, an harsh, a
cruel and turbulent behavior, are to be^ accounted wolves, rather then the
sheep of Christ. And therefore it is reckoned by our Savior among the 8.
notes of Beatitude, Mat. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the land, meaning the celestial Canaan, the land of the living, (...) (sc.
(...)) (...). Heb 2.5. as being in Christ the heirs Romans 4.13
of the world. whom the Lord will beautify with salvation. Ps. 149.4.76.9.

9. The last is temperance, which is also a moral virtue moderating the other
sort of affections, which are called desires and concupiscences, (...)
referred naturally either to the preservation of the individuu^, in the
nourishing and cherishing of the body; or to the propagation of mankind by
generation, and restrayning the abuses and disorders thereof. This virtue, as
it respects the former, is Sobriety in meat, drink, apparel, opposed to
drunkenness and bellicheere before mentioned, and vanity in apparel, as it
respects the latter, it is called Chastity, opposed to adultery, fornication,
lasciviousnes and all uncleannes.

And this was the first general note of difference, that the upright Christian
does know, or may know, that Christ is in him, by the fruit of the spirit: but
the hypocrite though he professes him self a Christian and consequently a
member of Christ; yet neither does, nor can know it, seeing that neither he is
in CHRIST by faith, nor CHRIST in him by his spirit.

2. The second is this; The upright man walking with God, and before God, is
desirous chiefly to approve himself to God 1. These. 2.4.
who sees the heart, and therefore is as religious (if not more) alone and in
secret, as before others, yea, chooses rather, according to the advice of our
Savior, Math 6.4.6.18.
to do private duetyes in secret, rather then before others. The hypocrite,
walking as before me^, who see the outward man only, seeks chiefly to
approve himself to men; and therefore is more religious before others, then
alone; and those good things, which he perfometh he does the^ to be seen of
men, Mat. 23.5. as our Savior shows in the duetyes of alms, prayer and
fasting, Mat. 6.2.5.16. And on the other-side, those sins which he
forbeareth, or fears to commit before men, he fears not in private to
commit before God. and in a word, if men be not acquainted with his actions;
he neither cares to do good, nor fears to do evil.

3. The upright man prefers the testimony 2 Cor. 1.12. 1. Cor 4.3. Job.
31.36.
of his own conscience concerning himself, before the opinions of other men,
and therefore labors to keep his Act. 24.1^.
conscience clear toward God and toward men. The hypocrite prefers the
opinion of others concerning himself before the testimony of his own
conscience, not regarding the verdict of his own conscience condemning him, so
he may have a good reputation among men commending him; not caring though he be
dead, so he may have a name that he Apoc. 3.1.
lives: desiring to seem to be good, rather then to be so; and to be evil
rather then to seem so. which is extreme madness, seeing it is better to be
good, then to seem good; and worse to be evil, then to seem evil.

The special notes respect either good things intended by the upright, The
special notes respecting.
and pretended by the hypocrite; or evil things, whether of sin, or of
punishment.

Good things, as their Profession of Religion, Worship of God, Obedience,
Graces.


The profession of the upright is in truth, Profession.
both in respect of the purpose and desire of his heart. practice of his life.


The purpose of his heart is sincere, without any sinister, sinful, or
worldly respects* or if any worldly respects may seem to concur, yet they
are not the chief, or those for which he professes religion, (...) secundary
respects, which he subordinateth to his profession, and to his care of keeping
a good conscience, being resolved, Luke 14.28.^^.
not to forsake his profession for a world, nor willingly and wittingly to
violate his conscience, though he might gain never so much for what would it
profit a man to gain the whole world and to loose his own soul. Mark 8.36.
The hypocrite makes his profession in pretense, Phi. 1.18.
pretending religion to his worldly, and sometimes to his wicked respects, and
first, for his worldly respects, whereunto he subordinateth his profession, and
his seeming care of keeping a good conscience, caring indeed for neither,
further then they may stand with the fruitio^ of his worldly desires; halting
betwixt God and Mammon, and dividing himself between them; but so, as to God
he gives the outward show, and to Mammon his heart, of such Mammonists the
Apostle speaks Phil. 3.18.19. There be many (says he) that walk of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the
cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is their shame, and who are these of whom all this evil is spoken^ viz.
such as walk, that is make profession of christian religion; and yet mind and
affect principally earthly things: These men, when they are brought to this
exigent, that either they must make ship wrack of a good conscience, and
perhaps forsake their profession, or forgo their worldly desires; they will
readily violate their conscience, and renounce their profession, rather then
they will be disappointed of that worldly thing, which they principally affect,
and which is in deed their God.

Such a profession made Saul 1. Sam. 15.
of providing sacrifices, when in his covetousnes he spared all the best of the
cattle, which he ought to have destroyed. Judas, John 6.71.12.6.
who for his gain followed Christ, being a theife, and for all his fair
shows, a Devil. The people that followed our Savior, that they might be
filled. John, 6.26. Ananias and Sapphira, who seemed forward professors, but
were worldlings Act. 5. and in a word all such, to whom not godliness 1 Timothy
6.5.^.
is gain, but gain is godliness These men professing themselves Christians,
do withal profess themselves to be pilgrims Heb. 11.13.
on earth, citizens of heaven, whose (...) Phil. 3.20.
and country is above, but in deed behave themselves like earth-wormes, being
wholly addicted, and as it were glued to the earth, and worldly desires, not
desiring nor expecting a better He^. 11.14.16.
country, but placing their Paradise upon earth.

Sometimes also they pretend religion to their wicked designs, as the Scribes
and Pharisees, Mat. 23.24.
who devoured widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer; even as the
Priests and Jesuits at this day do prey upon their devout Proselites. Absalom
when he intended rebellion, pretended the performance of a vow, 2. Sam. 15.7.
Iezabell, when she meant to have Naboth unjustly condemned; appointed a fast to
be proclaimed, as a preparative to that judgment. 1. King. 21.9. Herod makes a
show to the Wisemen, that he would come and worship CHRIST, when he meant to
kill him. Mat 2.8. Thus men many times pretend conscience, either to the not
doing of their duties as they will lend no more, because they have vowed the
contrary; or to the committing of sin, because they think they are bound
thereto by oath* as Herod, rather then he would break his oath, beheaded John
Baptist. so they sin double, first in their promise, but much more in the
performance. The high priest Caiphas Mat. 26.^5.
when he sought most unjustly to condemn our Savior unto death, in an
hypocritical ^eleren^ his clothes pretending that he had spoken blasphemy. And
what zele soever those priests and Pharisees, which most ho^ly persecuted our
Savior pretended toward God and his law, yet their true intent was, This is
the heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize upon his inheritance. Mat.
21.38. In respect of the desire of his heart, the upright is a forward
professor, and in some measure Tit. 1.14.
zealous of religion, The hypocrite is backward, careless and lukewarm Apoc
3.17.

So much of the intent, purpose, and desire of the heart; now follows the
practice.

The upright, being Christians within Romans 2.1^.
and not without only, do walk in the truth 2. John. 4. 3. Ioh. 3.
endeavoring to frame their lives according to their profession, and as the
truth is in Jesus* Ephesians. 4.21.22.23.24 joining works Iam. 2.24.
with faith, and doing Iam. 1.2.
with hearing, and well doing with saying well, sanctification 2. Cor. 6.17.
with justification, living not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, which by
the Apostle is propounded as the proper sign of those who be in CHRIST. Romans
8.1.

The hypocrites, being Christians without, Romans 2.18
and not within, profess the truth, but do not walk in the truth: not
framing, nor desirous to frame their lives according to their profession, but
live after the flesh, and not after the spirit, professing faith Iam 2.14
without works, justification without sanctification; saying well, but doing
ill, being hearers of the word, but not doers; being fruitless branches in the
vine. John. 15.2.6. figge^rees in Gods vineyard bearing no figs, Luke 13.6.
having leaves but no fruit; like the figtree, which Christ cursed, Mat. 2^.
having lamps, but no oil, like the foolish virgins Mat. 25. Of such our
Savior speaks Mat. 7.21.22. Luke 13.25.26. that notwithstanding their
profession; they shall at the last day be excluded from the kingdom of heaven.

Now I come to the worship of God; Gods worship.
first, in general: The upright worship the Lord in spirit and in truth. 1.
King. 3.6. the hypocrites draw near the Lord with their mouths, but remove
their hearts far from him. Es. 29.13. Mat 15.7.8.

In special, Prayer.
the upright pray in truth Ps. 145.18. with lips unfeigned. Ps. 17.1. lifting
up their hearts Ps. 25.1. Lam. 3.41.
and pouring forth their souls 1. ^am ^.25*
before the Lord, The hypocrites in their prayer cry, but not with their heart,
Hos. 7.14. They lift up their eyes and their hands, but not their hearts; they
power forth their voice, but not their souls. Their prayer is but a
lippe-labour. for both their mouth speaks what their heart does not think,
making a common and perpetual trade of praying with wandering thoughts, (which
I deny not sometime to be incident to the upright) and also asking with their
mouth that which they do not desire in their heart, promising (especially Ex.
10.^^* Ps. 78.34.
in time of affliction) what they do not truly mean to perform, pretending
what they do not intend, making show of that which they are not (as in the
Lords prayer throughout) craving that in prayer, which they do not seek by any
endeavor of their own, or by use of other means ordained of God.

The upright praise God with grace, Thanksgiving.
Col. 3.16.
that is thankfulness in their heart, and with humility acknowledging their own
unworthines Gen 32.10 1 Chro. 29.14
, and Gods undeserved favor toward the^. The hypocrites give thanks without
thankfulness, without humility; praising themselves, Luk 18.11
when they should praise God. or if they do praise him, they do it to this
end, to praise them selves.

But here it may be demanded; may not a man praise God for his graces and
blessings bestowed upon him, unless withal he shall seem with the Pharisey
Luke 18. to praise him self.

Whereunto I answer; first, the Pharisaicall hypocrite thanketh God for that
which he neither has received, not yet expects from God: which is both
falsehood and arrogance. But the upright man thanketh God for that which he has
received, or assuredly hops to receive, (as Zachary in this hymn prayseth
God for our redemption by the promised Messiah, before CHRIST was borne,) which
to do is not arrogance, but thankfulness; not falsehood, but truth.

2. The hypocrite thanketh God to that end and purpose, not so much to praise
God, (to whom he is a false 1 Cor. 15.15.
witness,) as to praise him self. The upright man in thanking God seeks not
his own praise, but the glory of God, stripping him self of all praise, that
God alone may have all the glory. ^or he thanketh God, as I said, in humility,
acknowledging his own unworthines, and the more, he extolleth the undeserved
bownty and favor of God toward him, the more he depriveth himself of praise*
and on the other side the more he acknowledges his own unworthines, the more
he magnifieth Gods goodness toward him. Thus Jacob Genesis 32.10. O Lord (says
he) I am less then the least of thy mercies: and David, 2. Sam. 7.18. Who am I
O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have brought me hitherto? and 1.
Chro. 29.14. but who am I, and what is my people? etc.

The upright preacher endeavors to approve himself to God, Preaching.
2. Tim. 2, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. seeking sincerely the glory of God in the
salvation of the hearers. The hypocrites preach them selves, and not the Lord
Jesus; not seeking Gods glory in the edification of the people, but their own
praise, or profit; not striving to approve them selves unto God, but to please
carnal men, which whosoever does, he is not the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10.
Herein, they grievously offend, who affecting the praise of humane eloquence,
feed the people as Heliogabalus did his parasites, with painted dishes; and in
steed of drawing faith the two edged sword of the spirit, bring forth an
embroidered sheath; professing them selves ambassadors from God, but bringing
no message from God, which concerns the people to hear, either for the
informing of their judgments, or reformation of their lives whose preaching
serves for no other use, but to please the itching cares of carnal men, and to
work in them a loathing of the sincere food of Gods word.

The upright preacher is careful to practice that which he preaches unto
others, and to avoid that in his own person, which he reproves in others.

The hypocrites say Mat. 23.3.
, but do not, commending that to others which them selves have no desire nor
care to practice; and reproving that in others, whereof themselves are no less
guilty. Romans 2.21.22. Ps. 50.16 who therefore may expect both from the hearers
this censure, Medi^^ cura teipsu^; and from God this sentence, out of thine
^uk. 19.2^.
own mouth will I condemn thee thou unfaithful servant.

Hearing*
The upright heare^s take heed how they hear. Luk 8.18. hearing the word of God
preached, as the 1 Thessalonians ^.13
word of God, (acknowledging Gods ordinance,) as in the sight Act. 10.3^
of God, with humility and submission, with reverence and attention, receiving
the seed into upright hearts Luk 8.5
, as it were into good ground, with desire ^ Pet. 2.1
to profit by it, and care to practice it, being Iam. 1.22
doers of the word, and not hearers only.

The hypocrites hear, not regarding, so they do hear, how they hear, not
looking to their feet, how they are affected, but come so disposed as to a
stage play, desiring that their itching ears may be delighted with
vaniloquence, rather then their hearts to be edified with sound and profitable
doctrine, not acknowledging Gods ordinance, nor behauing the^ selves as before
him, hearing without submission as to Gods word, hearing not as learners but as
censurers, without reverence, without attentio^, being present in body, and
absent in soul without de^^re to profit by it, without any purpose or care to
practice it, receiving the seed into stony ground, or else among thorns, like
to Ezechiels hearers, c. 33.31.32. they come unto thee (says the Lord) as the
people of God do use to come, and they sit before thee as my people, and they
hear thy words, but they will not do the^, for though with their mouths they
make show of much love and delight, yet their heart goes after their
covetousnes. And lo thou art unto the^ as a very pleasing song of one that
has a pleasant voice, and can play well on a^ instrument for they hear thy
words, Sacraments Baptism.
but they do them not. The upright are careful in some measure to perform
their vow made in Baptism, and to find the effect and fruit thereof: which is
to seal and assure to them that believe and repent, their union and communion
with Christ, for they receiving Christ by a true faith are baptized Gal. 3 2^.
into Christ, and consequently put on Christ.

The hypocrite rests in the outward baptism, as if the washing 1. Pet. 3.25.
of the flesh did save, taking no care to perform his vow made in baptism;
who therefore, though baptized, has no part in Christ, because his heart is not
upright in him. Act. 8.21.

The Upright are careful, The Eucharist
not only to receive the sacrament, but also to receive it worthily; and are
therefore careful ^. Cor 11*2^
(...) to prove and approve themselves, before they come to the Lords table,
preparing their hearts 2. Chro. 30 19.
to seek the Lord and so receiving the sacrament with the unleavened graces of
sincerity 1. Cor. 5.8
and truth, do eat the body of Christ and drink his blood.

The hypocrites not greatly caring how they receive, so they do receive, not
preparing their hearts to seek the Lord, nor caring to prove, and much less
to approve themselves unto him, coming to the Lords table as the guest without
the wedding garment, endued neither with saving knowledge, nor true faith, nor
unfeigned repentance, nor sincere love, with which graces every worthy receiver
is in some measure qualified: but being sowred with the leaven of hypocrisy do
eat the bread of the Lord, as Judas did, but not pane^ dominu^ that is the Lord
who is the bread of life which came down from heaven.

Thus much of the worship of God, Obedience.
now we are to speak of obedience. For 1. the upright yeldeth simple obed^e^ce
to the commandments of God, Heb. 11.8.
not consulting with flesh and blood as for the commandments of men, he
observes the^ no further the^ in obaying the^ he may obey God. Ex. 1.17. Act.
4.19.5.29. Da^. 3.18.6.10.

The hypocrite is more careful to observe the commau^dements of men Mat. 15 36.
, then the commandments of God; insomuch that for the commandments of men
he makes the commandments of God of none effect, yea he scarcely obeys the
commandments of God any further, then as they are commanded by men, in so
much that he embraces Religion it self, as commanded by the Sovereign
Prince, being ready to change his Religion, as the Prince changes* so that
their fear toward God is taught by the precepts of men. Es. 29.13.

To this purpose consider these instances. The Lord commands us to receive
the holy communion, when it is administred^ and the upright man makes
conscience so often to receive it, as it is administered, unless he be hindered by
sufficient occasion. But forasmuch as the law of man in some places does
require the receipt of the Sacraments once a year at the least; and namely at
Easter, hence it is that many will receive but once a year at the most.

The upright man makes conscience of his thoughts, because the law of God is
spiritual, restrayning the thoughts as well as the hands. the hypocrite takes
no care of his thoughts, which he thinks to be free, because the law of man
does not reach to them.

The Lord forbids all railing, and cursed speaking, all stealing: and the
upright man makes conscience to abstain from all: but forasmuch as the law of
man does not take hold of all evil speaking, nor of all stealing, therefore
the hypocrite fears not to practice such evil speaking, and such stealing as
is not punishable by the law of men, though perhaps the neighbor be more
wronged by that ill speaking, or damni^^ed by that stealing, then by that
railing against which lies an action of the case, or by that stealing against
which an action of felony lies.

2. The obe^^ence of the upright is voluntary, and from the heart, Romans 6.17.
proceeding from his will renewed, which appears not only in his good
actions, but also in his sins, whether of omission or of commission, for the
good which, he does not, he would do: and the evil which he does, he would
not do. Romans 7.19. But the obedience of the hypocrite is forced from him,
because he dares do no other. for that good which he does, he would not do
it; and that evil which he does not, he would feign do so that in respect of
the inclination of the will, which God chiefly regards; the disobedience of
the upright is better then the obedience of the hypocrite.

3. The obedience of ^he upright is ordinata, well ordered, For he prefers
the greater duties before the less, moral duties before ceremonial, and
the substance before circumstances, Mar. 12.7. 1. Sam. 15.22. But it has
always been the hypocrites guise, to prefer the less duties before the
greater; as to tithe, mint and cumin, and to neglect the weighty points of the
law, Mat. 12.(...). Luke 15.1^.
Mat. 23.23. Luke 11.42. to strain at a gnat and to swallow a camel, Mat.
23.24. to stumble at a straw, and to leap over a block. to prefer ceremonies
before moral duties, yea sometimes to place the height of their Religion,
either in the boisterous urging, or in the strict refusing of ceremonies. Thus
the Priests and Phariseyes, who made no conscience of delivering our Savior
through envy unto death, yet at the same time made conscience to go into the
judgment hall, lest forsooth they should be defiled. Ioh. 18.28.

They made no conscience to hire Judas with 30 pieces of silver to betray his
Lord: but when the pieces were brought them back again, their conscience would
not serve them, to put the money into the treasury, because it was the price of
blood. Mat. 27.6.

4. The obedience of the upright is total, not in respect of the performance,
but in regard of the upright desire, unfeigned purpose, and sincere endeavor,
according to the measure of grace received, to walk in the obedience of all
Gods commandments; to lie in no known sin, but to make conscience of all
his ways. Not, but that the upright contrary to their desire and purpose do
oftentimes fall; but that the Lord accepting of the will for the deed,
esteems the upright and entire obedience of his servants, (who are freed from
the rigor of the law) as total and perfect. Abraham has this testimony in
the Scripture Gen* 26.5.
, that he obeyed the voice of God, and kept his mishmereth, his whole charge,
that is, whatsoever God requires to be observed, viz. his commandments, his
statutes, and his laws. Zacharias likewise, and Elizabeth Luke 1.6. and many
others are said to have been perfect, and to have fulfilled after God, that is,
fully to have obeyed him, who had notwithstanding their stips and their falls,
as before I noted of Asa. In the same chapter, where it is reported of
Zacharias, that he walked in all the commandments of God blameles, we read
Luke 16*20.62
that for his incredulity in not believing the word of the Angel, he was
stricken with dumbnes, and as it may seem with deafnes also, for the space of
ten months. In this evangelicall sense the obedience of the upright is total,
in 3 respects; (...) legis. (...) hominis ^

as being the obedience of the whole law, of the whole man, and of the whole
life, after our justification and reconciliation with God. obeying the law in
respect of their desire and purpose totam, toti, tota vita.


The whole law they obey both in respect of the two tables of the law, and in
respect of all the several commandments.

As for the two tables, the upright man joyneth the obedience of them both
together, as here the Lord has promised to all true Christians, that they
shall worship him, not in holiness alone, nor in righteousness alone, but both in
holiness and righteousness before him. Neither can these two, if they be in truth
(as they are in the upright) be severed. For a man cannot truly love 1. Ioh.
4.20*
God, unless he love his neighbor also; neither can a man love his neighbor
as he ought, that is, in and for the Lord, unless he love the Lord much more,
as I have showed heretofore. And this we see verified in the examples of those,
who have been upright; who have this testimony in the Scriptures, that they
were holy and righteous, as our Savior him self (whom we are to imitate) Act.
3.14. and all his upright servants, as Noah Genesis 6.9. David. 1. King. 3.6. John
Baptist. Mark. 6.2. Symeon, Luke 2.25. Cornelius, Act. 10.22. etc.

But it is the fashion of hypocrites to sever these two, which God has so
unseparably linked together, that whosoever has the one in truth, has also
the other; and whosoever has not both, has neither. For some content them
selves altogether with a profession of holiness and religion toward God, not
caring or desiring to perform the duties of charity and righteousness toward
men, whereby notwithstanding, as it were by a touch stone, God would have the
uprightnes of our piety tried. Others wholly content themselves with a fair
civil conversation before men, having neither true faith in Christ, nor
repentance toward God nor the fear of the Lord, nor any sanctifying or saving
grace, living in ignorance, infidelity, imp^^^tency, etc.

Far be it from me to speak, either against the profession of piety, or the
practice of civil honesty; but I speak against the severing of them, and the
resting in either of them alone being severed from the other. For so necessary
is civil honesty, as those who have it not, are worse then many among the
heathen that know not God, who were commended for moral virtues: against whom
notwithstanding the Holy Ghost denounces that fearful curse, power out thine
indignation upon the heathen that do not know thee, and upon the nations that
have not called upon thy name. Ps. 79.6. And so necessary is the profession of
piety, as that those who profess not religion and piety toward God, are worse
then the Phariseyes themselves; against whom notwithstanding our Savior
denounces so many woes. Mat. 23. Wherefore those that content themselves with a
bare profession of religion, without any desire or care to practice the duties
of charity and righteousness among men, are no better then the hypocritical
phariseyes, concerning whose obedience our Savior has given us this caveat
Mat. 5 20. except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Phar^sey^s, you shall not enter into the kingdom of God. and on the otherside,
those, who professing themselves Christians, content themselves with the
practice of civil honesty, without any desire or care of religion, being not
only void of all spiritual graces, but also guilty of much outward
profanenes, as in ordinary swearing, and profaning the Sabbath, in neglect of
hearing the word, and of prayer. etc. are no better then some of the heathen,
who were alienated from the life of God, strangers from the covenant of
promise. having no hope, and being without God in this world. Ephesians. 2.12.4.18.

Be not deceived. true piety toward God is always fruitful in the duetyes of
charity toward men. and on the otherside, the streams of charity and true
righteousness are ever derived from the fountain of piety.

In respect of the several commandments; the obedience of the upright is
uniuersall, in the evangelicall sense, that is, in respect of his entire
desire, and unfeigned purpose (though contrary thereunto he fail, as we do all
Iam. 3.2.
in many particulars) having respect to all the precepts of God. Ps. 119.6. and
walking in all his commandments Luke 1.6. making conscience of all his ways,
both in performing all known duetyes, and avoiding all known sin; not
willingly retayning any one, but repenting of all, in respect whereof he is
said, to fulfill after God. Number. 32.12. that is wholly and universally to
follow him.

The hypocrite fullfilleth not after God. Number. 32.11. neither are his works
full. Apoc. 3.2. he obayeth God by the halves, or not so much. he can be
content to avoid some sins, unto which he is not so much addicted, but his
darling sins, perhaps his usury, or other gainful sins, perhaps whordome,
perhaps drunkenness etc. he will not leave. Herod reverenced John the Baptist,
and observed him, and when he heard him* he did many things and heard him (...)
with delig^e^ but for all that he would not leave his Herodias. Mark. 6.20. The
ship of a man's soul may be sunk with one leake, if it be not stopped; and one
breach in the fort of a man's soul, if it be not made up is sufficient to let
in the enemy to the utter overthrowe thereof. The continuance in any one crime
unrepented of is sufficient to drown the soul in perdition, Herepenteth of no
sin, who is not willing to repent of all; and he that willingly persisteth in
the breach of any one commandment, is guilty ^
of the breach of the whole law, for the law of God is copulative, and
copulatively to be understood, both in respect of the affirmative, and of the
negative. for he that is a keeper of the law, keeps, both the first, and the
second, and the third commandment. etc. and he transgresses neither the
first, nor the second, nor the third. etc. as therefore in a copulative sentence
consisting perhaps of 20 parts, if one be false, the whole sentence is false,
because the copulation is to be denied; neither is the sentence copulatively
true; and as in a chain consisting of many links coupled together, if any one
link be broken in the draught, the whole chain is dissolved; so the
transgression of any one commandment breaks the whole law, and this St.
James teaches* chapter 2.10.11. for whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all, for he that said, do not commit
adultery, said also do not kill. Now if thou do not commit adultery, yet if
thou kill, thou art become a transgressour of the law.

2. The upright man's obedience is (in respect of his unfayned desire and
purpose) of the whole man, as well of the inward man, as of the outward,
endevou^ring to cleanse Mat, 23.26
the inside as well as the outside: being a Christian within Rom: 2.29.
as I said before, and not without only and therefore is no less careful of
his heart Ps. 56 18 Ps 119.80
, then of his outward conversation. And in the outward man is careful both of
his words and of his works. he is rectus Cord. Via.


The hypocrite cleanses many times the ou^side, Mat. 23.2^.1^
but neglects the inside, not caring what inward vices and corruptions he
does cherish* so his outward conversation be plausible before men. he
justifies him self before men, but God knows his heart; for that which is
highly esteemed among men, is abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16.15.

These men think that thoughts be free, not knowing that the thoughts of the
wicked be an abominotion Pro ^5.2^
unto God* and that God has sufficient cause to condemn them for their wicked
Act. 8.22
thoughts, Genesis 6.5. Neither do they consider, that God looks to the heart,
and that he judges of a man, as I said before, according to the quality and
disposition of the heart; so that he whose heart does burn with Man. 5 ^^
lust is an adulterer in the sight of God; and he whose heart does boil 1 Ioh.
3.1^
with malice, he is a murderer before God.

And as there is great discord between the heart of the hypocrite, and his
outward appearance: so in the outward man also his works many times agree not
with his words, nor his words with his works. His works, I say, agree not
with his words, when he faith well, and does i^l, having Jacobs voice, and
Esaus hands, Neither do their words agree with their deeds, when seeming to
wrong any man by their deeds, make no conscience of speaking evil, thinking
that their words are but wind, and lightly to be regarded. But they should
remember him who says, that of every idle, and much more of every malicious
word, men shall give an accoumpt Mat. 12.3^.37
at the day of judgment. for by thy words, says he, thou shall be justified,
and by thy words thou shall be condemned. If therefore any among you, says
St. James, Iam. 1.26.
seem to be religious, and has not learned (...) as it were with a bitte or a
bridle to refrain his tongue; that man deceives himself, and his religion is
vain, that is to say, he is an hypocrite, having a show of religion but
denying the power thereof. for in whom there is any power of religion, they have
learned to bridle their tongues.

Yea in their words is a discord, not only between them and their hearts,
and between their words and their works, but also between their words and
their words. for as they speak with an heart and an heart, that is a double
heart, whence they are called (...); so also with a tongue and a tongue, that
is a double tongue; whence they are called (...) 1. Tim. 3.8.
and (...) Ecel 28 13.
bilingues. Out of the same mouth they breath hot and cold, which the Satyr
liked not, out of the same fountain issues both bitter and sweet, both salt
water and fresh; Iam. 3.9.16.11.12
with the same tongue they bless God and curse men, out of the same mouth
proceeds blessing and cursing. It is strange to see, and lamentable to
consider, how some men and women, who would seem religious, are given to ill
speaking; being not only sharp censurers and depravers of their brethren, but
also detracters, backbiters, and sclanderers, and (which is an evident sign of
an hypocrite) thinking, that the dispraise of other men tends to their
praise, and the praise of others to their disgrace.

3. The obedience of the upright is total in respect of his whole life, after
the time of his justification and reconciliation with God, as it is here said,
all the days of our life. Not, but that sometimes he stumbleth in the way of
Christianity, and sometime falls: but ye^ notwithstanding in respect of his
desire, purpose and endeavor, his obedience is constant and permanent. For he
keeps a constant course in well doing; as namely, in the practice of piety,
wherein by continual practice he is habituated. He so gives himself to
prayer, as that in the scriptures, he is said to pray Act, 10:2
always; not, that he does nothing else but pray, but that he prays, both
ordinarily at set times every day, perhaps thrice a day as Daniell Dan. 5:10*
did. and also extraordinarily, as occasion is offered. Likewise he keeps a
constant course, in reading, meditating, and hearing Gods word, and in other
Christian duetyes, wherein he steadfastly goes on, with desire to increase in
goodness.

And as his obedience is constant, so also it is permanent, for uprightnes is
evermore accompanied with perseverance to the end: as hereafter I shall show.

But the obedience of the hypocrite is neither constant, but as it were by
fitts, for the double minded man is inconstant in all his ways. Iam. 1.8.
neither permanent, but momentany, or temporary, like the morning mist or the
early dew. Hos. 6.4. like the seed sown upon the rockie ground, which in time
of heat withers, Luke 8.13. like the building of the foolish man, which in
time of temptation is overthrown. Mat. 7.26.

Graces
Now I come to the graces; every one whereof in the upright is (...), that is
unfeigned, and as Solomon speaks, Pro. 3.21. ^ushijah that which truly is; but
in the hypocrite, counterfeit. In these, the general note of uprightnes is
desire of increase, and striving forward phil 3.14.
toward perfections (for in this life we are in in ^ur growing age.
(...),) and God does crown their righteousness with increase, for to him that
has it shall be given, The hypocrites are non-proficients, contenting
themselves with that measure of grace which they seem to have, and have not,
and having not, they are so far from increasing in grace, that that, which
they seem Luke 8 18.
to have, Faith.
is taken from them.

And first, the faith of the upright is lively and effectual, both to
justification apprehending and applying Christ, who is our righteousness; and
also to sanctification, because i^ does purify Act. 15.9.
the heart, and Gal. 5.6:
work by love. Again the faith of the upright is permanent by it he stands,
Romans 5.2.
and by it he shall live, Heb. 2.4. by the power of God through faith he is
preserved 1* Pet. 1*5
unto eternal life. and therefore those who are of the defection, are not of
faith. and contrariwise. Heb. 10.39.

The seeming faith of the hypocrite is dead, being neither effectual to
justification, as being without root, Luke 8.13. nor to sanctification; as
being without fruit. For as the body without Iam. ^ 26.
breath is dead, so is faith without works.

Neither is the faith of hypocrites permanent, but te^porary, which in time of
trial fa^leth. Luke 8.13.

Love
The love also of the upright is unfeigned, whether we speak of his love to God,
which appears by obedience, both active, which is obedientia legis, (for this
is the love of God, that he keep his commandments, 1. Ioh. 5.3. Exodus 20.6.)
and passive, which is obedientia crucis, that is to say, patience. for love
suffers all things. 1. Cor. 13.7. or of his love to man, which appears in
giving and forgiving. But more specially an undoubted sign of uprightnes is to
love and respect the godly, though of mean account Iam. 2.^ 4.
in the world for their godliness sake; and to disrespect the wic^ed, though
great in the world, for their wickedness. Ps. 15.4. following therein the
disposition of God himself. 1. Sam. 2.30, and the example of Elisha. 2. King.
3.13.14. for in the eyes of the upright piety makes men honorable, but
wickedness makes them vile and despicable, Dan. 11.21. And as the upright are
an abomination to the wicked, so contrary wise. Pro. 29.27. The world loves
her own, but those, that be not of the world, the world hates, it is therefore
a good sign that we are not of the world, if we love and effect those whom the
world hates.

The love of hypocrites is not true, neither toward God, For they be haters of
God, Ex. 20.5.6.
that will not keep his commandments; nor toward men, being in word 1. Ioh.
3.18.
and tongue only, or (as we use to speak) from the teeth outward. But
especially their hypocrisy is discovered, as by ha^ing or envying the godly,
even for his godliness sake, because they cannot endure that any should be
esteemed better then themselves: (Thus 1. Ioh 3, 12.
Cain hated Abell, and Saul David, 1. Sam. 18.9.
and the Phariseyes Christ,) so by favoring and affecting the wicked. for
likeing is a sign of liknes. Hope.


The hope of the upright man conceived of a better life does in some measure
weane him from the world; neither will it suffer him ordinarily, either to be
drawn away into sin, by the desires of the world, which are but vanities in
comparison of that heavenly happiness, which he Heb. 11*^4.26
expects. nor to be driven from goodness by the terrors of the world, which
he con^emneth in respect of the joy that is set before him: but causes him to
purify himself in some measure, even as Christ is pure. 1. Ioh. 3.3.

The hypocrite, for all his pretended hope, is either so addicted to the
desires of this world, as if he did not expect an other world: or is so d^unt^d
with the affliction, of this li^e, as a man without hope, and as he lives
without the fear of God; so he dies without hope. For what hope has the
hypocrite, when God takes away his soul? Job 27.8.

Fear.
The upright man is endued with a sonne-like fear of God, which is a fear to
offend him. for such fear and uprightnes always go together. Job. 1.18.
Deuteronomy. 10.12. 1. Sam. 12.24. The hypocrite either has no fear of God at all,
Ps. 36.1.2. but is overgrowne with carnal security: or but a servile fear,
which is the fear of bondslaves, who are under the law, whereby he does does
not in deed fear sin, or the offense of God, but the punishment only which
sin deserves.

Humility.
The upright man is endued with humility. For he that walks with God, setting
God before his eyes, and therefore behaving him self as in the sight and
presence of God, cannot but humble him Mich 6*8.
self to walk with his God. Abraham when he stood before the Lord,
acknowledged him self to be but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. ^he holy Prophet
Esaias, when in a vision he beheld the Majesty of God, cried out, woe is me,
because I am a man of polluted lips. Es. 6.5. The Apostle Peter, when by the
miraculous draught of fishes he perceived CHRIST, then present with him, to be
the Son of God, fell down at his feet, and said, depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, O Lord. Luke 5.8. And no doubt, but so many of us, as have that
eye of faith, which Moses had, Heb. 11.27
to see him that is invisible present with them, are insome measure affected
with his presence, as th^se men were. But pride is an evident sign of an
hypocrite, who sets not God before his eyes. Behold (says the Prophet
Habakuk) his soul that is lifted up is not upright within him. Hab. 2.4. we
see it in the example of the Pharisey, Luke 18.11. who coming ^o pray, in
steed of humbling him self before GOD, extolleth him self above other men,
and for that thanketh GOD: but to this end, to praise him self.

The upright are confident; Confidence.
For he that walks in integrity, walks confidently, Pro. 10.9. for
confidence is a consequent of integrity, or that which Tushija^.
truly is* Pro. 3.21.23 24.25.26. Keep that which truly is, that is found
wisdom and discretion, then shall thou walk in thy way safely; when thou
lie down thou shall not be afraid, thou shall not be afraid of sudden
fear, for the Lord shall be thy confidence. A consequent of true faith. Romans
5.2. Ephesians. 3.12. of the spirit of adoption, which expels the spirit of
fearefulnes. Romans 8 15. Gal 4.6, of the true fear of God. For, in the fear of
the Lord there is strong confid^nce, Pro. 14.26. of a good and upright
conscience* which fears no evil, Ps. 112.7.8. The upright man shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. his heart is
established, he shall not be afraid, but is as bold as a lion. Pro. 28.1.
Neither does he fear the censures or ill reports of men, 1. Cor. 4.3. but as
Job in the integrity of his conscience desires that his cause may be tried;
professing, that if his adversary would write a bill or libell against him, he
would be so far from being daunted therewith, that it should redound to his
credit, and he would bind it as a crown unto him. Job 31.35.36. Of affiance
in Gods all sufficiency, providence, and protection. For setting God before his
eyes, and knowing, that the Lord is at his right hand, he is confident, that he
shall not be moved. Ps. 16*8. for he believes, that God is his buckler, and
his exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1. a sun and a shield to them that walk
uprightly, Ps. 84.11. Pro. 27. that the eyes of the Lord perlustrate the whole
earth to show him self strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is upright
toward him, 2. Chro. 16.9. that God by his fatherly providence causes all
things to work together for the good of those that love him. Romans 8.28.
therefore with David he professes, my defense is of God, who saves the
upright in heart, Ps. 7.10. and therefore resolves not to fear. Ps.
3.5.6.4.8.23.4.27.1.3.46.1.2.3.56.4.118.6. For what should he fear, that
needs not to fear death it self, which of all things in this world it most
feared. seeing as it freeth him from all other evil, and danger; so it is an
entrance unto him, and an introduction into happiness.

Thus is the upright confident. but fear surpriseth the hypocrites. Es. 33.14.
fearing not only where is occasion of ^eare, but also where there is no cause
of fear. Ps. 14.5.53.5. They will be afraid at the wagging of a leaf. Levit.
26.36. and they will fly where no man pursues the^. Pro. 28.1. And this fear
happens unto them for want of true faith* Mat. 8.26. for want of the spirit
of adoption, in steed whereof they are possessed with the spirit of bondage,
and of fear. Rom, 8.15. 2. Tim* 1.7. for want of the true fear of God. for
they that fear not God, fear all things else. For want of a good conscience,
for a bad and guilty conscience, conscious to it self of evil, fears evil.
for want of affiance in God, with whom they have no peace. The conscience of
the wicked is like the troubl^d se^, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. the^e is no peace to the wicked, says my God. Es. 57.20.21.

The repentance of the upright is entire, Repent^nce.
being a turning unto God Deuteronomy, 4 29 Ezrah 18.21.28
with all his heart from all his sins. The repentance of the hypocrite is
neither from the heart, but in outward shows, 1 King 21.^.
as of hanging down the head like a bulrush, Es. 58.5. of putting on
sackcloth, and going softly, of rending the clothes, Joel 2.1^
but not the heart. Neither is it from all his sins; for he will be sure to
retain some darling sin, from which he will not be reclaimed. But as he, who
t^uly repents of any one sin, repents of all, in respect of the desire
and purpose of his heart, being not willing to retain any; so he that
repents not of all, repents of none at all in deed, and in truth.

He that walks in uprightnes toward God, Simplicity^
without hypocrisy, walks also before men in simplicity and singlenes of
heart. without guile. both implied in the word: for (...), as Basil says, or
(...), as Chrysostom speaks, (...). simplicity of manners, and of speech, is
the character of an harmless or upright man. But he tha^ uses dissimulation
and guile toward men, is an hypocrite, and so is called. Mat. 22.18* Mark.
12.15.

So much of the notes that respect good things; now follow those which respect
evil. and that either of sin, or of punishment.

Sin.
The upright man hates sin as well in him self, as in others, or rather
more, and more severely censureth it in himself, then in others: not excusing
nor extenuating, but rather amplifying and aggravating the same. The hypocrite
hates sin in others, but not in him self, and to that end he is curious to
pry into other men's behavior, and neglects his own. he can see a mote in an
other man's eye, but cannot discern a beam in his own. Mat. 7.3.4. he is a
sharp censurer of other men's faults, but flattereth and blesses him self in
his own sins. Ps. 36.2. Deuteronomy. 29.19. examples hereof in Saul, 1. Sam. 14, 44
in Judah Genesis 35.24. yea in David, whiles he concealed his sin, 2. Sam. 12.5.

Afflictions*
The evil of punishment are afflictions, which God has ordained as trials to
discern the sound and upright, from the unsound and hypocrite: by the patient
bearing whereof the faithful are found to be (...), that is, sound and
approved, Iam. 1.12. For tribulation being (...), 1 Pet. 1.7 Iam. 1.3
the trial of our faith works patience, and patience, (...), Romans 5.3.4 ^
Probation
that is, as Chrysostom (with whom others agree) expounds. (...), it makes
him approved that is tried. as we see in Job, and in the three children. Dan.
3. in the faithful Jews Ps. 44.17. and in all the faithful, but chiefly in
all that are martyrs. By afflictions likewise the hypocrite being tried is
discovered, and as it were unmasked, by the not patient bearing and enduring
thereof. For either he does (...), set light by the affliction, and not take it
to heart; or else (...), he faints under it, contrary to the counsel of the
Holy Ghost, Heb. 12.5. cited out of Pro. 3.11.

He that takes not to heart an affliction, cannot be said patiently to bear
it; for in patiendo est patientia, in suffering is patience, and nor (...), in
not suffering. as appears in the examples of Job Job. 1 20
, and Ps 6.^38.5
David. And this is the cause many times, why the hypocrite does not profit by
afflictions, because he is not sensible thereof Ier. 5.3. and being unsensible,
becomes incorrigible, Ier. 2.30. And the cause hereof is, because hypocrites
not walking with God, do not acknowledge his hand; but ascribe their
affliction, either to misfortune, or to secundary causes, which are but the
instruments of God. Or if they do acknowledge the hand of God, yet they are
not humbled under it, neither do they bewail their sins, not crave pardon
of them, nor turn Es. 9.^^
to him that smites them, nor promise amendment; or if they do, they mean
not, or at least afterward they do not perform, nor submit them selves
meekely to bear their affliction, nor learn obedience by that which they
suffer, neither are they bettered by them, but become worse, Es* 1*5* If they
take it too much to heart, then either they impatiently bear it, murmuring
against God, and fainting in them selves; or they seek an evasion out of it by
some sin, and so fall away from God; by which their defection their
hypocrisy is discovered.

To these trials by affliction, we may add other temptations, as by the
doctrine of false teachers, either alluring to idolatry, which the Lord
sometimes permits to prove us, whether we love him entirely, or not, Deuteronomy.
13.3. or to heresies, which the Lord also suffers, that those which are
approved, may be known, ^ Cor. 11.19.

CHAP. XI. Of uprightnes toward men.
NOw we are to speak briefly of integrity, as in has reference to man. For as
we are to serve God in holiness before him, that is in uprightnes of heart,
without hypocrisy; so also in righteousness before him, that is in simplicity
and singlenes of heart, without guile. For th^s simplicity whereof we are now to
speak, is not that which is opposed to discretion, as being want of wit, (for
the simplicity of doves must be tempered with the prudence of serpents; we must
be without guile as doves without gall* but we must not be like Ephraim Hos
7.11. as silly doves without heart) but is opposed to dissimulation,
disguising, doubling, deceit and guile. From which the redeemed of the Lord
are free, according to the testimony of the prophet Zephany c. 3.13. and
according to the oath of God in this place. worshipping the Lord in
righteousness before him. that is performing the duetyes which they owe unto
men, as in the sight and presence of God.

Now this simplicity is expressed by the same terms which signified
uprightnes, being referred to men, and where they are put absolutely, without
relation either to God or man, both are, or may be employed, as always going
together. Thus the word Thamim, may be understood in this larger sense. And
therefore where Jacob is called Ish thamim Genesis 25.27. it is to be understood as
well of his simple and sincere dealing among men, as of his uprightnes toward
God, and so the 72 interpret it by the word (...) free from fayning or
dissembling, and Aquila by the word (...) a simple hearted man, free from
doubling and deceit, and so the word is used sometimes to signify simplicity.
Genesis 20.5.6. 2. Sam. 15.11. The like is to be understood of Job and other holy
men to who^ that attribute is given in the scriptures; who are also noted to
have performed their duetyes to men in uprightnes, or integrity. as David. Ps.
78.72. is said to have fed, that is ruled the people of God according to the
integrity of his heart. The want whereof is objected by Iotham to the men of
Shechem. Iud. 9.16 19. that they had not dealt in truth and integrity with
Gedeon his father. And therefore even such, as dissemble with men are sometimes
called hypocrites, Mat. 22.18. and their disguising is called hypocrisy. Mark.
12.15. or as Luke terms it (...) c. 20.23. deceiptfulnes. when one by
flattering words and fair shows seeks to entangle another.

The words jashar and Shalem, which signify upright and perfect, have also
sometimes relation to men, as 2. King, 10.15. 1. Chro^. 12.38. so have the
word, which signify sincerity and truth Iud. 9.16.19. 2. Cor. 1.12. The phrase
also of doing our duetyes to men from the heart as Ephesians. 6.6. Col. 3.23. and out
of a pure heart. 1. Pet. 1.22. imports also this simplicity and singlenes of
heart.

But the most proper words whereby this grace is signified in the scriptures of
the new testament, are (...) and sometimes (...) simplicity, or singlenes of
heart, opposed to doubling* to dissimulatio^ and guile. The m^n endued with it,
is called sometimes (...) which in latin is simplex (quasi sine plica) and
sometimes (...) which signifies either harmless being as it were without
horns* or rather sincere, as being without mixture of deceit or guile. Mat.
10.16. Phil. 2.15. sometimes it is signified by the denial of the contrary, as
1. (...), without guile, or sincere, 1. Pet. 2. 2. Blessed is the man in whose
heart there is no guile. Ps. 32.2. a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile.
Ioh. 1.48. 2. Not with an heart and an heart, that is not with a double heart,
1. Chro. 12.33. but as it is v. 38. with a perfect heart. 3. Not fained (...).
as 1. Pet. 1.22. brotherly love unfayned.

To serve God therefore in righteousness before him, is in the duties which we
perform to men, to behave our selves as in the sight and presence of God; not
in dissimulation and guile, not with an heart and an heart that is a double
heart, not with fayning or disguising, but in integrity, sincerity and truth,
with simplicity and singlenes of heart. which you are to understand, not that
simple men are to be fools, but that wise men are to be simple; or as the
Apostle exhorts. wise to that which is good, and simple concerning evil.
Romans 16.19. or as he speaks 1. Cor. 14.20. Babes in malice, but in
understanding men.

And thus we are to serve God in righteousness before him. For howsoever wordly
policy, which is mixed with dissimulation and guile, be commonly practiced and
highly extolled among men, and simplicity contrariwise neglected and contemned,
as folly; yet by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, true wisdom which descends
from above, as all good gifts do, is not mixed with dissimulation Iam. 3.17.
but is tempered with simplicity, as our Savior teaches his followers. Mat.
10.16.

Those therefore that will be wise in Gods account, must be content to seem
fools in the estimation of the world. 1. Cor. 3.18. As for that wisdom which
is mixed with deceit, the Holy Ghost does censure it, as earthly, carnal, and
devilish Iam. 3.15. And although that be accoumpted the only wisdom among
worldly men; yet the wisdom of the world is foolishnes with God. 1. Cor. 3.19.
for such men are, as we use to say, peny-wise and pound-foolish, who by their
policy to gain their desires in this world, do loose their souls; which is
not only folly, but madness. I say extreme madness, for the momentany
fruition of worldly desires, which are vain and unprofitable, not only to
deprive themselves of everlasting happiness in heaven, but also plunge
themselves into endless woe and misery in hell. Verily, it were easy for any
man, that is not a fool, to become worldly wise, if he would be so foolish, as
to cast away his soul by making no conscience of dissembling, and disguising,
of lying and deceiving, of faeing and out facing, of swearing and for-swearing
which, because no true Christian will do; therefore as every where in the world
true Christians are by the worldlinges accoumpted innocents, meaning fools; so
in the parts of Italy about Rome fools (as I have heard) are termed Christians.

But that we may be moved to embrace simplicity and singlenes of heart, and be
dissuaded from all doubling and guile, let us consider, what arguments the Holy
Ghost affords in this behalf. And first as touching dissimulation or guile,
it is twofold, either in word, or in deed. In word, when there is a divorce
between the tongue and the heart; the heart meaning one thing, and the tongue
speaking an other with purpose to deceive. This in the scriptures is called
speaking with an heart and an heart. Ps. 12.2. with flattering lips and with
an heart and an heart, (that is, a double heart) do they speak. It is also
called, a mouth of deceit. Ps. 109. 2. a deceiptfull tongue. such as should
not be found in the remnant of Israel. Zeph. 3.13. a tongue of deceit, when a
man speaks peaceably to his neighbor, but in his heart he lays wait for
him. Ier. 9.8. Ps. 28.3. having peace in their mouths, but mischief in their
hearts.

This double tongue and double heart, as it is odious to ingenuous men, in so
much as some of the heathen have protested, Achilles apud Ho^ erum Eliad 9.
that they hate it as the very gates of hell; so and much more it is abominable
unto God; who is the Patron of truth, and avenger of falsehood, Ps. 50:19: thou
applyest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue forgeth deceit. for these things
will I reprove thee, etc. Shall not I visit for these things, and shall not my
soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Ier. 9.9. Ps. 12.3. Therefore if we
desire to prosper, and to see good, we must keep our tongue from evil, and
our lips that they speak no guile Ps. 34.12.13.

Dissimulation or doubling in fact is, when one thing is intended, and an other
pretented, with purpose to deceive, which in the Scriptures is forbidden and
condemned. Forbidden, both in express terms, Levit. 19. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
and by types and shadows, as Levit. 19.19. Deuteronomy. 22.9.10.11.

Condemned, as a sin odious to God, (for the Lord abhors the deceitful
man, Ps. 5.7. and accordingly punishes them, Ps. 55.23. M^n of deceit shall
not live out half their days. for God is an avenger of deceit. 1 Thessalonians.
4.6. I^r. 9.4.5.6.9.) and as a mark of the wicked and reprobate, who are the
se^d of the serpent. Ps. 144.8. Romans 1.29.

On the contrary, simplicity and singlenes of heart is both commanded and
commended in the scriptures. Commanded Romans 12.8.9. he that exercises the
duty of charity in giving, let him do it in simplicity. Let love be without
dissimulation. For seeing the faithful have purified their souls by the
obedience of the truth (that is by faith. Act. 15.9.) through the spirit, to
the unfayned love of the brethren, they are therefore, to love one another out
of a pure heart fervently. 1. Pet. 1.22. Our Savior CHRIST, as he commands
his followers to be wise as serpents; so also simple, as doves. Mat. 10.16.
that they may be blameless, and simple o^ sincere, as the sons of GOD
without rebuke. Phil. 2.15. for that which in this behalf is required in the
duetyes of servants, is to be observed in all the duetyes of righteousness,
which we are to perform unto men in singlenes of heart, as unto Christ. not
with eye-services, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will GOD from the heart. Ephesians. 6.5.6. or as the same Apostle speaks to the
like effect, Col. 3.22.23. not with eye-services as men-pleasers, but in
singlenes of heart fearing GOD. And whatsoever you do, do it from the heart.
as to the Lord, and not to man.

Commended. 1. as an excellent virtue, as being that, for which the first
Christians are highly commended. Act. 2.46. that they conversed together in
singlenes of heart. as that, wherein we are to take comfort and to rejoice:
namely when our conscience testifie^h unto us, that in simplicity, and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world. 2. Cor. 1.12

2. As most profitable, as having the reward, not only of safety and security
( for he that walks in integrity walks safely, but he that perverteth his
ways, as dissemblers do, shall be known, that is shall be made an example of
punishment. Pro 10.9.) but also of blessedness. Ps 32.2. Blessed is the man in
whose heart there is no guile.

3. As necessary, as being the proper mark and cognizance of those that shall be
saved For the Lord being consulted by David, who is a true Christian, and an
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven: returns this answer; he that walks
before God uprightly without hypocrisy, and toward men sincerely, and without
guile speaking the truth that is in his heart. Ps. 15.2. this is Jacob, or this
is the generation of Jacob, that is Israel. Ps. 24.6. who from his integrity
or uprightnes is called Ieshurun. Deuteronomy. 33.5.26. Es. 44.2. for he is not a Jew
that is one outwardly, but he that is inwardly, whose praise is not of men, but
of God. Romans 2.28.29. And by the testimony of our Savior he is a true
Israelite, in whom there is no guile. Ioh. 1.48.

For a true Christian does in some measure resemble the disposition of Christ,
who left us an example, that we shoul follow his stepps, who did no sin,
neither in his mouth was found any guile. 1. Pet. 2.21.22. And therefore as he
was called a lamb, so his followers must be, as they are called, not foxes,
nor wolves, but sheep. But if our mind being corrupted with dissimulation and
guile, do degenerate from that simplicity which becomes those that are in
Christ Jesus, 2. Cor. 1^.3. or if, as Job speaks chapter 31.5. we have walked in
vanity and leasing, or if our feet have ha^ted to d^ceipt, we discover our
selves to be no true Israelites, nor sheep of Christ. For if they be true
Christians, in whom there is no guile, what shall we think of them, in whom no
simple or plain dealing is to be found. If true Christians be the sheep of
Christ, imitating the simplicity of the lamb of God, in whom was found no
guile what may we think of those foxes and wolves, who resemble the old serpent
in guile and deceit? If those which shall inhabit the mountain of God, be
such as walk uprightly, both toward God, and toward man; where shall all
hypocrites and dissemblers have their portion? see Mat. 24.51. If in the
remnant of Israel, that shall be saved, a deceiptfull tongue shall not be found.
Zeph. 3.13. then do they not belong to the Israel of God, whose hearts are
fraught with guile and their tongues are full of deceit.

To conclude* this necessity is proved from this oath of the Lord* who has
sworn, that he will give to all true Christians, who are the children of
Abraham, that they being delivered from the hand of their enemies shall serve
him in righteousness before him, that is, with simplicity and sing^enes of
heart, without doubling, dissimulation or guile. They therefore whose
conversation is in dissimulation or guile, can have no assurance, that they are
the redeemed of the Lord. But of this argument of integrity and uprightnes, I
have now spoken the more briefly in this and some other points, because I have
handled the same more largely in my lectures. on Ps. 15.2. Whereunto I refer
the Christian reader, as to the first treatise, that ever I saw, of this most
profitable and necessary argument.

CHAP. XII. Of the certainty of Perseverance, and the necessity of this
doctrine.
THe third property of our new obedience is constancy, or perseverance, noted
in these words: All the days of our life.

The meaning of the words.
. 1. Of which words the meaning is not, that all those who are in the covenant
of grace do always worship God in holiness and righteousness, from their first
birth, (for who then could assure him self that he is within the covenant of
grace) but from their new birth, and from the time of their actual redemption
and reconciliation with God. For so God has promised Luke 1.73.74.75.
to all the heirs of promise, that he will give us, that being deliv^red from
the hand of our spiritual enemies, we should worship him all the days of our
life. But before we be actually redeemed by the merits of CHRIST, that is,
actually made partakers of the benefit of redemption, justified by faith, and
reconciled unto God; we cannot worship God aright, as before we have showed.

Neither are the words to be understood of every day and every moment; as
though the Lord did promise to the faithful, that they shall continue in a
perpetual course of obedience without any interruption or intermission
whatsoever. Indeed every man that is redeemed is bound with his perseverance to
join both perpetuity in a continual practice of piety every day, and also to
increase daily in godliness, and in the graces of the Spirit, being renewed in
the innerman from day to day, 2. Cor. 4.16. But yet this is not the thing which
by oath the Lord has promised in the covenant of Grace to all that are
redeemed; for who then might not think himself excluded out of the covenant
of grace, seeing Iam* 3.^.
in many things we offend all? and Eccles 7 ^^.
there is not a righteous man upon earth that does good, and sins not: but
they are to be understood of our whole life, neither do they so much import
quando, when, as quam diu, how long: as being uttered in ^he accusative (...)
case. For the children of God, howsoever they fall in many particulars,
besides or contrary to their general purpose, yet for so much as they always
rise again, and hold out to the end, having a constant purpose to serve God
always, they are truly said to worship God all the days of their life. As
Asa's heart 2. Chro* 16.^
was said to have been perfect, that is, upright, all the days of his life,
though he failed in many 2. Chro. 16.^ 10 12.
particulars.

The faith of the Elect (that is, of all the true children of God, nam qui vere
filij sunt praesciti and praedestinati sunt. Aug. de corrupt. and gratia c. 9.)
which works by love, either fails not at all, or if there be any in whom it
fails, it is repaired before the end of their life: and that iniquity which
came between, being wiped away, it is accounted for perseverance to the end,
as Augustine says Aug. de corrupt and gratia c. 7. Horum fides, q^^ per
dilectionem operatur, profecto aut omnino non deficit aut si qui sunt qu^rum
deficit* reparatur antequam vita ist^ finia^ur, et delecta quae inter^ut^era^
iniq^itatem, usque in finem perseverantia deput^tur.
.

The meaning then of the words is, that God by oath does promise to the
faithful; that he will give them grace to worship him in holiness and
righteousness from the time of their actual redemption and justification, with
perseverance to the end of their life.

The certainty of Perseverance grounded upon the text.
. 2. Whereupon we do grownd this most comfortable doctrine, that the
perseverance of the faithful, I mean of all those that truly believe, and are
sound and upright Christians, is certain* perseverance being the perpetual
and peculiar privilege of the upright. But when I say it is certain, I speak
not of the certainty of the subject, as though the faithful were always
certainly assured of their perseverance (though they are always to labor for
that assurance) but of the certainty of the object, that is, that the
perseverance of the faithful is certain and sure, whether they be assured of
it, or not. Even as the foundation of Gods election abides sure ^ Tim. 2.19.
,) though the elect be not always sure of it, but yet are always to give Pet.
1.10.
diligence to make it sure.

The necessity of this doctrine.
. 3. Here therefore we are to refute the Papist, and all others who endeavor
to bereave the faithful and sound Christians of this privilege. And in this
cause we are to labor the more seriously, because those that would deprive us
of this privilege, do also endeavor to rob us of all true comfort, and
consolation. For first, this were no sound comfort (wherein notwithstanding our
Savior CHRIST does bid the Faithful especially to rejoice Luke 10.20.
.) that our names are written in heaven; if again they may be blotted out:
that we are the sons and heirs of God, if that notwithstanding we may become
the children of the devil: that we are now the elect of God, if hereafter we
may become reprobates.

2. Again, the maine comfort of a Christian in this life; is assurance of
salvation after this life is ended. For the life (as it were) of the life
mortal, is the assurance of the life immortal. But how can there be assurance
of salvation, if there be no certainty of Perseverance?

3. Thirdly, those which seek to undermine the certainty of Perseverance in
the children of God, do also overturne the very groundwork and foundation of
our Faith and hope. For what is Faith (I mean special Faith) or hope, but an
assurance of salvation, and consequently of perseverance unto salvation by
Christ; the one, as an assured persuasion, the other as an assured expectation?
The grownd of which assurance is the maine promise of the Gospel, declaring
the certainty of their salvation, who do truly believe in Christ. From whence
the Christian conscience gathers assurance in this manner. The salvation of
all those that truly believe is certain. This being the maine promise of the
John 3.16. Mark. 16.16. Act. 16.31. Romans 10.9.10.11
Gospel, that whosoever believes in Christ, shall be saved. But I (says the
soul of the faithful man, according to the testimony of his conscience
seconded by the testimony of the Holy Ghost. Romans 8.16
bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God) I do truly
believe in Christ, therefore my salvation is certain. But the proposition of
this syllogism with the proof thereof, which is the ground of our Faith, and
the foundation of our assurance and consolation, the adversaries of
perseverance do deny: not fearing to contradict the maine promise of the
Gospel. For whereas the promise of the Gospel affirms, that all which truly
believe in Christ, shall be saved* they are not ashamed to say, that some, which
truly believe in Christ, shall not be saved. For they say, that some which
truly believe* do not persever, and that those which do not persevere, shall
not be saved.

Lastly, the Faithful in the greatest temptations of Satan and conflicts with
despair, do use to raise themselves Ps. 77.6.
by calling to mind the tokens of Gods special favor vouchsafed unto them in
former times, and the undoubted fruits of saving grace, which they have
formerly brought forth: Knowing that the Lord ( who changes Mal. 3.6.
not) whom he loves once, Ioh. 13.1
loves to the end: and that the saving gifts Romans 11.29
and graces of God are without repentance. And hereby as penitent children, are
encouraged to seek unto their heavenly Father for mercy and pardon: Knowing
that howsoever he is justly angry with the^, yet he does not hate the^: nor
utterly cast off the^, who^ once he has received into his love in Christ. But
the adversaries of Persevera^ce by their doctrine discourage men, when they have
grievously offended from all exercises of faith and repentance, and teach them
to run desperate courses. For if a faithful man upon a grievous or as they call
it, a mortal or deadly sin committed, be translated from the state of
salvation into the state of conde^natio^, excluded out of Gods favor, and made
an object of his hatred, deprived of faith, hope, and charity, and of all
saving grace, and withal ceasing to be the child, or (as some say) elect of
God, is become a child of the devil: with what heart can he seek unto God, of
who^ he is now hated? how can he call upon him, in whom he does not believe? or
how can he hope to be heard, that has no hope? or how shall he seek to please
God who has no faith (without which it is impossible to please ^od) nor any
desire to please him? H^b. 11.6.


This doctrine therefore is to be avoided as a downfall of despair: the ^ull
co^futatio^ whereof I reserve to a peculiar Treatise purposely written of that
subject. Only here, to make better way thereunto, I thought good to add an
Appendix, for the further clearing ^f the doctrine delivered in the 8 Chapter of
this Book, concerning the certainty of salvation.

An Appendix to the Treatise of the certainty of Salvation.
THere came to my hands a treatise of the nature and properties of grace and
Faith, written by a learned and godly man, as I am persuaded: wherein many
things are delivered, which cross diverse points by me propownded in this
book; and more especially in my discourse concerning the certainty of
salvation. W.P.
whereat no man is to marvel, and much less to take offense. For so long as
our knowledge is but in part, it cannot be avoided, but there will be diversity
of opinions among the Faithful, who notwithstanding hold the maine substance
and foundation of Faith and true Religion.

The points of difference are eight.

1. The first* The first error. Vocation and s^nct^fication co^fou^ded.
that he confounds our vocation and sanctification, alleging that in our
vocation and first conversion the universal or general habit of grace,
containing in it all sanctifying graces is infused; whereby all the parts and
powers of man, being renewed together and at once, and the image of God in them
all renewed by the infusion of the habites of all sanctifying graces together,
are sanctified throughout. Resp. To omit his acception of the word Grace, even
where of purpose he does at large discourse of Grace, for one supernatural
quality inherent in us, or habit of grace infused into us, according to the
use of the schoolmen (who thereby have overturned the doctrine of justification
and salvation by Gods grace, magnifying under the name of grace their own
righteousness inherent, which in the question of justificatio^ is to be esteemed
Phil. 3.8
as dung, and not once me^tioning that which is out of us in him, which most
properly is the grace of God, for it is one of his attributes) and not
according to the scripturs, which never speak of grace in that sense, but
always use the word, either property for the gracious favor of God in Christ,
by which grace we are elected, called, justified, sanctified, and shall be
glorified; or metonymically for the Special gifts of Grace: To omit. I say
this oversight, I answer, it has been the received opinion, and usual
practice of all Orthodox divines, to hold and set down in this other the
degrees of salvation, which are wrought in this life, viz. our vocation,
justification, sanctification. and that in order of nature vocation, (wherein
justifying faith is begotten) goes before justification; and that
justification, wherein we are made just before GOD by imputation of CHRIST'S
righteousness, goes before sanctification: wherein we, being already justified
from the guilt of sin, and redeemed from the hand of our spiritual enemies
and reconciled unto God, receive grace to worship him in holiness and
righteousness before him. Howbeit, we deny not, but that in time our
justification does concur with our effectual vocation (for as soon as a man
does truly believe, so soon is he justified before God) and that in time the
first act of sanctification (which is our regeneration) does concur both with
our justification and effectual vocation. Now, of our regeneration, which is
the beginning of our sanctification, and of our spiritual life. which we live
by faith, there seem to be two acts; the one, wherein we are begotten unto God
of incorruptible 1. Pet. 1.23. ^^m. 1.18.
seed by the word of God; the other* wherein the image of God being in some
measure renewed in us, and our Savior Christ formed in us, we are borne anew.
The former, is our spiritual conception; the latter, our spiritual or new
birth. in the former regeneramur, we are begotten anew, in the latter
renascimur, we are borne anew. And as in natural generation there is a mean
time between the conceptio^ and the birth, in which time that which is begotten
is formed in the womb, acording to the image of the first Ada^; so between
the first act of regeneration and the new birth, there intercedeth a time,
wherein the image of the second Adam is in all parts by degrees renewed, until
Christ be formed Gal 4.19.
in us, The former, which also is the first act of our conversio^, is the same
with our calling or vocation, wherein our Savior Christ is co^ceived in our
hearts, when we do receive him by the true and lively assent of faith; which
is the seed, the root, the fountain of all other sanctifying graces; which
whosoevre has, 1 John, 5 ^.
he is begotten of God.

This act the holy spirit works ordinarily by the ministry of the word. for
faith Romans 10 17.
comes by the hearing of the word. For how should men believe in him, of who^
they have not heard, and how should they hear without a preacher, Ro^. 10.14.
In this regard preachers, being ministers by whom others believe. 1 Cor. 3.5.
are the instruments of the holy Ghost for our spiritual regeneration; and are
therefore called fathers in the faith, who beget men unto God. 1. Cor. 4.15.
Phile^. 10. 1. Tim. 1.2. Now in our vocation the work of the holy Ghost is
partly preparative, and partly operative. The preparation unto faith is 1. the
illumination of the mind, partly by the ministry of the law, revealing unto us
our miserable estate in our selves; and partly by the ministry of the gospel,
revealing unto us the mystery of our salvation by Christ. 2. the mollifying of
the heart by the finger of the spirit, humbling us in the consideration both of
our damnable estate in our selves, and of the undeserved mercies of God offered
in Christ. from which being effectual arises a desire both to be freed from
that damnable estate, and to be made partakers of that happiness promised in
Christ. 3. The invitation of the hearers, and the stirring of them up, to come
out of that woeful estate, and to accept of Gods mercies in Christ, by the
Ministers of the word; who being the Ambassadors of God in Christ's stead, do
beseech you, as if God himself did entreat you by them, ^ Cor. 5.18.20*
that you would be reconciled unto God.

The Holy Ghost having thus knocked at the door of our hearts, does himself
in his good time, open our hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, to assent to,
and to believe the Gospel. by which belief being lively and effectual, we
receive Christ, not only in our judgments by assent, but also in our hearts
by an earnest desire to be made partakers of him, and in our wills by an
earnest purpose and settled resolution to acknowledge and profess him to be
our Lord and Savior, and to rest upon him for salvation. The Holy Ghost having
wrought this assent, and by it this desire and purpose of applying CHRIST unto
our selves, and thereby also some beginnings of hope, of the hatred of sin,
of the love of God, and of our neighbor, and of other graces, by which the
Image of God begins to be renewed, and Christ to be formed in us, being yet
as it were Embryones in the womb, he teaches every one of us, who have
through his blessed operation the conditon of the promise, to apply the promise
to our selves, and to believe not only that Christ is the Savior of all that
do believe, but also that he is my Savior, that he died for my sins, and
rose again for my justification, so that when the Minister, according to the
word, pronounces this general proposition, whosoever truly believes in
Christ has remission of his sins, and shall be saved, the conscience of every
faithful man may both safely assume, but I through Gods grace do truly
believe in Christ, and also certainly conclude by the testimony of the holy
Ghost, bearing witness with our conscience in the assumption, according to the
word in the proposition, therefore I through the grace of God have remission of
sins and shall be saved. When the holy Ghost has thus taught us to apply the
promises unto our selves, and has sealed Ephesians. 1.13.
us after we have believed, and testified together with our spirits, Romans
8.15.16
that we are the children of God* then it appears, that we are already borne
of God, and that we are the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12 13.
not only by regeneration, but also by adoption. And being sons, God se^deth
forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba father. Gal. 4.6. By
this faith, first apprehending, and then applying Christ unto us, we become not
only the sons of God, but also members of Christ; and having union with him
as out head, we have communion also with him, both in respect of his merit
unto justification* first before God, and then in the court of our own
conscience; and in respect of his graces unto sanctification, receiving of his
fulness, Ioh. 1.16.
even grace for grace.

As therefore men are first conceived and borne, before and they are borne
before they are said to lead a life in this world: so we must first be begotten
and borne anewe in our vocation and regeneration, before we can live unto God
the spiritual life of sanctification. These two therefore were not to be
confounded; sanctification being the end, as of our election Ephesians. 1.4. and of
our justification, Luke 1.75. Tit. 2.14. ^. Pet 2.24.
so also of our vocation. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. By our vocation, we are begotten unto
God. by sanctification, we, being both begotten and borne anewe, do live unto
GOD. In our vocation, the spirit of GOD first draws Ioh. 6.44.
us unto GOD: in our sanctification, we being already drawn, the Spirit of God
does Romans 5 14 Gal. 5 18.
lead and guide us in the way which leads to life. Vocation produces Faiths
Faith being begotten, produces sanctification, both habitual (for the heart
Act. 15.9.
is purified by Faith) and actual, for Faith Gal. 5.5.
works by love, producing good works as the fruit both of Faith and
charity. I do not deny, but that Faith is a part of our sanctification, and of
our inherent righteousness: yet this hinders not, but that both it self does
sanctify us, and is also the mother of all other inward graces wherein our
habitual sanctification consists, and of all the works of grace wherein our
actual signification is occupied. For when the Holy Ghost does regenerate us,
he does ingenerate the grace of faith in us, and by it all other graces.

The second error That sanctification goes before justification.
The second (which is a consequent of the former) that sanctification goes
before justification. The contrary whereof I have proved in the discourse.
whereunto I add. 1. that sanctification is the Col. 1.22.
end and fruit Romans 6.22.
of our justification. the cognizance also and evidence whereby it is known,
and therefore a consequent thereof. 2. As we are made sinners, first by
imputation of Adams sin, and then being guilty of his transgression, are made
partakers of his corruption; so we are made just, first, by imputation of
Christ's righteousness, and then being justified, we are in some measure made
partakers of those graces, which he received without measure. Again, the
persons of men being sinners in them selves, must be accepted of GOD as
righteous in CHRIST, before either their qualities or their actions, (which
when they are at the best are defiled with sin) can be acceptable unto GOD.
Therefore we must be justified, before either our qualities or actions can be
holy and righteous before GOD. Neither can there be any sanctification without
justification, and reconciliation with God goeing before in order of nature: as
there is no justification. without sanctification accompanying and following
the same. For by the same faith whereby we are justified, we are also
sanctified. Christ being apprehended by Faith to justification, dwells in us
by his spirit to work in us sanctification, and to whom the merits of Christ
apprehended by Faith are imputed to their justification; to them the virtue of
his death and resurrection is applied by the Holy Ghost to the mortifying of
sin, and raising again to newnes of life. to which purpose the Apostle says
Col. 2. 12. by faith we are risen with CHRIST in Baptism. Again, faith, by
which we are justified, in order of nature goes before repentance, wherein our
sanctification consists. It is a resolved Case by Calvine, Poenitentiam seu
resipiscentiam non modo fidem continuo subsequi, sed ex ea nasci extra
controversiam esse debet. See Calvin. instit. l. 3. The title of that chapter
in Calvin is fide nos regenerare.
c. 3.. 1.2. and by De inca^n. and^ gratia c. 20.
Fulgentius, quod vita sancta a fide sumit initium. The same is testified by
the ancient Fathers, as Clem. Alexandr. strom. l. 2. Faith is (...), the first
inclination to salvation, after which follow fear, hope, and (...),
repentance. Ambros^ de sacram. l. 1. c. 1. In Christiano prima est fides. Chr.
hom. de fide, pe, and char. fide^ esse origine^ iustitia. August. de pradest.
SS. c. 7. fides prima datur, ex qua caetera impetrantur. Prosper. ad Dubium, 8.
Ginev. fides omnium virtutum fundamentum. Greg. Moral. l. 2. c. 33. fidem
primam in cord nostro gignit.

If any object that the learned Chamier in his panstrat. l. 10. treats of
sanctification before justification let him hear his own apology. c. 1. n. 2.
Debueramus sanctificationi justificationem praeponere, si nostri arbitrij
methodus esset: ut tum re tum ratione priorem; quod ab ea profiuat altera, sed
quia Papistae non distinguunt, cogimur de sanctificatione prius dicere.

The third er^or, that Justification goes before Faith.
3. The third, that justification and remission of sins go before faith.
which may seem a strange assertion to be delivered by him, who holds, that
sanctification; whereof faith, as he confesses, is a principal part, goes
before justification. But this absurdity he salveth with a distinction; that he
speaks of justification, not in foro Dei, but in foro conscientiae: and
consequently acknowledges no justifying faith, but that by which we are in our
conscience assured of our justification. But when we speak of justification, as
of a degree of our salvation, it is evident, that justification is to be
considered as an action of GOD (for it is God Romans 8 30.33
that justifies,) whereby he imputing to a believing sinner the righteousness
of Christ apprehended by faith, absolveth him from his sins, and accepts of
him as righteous in Christ. As for that justification, which is in foro
conscientiae, it is not justification properly, but the knowledge and assurance
of it. Neither is that to be accounpted justifying faith properly, by which we
are not justified before GOD, nor obtain remission of sins. But before and
without this Faith by which we are justified in our consciences, The 4. error,
that all the elect before their conversi^n, etc stand actually reconciled and
justified.
that is, assured of our justification, we are as he truly says, justified
before God.

The fourth, that all the elect before their conversion, and before they have
Faith stand actually reconciled unto God* and justified before him, may also
seem a strange assertion to be uttered by a godly man. For if this were true,
then every one that will persuade himself that he is elected (which most men
are ready to do, who will thank God for their election before they are called)
may cast of all care of converting unto God, of repe^ting for his sins, of
suing unto God for the pardon of them, o^ believing in CHRIST; because without
and before either faith or repentance he has remission of his sins, and
stands actually justified before God, and reconciled unto him. And this is
the very ground, whereupon carnal Gospellers, who Iud 4.
turn the grace of God into wantonness, do build all their presumptuous
licentiousnes, that CHRIST having died for their sins, they need not to die
to them, that Christ having freed them from sin and from damnation, they may
sin freely, and without danger; that Christ having reconciled them to GOD,
and purchased salvation for them, they neither need to sue for reconciliation
or pardon, nor take care of their salvation: that Christ having fully satisfied
the justice of God by his obedience and sufferings, they neither are obnoxious
to punishment, nor tied to obedience.

But this assertion is most evidently confuted by the scriptures, which do
teach, that the elect are by Ephesians. 2.^.
nature the children of wrath servants to sin and satan, enimyes, and
rebels against God, obnoxious in themselves to the fearful curse of God, as
well as others; until they turn unto God, crave pardon of their sins, and lay
hold upon Christ by faith, Then in deed, but not till then, they are reconciled
unto God, Col. 1.^1. Romans 5.10.
who before were enimyes: then, but not until then, they are actually
redeemed, who were before bondslaves; then, but not until then, they are
justified, who before were guilty of sin and damnation: then, and not until
then, their sins are actually pardoned. For actual pardon is of sins past.
Orig in Ro^. 3 lib. 3. indulge^. t^a non futuro ^um, sed preteri oru^ crimin^^
d^tur.
Romans 3.25. and we may not presume that our sins are pardoned, before we
repent of them, and much less may we dream, that they are actually remitted,
before they be committed. For the better understanding whereof, we are to
consider the merits of Christ, and the benefits which we have thereby, according
to his own intention expressed in the covenant of grace (the condition whereof
is faith,) and are not to extend them to those, to whom they were not intended,
CHRIST is the Savior of the world, yet all are not saved, nor to be saved: for
many still remain in the state of damnation. he is the redeemer of mankind,
yet all are not actually redeemed; for many still remain in the servitude of
sin and satan. For they that commit sin, are the servants of sin.
Whereas if the son had made them free, they should have been free indeed.
Ioh. 8.34.36. God was in Christ 2. Cor. 5.29.
reconciling the world unto himself; and yet very many, as they continue in
their rebellion against God; so the wrath of God abides upon them. Ioh. 3.36.
Neither ought this to seem strange, seeing the covenant of grace promises and
assures, neither salvation, nor remission of sins, nor other benefits of
Christ to all, but only to those that believe. So God loved the world that he
gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have life everlasting. John 3.16. Mark. 16.16. he that believes and
is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be condemned. To this
purpose consider the diversifying of the phrase used by the Apostle, in the
comparison betwixt the first and the second Adam. Romans 5.19. As by the
disobedience of one man (...) the many (that is the multitude of the^ which
shall be damned) were made sinners: so by the obedience of one (...) (that is the
multitude of them that shall be saved he does not say, were made, but) shall be
made righteous. The reason of which diversity is this; because the Apostle had
respect to all those elect, who as yet have not believed, either because as yet
they were not, or as yet are not, or because as yet they were not, or yet are
not called. For it is necessary that all men should confess and acknowledge
themselves to be sinners in Adam ab origin, from their first being. For by
generation the sin of Adam is actually communicated to all his posterity; and
no sooner are they partakers of the humane nature, then they do participate in
his sin. But we may not say, that the righteousness or obedience of Christ is
communicated to all from their beginning, but only (I speak after the manner
of the scriptures, of those which are adulti) to those that believe. Neither
are they in their generation, or before, made partakers of Christ's
righteousness, but in their regeneration. That no man therefore should neglect
the benefit of justification, as though he had already obtained it, before his
conversion or effectual calling, or regeneration in which faith is ingenerated
by the Holy Ghost in the souls of the elect; he speaks in the future tense;
that men should understand, that they are not borne just or justified; but that
they shall be justified, so soon as they turning unto God, shall believe in
Christ, and that they are just, non nati, sed renati, not borne, but borne
anew, Wherefore before we ought to presume that we are justified, we must be
called, converted, regenerated. For whom GOD has elected, them has he called,
according to his purpose; and whom he has so called, them, and no other has
he justified. Romans 8.30.

Thus then we are to conceive of Christ's merits, and the benifits which we have
thereby: that howsoever our Savior CHRIST did in the days of his flesh
meritoriously redeem and save men, paying a price of ransom sufficient for
all, and fully satisfying the justice of GOD in the behalf of all that shall be
saved: yet notwithstanding none are actually redeemed, or reconciled, or
justified, but they only to whom the merits of Christ are applied; and they
are applied only to those that believe (I speak of those which are adulti, for
to elect infants, dying in their infancy, they are applied by the Holy Ghost)
Neither can any be assured that they truly believe, but such as repent of
their sins, and make conscience of their ways.

This learned man therefore should have distinguished between the merit of
redemption, and actual redemption: even as well as between the merit of
salvation, and the actual profession thereof: Christ merited our redemption,
and salvation long since; yea his merit thereof hat ever been in force since the
beginning Apos 13.8.
of the world: but yet none are actually made partakers of redemption, but such
as to whom it is applied, that is to those that truly believe. for they only
receive it, and to them only, according to the covenant of grace it was
intended. Otherwise, he might say, that all the elect are naturally saved, for
whom Christ purchased eternal life; who notwithstanding are not saved, so much
as in hope, until they do truly believe. And if all the elect be actually
justified before God, because Christ did merit their justificatio^, why does he
not say in like manner, that all the elect are actually sanctified: seeing
Christ was made unto us of God, not only righteousness, 1. Cor. ^.308
and redemption, but also sanctification; and has as well merited our
sanctification for us, as our justification. Again, what benefits we obtain
by Christ we receive them by Faith: and therefore in the Scriptures, the same
benefits which receive from Christ, are ascribed to Faith; by which Christ and
his merits are ours; by which also Christ dwells (...) Ephesians. 3.17. we live by
Christ we live by Faith, Gal. 2 20. by Christ we have remission of sins; by
Faith we obtain remission, Act. 10.43.26.18. we are justified by Christ, we
are justified by Faith. Romans 3.28. By Christ we are made the sons of God; by
Faith we are made the sons of God. Ioh. 1.12. and so in the rest, and
therefore to imagine that we are justified before God without Faith, is a
dream.

Moreover this assertion cannot stand with the perpetual doctrine of the
Apostle Paul, who teaches that we are justified before God by Faith, therefore
not before, nor without Faith. By Faith, says he, without works, that is, by
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith, and not by inherent
righteousness. Neither does he in those places speak of justification in the
court of conscience, whereby we are assured of our justification; for as before
men we are justified Iam 5.^^.
, that is, declared and known to be just by good work^; so much more by our
good works (by which we are to make our election, ^. Pet. ^* 1^.
our calling, our justification sure) we are just^fied in our own conscience,
that is, assured of our justification. And to conclude, this assertion is such
a paradox, as neither Protestant nor Papist did ever hold, that a man who is
come to years, is actually justified before God, before and without Faith.

The fifth error. (...) not the mother-grace.
5. The fifth. that faith is not the root nor the mother of other graces, and
that the soul is not dispo^ed to believe, sooner then to love God, or our
neighbor, or to produce the act of any other grace. But this I have
sufficiently disproved in the discourse showing evidently that as without
faith, there can be no other grace; so not ^^ely from it all other graces do
spring, but also according to the measure and degree of it, is the measure and
degree of all other graces. We are not disposed to love GOD as we ought, until
we be by faith persuaded of Gods love toward us; we cannot hope for the
performance of Gods promises to us, unless by faith we are persuaded that they
belong unto us: we cannot trust in God, nor rejoice in him, unless by faith we
are persuaded of his goodness and bounty toward us, and so in the rest* and
what is more plain, then that love, which is the fullfilling of the whole law
proceeds from 1. Tim. 1.^^.
faith unfeigned, as being the fruit thereof. Chrysostom and Theophylact call
faith (...). seil. (...). the mother and fountain of all graces, and Calvin,
(...). l. ^. c. ^. 41.
sola est fides, quae in nobis charitatem primum generat, it is faith only
which first ingendereth charity in us, it begets also hope and newnes of
life, as he. 41. ^ 3 ^. ^.
says.

But to omit other testimonies, St. Peter seems to acknowledge this truth.
2. Pet 1.2.3 where he prays for them to whom he writes, that grace and peace
be multiplied unto them, by the knowledge of God and Jesus our Lord, according
as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertayne to life and
godliness, (...) by the acknowledgment of him that has called us etc. that is
by faith.

6. The sixth. that faith is affiance, The sixth (...). that Faith ^ affiance.
and so to be defined; and that trusting to the promise is the proper act of
faith as it justifies. etc. But I have proved, that faith is not affiance, nor
affiance faith. But a fruit of faith as well as hope, and that by faith we
have affiance. Ephesians. 3.^2. whereunto I add* that the trust in GODS promises to
be in particular performed to us, is not faith, but hope. Yea but promises,
says he, are both true and good, therefore our assent to them is with
adherence, affiance, and trust. Answ. the promises are true, the things
promised are good, we believe the promise, we hope for the thing promised. As
contrariwise Gods threatenings are also true, and the things threatened evil As
therefore he that believes the threatening to be true fears (if it be
applyable to himself) the thing threatened, and yet this fear is not of the
nature of faith, but a fruit and co^sequent thereof: so he that believes a
promise to be true, and can apply it to himself, trusts and hops for the
thing promised, which trust in respect of the promise, is no more of the nature
of faith, then fear in respect of the threatening.

But that affiance is of the essence of justifying faith, he will make good by
diverse reasons; first, from the phrases of believing, Ioh 1 ^^. Ro^, 10.14.
(...), Romans 4.^. Act 1^.3^.
(...), or Ephesians. 1.18.
(...), that is, in or upon which imply affiance.

Answ. that as I said in the discourse, affiance is such an unseperable fruit
of faith, that sometimes it is employed in the phrase of believing in Christ.
For that phrase may and sometimes does imply three acts; the first of assent;
that he is the Savior of all that believe in him: which assent, if it be
lively and effectual is the proper act of that faith whereby we are justified
before God and in this sense the phrase, of believing in him, is ordinarily
used in the Scriptures, yea sometimes it is attributed to those, who have
assented only by a bare historical, and temporary Faith, which is the Faith
of hypocrites, and all worldlings, as John 2.23. W^ believe on him and on his
name is all one, Ioh 3.18.
and 12.42. compared with John 5.44. John 4 39 Many of the Samaritans believed
(...) in Christ, upon the report of the woman; who, being confirmed in their
faith by hearing him self; say to the woman. 42. we believe no more because of
thy report; for we ou^selves have heard him. Now what was her report? that he
had told her all things that ever she did, and therefore that he was the Christ.
this is all that they believed, when they were said to have believed in CHRIST.
And what was their Faith, which was confirmed by hearing him self? that this
is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. And this, as I said, is the
ordinary signification of the phrase in the New Testament. see John 7.31.
8.30.31.33. 11.26.27. Act. 8.37. so the Hebrew, is joined with belief, not
only in God, but in his Prophets also; not that we are to put affiance in
them, but to give credit to them as to the messengers of God, Ex. 14 31. 2.
Chro. 20.20* The second act is of application, when believing truly that he is
the Savior of all that believe, I therefore believe that he is my Savior:
which is the act of that special faith, by which we are justified in our
conscience in which sense the phrase seems to be used 1. Ioh. 5.13. in the later
clause, but in the first part of that verse in the former sense. so Ioh.
20:28.29. Gal. 2.20.

The third act is of affiance, that because I do believe not only that he is
the Savior of the world, but also my Savior* therefore I rest upon him for
salvation, and thus Ioh. 14.1. But this is not the act of faith, as it
justifies us before God, nor yet the proper act of the special faith, which
does justify us in our conscience, but a fruit and consequent thereof. For if
I truly believe that Christ is the Savior of all that believe, then must I
consequently believe that he is my Savior, (for the general always includes
the particulars) and if I do truly believe that he is my Savior, then shall
I consequently put my trust in him for salvation. Or more plainly, to use his
own terms; he says, that the proper act of faith, as it justifies,
consists in trust, or relyance upon the promise for our own particular, when
the soul depends wholly, or trusts perfectly in the promise, for remission
of sins, and for salvation. But say I, a man cannot at all, and much less
wholly and perfectly trust in the promise to be performed to himself, unless
he be first persuaded, and in some measure assured, that the promise does
belong unto him self, which persuasion is the act of special Faith. A man
cannot be assured at all, that the promise belongs to himself, unless he
have the condition of the promise, which is a true justifying faith. for the
promise is not made to all, but to those that truly believe. Therefore I must
have a justifying Faith, which is the condition of the promise before I can be
assured that the promise belongs to me. I must be persuaded that it belongs
to me; before I can confidently trust that it shall be performed to me.

But let us consider his testimonies, for (...) he alleges Ioh. 1.12. where
to believe in CHRIST is the exposition of receiving Christ. Now we receive
Christ, first, by assent, and then by application, whereof affiance is a
consequent.

2. Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed?
where the phrase is used as V. 11. whosoever believes on him, shall not be
ashamed, and that as the proof of V. 9.10. If thou shall with thy mouth
confess the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised
him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness etc. for the Scripture says, whosoever believes on him, etc. For
(...), he cites, 1. Romans 4.5. he that believes on him that justifies the
ungodly (as Abraham did) his Faith is counted righteousness v. 5.
. Now of Abraham it is said, that he believed God v. 3. (...)
, and it was counted to him for righteousness. 2. Act. 16.31, Believe on the
Lord Jesus, says Paul to the Iaylour, which he performed v. 34. (...)
believing God. for (...), he quoteth Ephesians. 1.12. where the word is (...), who
have before hoped in Christ* he might more truly have quoted, Mark. 1.15.
though against him self, (...), believe the Gospel: and the like he might
have alleged for (...) Luke 24.25. slow of heart to believe (...) all that the
Prophets have spoken.

His second argument is taken from the opposition of Faith to distrust, or
doubting; where as he confounds Faith and affiance, so he confounds also
doubting (which is opposite to Faith) and distrust which is opposed to
affiance; between which there it a great difference; for doubting is not
contrary to affiance, but to assent; for to doubt is to withhold the assent.
the places which he quoteth, do both concern doubting. Romans 4.20. Iam. 1.6.
in which sense the word (...) is often Mat. 21.21. Mark. 12.23. Act.
10.^0.11.12. Romans 14.23.
used in the Scriptures, but never in the signification of distrust.

I deny not, but that distrust, and distrustful fear are Boeth. in Top Cicer
Repugnantia dicuntur contrariorum consequentia ad ^lterum-contrarium relata
vigilare and dormire contraria sunt, ste^^ere autem and vigila^e sunt
re^u^^antia.
repugnant to faith: but that proves not faith to be affiance, but because
affiance is a necessary consequent of Faith, hence it is, that distrustful
fear, which is want of affiance, proceeds from doubting, Mat. 14.30.^^
which is want of Faith, Mat. 8.26. why are ye fearful O ye of little Faith.
Mark. 5.36. fear not, only believe.

His third argument from 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have believed, etc. is to
little purpose; for although in the words following the Apostle says, I am
persuaded, that is, I believe, that he is able to keep (...), my depositum, or
that which I have committed to his trust; yet this proves not, that the verb
(...), I have believed, implies trust, unless he understand the words, as if
the Apostle had said, (...), I know to whom I have entrusted or concredited my
self. But that is an other use of the word, much differing from that which is
in question, signifying as much as concrediting, or committing to ones trust,
and is as well attributed to God, as to man. John 2.23.24. Many believed in
Christ, to whom he would not (...), entrust himself. And in this sense the
word is sometimes used, both in the active voice with the dative of the person,
and Ioh. ^ 24*
accusative of the thing, as Luke 16.11. and also in the passive, and that also
with the accusative of the thing. Romans 3.2. 1. Cor. 9.17. Gal. 2.7. 1 Timothy
1.11. Tit. 1.3.

7. The seventh, The seventh error, that there is no other justifying faith,
but that by which we are justified in our conscience.
which I take to be the original of some other of his unsound opinions, that
he holds no other justifying faith, but that whereby we are justified in the
court of our conscience. for before God all the elect, as he teaches, stand
actually justified before, and without faith. so in deed they do before this
faith, and so it is also true, that sanctification goes before this
justification; and remission of sins before this faith. for how can a man be
assured of that which is not?

The proper act of this faith by which we are justified in our conscience (that
is, as I understand it, assured in some measure of our justification, is, as he
teaches, to trust wholly and perfectly to the promise of forgivenes of sin
and eternal life, for remission and salvation. For by this faith, as he
teaches, the Lord gives us assurance of our justification by Christ's
righteousness; whereupon follows peace of conscience, and that kind of
fiducia, which we call (says he) assurance or full persuasion of the pardon of
our sins. this is a fruit of the other fiduciae or trusting to the promise
it self, wherein stands the proper act of justifying faith. And it follows
not always presently but after sometime, happily a long time. which he speaks
for the comfort of those, who doubt they have not faith, because they not that
full assurance.

Here diverse things are to be misliked. 1. that he makes affiance the proper
act of justifying faith, which I have already disproved.

2. That he holds, that there may be a full affiance, whereby a man may
wholly and perfectly trust to the promise, without the like assurance. But this
is a manifest error borrowed from the Papists; who hope well of the remission of
sins, but dare not believe it. For this full affiance in trusting wholly and
perfectly to the promise for the performance of it to a man's self, is that
which the Apostle calls (...) the assurance of hope* which ever presupposes
(...) the assurance of faith. where, by the way. you may take notice of a
threefold (...) mentioned in the scriptures: the first is ^ol. 2.^.
(...) (...), the assurance of full persuasion of understanding to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and the Father, and of Christ. this is
the plerophory of assent, when a man understanding the mystery of the Gospel,
gives full assent thereto, that it is true, and that Jesus the Son of the
blessed Virgin, is the eternal Son of God, and the Savior of all that truly
believe in him. The second Hebr. 10.22.
is (...), the assurance of faith, when thou applying the promise to thy self,
do assuredly believe, not only that Christ is the Savior of all that
believe, but also that he is thy Savior. The third is Heb. 6.1^.
(...), the assurance of hope; when thou heing fully persuaded, that Christ is
not only the Savior of the faithful, but that he is also thy Savior; do
assuredly trust and hope to be saved by him. Every one of these plerophories or
assurances are infallible in their kind, nec falsum iis subesse potest: but
this is absolutely to be understood of the first, the object whereof is the
word of God, which is principium fidei (...), the second is not absolutely
true, as a principle like the former, but as a conclusion is necessarily and
infallibly true, concessis praemissis. For if this proposition be true, that
Christ is the Savior of all that truly believe (which is the undoubted word of
God: and if this assumption be true also, but I through Gods mercy do truly
believe, (which is certainly true in all the faithful:) then this conclusion
cannot be false; therefore Christ is my Savior; whereupon follows the
plerophory of hope; that seeing he is my Savior, therefore I do assuredly
hope for salvation by him.

3. That he makes the assurance of Faith to be a consequent of that assurance
of trust, which is nothing else but (...) the assurance of hope* the contrary
whereof is true, for as hope is a consequent and fruit of faith; so from the
assurance of faith proceeds the assurance of affiance and hope; and according
to the measure and degree of that, is the measure and degree of this. Neither
is it possible, that a man should have a full affiance wholly and perfectly to
trust to the promise to be perfo^med to himself, who is not first fully
assured, that the promise does belong to himself. And therefore it is but a
cold comfort, to be given to a man distressed in conscience, to tell him, that
if he have affiance to trust wholly and perfectly to the promise for remission
of sin, he has faith, though he have not full assurance. But miserable
comforters are they, who reach (as this man does not) that where is not full
assurance, there is no faith. But if we desire to minister true comfort to the
distressed conscience perplexed with doubtings concerning faith; we must
unteach these doctrines, either that justifying faith is an assurance of
remission, and much less a full assurance; or that it is affiance, much less
a full affiance, trusting wholly to the promise for the performance of it to a
man's self; which cannot be had, unless thou have the like assurance that the
promise does belong to thee. For inded that faith, by which we are justified
before God, is neither assurance properly, nor affiance, for assurance is the
second degree of faith, by which we are not justified before God, but in the
court of our own conscience; and affiance is a fruit and consequent of both.
Ask then the party distressed this question. Do thou believe, that the
promise of the Gospel concerning remission and salvation does belong to thee?
If thou do, then thou have assurance, that CHRIST is thy Savior, and that by
him thou have remission, and that by him thou shall be saved I^ he cannot
affirm, that he believes the promise to belong unto him, never go about to
persuade him, that he trusts to the performance of the promise unto himself.
But ask him again, do thou truly believe, that Jesus the son of the
blessed Virgin is the eternal son of God and Savior of all that truly
believe in him? If he say he does so, tell him then thou have the condition of
the promise, therefore thou may, and thou must undoubtedly conclude, that he
is thy Savior, and that thou shall be saved by him. If he say, he doubts,
whether he does truly believe, that CHRIST is the Savior, because many say
they believe, who do not truly believe. Ask him again, do thou believe that
in thy self and by nature thou art no better then a firebrand of hell, a
vassal of sin and Satan, subject to eternal death and damnation? To this
no doubt he will say, Yes. say then it seems you believe the sentence of the
law concluding you under the curse, but do you not also believe the Gospel,
that notwithstanding the guilt of your own conscience accusing, and the
sentence of the law condemning you, you shall be blessed, if you believe in
Christ? this also, if he have any grace, he will confess, as being the
express doctrine of the Gospel, Ask him then, is there any other means,
whereby you may hope to be saved, but by Christ? he will say, he renounceth all
other means, well then, you acknowledge (you may say) that in your self you
are a wretched sinner, but yet notwithstanding by Christ you shall be happy, if
you shall believe in him, tell me then, have not you earnestly desired to come
out of that damnable estate, wherein you were by nature, and to be partaker of
that happiness purchased by Christ for all that believe in him? he will say he
has, and that he has often expressed this his desire by hearty prayer. But
you believing (may you say) and desiring those things, have you not also
resolved to acknowledge and profess CHRIST to be the only Savior, and to
rest upon him alone for salvation, renouncing all other means, and to
acknowledge him to be your Lord, and therefore to obey him, and serve him,
making conscience of all your ways? All this have I done (will he say) and yet
I have not assurance, But say I, if thou have done all this, then thou have a
true justifying faith, For to believe in Christ is to receive him and thou have
received him not only in thy judgment by a firm and lively assent, but also
in thy heart and will, by an earnest desire and settled purpose of application,
by which thou have received him to be thy Savior. Herevpo I infer, that thou
have the condition of the promise, and therefore that the promise does belong
unto thee, and that thou believing truly, that Jesus is the Savior of all that
believe in him, he is thy Savior, and therefore need not, yea thou ought
not to doubt of thy salvation for by refusing to apply the promise to thy
self, when thou have the condition thereof, thou make God a liar. 1. Ioh.
5.10. If thou will not believe me, yet believe the Apostle Paul Romans 10.9.10.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that GOD raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the heart, man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth, confession is
made to salvation. Believe St. John, whose first epistle was written to this
very purpose, that those who truly believe that Jesus Christ is the Savior,
might have assurance that he is their Savior. 1. Ioh 5.13. for so he writes
in the same Chapter. v. 1 Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
borne of God, and v. 5. whatsoever is borne of GOD overcommeth the world, and
this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith, who is he that
overcommeth the world, but he that believes that JESUS is the son of GOD?
Believe our Savior himself; For, if being asked with the Apostles, what you
think he is, thou shall answer with St. Peter, thou art the Christ the son
of the living God, he will pronounce thee blessed. Mat. 16.16. If for all this
thou can not gather assurance, know then, that the premises being granted,
thou can not but have assurance; unless thou will deny the conclusion, which
cannot possibly be false, the premises being true.

But for thy better assurance, tell me, what you are to think of a man
believing truly that Jesus is the Christ yet in respect of his spiritual
estate is so poor, that he is as it were a mere beggar, who having nothing of
his own, whereby he might hope to be saved, depends wholly upon the mercies
of God, and merits of Christ? even as beggats, who having nothing of their
own, depend upon the alms of well disposed people, what think you of him,
who believing that Christ is the Savior, is not yet assured, that he is freed
from that damnab^e estat wherein he is by nature* but mourns in the sense and
acknowledgment of his woeful condition, desiring to befreed from it? what
think you of him, who truly believing that Jesus is the CHRIST but not yet
assured of his justification does therefore hunger and thirst after
righteousness? whatsoever you think of them, or whatsoever they be in their
own sins, they are justified before God. And that I prove thus. Whosoever
are blessed, are justified, and contrariwise; but all believers though they be
beggars in spirit, though they mourn, though they do but hunger and thrist
after righteousness, are blessed by the testimony of our Savior himself, Mat.
5.3.4.6. where directing his speech to them that believe v. 1 2. compared with
Luk, 6.20.21.22. he says, Blessed are (...), the beggars in spirit, blessed
are they that mourn, blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness.

4. This assertion cannot stand with the orthodoxe doctrine of justification by
faith. For that teaches the justification of a sinner, or as the word
signifies of an Romans 4.5.
ungodly person before God, this justification is neither of an ungodly person,
but of a man already justified before God, and also sanctified; neither is it
before God, but in the court of conscience. that justification is an action of
God, acquitting the sinner, and accepting of him as righteous by imputation of
Christ's righteousness: in this there is no such matter, in that we are taught,
that by faith a sinner does receive remission of sins, and that he is to
believe to that end, that he may obtain pardon, and to the same end is both to
repent of his sin, and to sue for pardon. by this doctrine are taught, that a
man has his sins actually forgiven, not only before he believe or repent,
or sue for pardon, but also before he commit them; there we are taught, that a
man is justified hefore God by faith; here that a man is justified before and
without faith; There we are taught, that faith does justify, not as it is an
habit or quality inherent, or as a part of inherent righteousness; but only as
the hand receiving Christ; who is our righteousness, and is therefore said to
justify, because the object which it receives, does justify. But according to
the new doctrine, faith does neither justify, as the hand to receive Christ
unto justification, nor in respect of the object, but as a part of the general
habit of grace infufed, not justifying a sinner before God by apprehension of
Christ's righteousness, but assuring the party already sanctified and justified
of his justification and salvation: in that we are taught, that we are
justified by faith alone; but in this, we are justified, that is, assured of
justification, not only by faith, but by good works, and all other means, by
which we are to make our calling and election sure.

8. The eighth. that faith, The eighth error, that assent is not the act of
justifying faith.
as it is an assent, does not justify; the contrary whereof (speaking of a
true, lively and effectual assent) I have fully, and (as I hope) sufficiently
proved. But let us examine his proofs* the first is this. The Act of
justifying faith is supernatural, Ephesians. 2.8. John 6.44.45. this assent to the
truth of the Gospel, concerning salvation by Christ, is not supernatural.
ergo. I deny the assumption, and affirm, that the true, lively, and effectual
assent is supernatural, and cannot be had without the help of the holy Ghost,
as being a proper work of the holy Ghost, when he does regenerate any of us. No
man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, 1. Cor 32.^^
but by the holy Ghost. And who knows not, that it is the proper work of the
holy Ghost in the ministry of the Gospel, to open the hearts of the elect, as
he did the heart of Lydia Act. 16.
, to assent unto the word? To use arguments to persuade the hearers to embrace
the Gospel, and to receive Christ, may be the work of the Minister; but to
persuade the hearer thereunto, is the work of the holy Ghost. Again, that
whereby we become the sons of God, is not a work of nature, but of the
regenerating spirit, by this lively assent we become the sons of God. for, By
this effectual assent, as I have showed, we receive CHRIST, But as many as
received him, to them he gave this power to become the sons of God, Ioh 1
12.13.
even to them that believe on his name, which are begotten or borne not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GOD. would
you therefore know who is borne of GOD? Whosoever Ioh. 5.1.
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God.

But the assumption he proves thus: Whatsoever the understanding by the only
light of nature judges to be honest and good, that the will can desire or will
by the ^nely strength of Nature, But by the only light of nature the
understanding ^udgeth that it is an honest thing to believe Gods authority
revealing any thing unto us.

Therefore the will by the only strength of nature may desire this act of
believing; and so consequently there is no need of grace to move the will to
command the understanding.

If any man imagine, that this conclusion does contradict mine assertion,
affirming such an assent, as I have spoken of* to be says* he must understand,
that I speak not of a bare assent to whatsoever God reveals unto us; but the
asse^t must be thus qualified. First it must be a willing, or voluntary assent.
For the understanding whereof, we must know, that whatsoever the understanding
conceives and judges to be true and good, that the will does receive as true
and good; for for the will is intellec^us extensus, And such is the natural
harmony between the understanding and the will that as the will follows the
judgment and resolution of the practicke understanding; so the will having
received for true and good, that which the understanding has so conceived, the
mind or the reasonable soul does both assent to it as true, and approve it as
good. so that the assent and approbation of the mind is an act both of the
understanding and of the will. But how the will, which naturally follows the
^irection of the understanding, should (as he speaks) command the
understanding to assent or approve, I do not conceive. But on the contrary, I
suppose, that the mind many times does assent, not only without the command,
but also without the consent of the will: as namely, when the understanding of
a man or devil, does know a thing to be true, but does not conceive it to be
good, but hurtful and pernicious to himself. That there is a God who is the
Judge of the world, that this God is just, that he has prepared hell for the
wicked: the devils, and wicked men do conceive and know to be true, and
because they cannot d^ny it, they do acknowledge, and after a sort assent unto
it: but yet this truth they do abhor, and with horror they do believe it,
Iam. 2.19. The legion of devils did know our Savior CHRIST, and confess bim
to be the Son of God, but with horror, fearing lest he came to torment them
before their time, Mark 8.29. so that the wicked, both men and Angels do many
times believe that, which they do not willingly assent unto, but abhor, and
wish it were otherwise. But the faith of Gods children is a willing assent.

Secondly, it is a true, lively and effectual assent. For in Divinity we are
said to believe, and by Faith to know no more then we believe effectually, and
know by a lively faith. Now where there is a true, lively, and effectual
faith, it works a disposition in us answerrable to that which we believe and
know. The wicked do believe after a sort, that there is a God, that he is
just, and good, that he is infinite in essence, power and wisdom, etc. that
JESUS the Son of the blessed Virgin, is the Savior of the world, etc. yet
none of all this do they truly and effectually believe. For if they did
believe in deed, that there is a GOD, they would not deny him in their deeds,
behaving themselves as if there were no God. If they did truly believe that he
is good, yea goodness it self, they would love him; if just, they would fear
him; if omnipresent, they would walk before him; if omnipotent or
allsufficient, they would either trust in him, or fear him, if omniscient,
they would not play the hypocrites before him. If they did truly believe, that
JESUS is the Savior, they would desire to be made partakers of his merits,
they would be careful to apply them to themselves, they would rest upon him
for salvation, they would obey and serve him as their Lord. But he that says
he knows him, that is, believes in him, and has no desire nor care to keep
his commandments, John 2.4.
he is a liar (says S. John) and there is no truth in him, That faith
therefore, which is not lively and effectual, but a dead faith, as S. James
Iam. ^.^0
calls it, is no more to be accounted a true faith, then the carcass or
counterfeit of a man is a true man.

3. The formal object of this assent, as it justifies, is not every truth
revealed of God (though it believes whatsoever God has revealed in his word)
but that only which (...) is called the truth of God Ioh. 5.33.18.37 1 Timothy 2.^
. that is, the Gospel, which is the truth of GOD in CHRIST, or his truth
concerning salvation by CHRIST. Now to give a willing, lively, and effectual
assent to his truth, far exceeds the strength of corrupted nature. John
6.44. Mat. 16.16, 17.

These things thus premised, I come to his argumentation, and first to the
proposition, which if it were universally true, as it is propounded (whatsoever
the understanding by the only light of Nature judges to be honest; that the
will can desire by the only strength of Nature) then might I as lawfully
assume, and conclude thus, to the great comfort of the Pelagians and Arminians,
(whom in diverse other points he does worthily oppose.) But by the only light
of nature the understanding judge^h it to be an honest and a good thing to
believe in God and to obey him, to believe in him, I say, no^ only as true in
his word, but also as faithful in his promises; and consequently to trust in
him, for the performance thereof, likewise to obey God commanding us any
duty, as namely to turn unto him by unfeigned repentance, and to lay hold
upon CHRIST by a true faith; therefore by the only strength of nature, the
will may desire or will any of these acts, namely to turn unto God by unfeigned
repentance, to lay hold upon CHRIST by a true faith to trust unto God for the
performance of his promises to us, which in his conceit, is the very act of
Faith, as it justifies.

I come to the assumption: where, I confess, in a confused generality, the
understanding, by the only light of nature, judges it an honest and good
thing to believe what God reveals indefinitely, but when you come to the
particular object of justifying Faith, viz. that JESUS CHRIST is the Son of
GOD, and Savior of all that believe in him; this either they will deny to be
revealed by GOD; as to the Jews the preaching of 1 Cor. 1.23.
of CHRIST crucified was a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishnes: or
if they do give a kind of assent unto it, yet they neither do nor can
believe it by a lively and effectual assent.

His second reason. That is no ast of justifying faith which is found in
devils, heretics, hypocrites and reprobates:

But this assent to divine revelations; because of Gods authority, is to be
found in devils, heretics, hypocrites, and reprobates.

Therefore this assent is no act of justifying faith.

Answ. The proposition is not universally true: for so much of faith as is
found in the wicked, either men or Angels, is common to them with the faithful
and elect, and without it there can be no faith. if therefore justifying Faith
do assent to divine revelations, because of GODS authority, and there can be
no justifying faith without this assent; then it follows, that to assent is
an act of justifying faith.

But I answer to the assumption, that this assent (meaning a willing, lively,
and effectual assent to the truth of God in Christ) is not to be found in
devils, whose assent is not so much as willing, but with horror, even to that
which they abhor, as himself confesses; not in heretics, who as they are
heretics, dissent from the truth. For though that assertion of the Papist,
that any one act of infidelity bereaveth a man of faith, be wicked and
desperate; yet this is true, that howsoever the proper object of faith, as it
justifies, is Christ: notwithstanding by the same faith by the which we are
justified, we believe, not only all other articles of the Christian faith, but
also Heb. 11.3. etc
whatsoever God has revealed in his word: and whosoever does refuse to believe
whatsoever God has revealed in his word, he has not a true faith. Not in
hypocrites and reprobates, whose seeming faith is neither lively, not true, but
dead and counterfeit, not formata, but infermis, In deed this distinction of
faith, that it is formata or infermis, according to the meaning of the
schoolmen and Papists is to be rejected, and that in two respects, ^ because
they propound it as a destinction of a true justifying faith, when as it is not
possible, that that faith which wants his form, and which is dead, and
therefore has not his true being, should justify: neither is it possible, that
that faith should be (...), that is, effectual, by an active efficacy, as
namely to justify, which is called actus secundus, which has not the formal
(...), which is called actus primus. Secondly, because the Papists in this
distinction imply, that charity is the form of faith, and as it were the soul
thereof, which they seem to ground on James 2.26. for how can one habit be
the form of an other, especially such an habit, as is the fruit and
consequent of the other? for charity which is the end of the 1. Tim 4.^.
law, proceeds from faith unfayned. For when we are by faith persuaded of
GODS love toward us in CHRIST, then are we moved to love GOD, and our
neighbor for GODS sake, and the more we are assured of GODS love, the more is
our heart inflamed with fervent love toward GGD, as I have showed. And if the
habit of charity cannot be the form of faith, then much less can good works
which are the outward fruits both of faith and charity; or as the Apostle
speaks of faith quae operat^r per charitatem which works by love. G^^ 5.6.

Neither does the Apostle S. James compare works to the soul, but to the
breath, as the word (...) (which is derived from (...) signifying to breath)
does properly signify, and so is used in many places, where it is called the
spirit of the mouth* and the spirit of the nostrilles, so that the meaning of
St. James is, as the body without breath is dead* even so faith without good
works (which are as it were the breathing of a lively faith) is dead. Not that
ever it lived, but because it is without life, as many things are said to be
blind which never saw, and dumb which never spoke.

But howsoever this distinction in the popish sense is to be rejected: yet it
cannot be denied, but that as knowledge is either literal, which is an idle
knowledge swimming in the brain, but not working on the heart and conscience;
or spiritual, which is a powerful and operative knowledge so faith, is either
a true lively and effectual, or else a counterfeit and a dead faith, which some
call a bare historical faith, answearable to the literal knowledge. The
former is called by the Apostle (...) in diverse places, and Gal. 5.6 it is said
to be (...), effectual (as that prayer which avails much, is called (...)
Iam. 5.16) or effectually working, or active, having in it duplicem (...) a
double act, beth the first and the second, the first, which is as it were the
for^^^, whereby it truly i^ and in respect whereof it may be called ^ormata,
which as Solomon speaks of other graces, Pro. 3 21.
is tushijah, the very essence and entity, the soundnes and integrity of it, in
respect whereof it is called (...), and this is the inward (...) whereby it
lives, and is effectual, having efficacy in it self. The other. which is
astus secundus, whereby it is lively, active, and effectual, in bringing forth
the acts and operations or the fruits and effects of faith. In respect of the
former, it is said to have root; whereby I understand that apprehensive and
attractive power of faith in apprehending and receiving Christ; in respect of
the latter, it is said to be fruitful and working by love; the latter, which
is not unfeigned, is counterfeit, having neither root, Luke 8.13. nor fruit,
and therefore is, as S. James says, Iam. 2.^0 26.
dead. Now as the counterfeit of a man is not truly a man, though called by
his name; so this counterfeit and dead faith, which is the faith of hypocrites
(though it have the name of faith) is not faith (...), indeed and truly, but
aequivoce; and being not a true faith, is not faith, for ens and verum
convertuntur, and in this sense it may well be called informis.

That faith therefore which is common to devils, to heretics, to hypocrites,
and reprobates is not true, but counterfeit; not lively, but dead; nor formata,
but informis.

And thus have I defended that necessary, and as I am persuaded most
comfortable truth, which I delivered in the Discourse concerning the certainty
of Salvation.

A TREATISE OF THE CERTAINTY OF PERSEVERANCE: MAINTAINING THE TRVETH OF THE
38th ARTICLE OF THE National Synod holden at Dublin in the year 1615. That a
true, lively, justifying faith, and the sanctifying spirit of God, is not
extinguished, nor vanishes away in the regenerate, either finally or totally.

JOHN 11.26. Whosoever lives and believesh in me, shall never die. Beleevest
thou this?

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. An. Dom. 1631.

A TREATISE OF THE CERTAINTY OF PERSEVERANCE.
CHAP. I.
The Method of this Treatise. Of whom this question is to be understood. Two
sorts of men in the Church: The testimony of Antiquity.

1. THat we may the more orderly proceed in the handling of the question of
the certainty of Perseverance: The Method observed in this Treatise.
we will first set down plainly and fully the state of this controversy: and
secondly we will prove the certainty of Perseverance by evident arguments;
thirdly and lastly, we will answer the objections of the adversaries, and
namely of Bellarmine the Goliath of the Papists.

2. The question concerning the certainty of Perseverance is not to be
understood of those that be regenerate of those that believe, The question
understood of those which truly believe.
of those that are justified and sanctified, of those that be the children of
God in show and appearance, in opinion and profession, or (...) the judgment of
charity only; but of such as are truly regenerate, of such as truly believe,
of such as are truly justified and sanctified, of such as truly are the
children of God.

De eccles minist. l. 3. c 7. The distinction of truth examined.
And whereas Bellarmine coyneth a distinction of that which is true, that there
is verum essentiae, and verum permanentia, true in respect of essence, and true
in respect of continuance, unto which some add a third, viz. of firm
solidity. R. Th c. ^. Voss hist pelag l. 6. the^. 13.
Whe^by they would signify, that a man may have the first, add yet not the
second, nor third: I answer, 1. that the nature of truth is simple, as being
one and the same; and that is it, which they call verum (...), or verum
essentiae, unto which is opposed, false, counterfeit, or seeming only: For
true is that saying of Philosophers, ens and verum cr^vertuntur; and therefore
what is not truly, is not indeed: and that of S. Augustine, (...). l. 1. c. 5.
verum est id quod est; falsum, quod non ita est, ut videtur. so that in this
question he is a true Christian, wbo is sound and upright.

Secondly, that the branches of this distinction are conincident: For that
which is true veritate essentiae, is also true veritate permanentiae; and that
which is true veritate essentiae and permanentiae, does also in time become
true in respect of firm solidity; such as they call faith and charity rooted,
and grace confirmed. Now the second is not a distinct sort of truth, but a
consequent, a sign and note of that which is true (...) indeed, or secundum
essentiam. A consequent, I say, for therefore is faith or any other grace
permanent, because it is true, and sound. A note, or sign, for as all true
graces are permanent; so whatsoever is not permanent, is not true. Wherefore
this distinction being applied to the present question makes wholly for us.
For what saving grace soever is true, in respect of the essence and being, is
also permanent, and the not being permanent, is an evident sign of the not
being true. If you abide in my word, says our Savior Christ, John ^.31
ye are (he does not say you shall be, but ye are) truly my disciples. Your
future perseverance will be a plain evidence of your present soundnes and
integrity* as contrariwise defection, or falling away is a plain evidence of
unsoundnes and hypocrisy going before. To which purpose S. John says, 1 John.
^.1^
they went out from us, but they were not (he does not say, they are not, but
they were not) of us; no, not when they lived among us, and made the same
profession with us. For if they had been of us in deed and in truth, if they
had been sownd and upright Christians, they would surely have remained with
us. For as Tertullian says, De praescrip. c 3.
Nemo Christianus nisi qui ad finem usque perseveraver^t: No man is a true or
sound christian, but such as persevereth to the end. And Augustine De corropt,
and gratia c ^.
, Si perseverantiam non habent (quos appellamus and electos Christi discipules,
and Dei filios) t^in eo quod caeperunt esse non manent, non vere appellantur,
qui appellantur quod non sunt. If those whom we call the elect disciples of
Christ, and sons of GOD have not perseverance, that is, continue not in that
which they have begun to be; namely, in their own profession and opinion of
others, they are not called truly, who are called that which they are not.
Therefore every true or sound Christian persevereth to the end* and therefore
also what saving grace soever is true veritate essentiae; is also true veritate
permanentiae.

Now they who add the third, which they call the truth of firm solidity, do
confess, that those graces which are true in that sense or degree, are
permanent: and that he, who so believes, believes always; and he that is
justified by such a Faith, does never loose his justification. But though there
be degrees of all saving graces, as namely of Faith, that it is sometimes
weaker, and sometimes stronger, sometimes less, sometimes greater; and of
Charity, that sometimes it is more fervent, sometimes more remiss, etc. yet
all saving grace which is true veritate essentiae, not only is true veritate
permanentiae, but also in time Aug de verb. Apost ^orm. 13.^.10
increases and grows to firm solidity. All true Faith is rooted like the
seed sown in good ground Luke 8.13.15. Non modo quoritur qua^ta sit charitas,
u. tium magna aut par^a, an mediocris: u number vel su quaero. Si nata est,
latendo erescit, eresceodo perfici^etur, perfect ^ permanebit.
which brings forth fruit with patience: and that which wants root, is
counterfeit. Every sound and upright Christian is like the Wise man Mat.
7.24.25. which built his house upon the rock, whose building cannot be
overthrown. And therefore that is true, which they cite out of Augustines
Tract. 106: ^ Iona:
, and makes for us; that vere credere, est inconcusse, f^rmiter, stabiliter,
fortiter credere: to believe truly, is to believe firmly and unmoveably. and
that faith which may be lost, was never a true justifying faith. For whosoever
truly believes, he shall be saved, and consequently shall persevere to
salvation; and whosoever is truly justified, he shall also be glorified.
Neither is it true which they affirm, that all the commendations and
prerogatives of Faith do belong to this degree. For to every degree of faith,
so it be true and unfeigned, the promises of blessedness and salvation do
belong* Neither are we to imagine with these men, that the permanency of faith
depends upon the strength thereof in it self, (for he that has the
strongest faith, if he be left to himself, and to the temptation of Satan,
may fall grievously; and as they teach, may loose his faith and justification,
to which purpose they urge the example of David) but rather upon the truth and
sincerity thereof (perseverance being always the consequent of integrity.
Neither is the perseverance of the true faith to be ascribed to the strength
and worthiness of it self, but to Gods eternal purpose of grace 2 Timothy 1.29
g^ven unto us in CHRIST before all times; according to which, we being elected
and called, are also justified and glorified, as likewise to the immutability,
truth, fidelity, and power of God, and to the intercession of CHRIST our
Savior, as hereafter I will show. But, as I said, this Question is to be
underrstood only of the first branch. For as in respect of the third,
themselves make no question; so in regard of the second, it were a very idle
question to dispute, an quod verum est, veritate permanentiae permaneat,
whether that which is true by the truth of permanency, be permanent.

The Question then is of those which truly believe, or are endued with a true
faith, etc. that is to say, of found and upright Christian; whether there be
certainty of their perseverance, or not, we hold the affirmative, the Papists
and their adherents maintain the negative.

3. Now for the better clearing of that which we hold, Two sott of men in the
Church.
we are to take notice, that there are two sorts of men in the Church of God;
some, which are in the Church visible, but not of the Church invisible, that is
to say (...), hypocrites, and unsound Christians; others that are not only in
the Church visible, but of the Church invisible, that is to say (...), sound
and upright Christians. The former sort are subject to defection and falling
away; and the Lord does suffer them many times to fall away, that their former
hypocrisy may be discovered. The latter have the privilege of perseverance,
both which S. John does plainly testify 1. John 2.1^.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they had surely remained with us: but this is come to pass, that it might
appear they were not of us.

This therefore we do constantly hold, and firmly believe; that howsoever the
hypocrite and unsound christian, who have not a true and a lively, but a
counterfeit and dead faith, be subject to d^fection* yet it is the privilege of
the upright to be constant, and to persevere; perseverance 1. John 2.19.
being the perpetual companion of uprightnes. Howsoever those which be hearers
and not doers of the word, that is to say, hypocrites, be like the foolish man,
Mar. 7.84.25.25.
which builds upon the sand, whose building is easily overthrown: yet he
that is not only an heater, but a doer of the word, that is to say, a sound
and upright christian, is like to the Wise man that builds upon the rock,
whose building cannot with any tempest of temptations be overthrown.

Howsoever the hypocrites be like the dog grass on the house tops Ps.
129.6 imi^antes spicam ^erbae ante messem flave^eunt Quintil
, which resembling corn, withers before hervest, or like the rush Job. 8.11,
1^,
that wants moisture: yet the upright are like the tree; Ps. 1.3, Pet. 17.7,
planted by the rivers of water, which never withers for want of moisture.
Though counterfeit piety be like the m^rning ^ist, H^s. 6.4:
or early dew, which vanishes away: yet true piety knows no end, Bucer in
Luc: 1:75: N^que enim pietas est quae finem ^ovit:
and the righteousness of the upright endures for ever Ps: ^* 2: 5:
Howsoever they, which receive the seed, Luk: ^: 1^: ^^:
as it were upon a r^ck superficially covered with would, that is, hypocrites
do in heat of temptation fade away: yet they which receive the seed into
upright hearts, as it were into good ground, bring forth fruit with patience
(...)
, or permanency. Howsoever those that be servants in Gods family, and not
sons, Ioh: 8.35.
are not to continue always in the house; yet those that be sons abide for
ever. Though the double minded man Iam. 1.8.
that is to say, the hypocrite, who speaks with an heart and an heart Ps.
12.2^
be inconstant in all his ways; yet the sound and upright shall shall never be
removed Ps. 112.5.6.
but his righteousness endures for ever Pro: 10:13*
.

And as we do hold, that all sound Christians do certainly persevere; so we
doubt not to aver, that those which do not persevere, were never sound. If
you shall abide in my words* says our Savior, you are (he does not say you
shall be, Ioh: ^, ^1.
but you are) truly my disciples. and contrariwise if you shall not abide in my
words, not only you shall not be, but you are not truly my disciples. Those
therefore that truly are the disciples of Christ, do abide in his word: those
that abide not in his word, were never truly his disciples.

. 4. And to this assertion collected out of the Scriptures, Testimonies of
fathers,
^ccordeth the judgment of an^iquity.

Tertullian says, De prescript^ Capt^: Neque fidelesneque prudentes, neque
^s^tatos estimandos, quos hares^^ potne^^nt de rutare.
that they were never true believers, norsound Christians, who can be perverted
by heresy.

That no man is to be acco^mpted a true Christian, Nemo christianns, nisi qui
ad finem vsque perseveraverit.
but he that persevereth to the end.

That the Lord has his fan in his hand, Ve^ilab^^m (al^ palam) in mann
portat ad purgandu^ aream s^a^: acolent quantum v^lent pakae levis fidei quo^^^
que af^^atu ^entationu^, ^o ^^rior ma^sa frumenti in (...) Domini^ op^netur,
to purge his floor; that although the ^^aff of light faith fly away with
every blast of te^tation, yet the heap of corn shall be laid up more pure into
the granaries of the Lord; and to this purpose he alleges, 1 Ioh. 2.19.

De ^^itate eclesse 256. Ne^o ^^istimet bonos de ecclesia posse decidere
triticum (...) ^ap^t ventus, nec arl orem (...) ^ef ^n latam p^ocella
^^^ver^^t. In^^es pal^^e te^^^state jactantur Inv^^id ae ar^^^ ^turbinis
incursione ever^^^ Hos execratur and er^u(...) Apostolus, dicens; ex (...), sed
non ^^e ^^nt ex nobis: si enim suissent ex nobis, man^ssent ut^que nobis^um.
4. Cyprian in like manner. Let no man think that good men can depart from the
Church, the wind carries not away the wheat, nor the storm subverteth the
tree, that is founded on a sound route. the empty chafe is tossed with the
wind, weak trees are over-turned with a tempest. Those men Saint John does
detest, and sinite, saying, they went out from us, but they we^e not of us, for
if they had been of us, they would surely have continued with us.

Epist 53 five lib 1 ep 3, Ecclesiam, quae in Christian (...), and quae semel
id quod (...) it, ^unquam (...) mind if^^dere, and co^ (...) siam qui in do no
Dei (...) plantationem vero(...) Deo patre non es^^^ (...) non f^u^enti (...),
fed ^^qua^ palea^^ ^pan^^s inimici spiritu ^ent^^ari. de quibus and Ioannes in
pistola sun die^e^ ex Iobis exi^^tunt etc.
5. And again. When Peter said, Lord whether shall we go; he shows, that the
Church which believes in Christ, and which holds that which it has known,
does never depart from him at all; and that those are the Church which abide in
the house of God, and that they are plants not planted of GOD the Father, whom
we see not established with the stability of the wheat, but as chafe to be
blown away with the wind of the enemy scattering them; of whom S. John in his
Epistle, they went out from us, but they were not of us, etc.

Aug. in Ps. 140 (...) quod dis^edis. and volas, paleamte esse indicas; qui
triticum suut serunt trituram.
6 Augustine likewise. In that thou do depart and fly away, thou show thy
self to be b^t chafe, for they that are wheat endure the threshing.

De corrept. and gratia c. 9. Non ait, ex nobis ex^enent, sed quia non
manserunt nobiscum, jam non sunt ex nobis: verum ait, ex nobis; ^xi^um, sed non
(...) ex nobis, ho^ est, and quiado vide bantur in nobis, (...) ^rant ex nobis.
and tarquam ^^ dicetur, unde^id o^tend. (...) suiscent, inquit, ex nobi, (...)
man^ssent ut^que non (...) lio^un Dei ^ox est. Cum ergo fi^^^ Dei dicunt, ex
nobis e^etunt, sed non erant ex nobi, quid aliud di^^nt, nisi non ^tant fil^
etiam quando eran^ in professione and nomine filios ruin*
7. Who also speaking of those words, 1. Ioh. 2.19. says. He does not say, they
went out from us, but because they did not abide with us, they are not now of
us; but he says, they went out from us, but they were not of us, that is, even
when they seemed to be among us, they were not of us. And as though it had
been said unto him, how show you that? for, says he, if they had been of us,
they had surely remained with us. This is the saying of the sons of God, when
as therefore the sons of GOD say, they went out from us, but were not of us;
what else do they say, but that they were not sons, even when they were in
the profession and name of soones?

8. Again. Ibid: (...), si^ut non vere discipuli Christ era^t (...) si
manieritis, inquit, in quit, in ^er^i^ meo ve^^d sei^u (...) est, ita ne^vere
(...) de fueru^^, etiam quando esse ^. deba^t^r* and ^ta (...).
Those who went back (Ioh. 6.) as they were not truly the disciples of Christ
(for if you shall abide in my words, (says he) you are truly my disciples) so
neither were they truly the sons of God, when they seemed to be, and were so
called.

9. And else where he teaches, De cate^^^^ iudib c. ^^ Nullum ex ecclesia
periturum, qu^a ^uiperierit, ex illa non erat. fir^^m enim fundamentum Dei stat.
that no man who is of the Church shall perish. For whosoever perishes, ^e was
not of it; for the foundation of God stands sure.

10. An other says, Auctor operis in praef. in Mat. 2. hom^ qui cum Christo
relicto peccaversunt, non agunt poenitent^am, nunquam suerunt Christi.
that those who when they have sinned forsaking Christ, do not repent, were
never Christ's.

11. Gregory likewise, Moral. lib. 2. cap 20.
sanctoru^ bona, quae ^era sunt permane^t; Moralt lib: 34: c: 8: de poenum
dict: 21 c: 44: Citius. Aurum quod pravis Diaboli Diaboli persuasionibus (...)
siout ^itum p^tueri^, au^n^ ante oculos Dei munquam suit Et qui seduci
quandoque non (...) quasi habi a^ sane. (...) a^e oculos hominum vindentur
amittere, sed eam ante oculos Dei nunqua^ habuerunt, quod valde justo judicro
agitut (se vt quia occul^e peccatis involutus (...) aliqua^, quam hab revilus
est, amititat) ut et perdat ante homine^; vnd* hominibus placuit, qui hoe vnde.
Deo displicuit (...) noluir.
hypoc ^taru^ vero bona quiaetalsa sunt, non perseverant. Elsewhere, that Gold
(says he) which by the wieked persuasions of the Devil may be trod under-^oot
like clay, it was never gold before Gods eyes. And whosoever may be seduced
never to return, they seem to loose that sanct^ty, which, as it were, they
had before the eyes of men, but before the eyes of God they never had it, which
comes to pass by very just judgment, (that a man secretly wrapped in sins,
should lose some virtue, which he seemed to have) that even before men he may
lose that whereby he pleased men, who would not amend that, whereby he
displeased God.

When as therefore it is objected out of the Scriptures or Fathers; that the
faithful* or the children of God do sometimes fall away, we are taught by the
Scriptures and Fathers to answer, that those which do fall away, were never
true Christians, never truly the sons of God, of whom only this question is
understood.

CHAP. II.
The controversy propounded in 6. questions: the two first, coucerning the
children of God, and the elect.

The Controversy propended in s^x several questions.
. 1 NOw forasmuch as the sound and upright Christian, of whom this question is
understood, is diversely described and termed in the scriptures, as that he is
the child of God elected in Christ, received into the favor and grace of God,
endued with the graces of his spirit, ingrafted into the body of Christ, and
united unto him as a true and found member, renewed and sanctified by the
spirit of grace and sanctification: hence it is that this question is diversely
propounded. As 1. whether he that is the child of God may become the child of
the devil. 2. whether he that is once elected in Christ, may become a
reprobate. 3. whether he who is once received into the grace and favor of God
in Christ, and endued with saving graces, may ever fall away from the grace of
God. 4. whether a man being once endued with the spirit of sanctification, may
utterly be deprived thereof. 5. whether a member of Christ may be cut off, and
utterly separated from all union and communion with Christ. 6. whether those
that are regenerate by the spirit of God, may sin unto death, or become such
as the Scripture calls sinners, who are the servants of sin, and in whom
sin reigns.

By that which I shall answer to these 6. questions severally, the truth of
that which we hold in this controversy shall be cleared and proved, as it were
by so many arguments.

2. As touching the first question, concerning the children of God; we are to
know* that the sons of God are so called, either in a more large, or in a
more proper sense. In a large sense, all that are sons of the visible Church,
upon whom the Name of God, or of Christ is called, are called the sons of
God, Genesis 4.26.2.
who terms himself the husband Es. 54.5
of his Church, and her sons Ezech. 16.20 22
his children. And yet not all the children of the Church Kom. 9.8
are truly the sons of God; but they only who John 1.12.1^
truly believe. etc therefore not of the former, but of the later is this
question understood. To the 1 question therefore I answer; that whosoever is
truly the son of God, he does never become the child of the devil. for they who
are the sons of God abide John 8.35
in their fathers house for eve^. Now the faithful are Gods children, both by
adoption, and by regeneration. In that they be the son^es of God by adoption
(unto which they were predestined Ephesians. 1.5.
in Christ.) they are also beyres Romans 8.17
, heirs of God, and coheyres with Christ. And of this inheritance they have
received the earnest Ephesians: 1: t; ^14* 4:30
of the spirit, by whom they are sealed unto the day of redemption. Of this S.
Ambrose says, De Jacob: and vita ba^te lib: 2^ c: ^
Donum adoptionis Deus non rescindit. In that they are the sons of God by
regeneration, they are begotten by an incorruptible seed ^es: 1:23*
, which never dies, but always ^ John ^:9
abides in them, by which a spiritual life is begun in them, which never
shall have end, being begotten unto a living 1 ^et: 1:3:^:5:
hope, to an heritance everlasting, reserved in the heaven for the faithful.
who are by the power of God through faith kept safe (...).
unto salvation. For as Origin says, it is not possible In Ierem: hom: 1:
Impossible est, quod semel v^xificavit Deus, ab eo ipsi^ (...) ab alio oc eidi:
that what God has once quickened, should either by himself, or any other be
destroyed.

. 3. The second question is of the Elect. wherein the most learned among the
Papists agree with us, denying that any of the elect can perish.
Notwithstanding by some others (who in this point are worse then Papists) gain
saying both the Scriptures and all antiqui^y, ^: Quest: whethe Elect may become
tepro bates.
the doctrine of election has been of late diversely corrupted, to serve their
fancies, and to avoid the truth, which we with all antiquity do hold in this
controversy concerning the elect. Diverse oqinions concerning election con^uted.
For 1. some deny that there is any decree of election or reprobation, but that
which is expressed in the Gospel, Whosoever believes in Christ shall be faved,
whosoever believes not shall be condemned, And consequently, that so long as a
man believes, he is elect: so long as he does not believe, he is a reprobate,
(the word elect and reprobate being adjectives in their conceit; and not
participles) and that the same man vicibus alternis may be sometimes elect, and
sometimes a reprobate.

2. Others hold an universal election, but conditional, that God would have
all to be saved, if they would believe and persever: who might as well hold an
universal reprobation of all, that either shall not believe, or not persevere.
Both these so^ts do hold that the elect may perish.

3. Others hold election according to faith and perseverance foreseen, namely
that God does elect those whom he fore-seeth will believe and persevere; and
reprobation of those, whom he foreseeth will not believe and persevere. These
hold in deed that the elect, according to their sense, cannot perish; I say
according to their sense, who therefore call men elect, because foreseen to
persevere* but they making the saving graces which are proper to the elect, to
be common to them that perish, do teach, that those who are elected according
to the senee and use of the Scriptures, as namely those who are justified and
sanctified, may perish.

But the Scriptures teach, whereunto antiquity consents, and the most learned
of the Papists do subscribe, that Election is an action of God, from all
eternity electing or predestinating certain men in Christ, both to salvation,
and to the means and degrees thereof, of his free grace, according to the good
pleasure of his will. who are therefore called elect, because they were before
all times elected of God. And that this decree of God is neither mutable, but
abides firm 1. Tim. 2.10.
and unchangeable: neither universal, for that is no election which is of all:
But election is a choosing or calling of some ex massa perdita humani generis,
out of all mankind being lost ^n Adam. For though vocation be not of all, but
of those only who are called out of the ^est of mankind, the company or
society of whom is called (...), that is, a company called out: yet far
greater is the number of the called, then of the elect; for Mat: 10:16:21:14:
many are called, but few chosen.

Neirher is it conditional, or suspended upon man's freewill, but absolute and
free, of his mere grace appointing certai^e men both to salvation, and to the
means and degrees of salvation, as namely to faith and repentance, to
justification, and sanctification.

Neither is it upon foresight of belief and perseverance: for these are
effects, not causes of our election and therefore God does foresee these
graces in his chosen, because in his counsel of election, he had decreed to
bestow the same upon them.

Neither is there any cause of election, but the (...), the good will and
pleasure of God; nor any thing else, which made the difference between the
elect and the reprobate. For as the Potter out of the same lump of clay, being
of it self a base matter, makes some vessels to honor, according to his own
will and pleasure others to dishonor, according to the baseness of the stuff;
no other reason (under God) to be given of the difference of these vessels, but
the will and pleasure of the Potter, the matter of all being alike base, in
respect whereof it were very absurd to ascribe the difference, that is between
the vessels, to the vessels themselves: so the Lord out of the same lump of
mankind, being all equally lost in Adam, chose some in Christ to be vessels of
honor, according to his own good will and pleasure; others he appointed to be
vessels of dishonor, according to that state of perdition, whereinto in Adam
they were fallen: of his own good will and pleasure assigning to the former
indebitam gratiam, undeserved grace; and to the other debitam poenam, doserved
punishment. And very absurd it were to ascribe the difference between the
elect and the reprobate to the vessels themselves. when it is manifest, that it
was God, as the Potter, who discerned 1 Cor: 4:7 That the elect cannot become
reprobatet.
or put a difference between them*

4. These things thus premised, I answer to the question: that it cannot be
that those who are elected should become reprobates. For although such as are
cast-awayes, do fall away from the true doctrine of faith and the profession
thereof; yet it cannot be that the Mat: 24^24
elect should be totally or finally seduced. For the foundation of the 2 Timothy:
2:19:
Lord (whereby is meant his immutable decree) remains sure, as the Apostle
says, and the purpose of God, Rom: 9:11:
which is according to election, abides firm. For whom God has elected unto
life, those also he has predestined unto the means of salvation, whereby as
it were by certain degrees he brings them at the length to eternal life. For
whom Rom: 8:30:
he has elected, them, and no other, he has called: viz; according to his
purpose; and whom he has so called, them, and none other, has he justified;
and whom he has justified, them, and no other, he has glorified. which place
of Scripture, if there were no other, were sufficient to prove the certainty
of salvation, and consequently of perseverance to salvation, in all that are
either elected, or effectually called or justified.

But against this allegation some do object; that the purpose of the Apostle
in that place is only to show, by what degrees the elect do come to
salvation: not that every o^e that is called or justified, is also elected, or
to be glorified. But it is evident that the Apostles propositions are general,
that whomsoever God calls, viz. according to his purpose, (for of such he
speaks v. 28) them also he justifies: and whomsoever he justifies, them
also he glorifieth. Neither can any of the linkes of this chain be dissolved.
For, as whosoever is elected, is also in due time called; and whosoever is
called according to Gods purpose, is also justified; and whosoever is
justified, is also glorified: so, none, but whom he electeth he calls
effectually, or according to his purpose, none, but such as he has elected and
called according to his purpose, are justified; and none but such as have been
elected, effectually called and justified, are glorified. So Augustine
understands that place.

De praedest. fanctorum. ca. 17
Non ergo alios, sed quos praedestinavit, ipsos and vocavit, illas^ vocatione
secundum propositum: nec alios, sed quos ita vocavit* ipsos and justificavit:
nec alios, sed quos praedestinavit, vocavit, justificavit, ipsos and
glorificavit.

De corrept and gratia c. 7. Cum audimus, quos praedesti unvit, ^^os and
vocavit secundum ptopositum vocatos debemus agnoscere; quoniam inde cepit
dicens, omnia cooperantur in bonum ijs qui secundum propositum vocati sunt, ac
deinde subjunx^t, quos autem praedestinavit, illos and vocavit.
And again when we hear, whom he has predestined, them also he has
called; we must understand this of those, who are called according to his
purpose, because thence he began, saying; that all things work together for
their good, who are called according to his purpose; and then he subjoyneth,
whom he has praedestinated, them also he called, etc.

Ibid. qui perseveraturi non sunt, proculdubio nec illo tempore quo been,
pieque vivunt in isto numero computandi sun^, fed in ijs vocatis de quibus
dictum est, n^u ti vocati, and uon in ijs de quibus dictum est, pauci electi.
And in the same place he denies those who do not persevere, to have bin
called acco^ding to Gods purpose, but to have bin of those, of who^ it is said,
many are called; not of those, of whom it is said, few are chosen.

And elsewhere. De hono perseverantiae c. 14. Donum perseverantiae daturum Deum
voca^is suis ista vocatione, de qua dictum est, sine poenitentia sunt dona Dei
and vocatio, omni Christiano confirendum est.
That God will give the gift of perseverance to those whom he has called with
that calling, whereof it is said, the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, every Christian ought to confess*

Hence also it appears, that never any reprobate is called effectually, or
according to Gods purpose, nor brought to repentance which is to life. (Of
those reprobate, says Augustine contr. Julian. Pelag. l 5. c 3* Istorum (rep
oborum) nemine^ adducit Deus ad poenitentiam sal^brenin and spiritualem
, God brings none to healthful or spiritual repentance.) Nor justified. For
Christ Epist. 50. non iustificat Christus nisi corpus suum, quod est ecclesia.
justifies none but his body, which is the Church. Neither is that de doctrina
christiana lib. 3. cap 32. non est revera corpus Christi quod non, erit cum
illo in aeternum.
truly his body which shall not be with him for ever. For as the Apostle in
this place says, Rom 8: 30:
whosoever are justified, shall be glorified: but no reprobat shall be glorified,
therefore no reprobate is justified It is true say some, in significatione
extensa, as the words called and justified do signify actum continuum. But it
is evident, that the Apostle speaks of the eternal and immutable counsel
and purpose of God, according to which, as he has elected certain men, so he
has also called, justified, and glorified* them, according to that, 2. Tim.
3.9. that God has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace given unto us in
Christ before all secular times. (...)
And it were absurd to imagine, that the grace given before all times, should
in time be reversed, Neither is it to be omitted, that the Apostle spe^king in
the tense signifying the time past, preventeth this cavil* for as God
according to his purpose has elected some; so according to the same eternal
purpose he has called, justified, and glorified them, and therefore these are
acts, not continui only, but aeterni.

To this evidence of holy Scripture, I will add the testimony of Antiquity:
Whom God is said to call, says Ambrose, In Ephesians. 1. Quos Deus vocare dicetur
(se: secundum propositum) perseverant in fide: hi sunt quos elegit ante mundum
in Christo.
they persevere in the faith* these are they whom he elected in Christ before
the world began.

Augustine, De catech: rudib: c: 11: Nullum execclesia esse periturum; firmum
cuim fundamentum Dei stat.
that none who is of the Church shall perish: for the foundation of God
stands sure.

And again. De corrept: and gratia c: 7: Quicu^que ab illa originali
damnatione ista divinae gratiae largitate discreti sunt, non est dub^^m, quod
and procura ut eis audiendum evangelium; and cum audiunt, credunt and in fide
quae per dilectionem operatur usque in finem perseverant; and si quando
exorbitant correpti emendantar.
Whosoever are by the largess of the divine grace severed from that original
damnation, without doubt they persevere in that faith which works by love
unto the end etc.

And in the same chapter, Hor^m si quisque perit, fallitur Deus; sed nemo eorum
peperit, quia non fallitur Deus. Horum si quisque perit ritio humano vinc^tur
Deus: sed nemo little perit, quia nulla revincitu^ Deus.
Of these (says he) (...) elected and called according to Gods purpose, if any
perishes, God is deceived: but none of them does perish, because God is not
deceived* of these, if any perish, by man's sin God is overcome; but none of
them do perish, because God is not overcome with any thing.

And again, Qui persevera^uri non fun^, non sunt a massa illa perditionis
praescientia. Dei and prae destinatione discreti; and deo non secundum
proposit^m vocati, ac per hoc nec electi.
those that shall not persevere, are not called according to Gods purpose, and
therefore not elected. And yet, Et tamen quis negateos electos cum credunt and
baptizantur* and secundum Deu n^vivunt. Plane dicuntur electi, a nose c^tib us
quid futuri fint etc.
who would deny them to be elected, seeing they believe, and are baptized, and
live according to God* surely they are called elect of the^ which know not what
they shall be etc.

And in an other place. De corrept: and gratia c. 12. Primo homini datu^ est
adjutoriu^ perseverantiae, non quo fieret vt perseveraret, sed fine quo liberum
arbitrium perseverare non posset* Nunc vero sanctis in regnum Dei per Dei
g^atiaim praedestinatis, non tantum tale adjutoriu^ perseverantiae datur sed
rale vt eis perseverantiae ipsu donetur, ibid * liberatia peccato servifa^cti
sunt justitiae, in qua stabunt vsque in finem donante sibi illo perseve^antiam,
qui eos pres^ivit.
To the first man such an help of perseverance was given, not whereby he
should be made to persevere, but without which freewill could not persevere.
But now to the Saints who by the grace of God are praedestinated to Gods
Kingdom, not only such an help of perseverance is granted, but such as
perseverance it self is given to them. Again, Being freed from sin, they are
made the servants of righteousness, in which they shall stand to the end, he
giving them perseverance who did foreknow them* And again ibid. Ipse eos
facit perse^erare in bono, qui facit bonos, qui auto^ cadunt et pereunt in
predistinatorum numero non fuerunt.
. Those that fall and perish were not in the number of the pradestinate.

Gregory in Enech. hom. 3. et de per nit. did. 1. c 9. Retro post aratrum
aspicit, qui post exordia boni operis ad mala revertitur, quae reliquit. quod
quia electis. Dei minime contingit* recti nunc per prophetam dicitur, non and
vertebantur cum incedebant.
. He looks back after the plough who after the beginning of well-doing,
returns to the evil which he had left, which because it happens not to the
elect of God, it is now well said by the Prophet, they did not return when
they went.

And in an other place* Mar^^l 25: c 7 Charitas in cordibus electorum
inextinguibilis manner, nunqua^ de altari ignis iste deficit.
Charity in the heart of the elect abides unquenchable, this fire never
cease from the altar.

Sermon. triplice coherant vi^^cul clav. and glutin. Scimus, quia qui natus est
ex Deo non peccat, quia generatio coelestis servat cum, Generatio coelestis est
aeterna predestinatio: Ex his nullus peccat, i, in peccato perseverat, quia
novit qui sunt ejus, and propositu^ Dei manet immobile.
Bernard. We know that he who is borne of God sins not, but the heavenly
generation preserves him, the heavenly generation is eternal praedestination.
None of these do sin that is, persevereth not in sin, because God knows
who are his, and the purpose of God remains immovable.

We will conclude this point with the confession of Bellarmine. De Romans Pont.
l. 4. c, 3. Per^everantia in gratia est d^num commune omnium elector^m;
quo^eni^ praedestinavit, hos and v^cavit* and quos vocavit; etc*
Perseverance ingrace is the common gift of all the elect* for whom he
praedestinated, them he called and whom he called etc.

CHAP. III.
Whether a man may fall from grace.

1. THe third question is, whether a man may fall from grace: Qu. 3. whether a
man may fall from grace.
where we are to consider in what sense the word grace is taken in this place.
Not as by a m^tonymie it signifies the doctrine of grace, (that is, as it is
called, Acts 20.24. the Gospel of Gods grace; and v. 32. the word of his
grace) as the word grace is used, 1 Pet 5.12. testifying that this is the true
grace wherein you stand, as Lori^us In 1 Pet 5.12. veram gratiam orthodoxam and
cathol^cam fidem Christi. veram and salu^a^em doctrinam etc.
himself expounds it, Ephesians. 3.2. the dispensation of Gods grace committed to
the Apostle, and in other places where Grace is opposed unto the law. as Romans
6.14.15. Not under the law, but under grace: in which sense the Apostle tells
the Galatians, Gal. 5.4.
that so many of them as sought justification by the law, were fallen from
grace. Nor as it signifie^h those common graces which the schoolmen call
gratias gratis datas, as the word is used, 1. Pet 4.10. Ephesians. 4.7. (for these
may come and go without impeachment of perseverance) but of the saving grace
of God, either as it is in God, which is his gracious love and favor in
Christ, or ^he gifts of saving grace, Whether from the gracious favo^t of God*
which are in us.

2. As touching the gracious love of God in Christ, out of which love he has
elected, Romans 3.2^^30
called, justified, and glorified all those whom he fore-knew according to the
grace 2. Tim* ^.9.
given unto us in Christ, before all wo^ldly times, in which Ephesians. 1.6. (...)
he graciously accepted us in his beloved; it is certain, whom the Lord has
once embraced with a fatherly love in Christ, that they never fall from this
grace and favor of God. For the Lord embraces his children, not with a
temporary, but an Ier. 31.3. 2 Timothy 1.9.
eternal love, from everlasting to everl^sting; so that whom he thus loves
once John. 13.1.
, he loves always, neither shall anything be able Ro^. 8.35.39
to separate them from the love of God in Christ* which is not the love,
whereby we love God, but the love of God, qua eos diligit, quos inseparabiles
facit Pro^ter de voca^, gent. l. 1. c. 24:
, i. usque in finem perseverantes, as Prosper says. In deed it cannot be
denied, but that God is offended with the sins of his children, 2. Sam.
11.2^. ^ King. 11.9.
according to that of Esaias, Es. 64.5.
behold when we sin thou art angry* neither ought the child of God to be
afraid of any thing so much, as the offense and displeasure of his heavenly
Father. Notwithstanding this anger does and may well stand with the grace and
free love of God. For though the Lord be sometimes angry with his children, yet
he never hates them whom he has once loved in Christ. see Ps. 89.31.32-33. If
^is children forsake my law, I will visit their transgression with the rod,
Aug. in Es. 88.30 filij hujus David, filij sunt sponsi; omnes ergo Christiani
filij eius dicuntur.
but my loving kindness I will not take from him, etc. Neither is God properly
said to be angry with his children, but only in regard of some effects of
anger; and those not eternal (such as he exercises against the reprobates,
the vessalls of wrath Romans 9.22
, upon whom the anger Ioh. 3.36
of God abides) but temporary: and those, not by way of vengeance, or in
ordine justitiae, to satisfy his justice, which properly are called
punishments, (such as he in^licteth upon the wicked and reprobates; for Christ
having sustained all the punishments due to the sins of the faithful, it
cannot stand with the justice of God, to punish the same sins twice: so that
as there is no condemnation, Rom: 8: 1
so no punishment properly so called to them that are in Christ,) but by way of
correction, which properly are called chastisements. It is true in deed,
neither may it be denied, but that the faithful, when they sin grievously,
are worthy of grievous punishments, and deserve to be cast out of Gods love and
favor; and in that they are not punished, nor cast off, it is not to be
ascribed to their merits, but to the mercy Lam: 1: 32
of God, and to the merits 1 John 2: 1: 8: Rom: 8: 33: 34:
and intercession of Christ. But whatsoever they deserve, the Lord only
infl^cteth upon them temporal judgments. And those judgments are not
punishments (as I said before) but chastisements. For the faithful 1 Cor: 11:
^^
when they are judged, that is afflicted for their sins, they are (not
punished, but) chastised of the Lord, that they should not be condemned with
the world. These chastisements, though to the sense of them, who are under the
cross, are sharp and bitter, as seeming to proceed from the fierce wrath and
indignation of God; in so much that many times, the dear children of God have
thought themselves to be forsaken of him Ps: 12: 1:
: notwithstanding, if you look, either to the fountain whence they pro^eed,
or to the measure, or to the end of them; you will easily acknowledge them to
be effects of the fatherly love of God. The fountain is love; for Heb: 12: 6:
Apoc* 3: 19
whom the Lord loves he chastises. And as touching the measure, he does so
moderate the afflictions of his children, that as they are always under their
demerit; so they are never above, either their strength, o^ their necessity.
Our afflictions are ever less Ezra 19: 13
then we have deserved: so that in our greatest afflictions we have just cause
to say with the Psalmist, Ps: 103: 10
The Lord has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to
our iniquities: and with the remnant of Judah Lam: 3: 22
, it is the mercies of the Lord that we are not consumed. Neither are they
above our strength, as the Apostle testifies 1 Cor: 10, 13
. For the Lord knows whereof we are made, Ps, 103: 14 Ps: 78: 39
he remembers that we are but dust. Neither are they more then the Lord in his
fatherly wisdom knows to be needful. For he is not delighted with our
afflictions, Laan, 3: 01
neither does he efflict willingly, and as it were from his heart; but only
inflicteth such a measure as he knows to be necessary for the atchieving of
those good ends, which he propounds to him self in correcting his children.
The end is the singular good Heb: 12: 1^ Ps, 94: 12: 119: 7^:
of those that are afflicted, viz. that they should not be condemned with the
world, but that they should be humbled under his hand, that they should be
reclaimed from sin and brought to repentance, that they might be wayned from
the world, refined and purged from their corruptions, that they might be made
partakers of his righteousness, and might be prepared for a better life. In all
these judgments therefore, whereby the Lord does correct the faults of his
children, he does always remember mercy. Luk: 3: ^ Heb: 3: ^^
And although sometimes he show him self much offended with his children, when
he does chastise them; yet (which earthly parents also are wont to do) under
an angry countenance he bears a fatherly mind. Neither is this anger of GOD
carried against the person of his child offending, but against his sin. For
by these chastisements, as the destruction of the sin, so the salvation of
the party is sought and intended. Even as the Physician or Surgeon, when he
uses cauterizing or incision, puts his patient to great pain; but thereby
seeks not the destruction of his patient, but of the disease, that he might
be cured: so the Lord, as the spiritual Physician, when he afflicts his
children, seeks not the destruction of them, but of their spiritual malady^
that it being mortified, themselves might be saved, this therefore ought to be
put out of a^l co^troversy, that those who once are elected, justified and
renewed by the spirit of God, howsoever sometimes they are so grievously
afflicted and tempted, that in their own sense they seem to be forsaken of
GOD, and as it were cast out of his love and favor: yet notwithstanding they
do never, no not for the least moment of time, fall from the grace of
election, justification or regeneration; but still remain in the state of
grace and salvation.

Whether from the graces of God?
3. But what are we to say of the grace of God meaning thereby the gifts of
grace? This question is to be understood, first, of saving graces, which are
peculiar to the elect, not of those gifts which are common, as I briefly noted
before, and shall hereafter more fully declare. 2ly. of true, and unfeigned, and
not of counterfeit graces, such as the scriptures call faith 1. Tim. 1.^, 2.
Tim. 1.5.
unfeigned, charity Romans 1.9. 2. Cor. 6.6. 1. Pet.^ ^^.
unfeigned, repentance unfeigned etc. For that faith which is not unfeigned, is
not a lively, but a dead faith, and as it were the carcass of faith. That
charity, which is not unfeigned, is but from the teeth outward, and is vain
Iam. ^.15.16.
and unprofitable. That repentauce which is not unfeigned, is not that
repentance which is Act. 1.28.
unto life: Neither can that faith, that charity, that repentance, which is not
unfeigned, be called truly faith, charity or repentance, but aequivoce as the
carcass or rather counterfeit of a man is a called that man, of whom it is the
carcass or counterfeit. It is a true saying, ens and verum convertuntur, and
therefore that which is not a true justifying faith, is not a justifying faith;
that which is not true charity nor true repentance is not charity nor
repentance indeed. That therefore was a strange paradox, delivered by some,
that the seeming graces, which sometimes are fear in those that perish that is
to say in reprobates; which are indeed but the counterfeits of true graces, are
ejusde^ speciei of the same special kind with those saving graces which are
found in the elect, differing only in degree or continuance, and not in
essence, when that which is not true grace has not the essence of that grace,
nor is that grace (...) and indeed, whereof it bears the name. As if the
faith of Simon Peter and Simon Magus, the charity of St. John and of Judas
Iscariot, the repentance of David and of Ahab, were of the same kind. And if
that were true, the^ were it all one to seem, and to be, all one for a man
truly to believe, and say Iam. ^.14.
he does believe, when indeed and in truth he does not; to be endued with true
charity, 1. Ioh 3.18.
and to profess charity, when he is void of it; to repent unfainedly, and to
make show of repentance, when indeed he does not repent. Neither can it ever be
proved, that any one, who perishes in his sins, was ever endued with a true
lively justifying faith, or with true christian charity proceeding out of a
pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; or with true hear^y and
unfeigned repentance, which as all other saving graces are proper fruits and
consequents of election.

Objections.
4, But here diverse things are objected. 1. that the same functions proceed
from the same habites, as believing from Faith; loving from charity, amendment
of life from rep^entance. But some of those that perish, do believe, love, and
amend their lives, as well as the elect: and therefore have the same habits. I
answer, that they may seem to believe, love, and repent, but truly they do
not, and therefore such, when they are said to loose their Faith, their
charity, their repentance, they loose only what they seemed to have. For when
they which have not, are said to loose that which they have not, as Mat. 13.12.
Mark. 4.25. it must needs be understood, as S. Luke expounds it c. 8.18. of
that which they seemed to have. For to have, and have not, imply a
contradiction; but many times men do seem to have that which they have not.

Ob. 2. Yea but say some, videri is a note of asseveration. Ans In some cases
it is, as in the oaths of the ancient Romans but yet the old saying is true,
multa sunt quae non videntur, et multa vide^tur quae non sunt. and that of
Augustine, Soliloq. l. 2. ^^ 5^^^
veru^ est id, quoth est; falsu^, quoth non est, ut videtur.

Ob. 3. As for that exception that Marcion, Saturninus and Ari^, did use the
like distinction that we do, I let pass, as both absurd and impious, as
though because Christ truly was that, which he is said to have been, and truly
did and suffered those things, which he is said to have done or suffered;
therefore there is no faining or dissembling among men. Or, as if it may be
said, that men sometimes do but seem to be or to do, that which they are
said to be, or to do, then the like might be said of Christ.

Ob. 4. Yea, but it may not be said, that all temporary professors do feign. I
answer, that as some of them play the hypocrites, to deceive others; So the
rest of them play the Sophisters to deceive themselves, So Iam. 1.22. be doers
of the word and not hearers only (...) deceiving your selves, and again V. 27.
If any among you seem to be religious, and do not refrain his tongue, that
man deceives his own heart, and his religion is vain, that is, though he
seem to be religious, yet indeed he is not. And this is the case of those
professors of religion, who nevertheless are mere worldlings who as they are
but te^porizers, professing religion for temporal respects; so are they also
but te^porary professers, who, as they have subordinated their profession of
religion, and their care to keep a good conscience to their worldly respects:
so when time of trial comes, that they cannot enjoy their worldly desires
(which chiefly they affect) with profession of religion, and keeping of a good
conscience, religion and conscience must give place to their wordly respects.
They love nor God truly, who do not love him above all things. And therefore
they that love the world, or the things that are therein more the^ God though
they may persuade themselves, and so seem to others, that they love God; yet
they cannot truly be said to be lovers of God. If any man love the world says
St. John 1: Ioh 2:15:
the love of the father is not in him; yea, he that is a lover of the world is
an enemy of God Iam: 4:4:
. Now worldlings are of 3 sorts; voluptuous, covetous, and ambitious according
to the 3 I. Ioh: ^^^
things which are desire^ in the world pleasure, profit, and honor; which 3
are said to be the worldly man's trinity; in which regard all worldlings are
called adulterers Iam: ^:4: Ephesians 5:5: Col, 2:5,
, that is Idolaters. These three though they may seem to themselves and to
others, that they love GOD; yet the voluptuous, are as the Apostle speaks* 2:
^im 3:5:
(...). lovers of pleasures more then of God; the covetous (...), lovers of
money more then of God; the ambitious, and vainglorious (...), lovers of
honor and glory in this world more then of God. Of this last sort some are
said John 12.42.
John 12.42. to have believed after a sort in Christ, yet because they loved
the praise V. 43
of men more then of God, by the censure of our Savior himself, they are
denied to believe. Ioh. 5.44
How can ye believe, says he, which receive honor one from another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God alone.

Ob. 5. But why should we deny them to believe, to love, to repent, whom we see
to profess the faith, and to lead an honest life?

Answ. We are in charity bound to think the best of Ph^l. 1.7.
those, who professing the true faith, do seem to lead a godly life. But yet
this is but the judgment of charity, and not of certainty, we can judge only
according to the outward appearance, but God only knows the heart. And many
times it happens, that Luke 16.15
what is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God. Neither
does it follow, if any of those whom we in charity do think to be faithful
and righteous men, do fall away, that therefore the faithful and just do
fall away; unless this also were certainly true, that all those who seem to
us to be faithful and just, were so in deed and in truth.

The saving graces of God without repentance.
. 5. The question then is to be understood of true saving graces, as true
faith, hope, and charity, and the like. Concerning which I answer with the
Apostle. Romans 11.^9
that the gifts and graces of God, (meaning his saving graces) and his calling
(which is according to his purpose) are (...), without repentance, that is, God
does never so behave him self, as though it repented him that he had bestowed
them; that is, that he never takes, or suffers them to be taken away, but
that good Phil. 1.6.
work of salvation whith he has at any time begun in any of his children,
he will bring to perfection. And so Augustine De praedest. sanct. c. 16.
expounds the word (...) without repentance. hoc est, sine mutatione
stabiliter fixa; that is, firmly fixed without change for as elsewhere he
says. ad artic fal^^ sibi imposit^s. art. 1^.
Nec qua illuminavit, obcoecat; nec quae aedificavit, destruit; nec quae
plantavit, avellit. Neither does he blind what he has enlightened; neither
does he destroy what he has builded: nor pluck up what he has planted.

6. But here the chief controve^sie, Whether faith may be lost.
is concerning faith. For some think they can prove out of the Scriptures,
that true justifying faith may be utterly lost, and that the faithful may
utterly depart from it. But the answer to those places of Scripture is easy
to them, who have learned to distinguish the diverse acceptions of the word
Faith in the Scriptures. The diverse acceptions of the word faith.
For faith is either Ethick and moral; or Theological. The Ethick is that
which is called faithfulness or fidelity, which is the proper signification of
the Latin word fides. For faithfulness is called fides, Cic. 1, de off^.
quia fiat quod dictum est, because that is done or performed, which is said or
promised; and in this sense the word (...) faith, and (...) faithful is
sometimes used; as Romans 3.3. Mat. 23.23. 1 Timothy 5. 12. Tit. 2.10. Heb 3.2. Mat.
24, 45. 1. Cor. 10.13. 2, These. 3.3. But not of this faith in this question
understood. The Theological faith signifies either metonymically the object,
that is, the doctrine of faith, which we believe, or more properly the habit
or gift of faith, whereby we do believe. This distinction is acknowledged by
Augustine De Trinit. 1 13: c: 2:
, who says, that faith is either quae creditur, which is believed, or qua
creditur, by which men do believe, and by the master of the sentences Sent: 3:
di^t:
, who says, fides id quod creditur, Faith is that which is believed, or id quo
creditur, that by which we do believe. The former significaton, though not
proper, but Metonymicall, is notwithstanding very usual both in the
Scriptures, and also in Ecclesiastical Writers. ^
as Act. 6.7. They obeyed the faith. Act. 14.27. the door of faith. Romans 12 6.
the analogy of faith. Gal. 1.22: he now preaches the faith, which erst he
persecuted, Gal. 3.2. the hearing of faith. Ephesians 4.5. one faith. 1^ Tim. 3.9.
the mystery of faith, 1 Timothy 4.6. nourished up in the words of faith, and of
good doctrine. Tit. 1.13 and 2.2. that they may be sound in the faith. Iud.
v.3. the faith once delivered. Apoc. 2.13. thou have not denied my faith. so 1.
Tim. 1.19. they made shipwreck as concerning the faith; that is are become
heretics: and 1 Timothy 4.1. diverse shall depart from the faith: how? attending
to erroneous spirits, and doctrines of devils. And thus in Athanasius his
Creed, and elsewhere, the Catholic doctrine of Faith is called the Catholic
faith. Near to this signification of Faith used for the doctrine of Faith, is
the acception of the word Faith for the profession of Faith. Act. 14.22. Rom
1.8. Iam. 2. 14.24. In both these senses, men may and often do depart from the
Faith, that is, from the doctrine and profession of Faith, unto the errors of
Antichrist, or other heresies and profane religions, who never had a justifying
Faith. As for example, when vain and proud men, carnal gospellers,
malcontents, do revolt from the profession of the Gospel, unto Popery, or
Anabaptisme, or any other heresy; they may be said to have departed from the
Faith: but they cannot be said to have lost a true justifying Faith, which they
never had.

The latter signification of the word faith, as it signifies the habit of
Faith, or an habitual persuasion wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, whereby we
give credit unto God, Heb. 11. is the proper signification of the Greek word
(...), which is derived from a ve^be which signifies to be persuaded (...).
. For we are said to believe that, whereof we are persuaded.

But yet this controversy is not to be understood of every Faith, which is a
persuasion. For first, there is an extraordinary Faith upon immediate and
particular revelation, which is not given to all the Faithful, neither is it
to be found in the Church at all times; as that which is called the Faith of
working miracles: and there is an ordinary Faith, which ordinarily is given to
the members of the visible Church. Of the former the holy Ghost speaks, Mat.
17.20. and Mark. 11.22. If you have Faith as ae grain of mustard seed, you
shall say to this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove.
and likewise 1. Cor. 13.2. If I had (...), all the faith, namely of working
miracles (whereof he had spoken chap. 12.9. (...). Chrysostom. Theop, Goru^ in 1.
Cor. 12.9. (...). Theodo. apud Gerum. in 1. Cor. 12.9. Hic fides prodigia
faciendi, quae montes transferat. Hieronym. in 1 Cor. 12.9. (...). pe quo
loquitur Christus Mat. 17.20. Luc. 17.6. Gerard apud Gorum. in 1 Cor. 1^.2
) so that I could remove mountains, etc. Of this Faith the question is
understood. For neither is this justifying Faith, neither i^ proper to the
Elect. For neither all the Elect have it, nor they alone; nor all they that are
justified have the Faith, not all they that have it, are justified. For Judas
the traitor, though a son of perdition (John 17.12.) yet he had the faith of
working miracles. Mat. 10.1. and the like may be said of th^se, to whom when
they shall allege for themselves, at the last day, that they have cast out
devils and done many great works in the name of Christ, the Lord shall
answer Mat. 7.8^.^3.
depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

Neither is the question understood of all ordinary faith; which is to be
distinguished, both in respect of the efficacy or effect, and of the object.
First I say in respect of the efficacy, or effect. For as knowledge is
distinguished into a literal and spiritual knowledge, the literal being
only a mere speculative knowledge, swimming in the brain, and not working
upon the heart, informing only the understanding, but not reforming the heart,
or the conversation, the spiritual, being an operative or powerful knowledge,
not only informing the judgment, but also reforming the heart, and conforming
the whole man to that which he knows, which in divinity is alone accoumpted
the true knowledge, for he that says he knows God ^.
and keeps not his commandments is a liar and the truth is not in him. For
although his knowledge may be true, in respect of the object, because it is the
knowledge of the truth, yet it is not true in respect of the efficacy or
effect. so says, which in the scripture sometimes goes under the name of
knowledge or acknowledgement (which is all one with assent) as Es. 53.11. My
righteous servant by his knowledge agnitione sui shall justify many, 1. Tim.
1.5. 2. Tim. 1.5.
1. Tim. 2.4. God would have all men to be saved, and to come (...) to the
acknowledgment of the truth. and likewise. 2. Pet. 1.2.3. So I say, faith is
distinguished into a true, and lively; or a counterfeit and dead Iam. 2.10.26
This distinction ^^^not be denied of the pap^^^ who dis^^^guish faith in
f^rma^^^^ ^t (...).
faith. which ^a^ter, though it may be true in respect of the object, as being
an assent to the truth; yet it is not true in respect of the e^ficacy and the
effect. Can they be said truly to believe, either that there is a God, who
behave themselves as if they were none, and so by their deeds deny Tit 1, 16.
him, or that God is just, who fear not to offend him, or that he is good and
gracious, who do not love him; or that he is all-sufficient, who do not trust
in him; or omniscient, knowing the very secreets of men's hearts, who play the
hypocrites before him, demeaning themselves as if he did not see them; or
omnipresent, who do not walk with GOD, and behave themselves as in his
presence, and so of the rest.

In respect of the object, faith is either general or special the general,
whereby we give assent to the whole word of God, and to every part thereof, as
being inspired of God, which of some is called the dogmaticall faith. The
special, whose object is special, and is either legal, whereby we believe
the threatening of the law, or evangelicall, whereby we believe the promises of
the Gospel.

And to the branches of this distinction is the former distinction to be
applied; For the general or dogmaticall faith is either a lively and
effectual faith, which is a saving acknowledgme^t of the truth, implying after
a sort the justifying faith, (so far forth as it is a lively assent) and is
proper to the elect, or else it is but a dead faith and uneffectuall, which is
called a bare historical faith: and is, common not only to wicked men, but
also to the devils. Iam. 2.19.
So the legal faith, is either lively and effectual, when as a man not only
assenting to the truth of the legal threatenings, The legal faith
but also applying them to himself, is thereby humbled. For where the law
says, Gal. 3.10*
Cursed is every one that continues not in all the things which are written in
the law to do them; he assumeth, but I have not continued in all the things
which are written in the book of the law to do them, therefore (in my self)
I am accursed. Such was the faith, not only of Josias 2. King. 22.18.13
, when he had heard the law read unto him: but also of the king of Ninive Ion.
3.6.7.
Or else it is but dead and uneffectuall, when as men assenting after a sort to
the threatenings of the law, are not humbled by them; but notwithstanding the
curse of the law, which they believe to be the word of God, bless themselves
in their heart as the Prophet speaks, Deuteronomy. 29.18.
as if all should go well with them, though they go on in their sins; as
though the curse were true in the general, but not in their particualr. And
such is the faith of those who are overgrowne with carnal and presumptuous
security, which seems to be that root of bitterness spoken against in that
place. Deuteronomy. 29.19.


The evangelicall faith.
. 7. In like manner the evangelicall faith is either a lively and effectual
assent, whereby we truly receive Christ, or a dead and counterfeit faith,
wanting the proper acts and operations of a true justifying faith, which are
requisite to salvation, to justification, to sanctification, and to
perseverance.

To salvation: for as with the heart Rom: 10.1^.
, that is the soul we believe to justification; so with the mouth we profess
unto salvation. That therefore is no true faith, when men assenting to the
doctrine of the gospel, refuse to profess it for worldly respects; And such
was the faith of some I say some of them, who did absolutely and altogether
prefer the glory of men before the glory of GOD, for other some, no doubt,
who both believed in CHRIST and loved him, were through humane frailty or
fearfulnes and too much love of the world (which are co^ruptio^s incident to
the best) hindered for a time from professing of Christ. and such were
Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea the rulers among the Jews, who are said to
have believed in CHRIST, but would not profess him, and therefore because they
loved the praise of men more then of GOD, they did not in truth nor in deed
believe. Compare Ioh. 5.44. with John. 4.42.43. But all the Faithful may
truly say with the Apostle 2. Cor. 4.13. because we have the same spirit of
faith, according as it is written, I have believed therefore have I spoken;
even so we also believe therefore we speak. As for those, who deny Luke 12 9.
Mat. 12.32: 2. Tim. 2.12.
CHRIST before men, they are such, as if they do not repent, he will deny them
befote the Angels of GOD.

The act of faith requisite to justification, is to apprehend or receive
Christ, who is our righteousness; which is done, first, by a lively assent to
the promises of the Gospel and then by special application of them to a man's
self, for where this lively assent is, that Jesus the son of the blessed
virgin Mary is the eternal son of GOD, and Savior of all those that believe
in him; there Christ is received, not only in the judgment, by that lively
assent but also in the heart and affections by an earnest desire to be made
partaker of him, and of his merits and righteousness, and in the will by an
unfeigned resolution to acknowledge him to be our Savior, and to rest upon him
for salvation. Now, whosoever has this lively assent thus working upon the
heart and the will^, he is bound (seeing he has the condition of the promise)
to apply the promise to him self. This apprehension of Christ, first by
assent, and then by application, is the very root of faith, whereby we receive
from Christ spiritual life to our justification, and salvation; and where this
root is wanting, as Luke 8.13. there is no true justifying faith, or communion
with Christ. For although the Role of Christ's righteousness be that wedding
garment which cove^eth our nakedness, and makes us accepted before God; yet it
will not cover us unless we put it on; and it is put on by faith, whereby we
apprehend and apply Christ to ourselves. Though the merits and sufferings of
Christ be a sovereign salve to cure our spiritual maladies; yet they will not
heal us, unless they be applied: they are applied by this apprehensive faith,
though the body of Christ be meat in deed, and and his blood drink in deed, to
nourish us unto everlasting life; yet they will not nourish us, unless we eat
his body and drink his blood: his body is eaten, and his blood drunk by this
apprehensive and special faith. They therefore who profess themselves to
believe in Christ, and yet do not by faith apprehend, that is, receive him,
and apply him to themselves, they have not a justifying faith. for faith does
justify, not in respect of it own worth, or as it is a grace inherent in us:
but as it apprehends and receives, or at least is apprehensive of Christ,
who is our righteousness. And such is the faith of all hypocrites, who profess
them selves to believe, and yet neither apprehend, nor so much as desire to
apprehend and apply Cheist and his merits unto them selves; but suffer, as
much as in them lies, the precious blood of Christ to be spilt in vain; as it
is in vain to them to whom it is not applied. And such hypocrites are all
Papists, who professing them selves to believe, do not only not apply Christ
unto them selves, but renounce and scorn the special faith, by which he is
received and applied.

The act of faith requisite to sanctification, is inwardly to purify the
heart. Act. 15.9
and outwardly to work Gal. 5.6
by love. For faith being a grace of the sanctifying spirit, which no man has
who is not regenerated by the holy Ghost. (for the holy Spirit, when he does
regenerate us, does ingenerate the grace of faith in us, and by ingenerating
the grace of faith, he does regenerate us,) it cannot therefore be severed from
sanctification, nor from the inward graces, nor outward fruits of
sanctification. and therefore that faith, which is aloue, not accompanied with
other graces, as hope, charity, repentance, and the fear of God, etc. nor
demonstrable by good works, is not a lively justifying faith; but a dead
faith. as S. James proves, chap. 2.14. etc. for as the body Iam 2 26
without breath is judged to be dead: so that faith which is without good
works, (which are as it were the breathing of a lively faith, which works by
love) is also judged to be dead. And such is the faith of all carnal
gospellers, who say they have faith, and have not works; for though it be most
true which S. Paul affirms, that faith alone justifies; yet it is as true,
which S. James teaches, that that faith which is alone, severed from other
graces, and destitute of good works, does justify neither alone, not at all;
because it is not a true and a lively, but a dead and a counterfeit faith. And
such is the faith of hypocrites, whose heart is unsound, as of those. John
2.23.24.25. who^ though they be said to have believed in Christ, yet he would
not believe them, because he knew what was in them; and of Simon Magus, who
though he professed him self to believe and was baptized, yet he remained in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, because his heart was not right in
him, that is, because he was an hypocrite. Act. 8.21.23.

The act of faith requisite to perseverance is, as of the instrument of the
holy Ghost, to stablish the believer, for if we believe 2 Chro. 20.10
we shall be stablished, if we believe not Es. 7.9.
we shall not be stablished, And as we live Heb. 2 4.
, yea shall live by faith; so by faith we Romans 5.2. 2. Cor. 1.24.
stand being by the power of God through faith 1. Pet. 1.5.
preserved or kept safe unto salvation. Faith is our victory 1. Ioh. 5.4*5.
whereby we overcome the world subdue Gal. 3.24.
the flesh, quench Ephesians, 6.16.
the fiery darts of the devil glory Romans 5.2.3.
in afflictions, and bring forth Luke 8.15.
with patience. And so contrary it is to defection or falling away as that
those which be of the defection (...)
are not of faith, Heb. 10.39.
and those which be of faith are not of defection. The faith therefore of
those, who are but temporary professors, is not a true faith; such as is the
faith of unsound and superficial christians, that is to say hypocrites; who
having superficially covered their stony Luke 8.13.
ground with the mould of external profession, do not only bring fo^th no
fruit, but have not so much as root or moisture and therefore in time of
temptation do fall away. And such also is the faith of worldlings, who receive
the seed among thorns Luke 8.14.
, who being overcome of the world, are thereby discovered to be void of true 1.
Ioh, 5, 4*5, ^
faith, and being the servants of Mammon Mat, 6, 24.
cannot be the servants of God; or if they seem for a time to be Gods
servants; yet when time of trial comes, they will hold to Mammon, and
forsake GOD, such was the faith of Judas Mat, 26, 14,
to whom gain was godliness; and such, as it seems, was the faith of De^as,
who forsook the Apostle for the love of the world. 2. Tim. 4.10. They
therefore who are subject to defection, are not endued with a true faith, for
it is the evil heart of infidelity Heb. ^* ^2
, that causes men to fall away (...)
from God.

Seeing then this question is not to be understood of faith, as it signifies
the doctrine of faith, nor of fidelity, nor of the faith of miracles, nor of
the hystoricall, nor of the legali faith, nor of that evangelicall faith which
is dead or counterfeit: it remains therefore that this controversy is to be
understood of the true, lively, evangelicall, and justifying faith only: which
being a faith not of all men 2 Thessalonians. ^5.
, that is, not common to the reprobate, but proper to the elect, and is for
that cause called the faith of the elect Tit. 1.2^
. (For all others, if they seem truly to believe, they do but seem so to do,
as Gregory Moral. l. 25. c. 11 - specie tenus credare* quantos certum est
electorum numerum summamque transir^.
well says, they believe only in show so many as are not elected) it never
therefore before the end of this life does utterly fail. Now I call that a
lively justifying faith; which produces those acts of a true faith, requisite
to salvation, justification, sanctification, and perseverance, whereof even now
I spoke.

. 8. Moreover concerning faith, Degrees of faith and other graces.
and other saving graces, we are to hold a twofold distinction. The former is
respect of the degrees thereof. For Faith sometimes is more lively and strong,
and sometimes more dull and weak; charity sometimes is more hot and fervent,
and sometimes more cool and slack* We acknowledge therefore, that even these
saving graces may in respect of the degrees be deminished, and decayed, which
to a faithful man ought to seem a very grievous and lamentable thing) but we
utterly deny, that ever in this life they are wholly and utterly extinguished,
and lost. For that the faith of any of the faithful does at any time faint, it
is to be ascribed to their own negligence, and to the malice of their
spiritual enemies; but that it does not utterly fail, it is to be ascribed to
the grace of God, and to the intercession of Christ. For whereas they object
the example of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, who Apoc. 2.4. is reproved,
for that he had lost his first love; the Text it self does clearly evince,
that Christ does not there speak of the grace of charity wholly; but of that
degree and measure thereof, wherewith he had been formerly adorned. For first
he does commend him for certain notable fruits of Faith and love, which he did
still ^aercise, v. 2. and 3. as namely patience and constancy. Secondly,
whereas he speaks of his first love, that cannot be understood otherwise,
then of a degree and measure of love, which before he had* and therefore his
meaning is not, that the Angels love was was wholly quenched, but somewhat
c^oled. And lastly the word (...) does not signify or insinuate* that he did
altogether amittere, that is, loose his love; but somewhat remittere, that is,
rem^t or abate of the fervency thereof: for even the elect sometimes do remit
somewhat of the fervencie of their love, in whose hearts notwithstanding, as
Mo^al: l. 25. c. 7
Gregory says, chaerity remains unextinguible.

The habit and act of faith distinguished.
9. Again, we are to distinguish betwixt the act and the habit of faith, and
other graces, even as we distinguish betwixt the faculty of sight, and act of
seeing: For the act of seeing may be interrupted as in sleep, and in the
dark: when notwithstanding the habit or power of sight remains entire. so
in the time of temptation* some acts of Faith and other graces may be
interrupted, when as the graces themselves are not abolished. they may be laid
as it were asleep, but they cannot be wholly extinguished. It is a natural
act of fruitful trees, to bring forth leaves and fruit^^ and yet in winter
time they have neither fruit nor leaves, and if a man should judge of them
according to the external show, he would scarcely say they lived: which
notwithstanding do live, and are nourished, and when spring and summer shall
come again, they will bring forth leaves and fruit. The like thing happens
sometime to faith. For whilst the winter storms of temptations do lie upon
it, you shall perceive both fruit and leaves to be shaken off, and if you
should judge according to outward appearance, you would imagine it to be dead:
the which notwithstanding lives at the root. and when these storms and
tempests are over-blowne, and by the power of GODS Spirit overcome, it will
bring forth both leaves and fruit to the glory of GOD, and to the good example
of others. Likewise, it is an act of fire, not only to heat, but also to give
light. But if it chance to be covered with ashes ^
it will not only send forth no light, but not so much as heat, and yet no
man can truly say, that it is extinguished, though (...) be hidde-so it fares
sometimes with the gift of faith, and other graces, which like to col^^^^ in
the dark, are so taken away, non ut ne sint, sed ut ne videantur, not that
they are not at all, but that they are not seen and discerned, and lie hid
as fire under the ashes. For as Gregory moral l. 8. c. ^0
says, saepe tentatio in cord electorum lumen justitiae abscondit, sed non
interimit. But if we being rowsed by the spirit of God, shall endeavor, as
the Apostle exhorts (...) 1. Tim. 1.16
that is, as the word imports, as it were with bellows to blow the coals,
and to quicken the fire covered with ashes; we shall be like unto a good fire,
burning within our selves, and shining to others. These and the like
distinctions, as they are by some applied to Saint (...) when he fell, so they
may be extended to any of the faithful in the like case. that in his full
gratiam fidei remisit, actum intermisit, habitum non amisit; motum fuit in eo
spirituals. vitae robur, non Amotum, concussam, non excussuum. he remitted the
grace of Faith, intermitted the act, but lost not the habit. The strength of
the life spiritual was moved in him, but not removed: shaken, but not shaken
off. he fell grievously, but he did not fall away.

CHAP. IIII.
The three last questions (...) the members of (...) of sin.

Whether a man endued with the spirit of God, may be utterly deprived thereof.
* 1. THE fourth Question, which is concerning the Spirit of GOD, is like to the
former. For by the Spirit we are to understand according to the Scriptures,
the gifts and graces of the Spirit, which are distinguished into two sorts:
For some are common to the elect with the reprobate, and some are proper only
to the faithful and elect, of which our Savior speaks John 14. John 14.17
that of the spirit of truth which abides in the elect, the world is not
capable. For although they be all the gifts of the same same spirit, 1 Cor.
12.11
which does sanctify, yet they are not all the gifts of the sanctifying Spirit,
quatenus sanctificat, as he does sanctify; but only those, which are called
the graces of sanctification. In respect of the common gifts, such as be the
spirit of politic wisdom, and fortitude, the gifts of prophecy, of tongues,
of working miracles, of arts, etc. John 15.35
which are given not only to sons, who abide in the family for ever; but
also to servants, who are not to abide in the house for ever: we deny not, but
the spirit may be lost; as the examples of Saul, Sampson, and Judas do prove.
But as touching the saving graces of GOD, and gifts of sanctification, such as
be unfayned faith, hope, charity, repentance, the fear of GOD, and such like;
howsoever we grant, that the spirit may in regard of them be said to be grieved
and dulled; yet we deny, that he is utterly extinguished, or exturbed* though
moved and shaken, yet not removed or shaken off. And this was the judgment of
Gregory. In Ezech. hom. 5. In sanctorum quippe cordibus ju^^^ quasdam virtutes
semper permanet, juxta quasdam vero recessu^us venit, and venturus recedit. In
fide enim spe and charita^e, and in bonis al^js, sine quibus ad coelestem
patriam non potest veni^j, perfectorum corda non deserit In prophetiae vero
vittute, doctrina facundiae, miraculorum exhibitione, electis ^uis aliquando
adest, aliquando ^e subtrahit.
In the hearts of the godly, the spirit according to some virtues is permanent,
but according to some he comes and goes. for in faith, hope, and charity, and
in other things, without which we cannot come to our heavenly country, he
forsakes not the hearts of the upright, but in the virtue of prophecy, in the
eloquence of teaching, in the working of miracles, he is sometimes present with
his elect, and sometimes he withdraws himself. And to the like purpose in an
other place Moral: in Job? lib. 2^ c: ^2 In his igitur donis sine quib: ad
vitam pervenire no^ possunt, spiritus sanctus, in praedicatoribus suis, five
electis omnibus semper manet: in al^is autem quibus per ostensionem illius non
nostra vita servatur, sed a lio^u^ quaeritur. neq* aqua^ semper in
praedicatoribus p^rmanet.
. In those gifts, without which men cannot come unto life, the holy Ghost in
his Preachers, or in all the elect, ever abides. But in those, whereby through
the showing of him (that is, the spirit) not our life is saved, but the life of
others sought, be does not always abide in them. The spirit whom the world
cannot receive Ioh: 14: 16: 17
, and therefore is not common to the reprobates, by the promise of Christ
abides with the Faithful for ever, he is the earnest of our inheritance Ephesians*
^: ^4
, by whom we are sealed until the day of our redemption Ephesians: 4: 30
. This anointing therefore abides in the Faithful; and as it teaches them 1
I^h: 2, 27
, so shall they abide in him. And hereunto let us add that excellent place,
John 4: 14
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst;
that is, whosoever is made partaker of the graces of the sanctifying spirit,
shall never be utterly destitute of them: but the water that I shall give him
(whereby is meant the spirit John 7: 38.39
) shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life.

Qu: 5: whether a member of Christ may be cut off,
2. The fifth question is, whether any one that is a member of Christ, may be
cut off and perish: whereunto I answer, that a member of Christ is either a
true member, or in appearance only. And that I call a member in appearance,
which is a member only in his own profession, and opinion of others, judging
according to charity. For not only the invisible church (which is the company
of all those, and only those that are elected) is in the scriptures called the
body 1 Cor: 12: 12: ^7:
of Christ; but also the visible church, which is the company of those that are
at the least outwardly called, and do profess the name of Christ. And in this
large sense, not only the members of the invisible church, but of the visible
also are called members of Christ, which notwithstanding, howsoever they live
in the visible church, yet are not all of the invisible church. and
consequently are not true members of Christ, but in show only, in title and
profession. for the true Catholic church (which we do believe) is the
company of the first borne Heb. 22.23
written in the Heavens, the body Ephesians. 1.23
of Christ, and his fulness. Electi omnes says Bernard, In Cantic. sermon. 78.
ipsi ecclesia sunt: all the elect they are the church. and Augustine In bonis
est ecclesia, in his qui aedificant super petram, non in his qui aedificant
super arenam, de unit. eccl. c. 181
. The Church is in the good, in them that build upon the rock, not in them
that build upon the sand. Gregory says In cant* c. 3. v. 9. secundum
praescientiae suae gratiam Christus suam eccle^iam de in aeter: number permansutis
sanctis construxit.
, Christ according to the grace of his p^aescience, has built his Church of
holy men who shall endure for ever. And again Moral. in Job Intra ecclesiae
mensuras sunt omnes electi; extra has omnes reprobi, etiams^ intra limite^
fidei ess^ videantur;
. Within the bounds of the Church are all the elect, without these bounds are
all reprobates, though they may seem to be within the limits of faith. And
Augustine Ep. 50. Non justificat autem Christu^ nisi corpus suum.
again in other places says, that Christ justifies none but his body; and
that none lives In Joan tract. 26: de spiritu Christi non vivit, nisi corpus
Christi.
by the spirit of Christ, but the body of Christ. And De doct. Christi, l 3. c
32. non est re vera domini corpus, quod cum illo non erit in aeternum.
speaking of the second rule of Ticonius de corpore Christi bipartito. that is
not the body of Christ which shall not be with him for ever: and therefore
says, that the rule should be de corpore Domini vero and simulato, quia non
solum in aeternu^, veru^ etiam nunc hypocritae non cum illo esse dicendi sunt,
qua^vis in ejus esse videantur ecclesia.

Notwithstanding the holy Spirit, that he might teach us to judge, and to speak
charitably of our neighbors, himself speaks according to the judgment of
charity: whiles he terms those the sons of God just, redeemed, sanctified,
ingraffed into Christ; yea, and (as it may be collected out of some places)
written in the book of life; who are only the sons of the visible church,
just in respect of some external works of righteousness, redeemed and
justified in their own profession and opinion of others judging according to
charity: sanctified and ingrafted into CHRIST sacramentally, written also in
the book of life, because they are reckoned in the catalogue of the church,
and numbered among the elect. This kind of men which live in the Church but are
not of it, is ever subject to defection: and them the LORD suffers to fall
away, that their hypocrisy might be discovered, and that it may be manifested
that they were never of the Church, Even as Saint John says of certain
teachers in his time, who were fallen into such gross heresies concerning
CHRIST, that he doubts not to call them Antichrists. 1. Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us (says he) but they were not of us; For if they had
been of us; they would surely have remained with us: but they are departed
from us, that it might appear they are not all of us.

The question understood of ^^ue members.
3. A true member is either a sownd member (excepting some infirmities,
whereunto all are subject) or a diseased or wounded member, for even a true
member of the natural body of man, may be so wounded or diseased; that for a
time it does receive from the head neither motion nor sense, as those which are
stricken with a dead palsy. For the nerves being stopped, the animal spirits,
which carry from the head sense and motion to all the parts, are intercepted.
Now such a member although, in regard of Communion, does scarcely seem to be a
true member in respect of the head, with which it does not now communicate,
that is, in respect of sense and motion, which other members enjoye;
notwithstanding in respect of union it is a true member, and in regard of life,
being still animated by the same soul, whereby the other parts are quickened.
Even so a true member of CHRIST may either be so wounded by the temptations of
Satan, or so fallen into some grievous sin, as it were a spiritual palsy,
th^^ for a time he receives not from CHRIST h^^ head by the sensible operation
of his spirit, s^^rituall sense and motion. But though he be wou^^ded, yet he
is not cut off; and though he be a sick member, yet he is not dead. And albeit
in respect of Communion, whiles he sins, or remains in his sin, he may
scarcely seem a true member of Christ, with whom he does not communicate, as
other sound members do: yet in respect of union, he does not cease to be a
member of Christ. For Christ our head has by his spirit begun in all the
faithful and regenerate, which are his members, a spiritual, and that an
everlasting life, by which he lives in them for ever.

Hence it is, that the faithful are said to be already translated from death
to life, Ioh. 5.24.
and to have already eternal life, Ioh. 6.47.54.
and that they which are justified, are said also Romans 8, 30.
to be glorified. And this truth is most evidently confirmed by that testimony
of Saint John in the place before cited 1. Ioh 2.19.
, for if they had been of us (says he) they would surely have remained with
us. From whence this general rule may be gathered, that those who are of the
Church (as all sound christians are) shall never fall away from the communion
of the church, but shall most certainly abide therein. But yet this by the way
is to be added, that to the faithful, being the members of Christ, it ought to
seem a very grievous and fearful thing, and worthy to be lamented with
abundance of tears, if they shall defile themselves with any foul sin, for
by this means they do (as much as in them lies) draw our Savior Christ the
holy one of Israel, whose members they are into the fellowship of their sin.
And this is that, which the Apostle urges 1* Cor, 6.15.
1. Cor. 6. Know you not that your bodies are members of Christ? shall I then
take the member of Christ and make it the member of an harlot? GOD forbid.
Quest 6, Of sin whether it does at any time reign in the regenerate Bellarm.
de iustif, lib 4. c. 13. in fine Qui natus est ea Deo non peccat, nec potest
peccare, quia ex Deo natus est, vt habetur 1 Joan. 3. quia non peccat non
prevarica^u, fed impletlegem qui en, legem non implet, hoc ipso prevaticatur
and peccat. Igitur omnis qui very justificatus est implet lege^, nec potest
fie^i, vt justificatus man^at* and legem non imple^t.


. 4. There remains the last question, whether those that are regenerate do
sin, or not. Whereunto I answer, that they do often, and sometimes very
grievously. For we do not hold the heresy of Iovinian which notwithstanding
Bellarmine maliciously imputes unto us^, but may more truly be retorted upon
the Papists; who hold that a regenerate man ^ay perfectly fulfill the whole
law of God. But we confess with St. James, Iam 3 2.
that in many things we offend all with Solomon 1, King, 8, 36,
, that there is no man that sins not, and that there is not a just man
Eccles, 7.20,
upon earth that does good, and sins not. And with St. John. 1, Ioh, ^, 8
Pro. 20.9.
that if we should say we have no sin, we should deceive our selves, and
there were no truth in us. And therefore with David we pray Ps. 143*^^^
enter not into judgment with thy servants O Lord for no man living should be
justified in thy sight, if thou should enter into judgment with him. But
howsoever the faithful are sinners, yet not in that sense as the wicked in the
scriptures are termed sinners; as when it said, the Lord hears not sinners
Ioh. 9:31: Ps. 50:16:
that is impenitent sinners, such as make a trade of sinning, and are therefore
called Mat, 7, 23. Luk 13, 27
workers of iniquity. Though they sin, yet not in that sense, according to
which St. John denies 1. Ioh: 3, 9:
them to sin, which he expresses by the phrase of working sin. viz. as
workers of iniquity, as servants of sin in whom sin reigns August: expos
in Gal: ^: aliud est non peccare aliud no^. habere pecca^um; na^ in quo
peccatum no^ regnat, non peccat*
who commit sin of malice, and ex imperio vitiosi habitus, who commit sin
with greedines and with the full swirge and consent of will, for so both St.
John understands that phrase 1: Ioh: 3: 8:
of committing or working sin, he that commmitteth sin (says he) is of the
devil, and also our Savior John. 8. he that commits sin is the servant
of sin. They fall, but they are not utterly cast down, Ps: 37.24:
for the Lord vpholdeth them with his hand They fall often, but they never fall
away; sin remains in them, but it never Rom:
reigns in them, they sin but not unto 1. Ioh, 5, 18.
death. And this is proved by St. John's undeniable testimony, and invincible
reason; whosoever is borne of God, says he, (...), he commits not sin,
namely in that sense, wherein he had used the same words in the verse V, 8,
preceding, neither can he sin, namely after that manner. Then which, what
could be spoken more plainly?

The reason which St. John uses is unanswerable* because says he the seed of
God (meaning thereby the spirit of regeneration) remains in him, and again,
because he is borne of God. For every regenerate man whilst he is clothed
with this mortal body, is partly flesh and partly spirit, through all his
powers, faculties and affections, in which there is a continual conflict, the
flesh that is the unregenerate part lusting against the spirit, Gal 5.17
and the spirit that is the regenerate part lusting against the flesh, so that
ye cannot do the things that ye would. No man therefore, whose w^ll is
regenerate, can whiles he is in the ^lesh, will any thing, whether good or bad,
with his full will. For that evil, which he wills; as he is flesh, the same
he wills as he is spirit; the good which he wills as he is spirit, he
wills, as he is flesh. And therefore a regenerate man cannot sin with full
consent of his will; because he is partly spirit, and partly flesh. And for the
same cause the sins of faithful and regenerate persons are committted all of
them through infirmity, the flesh prevayling against the spirit, in some more,
in some less. For he whose will is regenerate, has an earnest desire, and an
unfeigned will and purpose to abstain from all sin, when as therefore
contrary to his desire, will and purpose, he is by force of temptation
transported to the commmitting of sin, that I call a sin of infirmity.
Every regenerate person therefore may truly say with the Apostle, when he
has offended, either by omission or commission, the good Romans 7, 19.20.
thing which I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I do.
Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that
dwells in me. If therefore all the sins of the faithful be committed of
infirmity, and with some reluctation of the spirit, and so against their will
and unfayned purpose, as they are regenerate; then it is certain, that the
sins of the faithful, howsoever they provoke GODS temporal judgments
against them, especially when they do not 1, Cor. 11, 31
judge themselves, yet they do not exclude them out of the love and favor of
GOD; neither are they imputed unto them unto condemnation For Cor. 11.32:
when we are judged, we are chastised of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. And hereunto avails the intercession of CHRIST,
that the redeemed of CHRIST may, notwithstanding their sins, which they
commit through humane frailty, be continued in the favoar of God, as hereafter
I shall show.

But if any man, who professes himself to be regenerate, shall give himself
over to the practice of sin, and shall commit sin with full consent of
will, or so lives in sin, that sin may truly be said to reign in him, his
example does not prove, that a regenerate man may so sin, but does manifestly
convince himself not to be as yet renewed by the spirit of GOD. Mo al l. 34.
c. 8.
but as Saint Gregory says of such, quaesi habitam sanctitatem ante oculos
hominum videntur amittere. sed eam ante oculos Dei nunquam habuerunt. For
whosoever commits sin 1. Ioh. 3 8.9,
he is of the devil, says St. John but he that is borne of God does not
commit sin, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin because he is
borne of GOD.

. 5. There are two things more to be added as touching sin, the one,
concerning sins of infirmity, the other concerning the dominion of sin.

For as touching the former; some cannot endure, that the sins of the
faithful and regenerate should be so extenuated, as to be accoumpted sins of
infirmity: which in their opinion should rather be aggravated, and esteemed
more heinous, then the like sins perpetuated by ignorant and carnal men; as
being committed by men endued with greater knowledge, and more obliged unto God
in all duetyes of obedience and thankfullnes. And in very truth so they are in
these respects, and so to be acknowledged and detested of the children of GOD;
when either they have offended, or are moved to the practice thereof. But yet,
if you respect, either the disposition and condition of the parties, or Gods
estimation of them; esteeming the one, as his son regenerated by his spirit,
adopted and reconciled unto him in Christ, the other, as his enemy, upon whom
the wrath of God abides; you must acknowledge, that the same sin, which to
the carnal man is mortal, as being the transgression of a wicked man, who is
under the law; becomes to the faithful man venial, as being the offense of
a righteous man, who is not under the law but under grace; Yea that a carnal
man's forbearance of a sin, which he would feign commit, if he durst, is worse
in the sight of GOD (who looks especially to the heart) then the faithful
man's falling into a sin, which he wo^ld not commit. For to do that good
which he would not, or not to do the evil which he would, are signs of a
carnal man, whose will is not regenerate; and contrariwise, Rom 7.19.
not to do the good which he would, or to do the evil, which he would not, are
signs, (though sins) of a faithful man whose will is regenerate. The sin of
a ^^rnall man is committed with full consent of will, he being wholly flesh;
the sin of the regenerate (who sins carne non spiritu) is committed
against his will as he is spirit. Now Rom 7.20*
(says the Apostle) if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me.

The carnal man is, as I said, under the law, and therefore his sin makes
him obnoxious to the curse of the law, and eternal damnation. The faithful man
is not under the law, but under grace, and therefore freeed by Christ from the
curse of the law. For as every sin is mortal in it self and deserves
death, so every sin is punished with death; either with the death of Christ
imputed unto the believer; or with the death of the sinner himself, who has
no part in Christ. Hence it is, that the believers sin, for which christ shed
his blood, is to him venial, and the unbelievers sin, to whom CHRIST'S merits
are not imputed, is to him mortal.

The unregenerate man whose carnal disposition is enmity Romans 8.6.
against God* and whose frame of imaginations is evil and only Genesis 6.5.
evil continually, has no will nor disposition in him to that which is
spiritually good, and therefore with his whole will he wills that which is
evil. But the faithful, whose will is regenerate, as he has in him a
disposition to sin, as he is flesh, which is the remainder of original
sin; so on the other side, as he is spirit, he has an unfeigned desire and a
sincere will, purpose and resolution to abstain from all evil, and to do
good. If he therefore contrary to his desire and purpose, as he is spirit, be
by the violence of his passions and perturbations, which are egritudines animae
the infirmities of our souls, and by force of temptation transported to the
committing of sin, that sin by him committed, is neither of ignorance
merely, nor of malice, but of infirmity. I say not merely of ignorance; for
it is not ex ignorantia juris, sed facti. In the general, or in thesi he
knows that kind of sin to be unlawful, as for example, adultery, or
denial of Christ, and he has resolved Ps. 119.106. Mat. 26.35.
and vowed to abstain from them, and all other sins: ^ut his mind being
troubled with perturbations and passions, his judgment dazeled and blinded with
temptations, and the will for want of strength overcome by them both; he does
not in hypothesi or in the particular see, or not consider the unlawfullnes of
the fact, and therefore through weakness, the spirit being foiled by the flesh,
yields, contrary to his general purpose, to the acting of it. Neither is it
of malice or of set purpose, because the will and purpose of a regenerate man
is to the contrary.

. 6. The question concerning the dominion of sin may be understood, either of
original sin in general, or particular habitual corruptions or vices.

Original sin in general, rules and reigns in all the unregenerate, as a
tyrant without resistance. In the regenerate though it do not reign, yet it
remains as a rebellious subject, or discomfited enemy, who notwithstanding is
ready, upon all occasions, to assail us, and able sometimes to prevail
against us and to foil us, which must teach us to labor by all means to
mortify our corruptions, and with Paul to 1. Cor. 9.27.
buffet and beat down the body of sin, and to bring into servitude our
flesh.

But principally the Question is understood of particular habitual
corruptions, which in the regenerate remain as the relics and remainders of
original sin mortified in some measure and diminished; but in the wicked
they do reign, not all, but some of them as vicious habits.

By original sin there is in every man an evil disposition and pronenesse,
to all manner of sin; and of every one a spice remains, as of pride and
self-love etc, in the regenerate; of (...), more (which are their infirmityes)
of some, less (...) in the wicked the habitual corruptions either reign, as
the increments of original sin, or at the least remain unabated, unless
perhaps by the contrary vice. I say then, habitual corruptions do reign in
men, when from dispositions and inclinations they grow to be confirmed habits.
For when by practice of any particular sin, whereunto a man inureth himself,
the evil dispositions are grown to vicious habits, then those sins do
reign in that man, imposing upon him a kind of necessity to commit that
sin. And whosoever in regard of that necessity (custom being as it were
another nature) he may seem unable Ie^. 3.^3*
to do otherwise, yet it is certain, that as a wicked habit is gotten by
multiplying and reiterating voluntary sinful actions, in any kind; so the
habit it self is voluntary, and every sinful action committed by the command
of a vicious habit, is a sin of malice and not of infirmity; and the man so
sinning is the servant of sin. That therefore is but a simple or rather
sinful excuse, which some use, when they are reproved for sin, as
drunkenness, or swearing, etc. I pray you bear with me, I have got a custom, I
cannot leave it. for that is to confess themselves servants of sin.

CHAP. V.
The assertions of the adversaries.

The assertions of the adversaries set down in 3 degrees.
. 1 AND thus you have heard our assertion, concerning the certainty of
perseverance, not only plainly expounded in 6 several questions, but also
proved by so many arguments. Now we are briefly to propound the contrary
assertions of the adversaries of this truth, whereof there seem to be 3
degrees.

The 1 degree.
The first of those, who imagine that a faithful and regenerate man, by
committing any crime or grievous sin, does for a sin loose his faith and
justificatio^. And of this first assertion there seem also to be 2 degrees.
For when they say, that a faithful man by committing a grievous sin does
loose his faith; they mean either the act of faith only, or the habi^e also.
If the act only, which is to believe remission of sin, and namely of that
crime, which he has co^mitt^d, and whereof he has not as yet repented; we
acknowledge, that that act of faith when a man is fallen into a great sin, is
interrupted, until he rise again by repentance. But here is their error in
that they think, because the act of faith is interrupted, that therefore there
is an intercession of justification and reconciliation with GOD, and a falling
from the state of grace and salvation, into the fearful state of damnation.
Unless for the qualifying of their opinion, they shall say, that they speak
not of justification in foro caelesti, in the court of heaven, but in foro
conscientiae; and of falling for a time from the assurance of salvation into
the guilt of damnation* which if they shall avouch, there shall not need to be
any controversy betwixt us. For we do confess, that a man cannot be assured
o^ the remission of any crime, whilst he continues in it without repentance:
and that howsoever there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus;
yet a faithful man by committing any crime incurreth the anger of GOD, and
provokes his judgments and not only deserves damnation, and is in himself
guilty, or contracteth the guilt of death; but many times also by the terror
and trouble of his own conscience, aggravated partly by afflictions, partly by
spiritual desertions, and partly by the temptation of Satan, is, in his own
opinion, in the state of damnation. But if we will speak properly,
justification is to be considered a^ an act of GOD, for it is GOD Rom: 8, 33:
that justifies, and such an act as depends upon his eternal counsel, and
proceeds from his ^: Tim: 1:5
grace given unto us in CHRIST before all secular times. For whom he electeth,
them he calls, and whom he calls according to his purpose, them and no
other he justifies, and whom he justifies, them and all them he glorifieth.
This act of GOD, which from our effectual vocation is continued to our
glorification, is not interrupted, though the act of faith, which is the
apprehension of it, be interrupted. yea but, say they, by that act of faith
assuring us of our justification and salvation we are justified, and therefore
when that act cease, our justificatio^ cease I answer, ^. God is said to
justify, when he imputes the righteousness of Christ to them that believe,
that is to them that have the grace of faith, for as Agustine Epist 23 ad
Bonifac.
says, nihil aliud est credere quam fidem habere, and so the Apostle Romans 4.
to him that works not, Rom 4.5.
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. not that faith does justify, as it is an habit, or as part of
inherent righteousness* for then we should be justified by righteousness
inherent, or as it is an act, for then we should be justified by works; but in
respect of the object, which only as the matter does justify, which faith
only as the instrument does apprehend or receive, and because it does receive
that which is our righteousness, it ^s said to justify, or to be imputed for
righteousness, not that ipsum credere does justify, sed id quod creditur. But
howsoever faith does justify as the hand, or instrument apprehending or
receiving CHRIST, who is our righteousness; yet it is not the act of
apprehending or receiving which does justify, as the instrument, but that which
apprehends or receives, that is the habit or grace of faith. Otherwise our
justification, which is a constant and continued act of GOD; should be as
transcient and flirting, as our act of apprehending: and we should be no longer
justified, then we do actually apprehend the righteousness of Christ (which we
do not, either when we are asleep, or being awake, are otherwise employed)
and therefore to imagine, that our justification is interrupted, so often as the
act of faith is interrupted is a dream.

2ly. We are not justified before God by that act of faith assuring us of our
justification for we are justified before God, before we are, or can be assured
of it, and we must believe, before we can be justified. we must therefore
distinguish of ^ustification (...) it is either before God in foro coelesti,
which properly is justification; or else in the court of our own conscience.
Before God we are justified, when we give a lively assent to the promise of the
Gospel, by which, working upon the heart and the will, we receive Christ, not
only in our judgment by assent, but also in our hearts by an earnest desire to
be made partakers of Christ, and in our wills by a resolution to acknowledge
him to be our Savior, and to rest upon him alone for salvation. In our
consciences we are justified, when upon tha^ lively assent (which is the
condition of the promise) we, applying the promise to our selves, are persuaded
and in some measure assured of our justification. And such as is the measure of
our assurance, that we do in deed believe by a true and lively assent, that
JESUS the Soon of the blessed Virgin, is the eternal Son of GOD, and
Savior of all those that truly believe in him, such is, and ought to be the
assurance of our justification, and salvation. For the Gospel teaches us this
truth of GOD in CHRIST, that whosoever truly believes that JESUS CHRIST is the
Son of GOD, and Savior of all that truly believe in him shall be saved. If
therefore the conscience of a man be able truly and certainly to assume, but I
do truly believe that JESUS CHRIST is the Son of GOD, etc. then he may as
certainly conclude, therefore I shall be saved. But howsoever this act of faith
assuring us of our salvation (which they call the certainty of the subject) may
for a time be interrupted; yet so long as a man does truly assent to the
Gospel, and by it receives CHRIST, so long the certainty of the object is not
impeached and therefore the party so believing, stands justified before God,
though he be not always assured of it. Of those therefore that hold the
intercession of justification by the act of faith interrupted, this shall
suffice to have spoken.

But I understand the first degree of them, with whom we have this controversy,
to be of those, which hold, that the habit of faith and justification may be
lost without a total defection or falling away.

The 2 degree.
The second degree is of those, who hold that a man elected in Christ, justified
by faith, and sanctified by the holy Ghost, may fall into a total, but not a
final Apostasy. The 3. degree.
The third of those, who stoutly maintain, that a man justified and
sanctified, may fall away from God, and from his grace, not only totally for a
time, but also finally and for ever. And this is the assertion of the Papists
and some others.

Of these 3 deg^ees the second, is a consequent of the of the first, and the
third, of the second.
. 2. But howsoever the authors of these assertions would seem to differ one
from another, for the first would not be thought to agree with the second, nor
the second with the third: yet I do not see, how any man can maintain the
first, unless he will grant the second; nor how any man can defend the second;
unless he will grant the 3d. For faith and justification cannot be lost
without a total defection, and whosoever does make a total apostasy, does
also fall away finally. For as touching the first, he that loses his
justification loses also his adoption, and reconciliation, and therewithal
the grace and favor of GOD, and from the state of salvation is fallen into the
state of condemnation. And whosoever loses his faith, loses withal the
fruits of ^aith, as hope, charity, affiance, the fear of God, and all other
graces of sanctification, which cannot be where faith is not. If therefore the
falling away from the grace, that is, the favor of God, and also from his
graces, that is the gifts of grace to a total defection (as I suppose no man
can truly deny) then must it be confessed, that if a faithful man should loose
his justification and his faith, he should fall into a total apostasy. Now
those that make a total defection, do also finally perish; as the prophet
Ezech: 12:24:
witnesses, for it is impossible, as the Holy Ghost says Heb: 6:4:5:6 and c:
10:2^:
that they, who fall away should be renewed again by repentance. but their
latter end 2: Pet: 2:20:
as St. Peter says is worse then their beginning, wherefore St. John by that
one defection of those heretics, whom he doubts not to call Antichrists,
concludes, 1: Ioh: 2:19:
that they were never of the Church, Moreover, if any man should loose his
regeneration totally (as no man does, because he is borne of immortal seed 1.
Pet. 1.23. and because the seed 1: Ioh. 3.9:
of God remains in him) then must he be borne again, or else he cannot be
saved, being by his relapse fallen into the state of nature. But it is certain
ut semel nascimur, ita semel renascimur. as we are borne but once, so we are
borne anew but once. For as Augustine tract: 11: in loan
says, there are two birthes, the one, carnal; the other, spiritual; sed
ipsae duae singulae sunt, nec illa potest repeti, nec illa, but those two are
either of them bu^ one, neither can the one be repeted, nor the other. And this
also is to be observed, that all these adversaries of the certainty of
perseverance, howsoever they would seem to hold diverse opinions: yet they all
use the same arguments, and abuse the same testimonies of scripture, and by the
same arguments and testimonies, for the most part are refuted. Wherefore a
several refutation of them shall not need. But it shall be sufficient, as my
purpose was in the beginning, to deal directly against the Papists.

CHAP. VI.
The certainty of Perseverance proved from the causes and grounds thereof.

The certainty of perseverence proved.
. 1 AND first I will prove and demonstrate the certainty of Perseverance of all
the faith^^ll by evident arguments grounded upon the holy scriptures: and
secondly I will defend and maintain the same against the exceptions, and
objections of Bellarmine.

My proofs I will reduce unto two heads for therefore is the perseverance of
the faithful certain, first because the causes and grounds; whereon our
perseverance is founded, are sure and invincible. Secondly, because the causes,
which should cause the defectio^ of the faithful, if ever they should fall
away, are to weak for that purpose.

The certainty of perseverance proved from the causes thereof.
For as touching the first: The certainty of Perseverance is grounded, not upon
our own strength, or upon the constancy of our own wills, (for perseverance,
as Prosper de vocat. ge^^ 1. c. 24.
proves by many testimonies, is the gift of God; and as Agustine de bon
perseverantiae ex Ps. ^0.17,
says, est manus Dei non nostra quod non recedimus ab eo. it is Gods hand and
not ours, that we depart not from him. and lib: d^ correp^ ^ great. c: 1^:
ipse eos facit perseverare in bono, qui facit bones.) but it is grounded upon
the nature of the Deity* and the persons of the Trinity, confirming us, and the
gifts of saving grace in us, and preserving us unto eternal life.

. 2. And first I say the certainty of perseverance is grounded upon the nature
of God; From the nature of God, ^ first from hi^ immutability
as namely upon his immutabil^ty, truth, faithfullnes, and power, upon the
immutability, both of his will, and also of his grace, Of his will or decree,
which is immutable. for, None of the Elect shall ever fall away*

All the faithful are elect.

Therefore none of the faithful shall ever fall away.



The proposition I proved before at large, Chap: 3: 4
in answer to the second Question.

The assumption is proved thus. 1. All saving grace, (whether you understand
the degrees of GODS gracious favor in Christ, or the gifts of saving grace) is
proper to the elect, unde non communicate alienus, as Augustine Cotur. Cresc:
gram: l: 2. c: 15: De unit: eccles: c: 19: and in Ps 103: conc: 1:
says, that is, as he expounds himself, non possessu^us regnum Dei. whereof
none is partaker who is an aliant, that is, who shall not possess the kingdom
of GOD. 2. Justifying faith, is not of all men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. that is, not
common to the reprobate, but proper to the elect, and is therefore called the
faith of the elect. Tit. 1.1. it being a proper fruit of election. for
therefore do men believe because they are elected Act. 13.48. every one that
my father gives me, namely by election, comes unto me, namely by faith. Ioh.
6.37. And contrariwise, those which are not elected, do not believe, Ioh.
8.47.10.26. the election, says the Apostle, Rom: 11:7:
has obtained, (viz. the faith of the Gospel,) the rest were hardened. or if
they seem to believe, it is as we heard before out of Gregory, specie tenus,
in show only. For all that truly believe shall be saved; none of the reprobate
shall be saved, therefore none of the reprobate do truly believe.

3. All that shall be saved, are elected: all that truly believe shall be saved:
therefore all that truly believe, are elected* the assumption is the maine
promise Ioh. ^.16 Mark. 16.16
of the Gospel.

4. Moreover, all the faithful are justified, and all that are justified have
been effectually called, and all that are effectually called, are elected, and
consequently all that truly believe, are elected. For as Angustine De praedest.
sanct. c. 17. Non ergo alios, sed quos praedestinavit, ipsos and vocavit, illa
sc. vocatione secundum propositum; nec alios, sed quos ita vocavit, ipsos and
justificavit: nec alios, sed quos praedestinavit, vocavit, justificavit, ipsos
and glorificavit.
says. None other, but such as he has predestined, he has called with that
calling which is according to his purpose* nor other, but such as he has so
called, he has justified: nor other, but such as he has predestined,
called, justified, he has glorified.

On the immutability of his grace.
. 3. Upon the immutability of his grace, that is, both of his gracious love and
favor in Christ, and also of his gifts of saving grace. From the
unchangeablenes of his love and favor in Christ. we may argue thus. Those whom
God does always love, they do never fall away; for such as fall away, God
loves not, Heb. 10.38. But God loves the faithful with an everlasting love.
Ier, 31.3. John 13.1. So Chrysostom ^n Romans 5. hom 9.
(...). he said well, in which we stand, for such is the grace of God, it has
no end, it knows no limits. Prosper citing Romans 8.35. Devocat. gent. l 1. c
24.
where the Apostle speaks de Charitate Christi, qua (says he) eos quos
diligit, inseparabiles facit, and usque in finem perseverantes. whom Christ
does love, he makes them unseparable, that is, persevering to the end. It is
everlasting, not only in it self, but also to us; as it is eternal withont
beginning 2. Tim. 1.9. Ephesians. 14.6
, so it is perpetual without Psalm. 136
ending; it begins in Gods eternal foreknowledge, which has no beginning,
and ends in our glorificatio^, which has no ending* The gifts also of saving
grace, are as the Apostle says, (...), Romans 11.29 without repentance in the
giving and continuing whereof the Lord does show himself unchangeable. such as
are faith, hope, charity. Faith is invincible, as has been showed before.
Resp ad q. 3. page 34* c. 4.. 7.
so that not unworthily was it said by Chrysostom 1. Tim. 1. hom. 1.
, that it is the property of Faith never to fail. and Hom. 18. in Cor. 6,
faith a rock steadfast and unmovable; and, Hom. 9: in Heb. 6.
(...), faith is the foundation, the rest is the building, and it is Sermon. in
BB Job. and Abiah.
inexpugnabile scutum. Hope is an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast,
Heb. 6.19. and never makes ashamed, Romans 5.5.

Charity cannot be quenched, Cant. 8.7. but as Gregory says, in electorum
cordibus inextinguibilis manet, neither does it ever fall away, but it bears
all things, and endures all things. 1. Cor. 13.7.8. and in the last verse;
now, that is, in this life, remain faith, hope, and charity, these three, none
of which ends before the end of this life, and then, the end of those, which
have an end, is not their consumption, but their cons^mmation; faith ending in
vision, and hope in fruition, but charity is the greaetest, for it never has
an end, neither in this world, nor yet in the world to come. It was therefore
truly said of Ambrose De poeni^. did. 2. q. 3. charitos:
, that charity once had is never after lost: and of Augustine De poenit. did.
2. c. 2. apud August ^. 4. lib. de salutar doc. c 7. charitas quae deseri
potest, nunquam vera fuit.
, charity which may be lost, was never true. And of the same Augustine, as he
is cited by the master Lib: 3: did: 31:
of the sentences, and by Gratian. De poenit: did: 2. c: 8: Vnctio i^visibilis
charitas est, quae in quocunque fuerit, tanquam radix illi erit, quae ardente
fool ares^erenon potest: nutritur calore solis, non 21 escit.
the unction invisible is charity, the which in whomsoever it shall be, it will be
unto him a root* which when the Sun scorcheth, cannot be dried up, or
wither, it is nourished by the heat of the Sun, it is not dried. or as the
words are now read in Augustines Hom. 9 In epist. Joan. tract. 8. Vnctio
invisibilis charitas illa est, quae in quocunque fuerit, tanquam radix illi
erit, quamvis a^dente sole arescere non potest, omne quod radica tum est,
nutritur calore solis non exarescit.
Works. The invisible unction is that charity, which in whomsoever it shall be,
it shall be unto him as it were a root, though the Sun do burn, he cannot be
dried up or wither, all that is rooted (that is, that has this root) is
nourished with the heat of the Sun not dried up. And of Prosper. De vita
contemplat. ^ap 13. Charitas est recta voluntas juncta Deo inseparabiliter,
corruptionis nescia, nu^^i vitio mutabilitatis obnoxia, in omnibus semper
invicta.
Charity is a right will joined to God unseparably, not subject to corruption,
obnoxious to no vice of mutability, in all things always invincible. Gratians
De poenit* did. 2. c. 11 Ex praemissis itaque apparet, quod charitas semel
habita ul terius non amitritur.
conclusion in Ambrose his words is. It appears therefore by the premises,
that charity once had is never lost. Again, whosoever has true charity, he
shall be saved, and consequently shall persevere to salvation: yea as S. John
John 3:14
says, we know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love
the brethren. Charity is a grace proper and peculiar to the elect. For as
Augustine De unit: eccles: cap: 19 Ipsa quae domui Dei data su^^, no^nulla ex
ijs habent alieni, (id est non possessuri regnum Christi) hoc est donum
spiritus sancti proprium sanctorum, (...) de nemo communicate alienus.
says. Even of those gifts, which are given to the house of God, some of them
aliants have, that is, such as shall not possess the kingdom of God, but this
(meaning charity) is a gift the holy Ghost, proper to the Saints, whereof no
aliant is partaker. And again to the same effect. Aug: in Psalm: 10^: cor: 1:
Charitas est fons proprius and singularis bonorum, cui non communicate alienus.

. 4. But the certainty of perseverance is grounded also upon the truth of God
in his word, From the truth of God testifying th^s truth.
partly testifying, partly promising, partly by oath avouching it. Among the
testimonies of the word, some are plain and direct, as Ps. 15 5. he that
walks uprightly etc. shall never be moved. Ps. 112.6. and 9. Psalm. 112.6.9.
the upright shall never be removed, his righteousness endures for ever. Ps.
125.1. Ps. 125 1.
Those who put their trust in the Lord (as all the faithful do) are like to
mount Zion, which is not removed, but stands fast for ever. John 6.56. Ioh.
6.56.
he that eats my flesh (as every believer does) he abides in me (says our
Savior CHRIST) and I in him. 1. John. 2.19. 1 Ioh. 2.19
If they had been of us, they would surely have continued with us* Psalm.
37.37. The end of the upright man is peace. therefore he persevereth to the
end. he that is a servant (of sin) abides not in the house for ever, Ioh.
8.35.
he that is a son abides for ever. John 8.34.35.

Others conclude the certainty of perseverance by consequence* for whosoever
shall be saved, they do undoubtedly persevere Mat. 24.1^
unto salvation. for if any do fall away, they perish in their sins. Ezech.
18.24. 2. Pet. 1.20 But all that truly believe in Christ shall be saved. Ioh.
2.16. Mark. 16.16. all that eat the flesh of Christ (as all true believers
do) shall live for ever. John 6.51. yea they have eternal life Ioh. 3.36.6.47
54. 1. John. 5.23. and they are passed from death unto life. John 5.24. All
that truly believe in Christ, they are the sons of GOD. John 1.12. and being
sons they are also heirs, heirs of GOD, and coheyres with CHRIST. Romans 8.17
Again, All that are elected, shall be saved, and consequently persevere unto
salvation, as before has been showed. All that are called effectually, or
according to Gods purpose, do persevere unto salvation. For this calling of
God is without repentance, or irrevocable, Romans 11.29, and to them so called,
all things whatsoever work together for their good, and therefore nothing
causes them to fall away. Romans 8.28. for as the Apostle there reasons, v.
29.30. whom God did foreknow, he also did predestinate; etc. and whom he did
predestinate, them also he called, (viz according to his purpose) and whom he
so called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. Therefore says Augustine De praedest. sanct. c. 17 Non ergo alios,
sed quos praedestinavit, ipsos and vocavit, illa scil. vocatione secundum
propositum nec alios, sed quos ita vocavit, Ipsos and justificavit; nec alios,
sed quos praedestinavit, vocavit, justificavit, ipsos and glorificavit.
, whom he has predestined, them, and no other he has called, to wit, with
that calling accurding to his purpose, and whom he has so called, them, and no
other he has justified; and whom he has predestined, called, and justified;
them, and no other he has g^orified. And again, Manifestum est, non
justificatos, n^si vocatos; quanquam non omnes vocatos, sed eos qui secundum
propositum voca^i sunt, sicut superius dixit Apostolus.
it is manifest (says he) that none are justified, but such as are called,
though not all that are called, but those who are called according to his
purpose, as the Apostle before had said. Ambrose In Ephesians. 1. Quos Deus voca^e
dicitur, perseverant in fide, hi sunt quos elegit ante mundi constitutionem.
. whom God is said to call, they persevere in the faith* th^se are they whom he
elected before the creation of the world. And likewise Beda In Romans 8.28. Hi
(qui secundum propositum vocati sunt) in eo quod diligunt Deum p^^^manent usque
infinem: and qui ad tempus inde deviant, revertuntur, ut usque in finem
perdutant, quod in bono esse coeperunt.
. These (who are called according to his purpose) persevere in the love of God
unto the end, and they who for a time do go astray from it, (as all men do
when they sin) they return that they may continue to the end, what they
began to be (...) goodness. But most plainly Augustine De bono persevet c. 14.
Nam donum perseverantiae daturum Deum vocatis suis ista vocatione, de qua
dictum est, sine poenitentia sunt Dei dona and vocatio, omni Christiano
confitendum est.
: For that God will give the gift of perseverance to them that are called with
that calling, whereof it is said, the gifts of God, and calling are without
repentance, it must be confessed of every Christian.

Again, all that are justified are also glorified, Romans 8.30. for if Romans 5.9
when we were sinners Christ died for us, much more being justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him. Now I assume, all that truly
believe, are elected, as I proved before, all that truly believe, are
effectually called: all that truly believe are justified, therefore all that
truly believe shall be saved, and consequently persevere unto salvation. The like
may be said of adoption and reconciliation. All the faithful are the adopted
children of God, whom he has predestined Ephesians. 1.5.6.
unto the adoption of sounes by JESUS CHRIST to him self, according to the
good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved. Undoubtedly therefore the faithful shall
persevere unto salvation. Neither shall they who are reconciled to GOD, as all
the faithful are, perish. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled unto
God by the death of his sons; much more being reconciled. we shall be saved by
his life. And as Chrysostom argues. In Romans 5: hom: 9: (...).
if when we were obnoxious to such great matters, we were freed from all by
Christ, much more shall we be able by him to abide in that which we are.

Finally, this is the sum of the Gospel; whosoever truly believes in Christ
shall be saved. which our adversaries in this cause do plainly contradict,
saying; that many of them, which believe truly in CHRIST, shall not be saved.
and so plainly over-turne the foundation of our faith, which is the promise of
the Gospel.

^om the truth ^f God in his promises.
5. For the certainty of perseverance is also grounded on the promises of God,
promising perseverance to them that believe. And herein is great difference
between the covenant of works, and the covenant of Grace: that in the former
the Lord requires perseverance to be performed by us, (for which cause the
commandments are propounded in the future sense,) but in the latter, and
namely in this place, Luke 1.73.75. he promises to give it us. I (says the
Lord, speaking to every faithful man) will espouse thee for ever unto me by
faith. Hos. 2.19.20. I will make says the Lord, an everlasting covenant with
them, that I will never tu^ne away from them to do them good. (there is the
certainty of perseverance, ex part Dei, on Gods part) will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, that is, says Augustine De
bono perser. lib. ^. c. 2. Talis ac tantus est ^imor erit quem dabo in cordibus
illorum, ut mihi perseverantes adh^seant.
. such and so great shall my fear be, which I shall put into their hearts,
that they shall with perseverance adhere unto me. There is the certainty of
perseverance ex part credentis, on the believers part. Ioh. 6.37. whatsoever
my Father gives me, (namely by election) comes to me, says CHRIST, namely
by faith, and whosoever comes unto me, that is, believes in me, I will never
cast him off. There again is the certainty on Christ's part. But he will not
only not cast them off himself, but also he will not suffer the^ to be taken
from him by any others whatsoever. For I, says he, John 10.28. do give
eternal life to my sheep, (that is, to all the faithful) and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands, in confidence whereof, I
am assured, says the Apostle, Rom 8.38.3^
that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities nor powers, nor
things present nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

So that the perseverance of the faithful is certain on Gods part, on their
own part, and in respect of all creatures whatsoever. Ioh. 4.14.
But to return to the promises. Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever shall drink of the water
which I will give him, says CHRIST, meaning by water the saving graces of the
Holy Ghost, as ^^ is expounded Chap. 7. he shall never thirst again, Ioh. 7 39.
and much less shall the fountain of grace be wholly dried up nay the water
which I will give him, says he, shall be in him a wellspring of water springing
up into eternal life. unto which we may add Romans 9.33. Whosoever believes in
Christ shall not be confounded, and therefore whosoever believes in Christ,
shall never fall away. for all that fall away shall be confounded. see Ioh. 6.44.

But if any be so incredulous, From the truth of God in his oath.
as not to give credit to the promises of God: yet at the least let them
believe his oath, for the Lord has sworn in this place, Luke 1.73.74 75.
August. in Ps. 88. si securum me facis quod dixisti, quanto securiorem quia
jurasti^
that he will give to all those whom he redeemeth and justifies by CHRIST,
that is to all the faithful, that they shall worship him (...), without fear,
that is at the least without cause of fear, that is, (...) safely and without
danger in holiness and righteousness before him, not for some short time, and
then to fall away, but all the days of their life.

From the fidelity of God.
. 6. To the truth of God in his word, promise and oath, in which it is
impossible that the Lord should lie Heb. 6.18.
we will add the fidelity of God in respect, whereof he is most willing and
ready to perform his oath and promises. For from the faithfulness of God the
Apostle thus argues 1. Cor. 1.8.9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called
unto the fellowship of his Son JESUS CHRIST our LORD, therefore he will
confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. The Lord is faithful, who will stablish you, and
keep you from evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.24. faithful is he who has called you,
who also will effect it, namely that your whole spirit, soul and body, may be
kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. 1. Cor. 10.13. God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able.

From the power of God*
. 7. Unto the faithfullnes of God, let us adjoyne his power, For if the Lord
who has promised, that the faithful shall persevere, be both faithful, and
therefore willing; and also omnipotent, and therefore able to perform, what he
has promised, then out of question the persevera^ce of the faithful is most
certain. For though we be weak, and of ourselves not able to stand; yet God
is strong, and in our weakness 2, Cor, 12.9.
his strength is made perfect. By his power through faith we are preserved or
kept safe unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5. and from hence the certainty of
Perseverance is proved, not only by the Apostle, Romans 14.4. the servant of God
shall be established for God is able to make him stand (upon which place
Augustine Decorrept and gratia c. 12. Ipse itaque dat perseverantia^ qui
statuere pot^sis est e^s qu^ sta^^, ut perseverantissime stent, vel restituere
qui ce^iderunt.
infers. he therefore gives perseverance, who is able to establish those
who stand, that they may stand with very strong persevera^ce, or restore those
who shall fall.) but also by our Savior Christ. Ioh. 10.28.29. I give unto my
sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck
them out of my hand. My father which gave them me is greater then all, and none
is able to take them out of my fathers hand. I and my father are one. Every
faithful man therefore may and ought to resolve with the Apostle, 2, Tim, 1,
12:
I know whom I have believed, and I am assured that he is able to keep even
unto that day that which I have committed unto him, meaning himself (for unto
the Lord the faithful do commit and commend themselves 1 Pet, 4, 19: Ps, 31,
5.
as to a faithful creator and redeemer) and with David. Ps. 16.8. I have set
the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand I shall not be moved.

Seeing therefore that the perseverance of the faithful is grounded upon the
immutability of God in his decree, in his love, and in his saving gifts; upon
the truth of God in his word testifying, in his promises, and oath, assuring,
and confirming the same; upon the faithfullnes of GOD, whereby most readily he
will, and upon his omnipotency whereby most powerfully he can stablish the
faithful: we may not doubt of the constant perseverance of all the saints;
unless also we will doubt of the immutability, truth, faithfullnes, and power
of almighty GOD.

. 8. But the perseverance of the faithful is grounded not only upon the
nature of the Deity, Perserverance grounded on the persons of the Trinity.
as a most sure foundation, but also upon all and singular the persons of the
holy Trinity to wit, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

And first it is the will of the Father, The Father:
Ioh: 6, 39:,
says Christ our Savior, that of all that he has given me, that is, of all
the faithful and elect, I should loose none, but should raise it up at the
last day. and that we may be sure, that CHRIST will perform his Fathers will,
and will loose none of them for whom he gave him self; he adds in the next
verse, John c: 40.
and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son, that is, believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. And for further assurance hereof, add to the
will of the Father, which is ever effected, and can never be resisted, his
omnipotency. John 10.^9
My Father who gave me my sheep is greater then all, neither shall any be able
to pluck them out of his hands.

The Son.
. 9. But come we to the Son. For the certainty of our perseverance relyeth
also upon the redemption and intercession of Christ, as of our Priest: upon his
protection, as our King; upon our union with him, as our Head. Christ by his
merits had pu^chased for us all eternal redemption. Heb. 9.12. he has
thereby procured for us eternal righteousness. Dan. 9.24 and by one oblation he
ha^h made perfect all those who are sanctified by him for ever Heb. 10 14.
Therefore those that have redemption by Christ, and remission of sins, as all
the faithful have, they have it for ever* those that are justified by him, are
justified forever; those that are sanctified by him, are made perfect forever.
Christ in the days of his flesh, made intercession, (and his intercession is
always heard: Ioh: ^1: 42:
as for Peter, that his faith should not fail Luk: 23: 32
, no not for a moment, (for so much is signified in that phrase of speech,
(...), that is, that it should not suffer at any time a total eclipse) so also
for the perseverance, as Bellarmine confesses, De Rom* Ponti^: lib: ra c:
(...): alte Oravit Domnus Joan, 17* p^o perseve^^ntia omn^um electorum:
of all the elect; he might as truly have said, of all the faithful, not
only for his Apostles and disciples, whom the Father had given him; but also
Ioh, 17, 1^, 15, 20, 21,
for all them which should believe in him through their word, that they might
be one with him for ever. Of which prayer Athanasius says Ora^, q^e ont Ar an*
, this is the meaning, that the grace of the spirit in the disciples might be
(...), unmovable and irrevocable. And still he makes intercession for us,
sitting at the right hand of his Father, not only that our imperfect obedience
and services might be accepted, his holiness Ex: 28, 36, 38
being imputed unto them, and they being perfumed with the odours Apoc. 8, 4*
of his sacrifice: but also that we should, notwithstanding our sins, whereunto
all of us do fall through humane infirmity, be kept and continued in the grace
and favor of God. For that is it which S. John says, 1, Ioh, 2, 1, ^,
These things I write unto you, that ye sin not: but if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propi^iation for our sins. who Heb, 7, 25,
is therefore able perfectly to save those that come to God by him, because he
ever lives to make intercession for them* And to the same purpose, Romans 8.
Ro^* 8, 33, 34: ^^:
who shall condemn the elect of God? seeing it is God that justifies, and
Christ which died, or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right
hand of God, making intercession for us. who shall separaee us from the love of
CHRIST? to conclude this point with Augustine: De corrept and gratia c. 2.
seeing CHRIST makes intercession for those who are called according to his
purpose, that their faith do not fail: without doubt it shall not fail unto
the end; and for that cause shall persever to the end, neither shall the end of
this life find it not remaining. Now whom CHRIST has redeemed, and for whom
he makes intercession as a Priest, them also he protecteth as a King, Ps.
110.1.
sitting at the right hand of his Father, subdu^ng his and our enemies, and
defending us against them. John 10. I give says he John 10.18.
eternal life to my sheep, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them (...) of my hand. Nor in deed can it come to pass, that tho^^ who
are by Christ redeemed out of the hand of their spiritual enemies, should by
them be recovered (...)ut of his hands; unless we can imagine, that the
enemies of our salvation, whom Christ has already o^ercome for us are
stronger, and of more might then God the Father, and Christ our Savior.
Moreover, those who are redeemed by Christ, and justified by faith in him, as
all the faithful are, are also engrafted into Christ, and united unto him as
members to our Head. Now the body is safe, while the head is well, and
therefore he says John 14.19. because I live, you shall live also. Our life is
hid Col. 3.3.
, or safely laid up in God with Christ in heaven. For by reason of this union,
we are not only quickened and raised together with Christ, but in him also God
Ephesians. 2.6.
(...) has made us sit together in heavenly places, and in him has given unto
us eternal life 1. Ioh. 5.55.12.13.
. for this is the record of God, that he has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in his son, he that has the Son has life, these things have
I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that you may
know that you have eternal life. And as we have union with him as our Head, so
also as our Husband, who having espoused all the faithful unto him for ever by
faith, Hos. 2.19.20. has joined us unto himself by the indissoluble bond of
wedlock. Ephesians. ^.23.29.32.

. 10. The holy Ghost
Lastly by the spirit of God, Ps. 11 ^2.
the faithful are stablished. For the spirit by his testimony, as he is the
spirit of adoption witnesses; and by his efficacy, as he is the spirit of
regeneration, works the perseverance of the faithful. For this spirit which
is the spirit of truth, teaches them that they shall abide in Christ, and as
it taught you. says S. John 1. Ioh. 1 27
. ye shall abide in him. This spirit bears witness with our spirit Romans 9.16
, that we are the sons and heirs of God, and coheyres with Christ. and of
this inheritance Ephesians. 1.15.^4.
he is the earnest, by whom Ephesians. 4.30.
also we are sealed unto the day of redemption, he has begotten us not of
curruptible, but of incorruptible seed, 1. Pet. 1.23. which is called
incorruptible, because it is so in us, and ever abides in us. 1. John. 3.9. by
which he has begun in all, whom he has regenerated, a spiritual life,
which never shall have end.

CHAP. VII.
The certainty of perseverance proved from the supposed causes of defection,
nothing being able to separate the faithful from the love of God in Christ.

. 1. SEeing therefore the perseverance of the faithful is founded both upon
the nature of the Deity, From the supposed causes of defection.
as also upon the persons of the Trinity, as we have showed; what, or who
shall be able (that I may come to the supposed causes of defectio^) to separat
Romans 8.35
us from the love of Christ? For by this interrogation the Apostle does more
emphatically deny, that any thing whatsoever shall be able to separate us from
Christ, then if in plain terms he had said, as after he does. Nothing
whatsoever is able to separate us from the love of God in Christ. Shall
affl^ct^on, or the cause thereof which is sin shall heresy, or any
temptation? shall the world, or the god of the world the devil, or in a word
shall any creature whatsoever? I am assured, Romans 8.38.39.
says the Apostle, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities nor powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor
^eight^nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to s^perate us (meaning
by us any of the faithful or elect) from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

Not affliction. for all the afflictions of the godly are either chastisements
or trialls, which are laid upon the^ for their Heb. 12.10.
good, not to hurt them, but to purge them; not to drive them from God, but to
draw them nearer to him; not to destroy them, but to pr^v^nt destruction. For
when we 1. Cor. 11.31.
(that is to say the faithful, who are not of the world) are judged, that is
afflicted for our sins, we are chastised of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. To the faithful it is given, Phil 1 29.
not only to believe, but also to suffer. For howsoever those, which receive
the seed upon stony ground, do fade and fall away, when temptation or
tribulation arises Luke 8.13.15.
yet those who have received the seed into a good and honest heart do retain
the same, and bring forth fruit with patience or perseverance. Yea, so far
are afflictions from overthrowing the faith and hope of the saints, that they
become, through the efficacy of the spirit, notable means to exercise and
confirm them. For which cause, as Peter and James exhort the faithful to
rejoice in afflictions, 1. Pet 4.13. Iam. 1: 2: 3:
because afflictions are trialls whereby the sound and upright are discerned:
(whereupon it follows, that none that are (...), that is sound and upright,
are caused by afflictions to fall away) so St. Paul does testify, that the
faithful do rejoice therein. By faith says he we stand, and rejoice under the
hope of the glory of God. Romans 5.2: 3: 4: 5:
and not that only, but also we rejoice in afflictions, knowing that
affliction brings forth patience, and patience probation, and probation hope,
and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us, or as he speaks elsewhere,
because 2, Cor, 1, 5,
as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds through
Christ. Neither do they only rejoice in afflictions, but also triumph over
them. In all these things, says the Apostle Rom: 8: 3^,
(...) we are more then conquerours, through him that has loved us.

. 2. Not sin. for neither original, Not sin:
nor actual. Not original, which is called the flesh; for howsoever it
remains in the children of God, yet it does not reign in them; and whiles it
does not reign in them, it cannot make them fall away. Now that it does not
reign in the^, is thus proved. 1. Because those who are actually made
partakers of the redemption wrought by Christ (as all the faithful are) are
freed as well from the bondage, or dominion, Rom, 8, 2,
as from the guilt of sin. 2ly. because in the act of regeneration sin is
mortified in some measure, and has received a deadly wound, so that it can no
more reign in the regenerate. For they that are baptized into Christ are
baptized into his death, and their old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, as the Apostle testifies Romans 6.3.6. and Gal. 5
24. Those that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the passion and lusts
thereof. Now they that are dea^ to sin, how should they live to it? for as
Christ being once raised from death dies no more, neither has death any more
dominion over him; so we being raised once from the death of sin, sin can
no more reign over us, as the Apostle argues. Romans 6.9. Romans 6.14.
and in the 14 verse, to the singular comfort of all the faithful, he assures
them; that sin shall not have dominion over them, because they are not under
the law, but under grace.

Not the will of the flesh.
. 3. And if not the flesh, then not the will of the flesh; for in our
regeneration our will especially is renewed and changed. For howsoever some do
teach, that a regenerate man may will his falling away, and that he may fall
away, if he will, there being no such perseverance granted to men, but that of
their own accord they may fall away: unto which error of the semipelagians
some of late have added a strange conceit: that in the regenerate man there is
the spirit and the flesh, and the will set between both, which sometimes
follows the spirit, and sometimes the flesh, and this will being mutable, our
estate in grace is mutable, and therefore howsoever GOD does not forsake the
faithful, yet they may of their own accord fall from GOD.

But hereunto I answer, 1. that the will of a regenerate man is also
regenerated; and is therefore partly spirit and partly flesh, willing that
which is good, as it is spirit, and nilling it as it is flesh: willing that
which is evil, as it is flesh, and nilling it as it is spirit; and that
between these two there is such a conflict Gal 5 17.
that a regenerate man cannot will with his full will, either that which is
evil, or that which is good, And therefore as his good actions are stained
with the flesh; so his sinful actions are sins of infirmity, as being done
against his will and purpose, as he is a man regenerate.

2. That our perseverance does not depend upon our own will, though
regenerate, being left to it self, and much less upon the will of our flesh,
or upon our own strength; but upon the eternal love of God, from which no
creature, and therefore not our own will shall be able to separate us, and upon
the immutable will and infinite power of GOD, who is both able and willing to
stablish us, as has been said. I have before observed out of St. Augustine De
bono persev. c. 7, ex Ps 80 1^:.9.
that it is the hand of GOD upon us, and not our own, that we do not depart
from him, and as he says in the same place, Non nisi ad gratiam suam Deum
pertinere voluisse, ut homo accedat ad eum: neque nisi ad gratiam suam
pertinere voluisse, ut homo non recedat ab eo that he would have it belong to
his grace alone, both that men do come to him, and also that they do not
depart from him. and again, voluntate suae cadit, De bono perse ver. l. 2. c.
8.
qui cadit: and voluntate Dei stat, qui stat.

3. That to them, who are regenerate a constant will to persevere is partly
given by the spirit in their regeneration, and continued by the assisting grace
of the spirit in performance of the particular acts of sanctification; and
partly procured by our Saviors intercession. For as touching the former, in
our regeneration our will is renewed, seriously and constantly to will our
salvation and perseverance thereunto and in the continued course of our
sanctification we are assisted by the spirit to will and to do good, and to
resist evil, For as St. Augustine testifies De corrept and gratia c. 12.
God to his saints does give, not only such an help as he gave to the first
man, without which they cannot persevere, if they will; but also he works in
them to will; that because they shall not persevere, unless they both can and
will, the power and will to persevere should be given them by the largess of
Gods grace. For so greatly is their will inflamed by the holy Ghost, that
therefore they can, because they so will, therefore they so will, because God
works that they will. For in so great infirmity of this life, in which
infirmity notwithstanding for the repressing of pride, virtue was to be
perfected; if their will were left to them selves, that in the help of GOD,
without which they cannot persevere, they might abide if they would, and GOD
should not work in them, that they would: among so many and so great
temptations, the will it self by its infirmity would fail; and therefore they
could not persevere, because failing through infirmity, they would not so much
as will, or would not so will, by reason of the weakness of the will, as that
they could. Sub ventum est ergo infirmit^ti voluntaris human^, ut divina gratia
indecl nab^l^ter, and inseparabiliter ageretu^, and ideo quamvis infirma non
deficeter, neque adversitate aliqua vin^eretur.
Therefore help was given to the infirmity of man's will, that by the grace of
GOD it should be acted unavoydably, and unseparably; and therefore though
weak, should not fail nor be overcome by any adversity.

And as for the latter, it is evident, that as our Savior prayed for Peter,
that his faith might not fail, Luke 22.32. so he prayed also for the rest of
the Apostles, and for all the faithful, that they might persevere Ioh. 17,
15.20 21.
, and consequently that they might have a firm and constant will to persevere.
For as Augustine says, De corrept. and gratia c. 8. Quando rogavit Christus ne
fides Petri deficeret, quid aliud rogavit, nisi ut haberet in fide l^berrimam,
fort^ssimam, invictissimam, perseverantissimam voluntatem
When Christ prayed that Peter's faith should not fail, what else did he ask,
but that he might have a most free, strong, invincible, and persevering will in
the faith. And a little before An and ebis decere, etiam rogante Christo ne
deficeret fides Petri, d^fecturum fuisse, si eam Petrus deficere voluiss^t;
quasi aliud Pet us ullo modo vellet, quam quod Christus rogasser, ut vellet.
. will you dare to say, that although Christ prayed, that Peter's faith should
not fail, it would have failed, if Peter would have it fail? as though Peter
would or could by any means will an other thing then what Christ had asked for
him, that he would will.

And to the like purpose Athanasius says Orat. 4. cont. Arian.
, that when our Savior prayed for the faithful, that they may be one, as he
(says he) are one, his meaning was, that the grace of the spirit bestowed upon
them, might be unmovable and irrevocable. (...).
that what was granted to the son by nature, to be in the father that should
be given unto us irrevocably by the spirit, which the Apostle knowing, says,
(...).
who shall s^parate us from the love of Christ? for irre^ocable are the gifts
of God, and the grace of his calling.

. 4. Neither do actual sins cause the faithful to fall away. Not actual
sins.
For 1. God does keep the feet of his Saints. 1. Sam* 2* 9. And the steps of
a man (meaning a good man, with whose way God is delighted, Ps. 37.23.24.
are established by the Lord Ps. 37.23.24.
. Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand. 2. If the sins of the faithful should deprive them of
grace; then either sins of ignorance, or of infirmity, or of malice. But not
sins of ignorance, or of infirmity: for such sins may and do, even in the
best, stand or consist with grace. David complayneth of the greatness and
multitude of his sins, in many of his Psalms; wherein notwithstanding he
professes his faith and affiance in God. As Ps. 25.1. ^um 11.38.3.4.18. and
15.40.12. and 17.51.14. Nor sins of malice committed with full consent of will:
for such are not incide^t unto the faithful, and regenerat; who are partly
spirit, and partly flesh: because they are borne of God, and the seed of God
remains in the^, and therefore cannot so sin, as I have showed heretofore
in answer to the sixth question, out of the 1. Ioh. 3.9. who also chap. 5, 18.
notes this to have been a received truth in his time; we know (says he) that
whosoever is borne of God sins not (namely to death) but he that is begotten
of God keeps himself, (or as the vulgar edition has) generatio Dei
conservat eum) and that wicked one touches him not. 3. Howsoever the sins of
the faithful many times deserve to exclude them out of Gods favor, yet
notwithstanding such is the gracious dispensation of Gods fatherly providence
toward them, that he causes all things both good and bad, Romans 8.28,
^^d all evil not only of punishment, but also of sin, to cooperate or
work together for their good, Romans 8.28. the same is acknowledged by S.
Augustine De corrept: and gratia Talibus Deus deligentibus eum omnia coeperatur
in bonum, usque adeo pro^sus omnia, ut ^tiam si qui little deviant and
exorbitant, etiam hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia humiliores
tedeunt, and doctiores:
. God to such lovers of him works all things for their good; and so far
forth all things all together, that if any of them go astray, or be
exorbitant, this also he makes availeable for their good: because they return
more humble and more learned. And by S. Basil. Ascat qu. 81. (...).
The offenses of the godly many times and according to the disp^nsation (of
Gods providence) turn to their pr^fit* Now if they work for the good of Gods
children, then do they not work them out of the favor of God.

Not heresy.
Not any heresy fundamental or razing the foundation; for it is not possible
Mat. 2^ 24
, that the elect aft^e their effectual calling, should be so seduced, But
being onee of the Church 1. John 2.19
, they do ever abide in the communion thereof. For though sometimes, even
these which have been teachers of others, do fall away; nevertheless the
foundation of God 2. Tim. 2.19.
stands sure. And the faithful have received 1. Ioh. 2.^0.27.
an ^uction from the holy one, which abides in them, and even as it has
taught them, so shall they abide in him. Again, there must be heresies 1 Cor
1^.^9.
, as the Apostle says, that (...), they that are sound Christians may be
known, to wit, by not e^bracing them. De p^aescript. advers. haeres. c: 3:
therefore those that are seduced by heresies were not sound. as Tertullian
also says (as has been before cited) Neque fideles, neque prudentes, neque
usitatos aestimandos, quos haereses potuerint demutare. Nemo christianus, nisi
qui ad fidem usque perseveraverit.

. 5. Not any temptation; for as we heard before, Not temptation.
the Lord is faithful, 1 Cor: 10:13
, neither will he suffer any of his children to be tempted above their
strength. And our Savior testifies, that those, who are sound Christians Luk:
^:48
, have built upon the rock; and therefore cannot by any violence of temptations
be overthrown. Augustine quest: 4^: ad Oros:
therefore compares the faithful to such things as are square, which
howsoever they be tossed or turned, do stand alike so the godly, In
quibuslibet tentationibus stabiles permanent.
says he, in all temptations remain steadfast. Now it is certain, that no man
falls away unless he be withdrawn by temptation. For as Prosper Devocat:
gent: l: 1: c: ^4:
says, quid aliud est perseverare, quam tentatione non vinci? what is it to
persevere, but not to be overcome by temptation? But CHRIST has promised, that
against the Church or any found member thereof the gates, that is, the power of
hell shall not prevail. And true is the saying of Gregory Saepe tentatio in
cord electorum lumen justitiae abscondit, sed non interimit: Moral: l: 8: c: 6
Not the wo^ld.
Temptation does oftentimes hide the light of righteousness, in the heart of the
elect, but not destroy it. Not the world, for none but worldlings, who love the
world, and the things therein more then God, are overcome by the world: now
they that are lovers of the world, 1. Ioh 2.15 16
the love of God is not in them, but all that is borne of God overcommeth the
world, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith, by which
the victory of CHRIST Ioh. 16.33.
who overcame the world for us, is communicated unto us.

Not the devil.
Not the devil: for that wicked one 1. Ioh. 5.18.
shall not be able to touch them that are borne of God, namely to hurt them, or
to cause them to sin unto death. For he 1. Ioh. 4.4.
that is in us, is greater then he that is in the world* who having not only
bound the strong man Luk, 11.22.
as being stronger then he, but having also spoiled Col. 2:15:
principalities and powers, has made a show of them openly, and triumphed
over them; and all this for our sake, that he might tread satan Rom, 16, 20,
under our feet. And further we know, that the devil himself is not able to
annoy any of us, either in our persons, Job, 1 and 2: Mat, 8, 31,
or those things which belong unto us, further then it pleases GOD, to give
him leave or commission. yea the Lord is so far from suffering him to hurt
us, that he causes all his temptations and machinations against us to turn to
our good.

No creature, Rom, 8, 38 3 9,
. 6. And not only principalities and powers, but no creature whatsoever shall be
able to separate us from the love of God in Christ.

And here we are to observe, that diverse of those things already spoken of, as
afflictions, heresies, temptations of any of our spiritual enemies, as they
are ordered of GOD, are trialls to discern the sound from the unsound.
therefore those that are sound are not overcome by them, they are as it were
the fan wherewith Christ does purge his flower; and wherewith not the sound
corn, but the chafe is scattered, as we heard before out of Tertullian de
prescript, c. 3.
and Cyprian. de vuit. eccl. and epist. 55.


Finally all things whatsoever, not only good but also evil, and evil not
only of punishment as afflictions, but also of sin, are turned unto the good of
Gods children. We know says the Apostle Romans 8.28.
that all things work together for good, unto the^ that love God. to the^ that
are called according to his purpose. Now if all things whatsoever by the
gracious dispensatio^ of Gods providence are turned unto their good, the^ it is
certain, that nothing can happen to conclude them totally or finally out of
Gods favor: un^^sse any will be so absurd as to say, that it is good for men to
be separated from the love of God in Christ.

Seeing therefore perseverance is the privilege of every upright and sound
christian, let us by walking uprightly before God in holiness and righteousness,
endeavor to make our calling and election, and co^seque^tly our persevera^ce
sure unto us* for if we do 2. Pet. 1.10. Ps. 15.^^
these things we shall never be removed.

CHAP. VIII.
Bellarmines exceptions refuted.

. 1.NOW let us see what Bellarmine is able, Bellarmines exc^ptions against 5
testimon^es of scripture.
either to answer to our argument, or to object against our assertion. Out
of that multitude of infallible testimonies, and unanswearable arguments, which
are produced for the proof of our assertion, he culleth our de justified. ^.
c. 15.
5 testimonies only, which as he confesses, do in show not a little favor
our opinion. The first is that in the Canticles. Cant. 8.7.
Chap. 8. V. 7. much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown
it, if a man should give all the substance of his house for love, they would
greatly contemn it, that is, it would utterly be contemned. In which words the
love of the Church, and of every faithful soul toward Christ is testified to
be such, that neither tribulations, signified by waters, though they be many
and mighty, should be able to quench it, not all the desires of the world
should be a* able to withdraw it from Christ her husband.

His exception against this place is partly false, and partly ridiculous.
False, when as he says, this testimony does not prove, that charity cannot be
lost, if men be willing to cast it off, as many willingly do, embracing the
lusts and desires of the world; to whom it is said, Apo^^^. I have a few things
against thee, because thou have left thy first love, remember whence thou art
fal^e. In which answer Bellarmine signifies, that although true charity cannot
be taken from a man; yet he may willingly put it off, which is false. For he
that has true charity, proceeding from a pure heart, from a good conscience,
and faith unfeigned, has a right or good will Chatitas est voluntas recta and
bona ad Deum.
toward God, his will and affections being regenerate in such sort, that he
cannot so will the loosing or putting off the love of Christ, as that he should
loose it, or if he should, it would be in respect of some other worldly desire,
which he should more affect. But the holy Ghost here testifies, that as love
cannot be taken from him; that is endued therewith; so himself will not forgo
it for all the profits and pleasures of the world. To the place of the
Apocalypse, Apoc. 2.
I answered before, Chap. 40. 1.
that it speaks only of the measure and degree, for true love cannot in
respect of any kinds it has, be distinguished into the first and the second,
but in respect of the measure and degree. And in that sense the Angel of
Ephesus is said to have left and to be fallen from that measure and degree of
love which in former times he had. The very like exception is by others taken
against such allegatio^s of Scripture, as do testify, Ioh. 6.^7.10.28.29.
that neither the Lord will cast off the fait^full, neither will he suffer any
other to pluck the^ out of his hand. It is true, say they, but yet the
faithful may voluntarily, and of their own accord fall away. But I answer,
that they, whose will is once regenerate, cannot througely or wholely will
their defection or falling away, as has been already Chap. 8. 3:
proved. 2ly. both to Bellarmine and the^ I answer, that the certainty of our
perseverance, and constancy of Gods graces in us, is not grounded upon our own
will, or strength in our selves, but upon the will of God which is immutable,
and upon his power, which is omnipotent. Thirdly, that by the Scriptures
perseverance is proved to be certain, not only on Gods part, but also on the
believers, being stablished and confirmed by the Lord. Ier. 32.40. I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, 1. Ioh. 2.19. if
they had been of us, they would surely have remained with us, 1. Ioh. 3.9. he
that is borne of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
neither can he sin, because he is bo^ne of God. 1. Ioh. 5. 18. he that is
borne of God sins not (unto death.) but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

The other part of Bellarmines answer is ridiculous, when he says. that this
place of the Canticles, does not prove, that charity may not be lost, but that
whilst charity remains, there is no tribulation which may not easily be
borne, for the Apostle teaches, that charity suffers and indureth all
things. 1. Cor. 13. Ans. the Question is, whether charity may be lost; we prove
it cannot, because charity cannot be extinguished, It is true, says
Bellarmine, it cannot be extinguished so long as a man has it; for charity
endures all things. As if he should have said, that a man cannot loose his
charity, whilst he has it. And such is the answer that some make to those
places of Scripture, which testify, that the sheep of CHRIST shall not be
plucked out of his hands, that the just shall never be removed, that ^he
faithful and elect shall not fall away, that they shall never perish, Ioh.
10.28. It is true indeed, say they, in sensu composito, that is, whilst they
continue sheep, whiles they remain just, faithful and elect; But if at any
time they do not retain the nature of sheep, if they cease to be just,
faithful, and elect, then may they fall away, Why, but this is the question
betwixt us, whether those that be the sheep of CHRIST shall ever continue to be
his sheep, and whether those that be just, faithful, and elect, shall so
remain; we prove they shall, by evident testimonies of Scripture, which they so
expound, as if the holy Ghost had said, whiles men did not cease to be the
sheep of CHRIST, to be just, to be faithful and elect, they should so continue
and persevere. But if they did cease to be CHRIST'S sheep, to be just, faithful
and elect, then surely they should be no longer the sheep of Christ, no longer
just, faithful or elect, which is ridiculous. And not unlike is the exception,
which some take against those manifest places of scripture, testifying the
certainty of salvation, and consequently of persevera^ce unto salvation, as,
whosoever believes in Christ; Ioh. 3.16. Mark. 16.26
shall be saved* Whosoever eats Ioh. 6^^4.
the flesh of Christ, or drinks his blood, has eternal life; whosoever shall
drink of the water John 4, 14.
that Christ shall give him, shall never thirst again; that these words
believing, eating, drinking, do signify continued, or at least final acts. Not
that every one that once believes, eats or drinks should be saved: but he
that believes, eats, drinks to the end. Whereas it is certain, that Christ's
meaning is, that whosoever truly believes in him, shall believe to the end.
For if every one that believes shall be saved, the^ it follows, that he shall
persevere unto salvation, that he which eats of his flesh, and drinks of
his blood, shall thereby be nourished unto eternal life: that he which once
drinks of the water, which CHRIST shall give him, shall never thirst again.
Christ is the bread of life, or the living bread which gives life eternal to
those that eat his body, and drink his blood, that is, to those that believe
in him. For I am Ioh. 6.^^.
says he, the bread of life, he that comes to me, that is, that once eats
of my body, shall never hunger, and he that believes in me, that is that once
drinks of my blood, shall never thirst. Not as your fathers did eat Manna V.
^^
and are dead: he that eats of this bread shall live for ever. And not only
so, but he that believes in me, says Christ, has everlasting life, he does
not say shall have, but so soon as he truly believes, he has everlasting
life. And (as he had said in the Chapter Ioh. 5.^4.
going before) is passed from death unto life. Neither does he only say, if
any man shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, which were sufficient
to prove the perseverance of him, that once eats the body of Christ, unto
eternal life: but he says Ioh. 14.
who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life. which it
were foolish to understand only of the end of a man's life, and as it were of
the last gasp. But his meaning is, that a man does no sooner believe truly in
Christ, or eat his body or drink his blood, but he has eternal life, in
respect of the certainty of salvation, and consequently of perseverance to
salvation, therefore he that truly believes, believes to the end. And so our
savior Christ says in the same Chap. he that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood (...) V. 16.
abides in me, and I in him. Neither does our Savior Christ only say, that
whosoever shall drink the water, that I shall give him, shall never thirst
again, which were sufficient to prove the certainty of perseveran^e, but he
adds, Ioh. 4:14.
the water which I will give him, it shall become in him (that once drinks
thereof) a well spring or fountain of water springing up unto life everlasting.

Testimony. Ioh. 4.14.
. 2. The second testimony is that place now mentioned of S* John 4.14.
whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never any more
be a thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up unto everlasting life; where, by water, our Savior means
the spirit of grace (as Ioh. 7. ^9. Es. 44.3.) wherewith whosoever is once
endued, he shall never after be destitute of the spirit, or of grace; but the
spirit shall be in him a living fountain, which shall never be dried up, but
ever springing in him, until he has attained to the end of his faith,
eternal life.

Bellarmines (...).
This testimony says Bellarmine, is of the same force with the former. which
in deed is true, for there, charity was compared to a fire, that can never be
quenched: and here the grace of God to a fountain, that can never be dried.
But perhaps his meaning is, that his answer to this shall be such as was to the
former. For, says he, in whom the grace of God, or charity remains, he shall
never thirst, because he has a living fountain in him. Notwithstanding this
fountain may be dried and stopped up, whil^s we are in this place of
temptations. And if it happen to be dried, that is, if we fall from grace,
according to that, Gal. 5. you are fallen from grace, what marvel is it, if
again we begin (our concupiscence urging us) to thirst after vain delights.
Of which speech the former part is ridiculous like the former answer: for
whereas the question is, whether a man may fall from grace, and he proving by
this most pregnant testimony* that he, who once is endued with the spirit of
grace which is in him as an everliving fou^tain, shall never be athirst again,
that is, shall never be dry, or utterly destitute of grace, (for that is
Christ's meaning, as appears by comparing this verse with the 13th) he
answers, in deed whiles grace remains in him, whiles the fountain is not
dried, (which Christ says, never shall be dried) he shall not thirst, that is,
whiles he has store, he shall not want. But the latter part of Bellarmines
answer plainly contradicts the assertion of our Savior Christ. For whereas
our Savior says, that he which drinks of that water which he shall give him,
shall never be athirst, because it shall be in him a fountain of water, springing
to eternal life, Bellarmine says, that this fountain may be dried up, in
this place of temptations, neither shall it be a fountain springing to
eternal life, and that it being dried up, the party shall be athirst. To his
allegation out of the Gal. 5. I have already answered, and shall again, when I
come to his arguments. viz. to his 6. tes^imony. Chap. ^. 1.
. 3. The third testimony is Romans 8.35. who shall separat us from the love of
Christ? Testimony. Rom ^^:35.
and after v. 38.39. Certus sum, I am assured that neither death nor life, etc.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God. Where, by us he means all
the faithful and elect; and by the love of God, not our love toward God, but
Gods love toward us, as appears plainly by the last words, which Bellarmine,
because he was minded to expound otherwise the^ the Apostle meant, has
omitted; nothing shall be abl^, says the Apostle, Romans 8^39
to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, that
is, from that love wherewith he loveeh us in Christ.

To this testimony Bellarmine shapeth two answeares. the former, that the sense
of this place is according to the exposition of Augustine ^
that no terror, nor tribulation can make a man, in who^ charity is ferve^t, to
offend his God. But Augustine does not only speak of terrors and tribulations,
but of allureme^ts also, and promises. And he does not say as Bellarmine makes
him, that nothing can make a man to offend his God (which is more then is true)
but as the Apostle teaches him, that nothing can separate him from the love of
God. Notwithstanding (says he) Augustine in the same place, admonishes, that
charity in this life may be lost, and therefore that so great a good is most
diligently to be kept. If Augustine had said so, we must have believed the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 13.^.
rather then him* but indeed he says not so, but rather the contrary. For if
nothing says he, does separate us from the love of God (which the Apostle
testifies, and Augustine takes for granted) what can be not only better, but
more certain the^ this good. Only he advises, that men should take heed,
that by the love of the world they be not with-drawne from the love of God.
which does not argue, that true love may be lost, (for presently Augustine
infers, therefore not the other creature, meaning thereby the world, does
separate us) but that there are many which profess themselves to love God, who
had need to be admonished to labor for such a love of God, as will not give
place to the love of the world. For to the same purpose St. John Ioh 2 15.
exhorts, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world. his
reason is, if any man love the world the love of the father is not in him. He
therefore that is a lover of the world, more the^ of God, does not loose his
love of God, but bewrays himself never to have had it. For those who are
lovers of the world, b are haters of God as St. James says.

His second answer, not only agrees with the truth but also confirms that
assertion of ours, for which this testimony is alleged, viz. that the Apostle
here speaks in the person of the elect, de justi^, l 3 c 9 respons ad
testimo. 7.
as before he said, referring us to the 9. Chap. where he expounds this
testimony, whereof as he says, this is the sense, Certu^ esse omnes
predestinatos perseveraturos in charitate Dei. it is certain that all that are
predestined unto life, shall persevere in the love of God. For the same
Apostle had said a little before, we know that all things work for the good of
those that love God, who are called according to his purpose. For whom he has
foreknowne, he has predestined etc. And this (says he) is Augustines De
corrept, and g^^a. c. 7.
judgment of this place. And this, say I, is as much as we desire, seeing all
that are called according to Gods purpose, all that are justified, (as all are
that truly believe) are also predestined or elected) as I have manifestly
proved before. chap 7.. ^.
But here is to be noted, that some, who join with the Papists in their
erroneous assertion, that a reprobate may be justified, are worse then the
Papists, in saying, that the predestinate or elect, may utterly fall away from
the grace of God and become reprobates and so perish eternally, which according
to the scriptures, and the ancient fathers is impossible.

. 4. The 4th testimony. Testimony 4. 1. Cor.
1. Cor. 13.8. Charity does never fall away. whereunto Bellarmine frames two
answears. first, that charity is said never to fall away, because it is never
broken with labors, but endures all things. If the Apostle had said no more
but so, even that would have proved, that chariey never wholly saileth. but the
Apostle says more. For when he had said before, that Charity suffers all
things and endures all things (which Bellarmine absurdly makes the exposition
of that which follows) he adds, that it never falls away. In the second
place therefore he answeareth, that charity indeed does not fall of it self,
but we may fall from it, which is a most frivolous cavil, for if any man
should fall from charity, would not his charity fail and fall away? But the
Apostle says, that c^arity never falls away, yea but the Apostle puts a
difference betwixt charity and the other two graces says and hope in respect
of the life to come: for charity remains in the life to come, but faith and
hope end with this life: and in this respect he says, that charity never
falls away, therefore (says he) the Apostle does not signify, that no man
loses charity, but he shows, that it is not repugnant to charity, that it
should always remain, as it is repugnant to faith and hope. I answer, if
charity never fall away, then not in this life, in respect whereof the Apostle
acknowledges these 3 graces to agree in the property of continuance, though
there be difference in respect of the life to come. Now, 1. Cor. 13.13.
says he, that is, in this life, abides faith, hope and charity, these 3. but
the greatest of these is charity, which does not only abide in this life, as
the 2 other graces do, but also in the life to come. And whereas he says, the
Apostle shows that it is not repugnant to charity to remain always, but
does not signify that no man loses his charity, mark how Sophistically he
deals. The Apostle sets it down as one of the propertyes of charity that
it never falls away he expounds the Apostle, as if he had said, it may so
fall out, that charity never fails away, for it is not repugnant to the
nature of it to remain forever. And whereas the Apostle attributes those
propertyes to charity in respect of the ^ruits and effects which it works in
them, who are truly endued therewith, he would have them understood of charity
considered in it self. But who knows not, that charity is said not to seek
her own things not to envy, not to fall away. but to suffer, to believe, to
hope, to endure all things, because it causes him, in whom it is thus to be
disposed.

. 5. The fifth and last testimony is. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Testimony 5.
Whosoever is borne of God commits not sin, because his seed remains in
him, neither can he sin because he is borne of God. Bellarmine in steed of
one good answer tells us, there be five several expositions of this place
which he confesses to be of all others the most difficult The first of
Ambrose; who refers this place to the state of future glory. the second of
Bernard, who understands this place of the elect, who are said not to sin
not that they never sin, but because their sins shall not be imputed to
them unto condemnation. The third of those, who understand these words neither
can he sin, as if St. John had said, neither ought he to sin. The 4th. of
Augustine, who understands this place of venial sins; and says, that the
child of GOD, cannot so sin, as he is the child of GOD, but only as in
respect of his flesh, he is the child of this world The 5t. and last, which
only Bellarmine approves is St. Augustines also, and St. Hieromes, who
understand this place of mortal sins. This therefore (says Bellarmine) is
the Apostles meaning, that he which is the son of God, does not, nor cannot sin
mortally, whiles he is the son of God, because his seed which is charity,
abides in him. But as all the former expositions were very impertinent, so
also this; Impertinent I say, first to the text it self. For the holy Ghost in
this place, as Bellarmine himself teacheeh, sets down certain marks,
whereby the children of God in this life may be discerned from the children of
the devil. But this is not a mark of the child of God, that he never
commits a deadly sin, nor this of the child of the devil that sometimes
he does, for many of Gods dear children have fallen, and many do fall into
grievous sins; but he that commits sin in that sense, as the phrase is
used. 1. Ioh. 3.8. Ioh. 8.34. with ful^ swinge and consent of his will, as a
servant of sin, in whom sin reigns, who is a worker of iniquity, given
over to the practice of sin, making as it were a trade of it, and sinning ex
imperio vitiosi habitus; he is of the devil. But he that is borne of God, does
not commit sin, as a servant of sin, neither can he so sin, for the
reasons before mentioned. 2. Impertinent, or rather repugnant to his own
purpose, for if the child of GOD cannot fall into a mortal sin, then much
less can he fall away from God. Wherefore Bellarmine returns again to his
former absurdity. For he understands St. John, as if he had said, that the
child of God does not sin mortally, (and thereby, according to Bellarmines
conceit, cease not to be the child of GOD) whiles he continues the child of
God, and whiles his seed, that is, charity remains in him; whereas St. John
plainly says, that the child of God does not, nor cannot commit sin, because
he is borne of GOD, that is, because he is the child of God, and because the
seed of God, which is the spirit or grace of regeneration abides in him.
neither can he, that is borne of God, be unborne again.

CHAP. IX.
Bellarmines allegation of 11 testimonies out of the holy scriptures answered.

1. WE have heard Bellarmines cavillations against some few of our
allegations; Bellarmines arguments. de justifili 3. c* 14.
now let us examine his objections. For that faith and justification once had
may be lost, not only totally for a time, but also finally for ever, he
labors to prove, by testimonies and examples of scripture, by the difinition
and tradition of the Church, and lastly by reason.

As touching the testimonies of the scripture, Testimonies of scripture.
there be so many and so evident places proving the certainty of perseverance,
which before I produced; as that he, which hears or reads them, had need to
be very obstinate, if he shall not yield to this truth, so clearly testified
in the scriptures. Notwithstanding Bellarmine, as his manner is, se^teth a good
face on the matter, and says: there be so many and so plain testimonies of
scripture, to prove his conceit; that it is a wonder to him, that such an
error (as our assertion is) should ever come into the minds of men.

Out of the old testament, Bellarmines 1. testimon. Ezech 18.26.
he cites only the testimony of Ezechiel, Chap. 18.26. when a righteous man
turns away from his righteousness and commits iniquity, he shall even die for
the same. What can be more clear says Bellarmine? how is he, I pray you,
turned away from his righteousness, if he be justified by faith only, and
faith, being once conceived, cannot be extinguished? His reason is thus to be
framed. If a righteous man may be turned from his righteousness, then faith once
had may be lost. But a righteous man may be turned from his righteousness.
Therefore faith once had may be lost.

Answer to the testimony out of Ezech. 1826. and ^ to his proposition
. 2. I answer by distinction. if by a righteous man in this text, be
understood such a one, as is righteous only in appearance, or before men, then
the consequence of the proposition is to be denied: but if he be meant that is
truly righteous before God, then the assumption is false. The connection or
consequence of the proposition he would prove by another assertion of ours,
that we are justified by faith alone, hoping to make us deny either the one or
the other.

But Bellarmine deceives himself, whiles he seeks to deceive others. For
when we say that faith alone does justify, our meaning is that we are not
justified by any righteousness inherent in our ^elves, but by the righteousness
of Christ alone, which is apprehend by faith only, and not by any other grace
But Bellarmine would feign make the world believe, that we acknowledge or care
for, no other righteousness inherent, but faith only; and in that sense do
say, that faith alone does justify. Howbeit we acknowledge faith to be but a
part of that inherent righteousness, wherein our sanctification consists* and
we are so far from saying that faith alone does justify, in that sense, that
we affirm it does not justify at all, as it is a part of our inherent
righteousness, but as it is an instrument to apprehend the righteousness of
Christ, which is out of us in him, and therefore does not justify in respect
of its own merit or dignity, but in respect of the object, which it does
apprehend, and in this sense it is said to justify alone, because to apprehend
the righteousness of CHRIST is the proper office of faith alone, and not
belonging to any other grace, as to look upon the brazen serpent, was the
office of the eye, and not of any other member.

Our assertion therefore of justification by faith alone does not prove
Bellarmines proposition. For their is a double righteousness, the one inherent,
or at least adherent, which is called our own righteousness: the other imputed,
which is not our own, Ro^. 3.21.^^.103 Phil. 3.9.
but is the righteousness of God, that is of Christ who is God, apprehended by
faith. Of the former the prophet speaks, calling it the parties own
righteousness. (for so he says) his righteousness, and Chap. 33.13. his own
righteousness) in respect where of a man may be reputed just before men, who is
not just before God by that righteousness which is through faith; without which
no man is truly righteous; for as much as every man in himself, is a s^one^ or
transgressour of the law. A man therefore, who in his own opinion and
estimation of others, is reputed righteous by reason of some works of
righteousness which he performs in his outward conversation, as the Phariseyes
Mat 23 2^. Luke 16.1^.18.11.
were; may turn himself from his righteousness, and commit all the
abominations of the wicked, and perish therein, and yet cannot be said to loose
his justification, or his faith, which he never had. If any object, that the
prophet would not call such a one a just man. I answer, that the holy Ghost
in the scriptures, Phil. 1.7:
that he might teach us to speak and think charitably of our neighbors, does
many times speak according to the judgment of charity, terming those just,
redeemed, sanctified, the sons of God, who are such only in their own
profession, and opinion of others. As in this particular. Our Savior says.
Mat 9.13.
I came not to save the righteous, but to call sinners to repentance; meaning,
by righteous, such as be righteous in their own conceit, and trust in their
own righteousness. And of such a one the prophet* when he presupposes his
possibility of falling away, seems to speak, as appears by conferring this
place with Chapt. 33.13. where the same commination is repeated, If the
righteous (upon such promises as God has made to them that are truly
righteous) shall trust to his ewne righteousness, and commit iniquity etc.
Seeing therefore the holy Ghost speaks (as it seems) of him that is not
truly just before God, nor justified by that righteousness which is by faith,
the consequence of the proposition is to be denied.

Answ. to his Assumption.
. 3. But if the Prophet should speak of him that is truly righteous before God,
I would answer, that the assumption is false: which as it is plainly
contradicted by other places of scripture, so can it not be proved out of this
text. The assumption, which Bellarmine fasly groundeth on this text, affirms,
which the text does nor affirm, that a man truly just may be turned away from
his righteousness, meaning thereby a total and final apostasy. for of such a
defection the Prophet speaks. Of a total. V. 24. If the righteous turn away
from his righteousness and commit iniquity, and do according to all the
abominations of the wicked, he shall not live, but die therein. Of a final v.
26. when a righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commiteth
iniquity, and dies in them (without repentance) for his iniquity, that he has
done, he shall dye. his final impenitency shall be punished with eternal death.
Now this assertion, as I said, is plainly contradicted by other testimonies of
scripture, as namely, Ps. 15.5.112.3.6.9. where it is said, that the righteous
shall never be removed, and that his righteousness remains for ever, and that
it shall be had in everlasting remembrance; and by all those evident places, which
I produced before. And therefore Bellarmines exposition of this place, is not
agreeable to the analogy of faith. Neither can this assumption be grounded on
this text. For if the Prophet do speak of him that is truly just, then is the
proposition indeed contained in the text, if a righteous man do turn away
from his righteousness he shall not only loose his justification, but also
finally perish. But the assumption is of Bellar. own coining. For the Prophet
does not say in a simple or categorical proposition, the righteous man do that
any time turn away from his righteousness; but in a connexive or conditional
proposition: if the righteous turn himself from his righteousness, etc. or when
the righteous shall turn himself from his righteousness. for a sentence wherein
is relation of time, is all one with a connexive or conditional proposition,
and the vulgar translation reads both ways, v. 24. si avetterit se justus, if
the righteous shall turn away. v. 26. quu^ averterit se justus, when the
righteous shall turn away. Now in a connexive or conditional speech the
antecedent is not absolutely or simply affirmed and therefore from it, in a
connexive syllogism, we do sometimes conclude the contradictory of the
antecedent by denying the co^sequent, as well as by assuming the antecedent, we
conclude the consequent. Neither have we in judging of the truth of a connexive
proposition, respect to the truth of the parts thereof, but to the necessity of
the connection; which may be true and necessary where both the parts be false. As
for example. If an elect man do fall away utterly from grace, he shall perish
in his sins, the co^nexio^ is necessary, and yet both parts are false in
Bellarmines own judgment. So when the Prophet says, if a man truly just turn
from his righteousness, he shall die or perish in his sins; he does not
affirm, either that he who is truly righteous, does turn away from his
righteousness, or that he shall dye in his sins. But this he says by way of
supposition, if the righteous, or when the righteous shall turn away, then he
shall dye in his sins. But from this proposition we may, or rather must
infer more agreeably to the Scriptures, the very contrary conclusion. For if
a man will argue from a con^exive proposition, whereof the several parts be
false, he may not conclude by assuming the antecedent, but by denying the
consequent: the deny all whereof will conclude the antecedent to be false.
Thus, if any of the elect should utterly fall away from grace, he should perish
in his sins; but none of the elect does at any time perish in his sins;
therefore none of the elect does at any time utterly fall away from grace. In
like manner, If a man truly righteous (as no man is, that is not elect) shall
turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, according to all the
abominations of the wicked: then his righteousness shall not be remembered; but
he shall dye in his sins; but the righteousness of the^ which be truly
righteous, endures for ever, and shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and he
that is truly righteous, shall never be removed; therefore the man that is
truly righteous does never turn him self wholly from his righteousness.

These words therefore of the Prophet are not a simple or absolute assertion,
that the man who is truly righteous, shall or may fall away, but an wholesome
and profitable admonition to all that are, or seem to be righteous, that they
do not fall away for if they do, the Lord threatens that their former
righteousness (which by their defection is proved to have been counterfeit) shall
not be remembered, but that they shall perish in their sins. It is true in deed,
if a man truly righteous, yea if a man elected or predestined shall utterly,
that is, wholly and finally turn away him self from his righteousness, and do
according to all the abominations of the wicked, that he shall perish in his
sins. But that he should not fall away, the Lord does sustain and establish
him, and by such admonitions and comminations, he stirs him up to vigilance;
that he which seems to stand, may take heed that he do not fall. Wherefore the
defection of the righteous is no more proved out of this place, the^ out of
other threatenings and admonitio^s in the word, which (as I shall show hereafter
in answer to Bellarmines 4t reason, and that by his own confession) are not
arguments of their defection, but so many adiume^ts and helps that they may not
fall. For as the Lord has decreed and promised, that those which be truly just
shall persevere (as I have shown before) so he has preordayned means, (such
as be admonitio^s and comminations) to that end for by them he works in the
faithful his fear, Ier. 32.41.
which he puts into their hearts, that they should not depart from him.

. 4. Out of the New Testament he cites 10. testimonies, Bellarmines second
testimony Luk, 8.13.
his 2d allegation therefore is out of Luke 8.13. For that on the stones, are
they which when they have heard receive the word with joy, but they have no
roots, which for a while believe, but in the time of temptation go away. These
says Bellarmine, receive the seed of the word with joy, neither do they want
faith, but perseverance in faith. His reason thus stands. The temporary
believers spoken of Luke 8.13. do loose their faith, those temporary believers
do truly believe, therefore some which do truly believe do loose their (...)*
the proposition is proved by this testimony, that in the time of temptation
they go away. the assu^ption out of those words, they receive the word with
joy, and believe. therefore says he, not says is wanting unto them, but
perseverance in faith. I answer, that both the proposition, and the
assumption, if they be understood of true justifying faith, are false: if
otherwise, then this allegation is impertinent. For the question is, whether
they which truly believe, and are justified by faith, may altogether loose that
faith whereby they are justified. First therefore I deny the assu^ption; for the
faith of those temporary persons is not the true faith of the elect, but the
cou^terfeit faith of hypocrites. And this may be proved out of the Text it
self. For 1. Christ does not say, that they do truly believe, but that they
believe for a time and in time of te^ptatio^ fall away. which is an evident
sign not of true faith, but of infidelity. for it is an evil heart of
infidelity which falls away from God, Heb. 3.12. whereas they that truly
believe in the Lord, Ps. 125.1.
are like to mount Zion, that shall never be removed. they are built upon the
rock, Mat. 16.18.
against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. wherefore the Apostle
makes such an opposition betwixt faith and falling away, as that they are not
coincident to the same person Heb. 10.39.
. (...), says he, (...), we are not of defection, but of faith. therefore he
which utterly falls away, never truly believed for those that truly believe
are justified, and none are justified but such as are elected, and shall be
glorified and as their defection argues their want of faith, so also of the
true love of God, Ioh. 2.15.
which is not in the^ that love the world, and much less in the^ who for love
of the world forsake God

2ly, because it is said, they have no root; and that which has no root is no
lively says, they have leaves only of an outward profession, wherein te^porary
faith testeth, but they have no root, which all have that truly believe, and
are endued with a justifying faith. For by faith Col. 1.7.
we are rooted in Christ, and by it, we apprehending Christ and his
righteousness, draw from him spiritual sap and nourishment, which in the
scriptures is called the eating of his body and drinking of his blood. And
fitly also, in an other respect, is the special apprehension of faith compared
to a root, because from the persuasio^ of Gods love toward us in Christ, does
all our new obedience, and all other sanctifying graces spring as it were from
a root, as I have showed heretofore.

Thirdly, because the last sort of hearers only are said to receive the seed
into a good and honest, that is, an upright heart; whereas this is not good,
but is compared to a rock superficially covered with a little mould, therefore
these superficial christians are not those, of whom our Question is, but these
sound christians who retayning the seed of Gods word, do not fall away in time
of temptation, but bring forth fruit with perseverance.

Object. Why, but they are said to believe, and to receive the word with joy.
Answ. they are said to believe, not because they do by a true justifying faith
apprehend the merits of Christ, or apply the promises of the Gospel to
themselves: but because they profess the doctrine of faith, assenting to it as
true, and approving it as good, and after a sort rejoicing therein; all which
may happen to the reprobates, who many times profess the Gospel, and in the
acknowledgment, and approbation thereof, for certain temporal respects, do
rejoice, but without any true faith in Christ, or repentance toward God. as
Herod is said to have heard Mark. 6.20.
John the Baptist with delight. And therefore when question arises (as it does
in time of temptation) whether they must forsake their profession, or te^porall
respects, they usually fall away, and with Demas embrace this present world.
And in this sense the word believe is used elsewhere, as has been showed out
of John 2.23.24. John 12.42. compared with John 5.44 And in this sense Simon
Magus is said to have believed, Act. 8. and diverse followers of our Savior
Christ, among who^ was Iu^as, who though they professed the faith and were
reckoned among the believers, yet did not Ioh. 6.64.
believe in deed. These temporary believers therefore have not a true says,
and hereby the proposition is also proved to be false. For if they never had
true faith, they could not loose it, but an opinion or shadow of it. neither
do they cast off the true faith, but the profession of it, and by that meines
their former hypocrisy is detected. For of them is that verified, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would surely have continued with us; but they went out, that they might
appear not to be of us,

Bellarmines third testimony John 15.2.
. 5 His third testimony is John 15.2. every branch that bears not fruit in
me, he takes away. But it cannot be a branch, says Bellarmine, which has not
sometimes lived in the vine, for branches are not engrafted from elsewhere, but
they spring out of the vine, and they spring not dead, but living. so therefore
the faithful are borne again in Christ, and when they are borne again, they
are not dead but living, and yet, if after they be borne again, they refuse to
bring forth the fruit of good works, they dry away, they are cut off, and
perish.

His reason is thus: to be framed. some branches in Christ, the true vine, may
wither; be cut off, and perish*

All the branches in Christ are, or at least have been faithful, and
regenerate men, and true members of Christ, by a true and a lively faith.

Therefore some that are or have been faithful, and regenerate men, and true
members of Christ, may wither, be cut off, and perish.

The proposition he proves by the testimony of Christ, who says, every branch
that bears not fruit in me, my Father the husbandman shall take away, and it
being cut off, it shall be gathered, V. 6.
and cast into the fire.

The assumption he proves thus. Those who were once alive in Christ, they were
faithful and regenerate men.

All the branches in Christ the Vine, were once alive in Christ. And that he
proves by a similitude. As the branches of the vine are not engrafted from
others, but spring out of the vine, and they spring not dead, but livinge, so
the faithful are borne again in Christ, and when they are borne again, they
are noe dead, but alive.

Therefore all the branches in Christ, are or have been faithful and
regenerate men.

Answ. Christ in this place compares his body, which is his church, to a vine,
as elsewhere Romans 11.17.18.
to an olive tree, and the members of his church, and so of his body, to the
branches of the vine. Now the members of his church, and branches of this vine,
are all such as being once ingrafted into the body of the church (as it were
into a vine or olive tree) by the Sacrament of Baptism, and living therein,
do make profession of the faith. But of these branches there be two kinds.
For some are by the inward and spiritual, baptism, engrafted into the
invisible church of Christ, as his true and lively members, and are united unto
Christ their Head by the spirit, and by faith, and consequently receiving
spiritual life and nourishment from Christ, as it were from the route they
bring forth fruit. Others are by the outward Baptism of water only, engrafted
into the visible church of Christ, and by reason of their profession of the
faith, and external communion with the members of the Church, are reckoned
among the members of Christ; who yet notwithstanding are not united unto Christ
by his spirit and by faith. and therefore having no spiritual communion with
Christ, they are unfruitful. These, though they be not the members of Christ in
truth, but only in title and show, living in the visible church, but not being
of the church invisible notwithstanding they are called the branches and
members of Christ, in a large and general, or rather equivocall sense, because
they profess the faith of Christ, and are numbered among the members of the
church and of such do Cyrill In Joan. l 10. c. 14.
and Theophylact Theoph. in Io^n. 15.
understand this place.

This distinction of branches is propounded by Christ himself, that some are
fruitful, as namely those which being engrafted into Christ by faith, receive
the grace of his spirit, as it were sap and nourishment from him others are
unfruitful, as those who being not united unto Christ, by his spirit and by
faith, do rest in the outward communion of the church and in the external
profession of the faith. which distinction being all one in effect with this that
some are (...), sound and upright Christians, of whom only this question is
understood; others (...) unsound and hypocrites: of the former, our Savior
says, that his Father does not (...) but (...) Ioh. 15 2.
, not take them away, but purge them, that they may bring forth more fruit; so
far are they from being ever cut off. And therefore this text does manifestly
prove; that those of whom the question is understood, viz. sound Christians,
who are lively members of Christ, and fruitful branches of the vine, are so far
from being cut off, as that the Lord does prune and dress them, that they may
be more and more fruitful and in the 16. v. our Savior says, Ioh. 15.16.
that he has ordained the^, that they go and bring forth fruit. and that their
fruit shall remain. In which words says Augustine De corrept. and gratia c.
12. Quibus ver^ is eis non solum justitia n. verum etiam in illa perseveran^iam
se dedisse monstravit: Chissto n. sie eos ponente ut cant, and fructum
^fferant, and fructus little manear, qui^ and ^at dicere, forfitan non manebit,
etc.
, Christ declared, that he gave them not only righteousness, but also
perseverance therein; for seeing Christ so disposes of them, that they go and
bring forth fruit, and that their fruit remain, who may dare to say, perhaps
it shall not remain. for the gift and calling of God are without repe^ta^ce, I
mean the calling of those who are called according to his purpose. for seeing
Christ makes intercession for the^, that their faith should not fail, without
doubt it shall not fail unto the end, etc.

As touching the others, who being not engrafted into Christ by faith and by
his spirit, do rest in an outward profession, not caring to bring forth fruit
these, because they are but hypocrites shall be cut off, that is, their
hypocrisy being by their defection discovered, they shall be convinced, Ioh
2.12.
never to have been of the church; and in the end shall have their portion with
hyyocrites. Of these our question is not understood, and therefore this
allegation is impertinent.

These things thus premised, I dony Bellarmines assumption.

For, not all that are accoumpted and termed branches of the vine, are true or
lively members of Christ; for as I have said, thore be many in the church,
which be not of it many by reason of their profession are esteemed members of
the church, which is the body of Christ, who yet notwithstanding are not
engrafted into Christ, many by an external calling joined to the visible church
who are not by the effectual calling of the holy Ghost adioined to the
invisible, which is the elect. for as our Savior says Mat ^0.16.^3 ^4
, many are called, but few are chose^. but says Bellarmine, none are branches,
but such as are, or have been faithful, for branches are not engrafted, but
spring out of the vine. etc.

But here Bellarmine streacheth the similitude further then Christ meant. For
we are not borne branches and members of Christ, but engrafted into him; and
those that are truly engrafted into him by faith, are also renewed and borne
again, by his spirit, by which spirit 1. Cor. 12.13.
we are all baptized into one body. Now those which are borne again, their
will also is regenerated, that they be willing to bring forth fruit^. And
therefore those who refuse altogether to bring forth fruit, they do not
wither away after their regeneration, but do manifestly bewray themselves
never to have been renewed by the spirit of God, nor engrafted into Christ, but
only sacramentally. and therefore not to have been true members of Christ, but
in title and show only, even as a graft sometimes orcyon; which being
engrafted, and as it were incorporated into the stock, does notwithstanding
receive no juice or sap from the stock, but withers, and is broken of, as
having never been truly united to the stock, per unitatem forma, but only in
show and appearance.

Bellarmines 4* testimony Mat 24.12.13.
. 6. His 4the testimony is Mat. 24.12.13. And because iniquity shall abound,
the chari^y of many shall wax cold, but he that endures to the end shall be
saved. Out of this place, says Bellarmine, we understand, that not all just
men do persevere, and therefore that not all just men shall be saved. for that
cooilng of charity, signifies the extinction of it, othe^wise it should not
have been opposed to perseverance unto the end. As if he had said. They, whose
charity shall wax cold, and be extinguished, shall not persevere, neither shall
they be saved.

The charity of many just men shall wax cold, and be extinguished.

Therefore there are many just men which shall not persevere, nor be saved.

Answ. If the conclusion be understood of such as are not truly just, but in
show only and before men, I grant all, as being nothing to our present
purpose. But if the argumentation be understood of those that are truly just, I
deny the assumption; neither does the testimony of Christ prove it. For neither
is the charity, whereof he speaks, that true charity 1. Tim. 1.5.
which proceeds from a pure heart, and good conscience, and faith unfeigned
nor the many, of whom he speaks, just or upright men. For as touching the
former, Augustine says, that was never true charity, which can be lost; and
Ambrose, charity once had, is never lost. Solomon says, it cannot be quenched
with many waters; and Paul testifies, that it never falls away, as before we
have showed, and as for those many, they were such as our Savior had spoken of
in the two verses going before. v. 10. Then (when persecutions shall arise
against the professors of the Gospel) many shall be offended, and shall betray
one another, and shall hate one another, v. 11. Many false prophets shall arise
and deceive many. those many therefore, whose love to religion in the
afflictions going before the desolations of Jerusalem, waxed cold (as the
manner of hypocrites is, when they come to be tried) were of those many that
were called, but not of those few, that are chosen.

. 7. His 5t. testimony is. 1. Cor. 9.27. Bellarmines 5. ^estimony 1. Cor. 9.27.
I chastise my body, and bring it into servitude least perhapps when I have
preached unto others, I my self become reprobate. But the Calvinistes
worthily, says he, do not chastise their body and have bidden farewell to all
works of penance, because they are certain by the certainty of faith, that
they by no means can become reprobates.

His argument, if it be applied to the proof of the present question, is to
this effect: Paul might have been a reprobate.

Paul was a faithful and righteous man,

Therefore some faithful or righteous man may become a reprobate.



He might have as well concluded, that some elect man might become a reprobate,
as namely Paul.

The proposition (which is most false) he would prove because by this testimony
it appears, that Paul fe^red least he might become a reprobate.

I answer, that the word (...) does not signify reprobate, as the word
reprobate is opposed to elect, (for Paul was elect, and knew himself so to
be, and therefore could not by Bellarmines own doctrine, become a reprobate)
but reproved, for it is opposed to the word (...), which signifies approved;
and therefore is not so much to be referred to the person of Paul, as to his
ministry. namely, that he used this, carefullnes, in buffeting or beating
down the body of sin; least perhaps, if his life should not be suitable to
his doctrine, his ministry should be rejected and himself worthy to be
reproved: or as Hiorome ad Furiam.
speaks, ne. quodalijs praecipit, ipse non servet. For the auditors commonly
do hear with some disdain the minister teaching others that, which he does
not care to practice himself; and in their minds return upon him, that which
is said in the proverb, Physician cure thy self. Paul's meaning therefore in
this place is, that (as he speaks in other places, 2 Timothy 2*15. 2. Cor 4.2, 5
11
) he gave diligence, and carefully labored in this, that he might show himself
approved, (...).
not only to God, but also to the conscience of his hearers. But suppose, that
the word (...) in this place (as I suppose it never does) did signify a
reprobate, yet how will Bellarmine prove, that Paul might have been such an
one? forsooth, because he feared least he might become a reprobate. I answer,
though he had feared so much, yet it follows not, that therefore he might be
a reprobate, for the perseverance and salvation of the elect is always
certain certitudine objecti, in respect of the immutable decree of God, and in
respect of the event wherein the decree of God shall most certainly be
accomplished. Yet it is not always certain to them in respect of their own
knowledge and persuasion, which is called the certainty of the subject,
wherefore though the child of God, do sometimes doubt of his salvation and
fear least he shall be condemned, yet is his salvation certain, and his life
laid up with Christ in God Col. 3.3.
But indeed Paul's carefulines and fear is so far from proving, that he might
be a reprobate, as that it was an effectual preservative to keep him from
falling away. for as the Lord has decreed and promised the persevera^ce and
salvation of the elect; so he has fore appointed, and promised the means. And
therefore the assurance, which the faithful have of their salvation, and
perseverance, is not joined with a careless presumption, that they shall
attain thereto without using the means; but with a reverent fear, and ear
to use such means, and to walk in such ways, as GOD has appointed them, and
indeed this reverent sear, wherein the Apostle, wills us, to work out our
salvation, is one of the principal means to preserve us from falling away. The
fear of the Lord Pro. 14.27.
, is a well spring of life, to avoid the snares of death. And blessed is the
man Pro. 1^.14.
that fears always. Therefore the Lord as he has promised the faithful,
that they shall persevere, so he has promised to give them this mean, namely
of reverent fear. Ier. 32.40.
Ier. 32.40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will never
turn away from them to do them good but I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me. From hence therefore we might better
conclude, that Paul could not be a reprobate; because the Lord, as he had made
him a vessel Act. 9.15.
of election: so also he had given him this godly care, and reverent fear, as
a notable preservatiue to keep him from falling away from God. You see then,
how little force there is in this allegation to prove the present question.
Notwithstanding Bellarmine does so greatly please himself therein, that in
confidence thereof, he takes occasion after his pharisaicall manner, to scorn
us. But the Calvinists says he worthily. etc. insinuating that there is a
great dissimilitude between the Apostle and us. For he, fearing least he should
become a reprobate, did chastise his body; but we, because we be assured
forsooth by the certainty of faith, that we can never become reprobates, have
bid farewell to all works of penance.

Bellarmines pharisaicall se off answered.
. 8. To the protasis or former part of this dissimulitude, I answer, first,
that Paul was certain by the certainty of faith, 2 Timothy 1.12. Romans 8.38.
both of his perseverance, and of his salvation.

Secondly, that this (...) this, nor chastising, but buffetting (if you read
(...)) or beating down (if you read (...)) of his body, after the manner of
champions, which fight in combat. (For that metaphore begun v. 26. (...) so
I fight after the manner of champions, the Apostle here continues.) is not the
popish whipping, or macerating of the body; but the mortifying of the body of
sin, the subduing of the flesh, the crucifying of the old man. For the
Apostle in the former verse, speaking of his spiritual combat, wherein he was
to fight against his corruptions: I so fight (says he) not as though I did
beat the air, but I buffet or beat down, I subdue or bring into servitude my
body, meaning by body, the enemy with whom he did fight, which is not this body
of flesh and bone (which by the sixth commandment, and by the law of nature
Ephesians. 5.29*
every one is bound to preserve and cherish) but that which is elsewhere called
the body of sin; Romans 6.6.
the flesh, Gal. 5.17.19.
the old man, Ephesians 4.2.
the body of death. Romans 7, 24.


This Philosophical conceit of opposing the body, as an enemy to the soul,
as if the body were that spiritual enemy, which we are to fight against; and
as if the soul were not carnal and corrupt as well as the body; is the
ground, both of all their pharisaicall observations tending to that, which the
Apostle calls (...) the not sparing, or afflicting of the body Col. 2.22.23.
(the chief note of those who are addicted to superstition and will worship
after the commandments and doctrines of men) and also of their hypocritical
practice of punishing the body, in steed of mortifying the flesh, which is the
body of sin.

As for the antapodosis, or latter part of his similitude I answer, that
although we teach that we are to labor for the fullnes of persuasion, and for
that great measure of assurance, which Paul had attained to; yet we do
confess, that scarce any of us have attained to such full assurance but that
we still have need, after the advice of St. Peter, 2. Pet. 1.10.
to give diligence to make our calling and election more and more sure unto us;
and after the example of Paul, so to mortify the body of sin, and to subdue
the flesh, that we may not be refuze christians, or worthy to be reproved, but
such as are approved before God and man. For we acknowledge there can be no
sound assurance of salvation, as of the end, where is not a careful using of
the means, and an upright walking in the ways, which God has appointed to
the end we also acknowledge, that so many as are justified by faith are Ephesians.
2.10.
the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good works which God has
prepared that we should walk in them: and that from our election, vocation and
justification, we are to pass through sanctification, as the way unto
salvation. which sanctification consists, partly in renouncing Tit. 2.11.
all impiety and worldly lusts (which is the mortifying and subduing of the
body of sin, whereof the Apostle here speaks) and partly in living soberly,
justly and holily in this present world; which duties we are to perform, not
as the Papists would have us, in fear of damnation, contrary to the express
oath of God in this Luke 1.74.
place; but in expectation Tit. 2.12.13.
of the happy hope, that is the happiness hoped for, as the Apostle teaches. As
for the Popish whipping and lashing of their bodies, in imitation of the old
priests of Baal, 1. King. 18.
and all other hypocritical works of penance, which they in their popish
superstition have devised, to be done, either to satisfy GODS justice, or to
merit his mercy; we do not only, detide them as vain (for who required those
things at your hands,) and as the practices of men, either mad or drunk,
(for else who ever hated his own flesh) Ephesians. 5.20.
I say of men intoxicated, and made drunk with the cup of the whore of
Babylons fornications; but also we detest them, as merely Antichristian, as
being derogatory from the alone satisfactory and meritorious obedience and
sufferings of Christ. And this is all that Bellarmine has gained, either by
his pharisaicall scoff, or by his impertinent allegation which how impertinent
it is, has been showed in these particulars.

1. by (...), whereby is only meant reprobate or reproved, as it is opposed to
(...), which signifies approved: he understands a reprobate, as opposed to
elect. 2. He alleges the example of S. Paul, who was certain and sure of his
election, and salvation, as fearing lest he might become a reprobate. 3. By the
body, whereby is meant the body of sin, and of death, which Paul labored to
mortify and subdue, he understands this mortal body, which in the faithful
is a member of Christ 1 Cor. 6.15
, and is not the enemy, but instrument of the soul. 4. By buffetting or
beating down the body, whereby is meant the subduing and mortifying of the
flesh, that is, the corruption of our nature, which is specially seated in the
soul; he understands the chastising of the body, which consists of flesh
and bone, as if that were, after the devil and the world, the third enemy of
our salvation, called in Scripture the flesh, against which we are to maintain
a spiritual war; not by chastising it, but by fighting against, and seeking
to destroy it.
. 9. His 6t testimony is Gal. 5.4. evacuati estis, Bellarm 6. ^^stim. Gal. 5.4*
that is, (as our Rhemists translate ( ye are evacuated from Christ, ye that
are justified in the law, ye are fal^e from grace, how could they, says
Bellarmine, be evacuated from Christ and fall from grace, if they were never
truly in Christ, nor in grace.

His argument stands thus: The Galatians did fast away. The Galatians had
been in Christ, and in grace. Therefore some which have been in Christ, and
in grace, fall away.

Answ. An argumentation consisting wholly of particulars as this does,
concludes nothing. For neither is the proposition general, that all the
Galatians did ^all away; nor the Assumption, that all the Galatians had been
in Christ, and in grace. But some did fall away, and these were never truly in
Christ, or in the state of grace. and some were in Christ, and in the state of
grace, and these did not fall away. Neither does the Apostle direct his speech
to every particular Galatian, as though his meaning were, that all and every of
the Galatians had either fallen away, or had been in Christ, and in grace: but
unto the churches Gal. 1.2.
of Galatia: wherein, as the^e were many unsound christians, who were apt to
fall away, and perhaps the greater part, who neither were truly engrafted into
Christ, nor had been in the state of grace; so no doubt there were also some
(...) or sound christians among them, who did not fall away. For those that
were sound, did not fall away, contrary to the proposition; and those Galatians
which did fall away, had not been truly in Christ, nor in the state of grace,
contrary to the assumption. The like objection might have been made against
the church of England in Queen Maryes days, which made the like revolt from
Christ, and from grace, seeking to be justified, even as the Galatians did, by
the works of the Law, that is by their own righteousness and obedience, which
is prescribed in the Law. And yet those which were sound did not fall away, but
as many of them did seal the truth which they had professed with their blood;
so no doubt would the rest, either have forsaken their country, rather then
their religion, (as many did) or have undergone the fiery trial, if God in
mercy had not shortened those days. visible churches may be said in respect of
the greater part over swaying the better, to fall away, when not one sound
christian in them does fall away.

Yea, but Bellarmine proves the assumption. that those Galatians which did
fall away, had been in Christ, and in grace, how could they, says he, be
evacuated from Christ, and fall from grace if they were never truly in Christ,
and in grace? His reason is thus to be framed.

Those that are evacuated from Christ, and fallen from grace, have been truly
in Christ, and in grace.

The Galatians that sought justification by the works of the Law, were
evacuated from Christ, and fallen from grace.

Therefore those Galatians had been truly in Christ, and in grace.

The assumption we grant, that so many of the Galatians as sought to be
justified by the Law, that is, by their own obedience prescribed in the Law;
(were to use their Inke-horne term) evacuated from Christ, and fallen from
grace. For the same argument we use against our Papists, who seek for
justification by their own righteousness. But hereof it does not follow, that
either those Galatians, or these Papists were ever truly in Christ or in
grace. And therefore we deny the proposition. For, as touching the former
branch thereof, they are evacuated from Christ, to whom Christ is made void,
and of none effect; or as the Apostle speaks, v. 2. whom Christ profits
nothing* for seeing Christ came to this end, that he might satisfy the law for
us, both by performing the obedience therein commanded, and by suffering the
curse therein threatened; hereof it follows, that if we still remain under
the curse, unless we fulfill the law in our own persons, neither can be
justified, unless we perform full and perfect obedience to the law, CHRIST
then is made void unto us, and the promise Romans 4.14.
of none effect. And as touching the latter, they are said, in the Apostles
meaning, to befalne from grace, that is, from the doctrine of grace, as I
showed in my answer to the third question, chap. 4., 1. who seeking to be
justified by their own righteousness, do revolt from the Gospel, which is the
covenant of grace, to the law, which is the covenant of works, and exclude
them selves from the justification, Romans 10.4.
which is by grace; for they that will be justified by works Romans 11.6.
, cannot be justified by grace. Both which things may be verified of all
justitiaries whatsoever, whether among the Jews, Galatia^s, or Papists, who
yet never were truly in Christ, nor in the state of grace, and therefore cannot
be said to have lost that which they never had. whereby it appears this
allegation to be impertinent, for they are evacuated from Christ, whom Christ
does not profit; and they are fallen from grace, who are fallen from the covenant
of grace, to the covenant of works.

Bellarmines 7, 8, 9, testimonies*
. 10. The 7th, 8th, and 9th testimonies, Bellarmine joyneth together.

1. Tim. 1.19. Some have made shipwreck concerning faith*

1. Tim. 4.1. In the last days some shall depart from the faith*

1. Tim. 6.10. Which certain desiring, have erred from the faith. What can
here be said, says he, had not they true faith, who departed from the faith?
and how did they make shipwreck, which never were in the ship?

Answ. In all these 3 places Faith does signify not the gift of faith, whereby
we do believe, but the doctrine of faith, which we do believe, as I have
showed before in my answer to the third question. Chap. 4.. 6.
And therefore he did well to ^oyne these places together, seeing this one
answer will serve them all. For as touching the doctrine of faith, men may
make shipwreck, or depart or err from it, who neither had the grace of
justifying faith, But let us weigh them severally. In the first place the
Apostle says, that some having (he does not say expelled, but) repelled or put
from them a good conscience; that is, not caring to keep a good conscience,
had made shipwreck as concerning the faith that is, had become heretics. Of
whom, says he, is Hymenaus and Alexander, for in the same sens^ it is said of
the same Hymenaeus and of Phyletus, that they had erred 2. Tim. 2.1^.
as concerning the truth, Paul therefore signifies, that faith, that is the
truth of the Gospel, or purity of doctrine is preserved by a good conscience.
But contrariwise, that an evil conscience is the mother of all heresies. For
when as men embrace the doctrine of the gospel, not with a true and a lively,
but with a dead and counterfeit faith; their hearts are not purified by faith,
neither are they regenerated unto newnes of life, but remain in their former
vices and corruptions, when as therefore they see their corrupt manners, and
conditions (which they will not leave) to be discovered and reproved by the
truth, and themselves to be condemned by that doctrine which they profess,
they either labor to falsify it, and to conform it to their own conditions
and conceits, or go about to persuade them selves, that it is false, or wish
it altogether extinguished. For he that does ill, hates the light. And so the
Greek Scholiast expounds this place (...). Graec. schol in 1. Tim. 1.
. Faith, concerning doctrines; conscience, respecting the conversation and a
godly life. for says he, when a man liveeh reprovably, he also makes
shipwreck as concerning the faith. For that they may not be tormented with the
fear of things to come, they endeavor to persuade their own soul, that all
those things are false, which among us are believed concerning the resurrection
and the judgment. I answer therefore, that they which have repelled a good
conscience (such as were Hymena^s and Alexander) may fall away from the sincere
doctrine of the faith which they have professed, but they cannot be truly said
to have justifying faith, which they never had.

But if the place be understood of the habit of faith; one of their own
writers shall answer Bellarmin thus: Espe^teut in* Tim. 1.19. Repulsa
contemptaque puritatis conscientiam fidem quoque quam habere magis videbantur,
quam haberent, perdiderunt; juxta Domini aenigma, ei qui non habet etiam quod
habet, vel potius habere videtur, autse habere pu^at auferetur.
Having repelled, says he, and despised a pure conscience, they did loose also
faith, which they rather seemed to have, then had; according to that
aenigmaticall speech Mat. 13.12.25.9. Mar. 4.2^. Luke 8.18.
of our Lord; from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he
has, or seems to have, or thinks that he has.

1 Timothy 41:
Now in the fourth chapter of the same Epistle, v. 1. what it is to depart from
the faith, meaning the doctrine of faith, Paul him self teaches, and the
Papists (of whom that prophecy is to be understood) declare. Diver^^, says he,
shall depart from the faith; how? attending to erroneous spirits, and doctrines
of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, and having their consciences seared,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, etc.

And the like is to be said of the next allegation, 1 Timothy 6, 10,
where erring from the faith, signifies nothing else, but erring from the
doctrine of faith, or as he speaks to the same effect. 2 Timothy 2.18. from the
truth. For such worldly men, who accoumpt gain to be godliness, are not only
void of justifying faith, which 1. Ioh. 5, 4,
overcommeth the world, but are also as the Apostle says v. 7. destitute of
the truth. And in this sense all those who do hold erroneous doctrines, or as
our Savior speaks of the Sadduces, Mat. 12.2^.
do err not knowing the Scriptures, may truly be said to err from the
faith. who notwithstanding cannot be said to have lost the justifying faith,
which they never had, Or if the word Faith did here signify the gift of Faith,
this erring from the Faith, might better be expounded to be a missing of it,
when they had entered into the way of getting it, then to be the loosing of it,
after they had gotten it. for covetous worldlings of whom the Apostle speaks,
are many times content to use the means of obtaining faith, as namely to hear
the word preached, who nevertheless receive the seed among thorns (which
choke the seed of the word) and pierce them selves through with many sorrows.
1 Timothy* 6.1^,


. 11. His 10th testimony, Bellarmin^^ tenth testimony, Heb. 6.4.
Heb. 6.4* It is impossible that they which were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and
have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, if
they fall away, should be renewed again by repent^^ce. Were they not truly
justified (says he) who being enlightened, had tasted the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost? and yet they are fallen away. His reason
is thus framed.

Some that have been enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly gift. and have
been partakers of the holy Ghost, do notwithstanding fall away.

All that have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift* and have
been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, have been truly justified.

Therefore some that have been truly justified, do fall away.

The proposition he proves by this testimony of the Apostle. But the Apostle
does not say, as Bellarmine does, in a simple proposition, that some of those
which have been enlightened etc. do fall away, but in a connexive or
conditional sentence; if any such do fall away, it is impossible they should
be reclaymed; because if any should so fall, they should sin against the holy
Ghost, crucifying again to them selves the Son of GOD, and making a mock of
him. From which testimony is refuted the erroneous conceit of Bellarmine and
others, who imagine that a faithful man may fall away by a total Apostasy,
and commit the sin against the holy Ghost, and yet be renewed again by
repentance. For where the Apostle says, it is impossible they should be
renewed, Bellarmine says, it is not impossible, but a very hard and rare
thing. And to the same purpose the same Apostle chap. 10.26. says, if any
sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of the truth, treading
underfoote the son of God, and accoumpting the blood of the testament
wherewith they were sanctified (sacramentally) an unholy thing, and despiting
the spirit of grace, that there remains for such no more sacrifice for
sins, (who have renounced their part in the sacrifice of CHRIST) but a
fearful expectation of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries. We do therefore confess, that if any of the faithful and elect
should thus fall away by a total apostasy, and by sinning against the Holy
Ghost, that they should never be renewed, but should perish in their sins.
But seeing it is most certain, that none of the faithful or elect shall
finally perish, as I have evidently proved before, and as the Apostle here does
insinuate, v. 9. ( but beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and
things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.) therefore it is
certain that they shall never thus fall away by a total apostasy. And
consequently the proposition, if it be understood of such gifts and graces as
are peculiar to those that are justified, is untrue. Otherwise the assumption
is merely false. For not all are justified, that have been any ways
enlightened, that is, that either have received any knowledge of the truth, or
have been baptized, (for so the Syriacke Heb: 6, 4.
Interpreter, and some of the Greek Fathers Dionys Ar^op. eccl. hier. c* 2.3.
Justin, martyr. Apolog. 2. sub finem
understand that phrase, calling baptism, (...), those that are baptized
(...), the day appointed for baptism (...)) nor all that have in any sort
tasted of the heavenly gift (for as Gregory says, it is one thing to drink or
eat, and an other to taste, Aliud est bibere vel manducare atque aliud
degustare, vnde in Evangelio de Christo legitur. Mat. 27. d. and cum gustasse,
noluit bibere. Bibit e^go squam vivam. and manduc^t Panem, qui de caelo
descendit, qui in charitate radicem figit, degustat qui e^ aliquatenu^
co^municat, a qua postea delinque^do recedit, de quibus Apostolus dicit M. b.
6. a impossible est eos etc. De Paenit did. 7.^.44. citius ex Greg Moral. l
34 c 8.
for we read in the Gospel, that Christ when he had tasted, would not drink,
Mat. 27.34. he therefore drinks the water of life, and eats the bread which
came down from heaven, who is rooted in charity; he tastes, who in some sort
communicates therewith, and afterward by sinning departs from it, of whom
the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4. it is impossible that they. etc.) nor all that
have been made partakers of any gift of the holy Ghost. For not every one that
is enlightened, has a justifying faith; nor every one that has knowledge, has
saving knowledge, nor every one that has had a smack and taste of the heavenly
gift, does eat the bread which came down from heaven, (for men may taste that,
which they spit out again) nor every one that has gifts of the holy Ghost,
have the gifts of sanctification, which are proper to them that are justified,
as may appear by the examples of Balaam, and of Judas; of whom as much might
be affirmed, as here is spoken of such, as are supposed may fall away.

Bellarm. 11. testim. 2. Pet. 2.21.22.
. 12. His last allegation is, 2. Pet. 2.21.22. For it had been better for them,
not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to
turn from the holy commandment given unto them. But it is come to them,
according to the true proverb, the dog is returned to his own vomit, and the
sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

Could a true falling away (says Bellarmine) be more clearly set forth? For he
which returns to his vomit, had surely vomited, and by vomiting had emptied
his gorge. And the sow that is washed, could not be said to return to her
wallowing in the mire, unless she had before come out of it, and had been
truly washed.

Answ. The Apostle here speaks of some, who having been by the preaching of
the Gospel converted from Gentilisme, or any other false and idolatrous
religion, do suffer themselves to be seduced by false teachers, and return to
their former errors and enormities, as the dog to his vomit, or the sow to
her mire. But this does not prove, that the faithful or elect, (who in the
scriptures are not compared to dogs or hogs) may fall away; or that true
justifying faith may be lost. For as they were turned from their false religion
to the acknowledgment only and profession of the truth: so they return from
the doctrine of the Gospel (which Peter here calls the holy commandment
which was delivered unto them) to their former errors and superstitions.
Suppose a man reclaimed from Popery, to be seduced again by Popish Priests,
and Jesuits (of whom especially, this prophecy is to be understood) of him it
may be said* 2. Pet. 2: 18*
that he which had been truly (...).
, or as some editions read, for a while escaped from them who live in error,
(...). Compl^t.
that is to say from Papists, and had also escaped from the filthynesse of the
world, whereby especially is meant Idolatry, and from all other the enormities
of the church of Rome (which is the mother of all the abominations and
spiritual fornications in the christian world) and consequently, that he, who
was purged and washed from the filthynes of Idolatry, is like a dog, that had
vomited, returned to his vomit, and like the swine that was washed to his
wallowing in the mire.

But our Savior Christ has taught, that the elect shall not utterly be
seduced Mat. ^4.24.
by Antichrist, and his adherents; and Paul, that Antichrist prevails only
in them that perish, 2 Thessalonians 2.10.11.12.
whose names are not written Apoc. 17.8.
in the book of life, because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved. Whereas those that truly believe and have received the
love of the truth, are by the power of God through 1. Pet. 1.5.
faith preserved unto everlasting life, as the Apostle also shows in the next
words that the Lord has from the beginning chosen the faithful to salvation
through sanctification of the spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.14.
and belief of the truth, whereunto he has called them by the Gospel to the
obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. The examples therefore of such
a one as having been reclaimed from Antichristianisme, or gentilisme, is
afterward seduced by false teachers, and makes a relapse into his former
errors and corruptions, does not prove that a man endued with a true
justifying faith may fall away from grace: but his revolt does prove, that he
was never a sound Christian, never endued with a true justifying faith.

And these were his testimonies of holy scripture.

CHAP. X.
The examples alleged by Bellarmine answered. Example^ of defection alleged
by Bellarmine. De justif. l. 3* c. 14.


1. NOw let us examine his examples. for though he produce eight examples, yet
he is not able out of any of them to conclude the present Question. For five of
the^ agree not with the antecedent of the Question; and the other three agree
not with the consequent. For those five which indeed did fall away, were not
men justified by faith; and therefore those five examples of the reprobate
Angels, of Adam, Saul, Simon Magus, and Judas are impertinent; and those three,
which were justified by faith, as David. Peter, and Solomon, did never wholly
fall away.

His two first examples are the fall of the wicked Angels and of our first
parents. The fall of the angels and of our first Parents.
Concerning both which examples, I acknowledge, that they having been created,
according to the image of God, and placed in an happy estate, did fall into
sin and misery. But our question is not of reprobate Angels, but of men
justified by faith, and regenerated by the spirit of God, and therefore not of
our first parents before their fall, who then were neither regenerated by the
spirit, nor justified by faith.

For they are said to be regenerated, who were before dead in sin, and they
are said to be justified, who are absolved from their sins, and accepted of
God as righteous in Christ.

If any shall object, that from these examples we may argue as from the
greater, if diverse Angels, and also our two first parents, who were created in
a perfect and happy estate did fall away; how much more may any of us, who are
subject to so many imperfectio^s and sins. I answer, if our persevera^ce
depended on the co^stancy of our own freewill, as theirs did; and we should be
left to our selves as they were, we should be more prone and apt to fail the^
they. But our persevera^ce as I have showed before, is not grounded upon our
own strength, or constancy of our own wills; but upon the promises of God,
who is almighty, immutable, most true and faithful, and upon the mediation and
intercession of Christ our Savior, etc. which promises of God, and
intercession of Christ, did not appertain to them.

If it be demanded, why we may not fall away, as well as they, seeing we fall
into sin, as well as they, I answer, first, that Christ having satisfied
for the sins of all the faithful, does now also sit at the right hand of his
father, making intercession for us; that he having redeemed us, and fully
satisfied for all our offenses, we may notwithstanding all our sins,
whereinto through humane frailty we do fall, be still preserved and continued
in the favor of God. 1. John 2.1.2 which benefits of redemption and
intercession did not belong to the wicked Angels at all, not to our first
parents, when they fell, nor after their fall, until they believed in the
promised seed.

Secondly, though the faithful fall, as they did, yet they do not fall away
fall from God, as they did, for the reasons before alleged.

If again it be objected concerning our first parents, that they had a
stronger faith, more perfect righteousness, more constant will then we have. I
answer, that they had faith; but not the evangelicall justifying faith. For as
yet the promise of salvation by Christ was not made, neither did they before
they fell, need a redeemer. And as touching righteousness; we are justified by 2
more perfect righteousness then they were For they stood just before God by
their own righteousness; but we, by the righteousness of Christ. And for the
constancy of their will hear what St. Augustine De Corrept. and grati^a c. 11.
Non solu^ posse quod volumu^ verum etiam velle quod possumus. acceperat posse
si vellet, sed no^ ha ^uit velle quod posset, nam si ha b^isset persev^aisset
says.

There is in us says he by this grace of God in receiving that which is good,
and keeping the same with perseverance not only that we can do what we will,
but also, that we will, what we can, which was not in the first man, for one of
these was in him, but the other was not, that is as after he speaks, he had
received to can if he would, but he had not to will what he could. for if he
had, he had persevered.

To which purpose you may see more in the Chapter De co^^ept. and grati^a c. 12.
following.

. 2. As touching all other examples, The rest of the examples by Bellarm^ne
produced.
which may be produced, we are to hold that certain rule of St. John If they
had been of us, they would surely have remained in us. And therefore it is
certain, that those, which were faithful indeed, did not fall away; and
contrariwise, they that did fall away, were never endued with a true faith:
such were Saul, Simon Magus, and Judas, whose examples notwithstanding
Bellarmine does allege.

As touching Saul, Saul.
Bellarmine cites 1. Sam. 9.2. Saul was elect, and good, and there was not a
better man then he among the sons of Israel. For from the shoulder upward he
was taller then all the people. Hereupon Bellarmine infers, if Saul were not
truly just, then there was not a just man in Israel, for there was none better
then he. But there were some just men in Israel, for Samuel was then living,
and many prophets with him, and the sons of the Prophets. Therefore Saul at
the first was a just man and a good and yet notwithstanding he did not only
fall into sin, but is also thought to be a reprobate and damned person.

Answ. This text is misinterpreted to prove Saul to have been a good man, who
when he was at the best, was but an hypocrite, or as Nazianzene speaks
Apolog. ad Pat rem. (...),
of him, because he was not turned uprightly and sincerely into another man,
therefore he came to a tragical and fearful end. For first the word Bachor
which he translateth elect, (from whence he might as well have concluded
against himself, that he was elected, as from the other word that he was good)
does ordinarily in the scriptures signify a young man, because such are
fittest^ to be chosen for war or any bodily service as Ps. 148.12. Ier.
31.13. Ezech. 9.6. Joel 2.28. and in many other places Deuteronomy 32.^5. 1. Sam. 6.1.
Such a man of choice was Saul.

2 Chronicles 25.5. Es, 23.4. Ecel. 1^.1.
Secondly, the word, which he translateth good, oftentimes signifies goodly, or
beautiful, not simply good, but good in form, or good to behold. And in this
sense Saul is said to have been elect and good, that is a young man and goodly
or beautiful. And there was not a better, that is a more goodly young man then
he. Thus the word is used Ex. 2.2. When the mother of Moses saw that he was
good, meaning as St. Luke translateth it, Act. 7.20,
Act. 7. (...) a goodly child, she hid him etc* so Genesis 6.2. When the sons of
GOD saw the daughters of men, that they were good, meaning goodly or
beautiful. For it had been no fault to have married them for their goodness. So
Bathsheba 2. Sam. 11.2. was good to look upon, so was Rebecca, Genesis 24.16. and
Esther, c. 27. here therefore the like commendation is given to Saul. as
afterward to Absalom 2. Sam 14.25.
and to Adonijah, 1 Kin. 1: 6.
that he was of a goodly personage, which is confirmed by that which follows,
from the shoulders upward he was higher then any of the people. And in respect
hereof, I mean of his goodlines, and not of his godliness, he is preferred
before all the rest of the Israelites. This may also appear by conferrence of
this text with the 23 and 24 verses of the next Chapter. 1. Sam. 10.23.14.
And thus Josephus understands this place, relating the story of Saul, who
was as he says a young man, Antiq. l. 6, c. 5 (...).
of an excellent form, and of a great stature. Procopius Gazeus, expounding
this text, says, that the scripture attributes to Saul, not virtue of mind,
but beauty and greatness, for it reports him to have been of a beautiful and
excellent body. Vatablus, florens ae^ate, and formosus, and non erat pulcrior
illo. Or as Serarius Diciturelectus et bonus, bonitate, non moru^, ut putat
Abulensis, et quodammedo S. Gregorius, l. 4.24. sed forma, ut ^roecpius ait, ae
Chaldeus, qui juvenem pulerum vertit, et patetex comparatione,
himself writing on this place he is called elect and good, in goodness not of
manners as Abule^sis supposes, and in some sort St Gregory: but of form, as
Procopius says, and the Chaldee paraphrast, who tra^slateth elect and good, a
goodly young man and this is evident by the comparison. This therefore being the
sense of these words, that Saul was a young man goodly, and tall: Bellarmine
cannot conclude any thing from this place, unless he would be too ridiculous.
If he would have concluded any thing from the example of Saul, he should rather
have alleged, first, that the spirit of God came upon him, that God gave him
another heart, and afterward that the spirit of God departed from him.

For this commendation which Bellarmine alleges, was given unto him, before
the spirit of God had come upon him, or before the Lord had given him another
heart. But Bellarmine did, or might perceive, that it was not the spirit of
sanctification that came upon Saul, and went from him, but the spirit of
politic wisdom, fortitude, and government, and that he was endued, not
with saving and sanctifying graces, needful to salvation; but with gifts
royal, or heroical, fit for a King.

. 3. No more pertinent is the example of Simon Magus who though he was
baptized, Simon Magus.
yet was not truly converted, and though he believed after a sort, yet was he
not justified. For being ov^rcome by the majesty of Gods word, and his
conscience being co^victed, partly by the evidence of truth and partly by the
great signs and wonders, whereat he was affonyed: he gave asse^t to the
doctrine of the Gospel, that it is true, and was content to profess ^t, and
to be baptized. But for all his profession he was but an hypocrite. For
although when he was baptized, he professed himself to repent and believe in
Christ, yet neither did he repent, nor truly believe in Christ, by a lively
faith, which is evermore a grace of regeneration. for he believed, as the
devils are said to believe, without grace, without apprehending the merits of
Christ, or resting upon him as his Savior. And he repented without amendment
of life, remaining still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity;
neither was his heart upright with him, as Peter tells him, Act. 8.21-23. And
here I may not let pass Bellarmines impudent belying of Calvin, who^ he
reports to have said, that Simon did not believe indeed, but fained himself
to believe, which if he had said, he had avouched no more, the^ Ireneus lib. 1.
c. 20.
before him had plainly affirmed. Simon fidem simulavit. But we (says
Bellarmine) do rather give credit to S. Luke, who says he did believe Calvin's
Calv. in Act. 8 13:
words upon this place are these. But I do not assent to many, who think that
Simon only feigned himself to believe, when indeed he did not believe. for
Luke plainly testifies, that he did believe, and the reason is added, because
he was touched with admiration. And in his Institutions. Simon Magus is said to
have believed; lib. 3. c. ^ 10
who notwithstanding a little after bewrays his infidelity, whereas faith is
attributed to him, we do not understand with some, that in words he fained
himself to believe, when in heart he did not believe at all; but rather we
think, that he being ouercom by the majesty of the Gospel, did believe after a
sort. etc. Such conscience Bellarmine makes of dealing fairly with his
adversaries. Notwithstanding Calvine says, that all this while Simo^ was an
hypocrite. and therefore his faith could not be (...). true and unfayned, but
such as is the faith of hypocrites; which Peter testifies when he says, his
heart was not right before God, that is to say he was an hypocrite. And yet
Bellarmine can find never a word, wherein his dissimulation is noted.

. 4. But the example of Judas the traitor, Iuda^.
says Bellarmine, were sufficient if there were no more, to stop all our
mouths. For that Judas had been just, Hierome proves out of those words of
Christ, John 17.12.
Father I have kept them whom thou gave me, and none of them is lost, but the
son of perdition. For if the Father gave him to the Son, assuredly he was
good; and if he perished out of the stock, then before he perished, he was
numbered in the flock of Christ. Now it is evident that Judas is a reprobate,
and damned, not only out of this place, where he is called the son of
perdition, but also out of Mat. 26. where the Lord says of Judas, it had been
better for that man if he had not been borne. Thus therefore he argues.

Judas became a reprobate and damned person.

Judas once was a just and good man.

Therefore some men that have been just and good, may become a reprobate and
damned person.

Answ. The assumption is false, Judas was never a just or good man. For first,
he never truly believed, as appears by the testimony of our Savior Christ,
Ioh. 6.64 There are some of you (says he to his disciples) that believe not.
For Jesus knew from the beginning which they were that believed not and (among
them) who should betray him. Secondly because from the beginning he was a
servant of Mammon, and followed our Savior for his own gain, for he was a
thief says John 12.6.
St. John.

3. When diverse of the disciples, who did not truly believe had forsaken
Christ; our Savior asks the 12 Apostles, if they also would forsake him: and
when Peter had answered in the name of the rest, that they would not depart
from him, for they did know and believe, that he was the Christ the Son of
the living God. John 6: 69.
Our Savior replyeth, have I not chosen you twelve, and, one of you is a
devil? Now he spoke it of Judas Iscariot, etc.

4. In the place cited by Bellarmine, he is called the son of perdition, In
Joan tract. 107.
because, as Augustine truly says, he was predestined unto destruction.
Wherefore Judas did not then begin to be a wicked man and a reprobate, when
he betrayed CHRIST, but then his wickedness and hypocrisy was plainly
discovered. For before that time he had never truly believed or repented, but
was an hypocrite, a thief, and a devil, and by the decree of GOD appointed
unto destruction. Yea but says Bellarmine, he was given to CHRIST of GOD the
Father, therefore he was good. Answ. he might as well have concluded, therefore
he was elected, and consequently that he was saved. For every one, says
Christ, John 6.37. that my Fathre gives me (namely by election) comes unto
me, namely by faith, and he that comes unto ma^^ill I in no wise cast off and
verse 39. this is the Fathers will, that of all which he bath given me, I
should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And this
is my will, says the Son, John. 17.24. that they whom thou have given me, be
with me, etc. These, says Augustine De correp and gratia. H^ intelliguntur
Christo dati, qui, ordinati sunt advitam aeteana^, ipsi sunt illiptaedestinati,
and feeundum propositum voc^i, quorum nullus perit.
, are understood to be given to Christ, who are ordained to life eternal,
these are they that are praedestinated and called according to Gods purpose, of
who^ none perishes. But I answer, that Judas was given to be a disciple and
an Apostle, not as one elected unto life. For as there is a double vocation, so
there is a two fold election, either to some office or work in this life, or
to salvacion in the life to come. Judas was chosen to the office of an Apostle,
but he was not chosen unto life; for he was a child of perdition, not only in
Gods decree, but upon record. Ps. 109. And this evidently appears by
conference of these two places, viz. John 6.70. and John 13.18. In the former
our Savior says, Ioh. 6.70.
have not I chosen you twelve (namely to be my Apostles) and one of you is a
devil? In the latter place speaking to the same twelve he says, Ioh 13*18.
I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen, but that the scripture
might be fulfilled, he that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel
against me; thereby plainly signifying, that Judas, who was chosen to the
Apostleship, was not chosen to salvation. Those are properly called elect)
says Augustine, de corrept, and gra^^a c 7.
who are chosen to reign with Christ, not as Judas was elected to the work,
for which he was fit.

Yea but, says Bellarmine, if he perished out of the flock, he was before he
perished, numbered in the flock.

Answ. He was numbered indeed among the sheep and elect of Christ, Ecce inter
sanctos est Judas. ecce fur est Judas, et ne contemnas fur sacrilegus. Aug. in
Joan. 12. trac. 50.
as Peter says, Act. 1.17. but he was a goat, yea a wolf, rather then a
sheep. he went out from them, but he was not of them. he was numbered among the
elect. but he was a reprobate from the beginning; though he were not discovered
to be such a one, until he fell Act. 1.25.
by transgression, that he might go to his own place. Aug. in Io. 2. tract 50
Judas iste non tune perversus factus est, quando ^ Iudeis corruptus Dominum
tradidit, non tune p^rijt, iam fur erat and Domi nu^ perditus sequebatur, quia
non cord sed corpore Dominum se quebatur.
And whereas Hierome is alleged to prove, that Judas was a good man, when he
was chose^ to be an Apostle. I answer, that the same Hierome (...) Mat. ^^.
says that Judas even after he had betrayed Christ, was not of an evil
nature,when as Christ, even before he had betrayed him, says, he was a Devil.

But Judas (say some) was one of those 12, to whom our Savior Christ promised,
that they shall sit upon 12. seats* and judge the 12 Tribes of Israel.

Answ. By that reason they should conclude that Judas is saved* whom our
Savior calls the son of perdition; and faith, that it had been better for
him that he had never been borne. and Peter, that after he fell, he went unto
his own place. But though our Savior speaks of 12 seats, answerable to the
12. tribes, yet he speaks not expressly of 12 that should fit in those 12
seats, (for in the same seat of judgment many may sit) nor particularly of the
twelve, but indefinitely of those that were his followers. And if he did speak
of 12 who followed him, we may well understand him to have spoken of Matthias,
as the 12th. for he* even from the Baptism of John, until CHRIST'S ascension,
was one of the followers of CHRIST. Act. 1.21.22.

5. Hitherto we have spoken of those 5. examples which were impertinent. now
remain the other three.

David.
And first, as touching David, we freely confess, both that he was truly just,
and also that he fell very grievously, which is all that Bellarmine proves.
But when he should prove, that he fell away wholly from grace, he beggeth the
Question. asking, who can deny, that he truly felt from grace; from
righteousness, from faith? when he cannot be ignorant, that all those who are
his adversaries in this cause, do utterly deny that he fell wholly from grace;
whether by grace you understand the gracious favor of God, or the habites and
gifts of saving grace, he incurred the anger 2. Sam. 11.27.
of God, but not his hatred. God still loved him, and therefore sent the
Prophet Nathan to him, the habites also of grace, and the seed of GOD remained
in him, though some acts of grace, and fruits of the spirit were for a time
interrupted.

But you will say, David prays, Ps. 51.10*
Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me, and
therefore had lost his former regeneration, and was deprived of the spirit. I
answer. 1. that he who is once borne the child of GOD, as David was, cannot
be unborne again, that the seed of GOD remains in him 1. John 3.9.
: and that he cease not to be the son of GOD, because he is borne of GOD.

2. That David when he made this prayer, had renewed his repentance, and was
endued with faith, as appears v. 14 and with the Spirit of GOD, and therefore
prays in the next words, Ps. 51.11.
that the Lord would not take his spirit from him, which proves that he had
not utterly lost it. And therefore the meaning of his prayer is, not that the
Lord would again regenerate him, for that is never done, but that the work of
regeneration, and sanctification which he had formerly begun in him, and
which by his sin was impaired, he would repair, accomplish, and perfect.

Notwithstanding thus much is to be confessed concerning David, and so of all
the children of GOD, when they have committed any grievous sin; that he
highly offended GOD. 2. Sam. 11.27. incurred his anger, and provoked his
judgments. 2. Sam. 12.10.11.14. contracted in his own conscience the guilt of
damnation, deserved to be utterly cast off; that the act of his faith whereby
he was justified in the court of his conscience, was interrupted, and his
justification in tha^ respect suspended (for until he repented of that his
sin, he could have no assurance of the forgivenes of it,) that whiles he did
lie in his sin, his faith, and hope, and other graces were much dulled and
daunted in him, the clearnes and peace of his conscience disturbed* the inward
joy and comfort of the holy Ghost for a time interrupted and therefore he
desired Ps. 51, 8*12.
that they might be restored unto him again.

Other objections concerning David answered,
6. If further it be objected concerning David, that by his own verdict 2.
Sam. 12.5. he was vir mortis, a man of death, I confess he was reus mortis,
guilty in himself of death, or worthy to die, but the effect of Gods speech
unto him by the prophet 2. Sam. 12.13. seems to have been like that of
Solomon to Abiathar 1. Kin. 2.26. thou art vir mortis, thou art indeed worthy
to die, but yet I will not put thee to death. And therefore though in himself,
and in his own conscience, he were very guilty of death, and worthy of
damnation: yet GOD did not take Ps. 89.2^.33.35.
his mercy from him, nor cast him out of his favor, with whom he had made an
everlasting covenant Es, 55.3.
even the sure mercies of David. So that although he deserved damnation, and
consequently contracted the guilt of death; yet he did not fall into the state
of damnation, neither did he loose his right and title to the kingdom of
heaven, but still remained the child of GOD. For although the children of GOD,
by their sins deserve to be cast off, and sometimes do seem unto themselves
to be forsaken of GOD: yet whom once he has adopted to be his sons, and
heirs in CHRIST, and coheyres with Christ, them he does never disinherit. It
is true, tha^ for adulterers and murderers there is no inheritance in the
kingdom of heaven, but this is understood, if they do not repent, wherefore
if David should have dyed in those sins without repentance, he should have
been condemned. But as it is not possible, in respect of GODS eternal decree,
which is immutable, that any of the elect should perish; so no more possible it
is in the same respect, that they should sive and dye in sin without
repentance, or if any do live and die in sin without repentance, their
final impenitency is a plain evidence, that they were never elect, never the
true children of GOD. Let this be the sum, that David by his sin contracted
the guilt of death and damnation: but this guiltines did not alter or change
his state, viz. from the state of salvation, to the state of damnation. For
neither was he condemned, nor to be condemned, if he did repent; which
necessarily (I speak of the necessity of infallibility) he was to do. For as
the Lord had predestined him to salvation; so he had preordained his
repentance unto life.

Yea but David by committing adultery, made his body the member of an harlot ^.
Cor. 6.15.
I cannot deny, but that a great indignity is offered unto our Savior Christ,
when a man professing him self to be a member of Christ, shall make himself
one flesh with an harlot, or commit any other crime.

But yet, as the members in their sins do not communicate with their head,
from whom in the act of their sin, they receive not spiritual sen^e and
motion: so does not he communicate with them, who notwithstanding in respect of
union, cease not to be his members, though diseased members, yea but David was
also a murderer. Now the scriptures testify, that whosoever loves not his
brother abides in death, 1. Ioh. 3.14.15.
and that whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. And ye know that no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him, therefore David lost his
justification, and with it his title unto the kingdom of heaven, and fell into
the state of damnation. Answ. it follows not, for in the same sense that it
may be affirmed of him, that he did abide in death, it may also be denied, that
eternal life did abide in him. For as by death is meant the guilt of death and
damnation, so by eternal life, the assurance of it. For we are in this life,
saved in hope, we confess therefore, that as David by his sin contracted the
guilt of death; so whiles he remained in his sin, he could have no sound
assurance of eternal life. Yea but David continued in his sin many months,
without repentance. Answ. that he continued impenitent many months, is more
then I know, or am bound to believe. But this in charity I judge of him; that
he having been by the violent temptation of satan and his own flesh
transported to the committing of adultery, he was very desirous to conceal it,
because he knew, that the divulging of it would besides his own shame, tend to
the great dishonor of God, and disgrace of religion, as causing the holy name
of God and his religion to be blasphemed. In which his desire to conceal his
sin from the eyes of men, he so far exceeded, that the Lord thought it
needful, though he had privately repented, to bring him upon the stage, that
both his sin might be published, and his repentance also made public; and
that not so much for his own sake, as for the example of others. That both his
fall, and repentance, remaining upon public record; his fall, might be
aspectacle of humane frailty, that those who are inferior to David in grace
(as wh^^ is not) might be affraide to sin, and not to presume of their own
strength, (for as Augustine says, in Ps. 50.
sit casus majorum tremor minorum) his repentance, that it might be a good
precedent to others, who having fallen according to his example, might by his
example, be moved to repentance. This example therefore as the said Augustine
admonishes, audiant, qui non ceciderunt, ne cadant audiant, ibid.
qui ceciderunt, vt surgant.

7. Now let us come to the example of Peter. St. Peter,
which Bellarmine alleging to prove the title of his Chapter, ^o justif. 1.3.
c. 14.
that faith and justice once had may be lost, does notoriously contradict
himself. For where he maintains De Romans Po^tif. l. 4. c. 3
against us that Antichristian assertion, that the Pope cannot err, he takes
for his ground Christ's prayer for Peter Luk 22.32.
that his faith should not fail. For if Christ prayed for Peter, that his
faith should not fail; then undoubtedly his faith could not be lost, no not
for a moment, for as he says in the same place Dominus hoc privilegium pro
Petro impetravi^ ut ipse non posset vnquam veram fidem amittere, quantumvis
tentaretur a-Diabolo.
Our Lord obtained this privilege for Peter, that he could never loose his true
faith, though he were never so much tempted of the Devil.

And to the same purpose in the 8th De Rom Pont. l. 4, c, 8.
chapter of the same book, he uses Gregoryes Christum a Pe^ro negatum fuisse,
ore, non cord. proinde perdidisse Petrum confessione^ fid^^, non ipsam fidem.
distinction, that Peter denied Christ with his mouth, not with his heart. and
therefore that Peter lost the confession of faith, and not faith it self. And
this is confirmed. 1 by the prayer of Christ for him. For Christ having
foretold, both that Satan would tempt him, seeking to sift him as it were
wheat, and also that being tempted he should deny him, he tells him, that he
had prayed for him, that notwithstanding his fall, his faith should not be
eclipsed, meaning by a total eclipse, for so he says, (...). 2. By
testimonies of the fathers. Tertullian. de ^ug in persecut.
ego rogavi pro te ne deficeret fides tua, i. ne tantum Diabolo permitteretur,
Cathemerin. hymn. ad Gallicantum.
ut fides periclitaretur. Prudentiuse.

Flevit negator denique.
Ex ore prolapsum nefas.
Cum men's maneret innocens,
Animusque servaret fidem.
Nec tale quicquam postea
Lingua locutus lubrica est
Cantusque Galli cognito
Peccare justus deslitit.
Augustine. De corr^pt. and gratia c.^. Nisi ut haberet in fide libertituam,
fortissimam, invictissimam, perseverantissimam voluntatem.
When Christ prayed that Peter's faith should not fail, what else did he ask,
but that he should have in the faith a will most free, most strong, most
invincible, most persevering.

Leo De passione Domini sermon. 9. Adsuit dextra Domini Christi, quae labantem te
pr usquam dejice ^eris, exciperet, and firmitatem standi in ipso cadendi
periculo recepisti.
. The hand of the Lord was present with Peter to hold him up when he was
falling, that he should not be cast down, and, that he received strength to
stand in the very danger of falling.

Gregory Moral. l 25. c 16. Deum quem cord tenuit, voce denegavit Confessio
quidem defecit in ore, sed fides non defecit in cord.
. That Peter when he denied Christ with his mouth, retained him in his heart.
And again, confession failed him in the mouth, but faith did not fail him in
the heart.

Theophylact In Luke 22.32. (...).
. I have prayed, says CHRIST, that thy faith should not fail. for although
for a little while; thou shall be shaken, yet thou have the seeds of faith
laid ^p in thee and although the blast of the tempter shall shake off thy
leaves, yet the root lives, and thy faith shall not fail. Where says
Bellarmine De Rom Pontif hb, 4 c 3.
, by an elegant similitude he does declare that Peter by denying Christ* lost
the confession of says which is made with the mouth, (for the leaves signify
words) but lost not faith whereby men believe unto righteousness.

But though Peter lost not his faith, yet says Bellarmine Ibid. altera. Non
dixit Dominus, rogavi ut non deficerut charitas tua, sed fides tua; and teipsa
seimus defecisse Petti charitatem, and gratiam, quandone^avit Dominu^. fidem
autem unqua^ defecisse non scimus.
, he lost his charity, and grace by denying Christ.

Answ. Our Savior speaks of that faith whereby Peter was justified, and for
which he had before pronounced him blessed, Mat, 16.17.
which cannot be severed from charity or saving grace, and therefore whiles his
faith remained, which did justify him, he could neither loose his
justification, nor his charity, for as notwithstanding his denial in word, he
believed in his heart so notwithstanding the same denial, he loved Christ in
his heart. The Lord, says Leo De pass. Domini sermon. 9. in fire. Videt in te
Dominus non fidem fictam, non dilectionem aversam, sed constantiam suisse
turbatam, abundavit fletus, ubi non defecit affectus, and sons chatitatis lavit
verba formidinis.
, did see in Peter says not fained, his love not averted, but his constancy
troubled; and that weeping abounded, where affection failed not, and the
fountain of charity (sending forth tears) washed the words of fear.

Yea but Peter fell grievously, that is all which Bellarmine proves, and that
all no man denies; though not so grievously as some imagine, who* when Peter
is said to have cursed and sworn, understand him not to have cursed himself
(as men in their oaths use to do) but to have cursed our Savior, whereof
there is no probability But though he did fall, yet he did not fall away,
neither was his fall a sin of malice, wi^fully committed, but a sin of
infirmity, whereunto he did fall, being tempted by Satan, and transported with
extreme fear and consternation of mind, into the which the Lord permitted
him to fall, leaving him for a time to him self, and to the temptation of
Satan that so he might correct him for his former confidence in himself, and
might make him the more humble and circumspect for the time to come. And that
his fall was a sin of infirmity, Leo De passi. Dni sermon. 9.
testifies, Petrus ancilla sacerdotis calumniante perterritus ex infirmitate
periculum negationis incurrit And likewise Gregory Moral. l. 25. c. 16.
who having propounded that received distinction of sin, that it is committed
either ex ignorantia, or ex infirmitate, or ex studio, that is, out of
ignorance, or of infirmity, or malice, he says, Petrus infirmitate peccavit,
quando omne robur fides quod Domino perhibuit, una vox puellae concussit^et
Deum, quem cord tennit, voce denegavit.

Solomon.
8. There remains the example of Solomon; concerning whom there are diverse
opinions, some, thinking that he was never truly just, some, that after he was
justified he never fell away, some, that he fell totally for a time, but after
was reclaimed: some that he fell both totally and finally. In this diversity of
opinions we are to hold that undoubted rule of St. John, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
If they had been of us, they would surely have remained with us. This
therefore is certain, if Solomon did utterly fall away, he was never truly
just; and if he were truly just, he did never utterly fall away.
Notwithstanding their opinion seems to be most probable. I am sure, most
charitable who hold that Solomon was a just man; and that howsoever he fell
very grievously, yet he did not perish in his sin, but was recovered by
repentance: and in testimony thereof did write the book of the preacher. And
this is the judgment of many writers ^e Caleb Da Ischampius his vindiciae
Solomonis.
both old, Hebrew Greek, and Latin, and new, both Protestants and Papists. And
that Solomon was truly just it may be proved by these reasons. 1. Because he
was beloved of God, and also himself did love God. That God loved him, it is
testified 2. Sam. 12.24.25. and to that end the Lord sent by Nathan, and
appointed that his name should be Iedidjah, that is beloved of the Lord.

That he loved God, the holy Ghost bears him witness, 1. King. 3.3. And
Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David his father.

2. Because he was the child of God, according to Gods own promise 2. Sam.
7.14. and 1. Chron. 22.10. I will be his father and he shall be my son.

Thirdly, because he was a type of Christ. Ps. 72. and for his sake, whose type
he was, beloved of God, for he was called Iedidjah, beloved of God, for the
Lords sake. 1. Sam. 12.25.

4. Because he was the penman of the holy Ghost, in penning a good part of the
canonical scriptures, and consequently an holy man of GOD, 2. Pet. 1.20.21.

And that Solomon repented after his fall, it appears; first, by the book of
the preacher, which he wrote to testify his repentance. 2ly by the testimony of
the holy Ghost, 2. Chron. 11.17. where it is reported, that the priests and
Levits, and so many as feared God, separated themselves from Jeroboam, and his
Idolatrous church, and joined themselves to Rehoboam etc. for they walked in
the way of David and Solomon 3 years. whereby it appears, that Solomon after
his fall, restored the worship of God; although he could not wholly abolish the
idolatry, which through his own default, and (if I may so speak) uxoriousnes,
was brought into the church. 3ly if Solomon had not repented, he had dyed, and
so perished in his sin. But this is altogether improbable, for the sons of
God, are also heirs, and whom he loves in Christ he loves to the end. 4ly.
because the Lord promised, both to him in particular, that if he did sin (as
the Lord did foresee he would) he would chastise him as his child, but he would
not take his mercy from him. 2. Sam. 7.14. and also indefinitely to the
faithful seed of David Ps. 89.29. etc.
Ps. 89. in which Solomon is included.

Now if Solomon did not finally perish in his sin, but was recovered by
repentance; then also it follows, that he did not wholly fall away from God;
for if he had, it had been impossible, Heb. 6.
that he should have been renewed by repentance, as the Apostle testifies, But
though he fell grievously, yet he did not wholly fall from God: neither did he
sin of malice, or with full consent of will. He fell not wholly from God, for
he abolished not Gods worship, but retained it; although out of too much love
to his wives he permitted, and, as it seems, allowed the practice of their
several religions: and that which was permitted or authorized by him, though
not practiced in his own person, is by the LORD accoumpted his act, and he for
it censured as an Idolatour.

Which may serve for a caveat to all Kings and Princes, not to tolerate, and
much less to allow or authorize the profession of any false or idolatrous
religion within their dominions, for what is done with their leave, and by
their authority, is judged their act. Neither did he sin of malice or with
full consent of will, but of infirmity, and with some reluctation of the
spirit, even as Aaron for fear of the people, yielded with an unwilling mind
to make the golden calfe, so Solomon, for fear to displease his idolatrous
wines, upon whom he too much doted, and in too much desire to gratify them,
yielded to give way to their idolatries, which he could not but mislike.
Therefore he is censured, not that he had utterly forsaken God, but that ^
King. 11.6.
he went not fully after the Lord, as David his father did; but halting alter a
sort beteweene GOD and his idolatrous wives, he was desirous to serve, and to
please both. And howsoever the Lord was very angry with him for his sin, yet
did he not hate him, nor utterly take his mercy from him, (which is a plain
evidence, that he did not wholly fall away from God) but as a father chastises
his child; so the Lord corrected him, not so much as threatening ^ Sam. 7.^
any other judgments against him, but such as he calls chastisements.

CHAP. XI.
Bellarmines proof from the Tradition of the Church, disproved.

, 1. ANd these were the testimonies and examples, Tradition of the Church.
which Bellarmine produces out of the Scriptures.

In the next place he adds the Tradition of the church. for first, he says,
the Church long since condemned this error in Iovinian.

Answ. Iovinian, as Bellarmine himself reports, held this error, that the
just after their baptism cannot sin. but we are further from this erroneous
conceit, then the Papists themselves, as I have showed before in the answer
to the sixth or last question.

To this public testimony of antiquity, as he calls it; he adjoyneth the
private opinions of some of the Fathers. and for want of better store, he
cites only two, Augustine and Gregory, who in all their writings give
pregnant and constant testimony to the truth which we hold in this Question, as
has already been shown by many fold allegations produced out of them.

His allegation out of Augustine is this. De eorrept. and gratia ^ 13.
It is to be believed, that some of the sons of perdition, having not
received the gift of persevering to the end, do begin to live in the faith,
which works by love, and for a time do live faithfully and justly, and
afterward fall, nor are taken out of this life, before that happen unto them.

Answ. Augustine speaks of the judgment of charity, whereby we are to judge
and believe some men to live in faith working by love, and for a time to live
faithfully and justly; who, seeming such to us, do notwithstanding fall away.
For as whiles they seem to live faithfully and justly, we Phil 1.7.
are in charity to judge them to be just and faithful men, so also we are to
esteem them elect; until by their falling away, they discover themselves to
be hypocrites, and reprobates. and yet says he, in the same De c^rrept. and
gratia c. 7. Et tamen quis ne^at nos electos, c^m credunt and bapt^z^n ^ut and
secundum Deum virun^ Plane dicuntur electi a ^efcienbus quid futuri sin^.
book, c 7. who would deny the^ to be elect, when they believe and are
baptized, and live according to God. surely they are called elect, by them who
know not what they shall be. Even so plainly they are called faithful, and the
children of God, by them who know not what they are or shall be, for none are
truly faithful, none truly the sons of God, but such as are elect neither
are any truly faithful, which abide not in the word of Christ; nor^^ly the
sons of God, who do not persevere For this is the voice of the children of
God, as Augustine says again in the sa^e book De corrept. and gratia, c. 9.
. they went out from ^s, but they were not of (...) for of they h^d been of
us, they would surely have remained with us, when as therefore the sons of
God say, they went out from us, but they were not of us, what else do they say,
but that they were not sons, when they were in the profession and name of
sons. And again. those disciples, says he, who went back, John 6. (...)
they were not truly the disciples of Christ (for if you shall abide in my word,
says Christ, ye are truly my disciples,) so neither were they truly the sons
of God, even then when they seemed to be such, and were so called.
Notwithstanding as he says, propter utilitatem hujus secreti, for the profit
of this secret, that we should not securely presume of our own strength, when
we see others who have seemed to live faithfully and justly to fall away, but
should fear lest the same thing should befall us; we are to believe that they
live in faith, which works by love, etc. Again, those that truly believe,
are the sons of God, both by adoption and regeneration, Ioh. 1.12.13. Romans
8.15. and therefore shall abide John 8.35. Romans ^.16:17.
in the house for ever, as the heirs of God, (...) coheires with Christ. And
as they are adopted, and regenerated, so also justified, and to be glorified.
And as justified, so also effectually called, for as Augustine touches, they
and none but they are justified, who are called according to his purpose, and
are to be glorified. Now says the same Augustine De bono persever. c. 14.
Donum perseverantiae daturum Deum vocatis suis ista vocatione de qua dictum
est, sine poenitentia sunt dona Dei and votio, omni Christiano confitendum est*
, that God will give the gift of perseverance to his that ^e called with that
calling, of which it is said, the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, it is to be confessed of every christian. And the like answer is to
be give^ to that testimony of Augustine, which someone out of the same book. De
corr^pt and gratia, c. 8. Mirandum quod filiis suis De^ quibusdam, quos
regeneravit in Christo, quibus fide^, spe^, dilectione^ dedit, non dat
perseve^^^
It is to be marveled, that God to son of his sons, whom he has regenerated
in Christ, to whom he has given faith, hope, and love, he gives not
perseverance. For neither are those truly the sons of God, for as he says c.
9.
, qui vere fili^ sunt, praes^iti and praedestinati sunt, those that are truly
sons, are fore-knowne and pred^stinated. Neither were they truly regenerated,
but only sacramentally; neither were they endued with true faith, hope, and
charity, but only in the opinion of men, judging according to charity, in
which ^ence he says Epist. 23.
. Nobis sacramentum fidei fides est. Neither let it move us, says he, Nec nos
moveat quod filiis suis queb^sdam. Deus non dat istam perseverantiam; absit
enim ut ita esset, ^^ dei ^lis praedestinat^ ^^ent, (...) secundum propo^^^^^^
voca^^il, qui vere sunt filii promissionis. Nam isti, cum p^e vi^^nt, dicuntur
filii Dei, sed quoniam victuri sunt impie, and in eadem impietate motit^ri, non
eos dicit filios Dei, p^^s^^a^ia Dei. De corrept and gratia c. ^ ^^^.
that God to son of his children does not give this perseverance; for God
forbid that it should be ^o, if they were of those who are pr^edestinated and
called according to his purpose; who truly are the sons of the promise for
these (others) when they live godlily, are called the sons of God, but
because they will live impiously, and shall die in that impiety, them the
fo^^-knowledge of God does not call the sons of God. If any other places be
alleged out of Augustine, as diverse may to this purpose, that many of the
children of God who have been regenerated, justified, endued with faith, which
works by love, who have begun to live justly and holily etc. have not
withstanding fallen away from grace, and perished in their ^^nes; one answer may
serve for all that forasmuch as he does constantly hold, that all the el^^ do
pers^^ere, and that those which fall away are reprobates, and that none are
truly the sons of GOD, but such as are elected, and called according to his
purpose, therefore in Augustines judgment, they that fall away, were never
truly the sons of GOD, never truly regenerated by the spirit, never truly
justified or sanctified, never truly endued with the faith of the elect, nor
with true charity, (which he constantly holds to be proper to the elect,) nor
true repentance; but were such only in their own conceit, or profession, and
in the opinion of others, judging of them according to the judgment of charity
vid supr. c. 2. and 3.

The testimony cited out of Gregory Moral. l. 30. c. 32.
is not in the place quoted by Bellarmine, neither is it to the purpose,
unless he can prove, that religion is hereditary; and that every one which
descends of Catholic parents, is also a good christian. Who can understand
(says Gregory) that one man who was borne of a mother which is a Catholic or
orthodox christian, is near to the end of his life swallowed up of error, and
another, who was borne in infidelity, and sucked the poison of error with his
mothers milk, ends his life in the Catholic religion.

CHAP. XII.
Bellarmines two first reasons, the first, because he that has faith may
commit an act of infidelity. 2. because many that are baptized fall away.

. 1. NOW we are to examine Bellarmines reasons, Bellarmi^es 5. reasons. 1,
because he that has faith, may commit an act of infidelity.
which only remain to be discussed. And they are five. The first: Whosoever
commits an act of infidelity, loses the habit of faith, and becomes
simply unfaithful, and an enemy of God, and guilty of eternal death.

But he that has the habit of faith may commit an act of infidelity.

Therefore he that has the habit of faith, may loose it, and become merely
unfaithful, and an enemy of God, and guilty of eternal death.

The proposition he proves by 2 arguments first, because it is agreeable to
the scriptures. Secondly, because by the doctrine of his adversaryes,
justifying faith is shaken of by every sin, and the holy Ghost ejected out of
the heart of the offendour.

But I answer, that the proposition is false, and absurd, for an habit is not
lost by one act, but by a privation, or a contrary habit. It were strange, if
by every act of ignorance, a man should loose all his knowledge; by every act of
forgetfulness, he should be utterly deprived of his memory, or by every act of
folly be wholly bereft of wisdom etc. It was an act of infidelity which Moses
and Aaron committed Number. 20.11.12. when they smote the rock twice, of Zacharias
Luk 1.18.20. in not believing the Angel, of Peter, who being called by Christ
to come to him upon the water, was ready to sink, Mat. 14.30.31. But that
especially was a foul act of infidelity, when he denied his master; and yet as
Bellarmine himself holds he lost not his faith.

2. That it is not agreeable to the scriptures which teach no such desperate
doctrine, as this proposition contains where in Bellarmine has set up a
ra^^e, as it were, for men's consciences, teaching, that by every act of
infidelity a man is wholly de^^i^ed of his faith, and by every act of sin
bereaved of all grace.

3. Bellarmine deals absurdly to allege against us, their opinion, which
hold, as he says, that by every sin faith is lost, and the spirit shaken off,
as the doctrine of his adversaryes, when as those, whom he terms his
adversaryes, are adversaryes to us in this cause, as well as the Papists,
although not in so high a degree. For though they hold the total defection of
the faithful, yet they deny the final, neither are they so absurd as to
affirm, that faith and the holy Ghost are lost by every sin, but by great
and grievous sins, wilfully committed, and such as do wast and make havoc
of the conscience, and much less ought he to imagine us to be so absurd, as to
defend the certainty of perseverance, and yet to hold, that justifying faith is
shaken off, and the Holy Ghost ejected by every sin.

4. I answer; that although the nature of faith in it self, as it is an
habit inherent in us, were such, as that by some act of infidelity it might be
lost, and though we in ourselves considered, be such, as that we might fall away
from grace; yet nevertheless the perseverance of all the faithful is certain
and sure, for it depends not upon the worthynes of our faith, nor yet upon
our own strength, or constancy of our own will, but upon the immutability of
the will, and counsel of God, and upon his power assisting and establishing us
according to his gracious promises, and upon the meditation and intercession of
Christ.

But here Bellarmine cavilleth, perhaps they will say, says he, that it is not
of the nature of faith, that it remains unmovable, but that it is to be
ascribed to the assistance and providence of God, who does not suffer men once
truly justified to fall into sin. But if it were so, why should they say,
that all the works of the righteous are mortal sins? and where is this
promise of GOD, that he will not suffer the just to fall into sin? Answ. If
we should hold that the righteous never fall into sin, and yet that the
works of the righteous are mortal sins, (as Bellarmine in his blinded
malice charge us) we should show our selves very absurd, in holding two
assertions so repugnant the one to the other. But indeed we hold neither of
both. Not the former; for we acknowledge a great difference between falling
into sin, and falling away from God. The righteous may, and often do fall
into sin, but they never fall away from God they never sin with full consent of
will, they never become servants of sin reigning in them, they sin not unto
death, as the Apostles Paul and John do plainly testify, Romans 6.14. 1. John
3.9.5.18. Neither do we say, that all the works of the righteous, as prayer,
and alms etc. are mortal sins. That which any of us has said in derogatio^
of good works, has been in the question of justificatio^, when the Papists
obtrude them as causes of our justification, in which case, we are not only to
acknowledge them defective and imperfect, not able to stand in judgment before
God, as being stained with the flesh, but also we are to abhor them as
menstruous clouts (...). 64.6.
, yea as doung Phil. 3.7.8.
, yea as loss. But in the question of sanctification, whereunto good works
are required, as fruits of our faith, and consequents of justification: we
acknowledge them to be good, and commendable: not according to the rigor of
the law (from which Christ has freed us) but according to the doctrine of the
Gospel; which teaches us, that our good works, the imperfections of them
being covered with the perfect obedience of Christ, are in him not only
accepted as good, but also graciously rewarded.

. 2. His second reason is this: ^^^ause ma^^ that have bee^^ bapti(...).
Many that are baptized, do fall away and perish.

All that are baptized, are truly justified.

Therefore some that are truly justified, do fall away, and perish.

I deny the assumption, and avouch the contrary: Not all that are batized are
truly justified. for as Augustine says Sacramenta i^ sol s electis hoc vere
efficient, quod figurant. Augustine. apud magistr. Sentent. l b. 4. did 4. A
; sacraments in the elect do truly work that which is figured by them. but
all they that are baptized, are not elect. Again, whom God truly justifies,
their sins he does remit, but says Augustine Qui non omnium (sicut iste ait)
sed eorum quos praeseivit and praedestinavit, delicta demittit. Contra. advers.
leg. and proph: l: 2: c: 11:
, God does not forgive the sins of all, but of them only whom he has
fore-knowne and predestined: and indeed it is absurd to imagine, that grace is
otherwise given, then according to the eternal purpose of grace.

Moreover, all that are truly justified, Rom: 8, 30
shall be glorified.

Not all that are baptized, shall be glorified.

Therefore not all that are baptized are truly justified.

For the better clearing of this point, Distinction 1, of Baptism.
we are to use diverse distinctions; 1. in respect of Baptism. For there is an
outward baptism, which is the washing 1 Pet: 3, 21,
of the flesh with water by the Minister, and an inward baptism, which is the
washing of the soul with the blood of Christ by the holy Ghost. The former, is
also the engrafting of the party baptized, into the body of the visible Church,
which is the society of those who profess the Name of Christ. the other, is
the insition of him into the society of the invisible Church, which is the
mystical Body of Christ, and company of the Elect. the former insition is
wrought by the Minister; the latter, by the holy Ghost, by whom 1 Cor: 12, 1^
we are baptized into one body. But not every one that has the outward
baptism, has the inward; no more then every one that had the external
circumcision of the flesh, Rom: 2, 18,
had the inward circumcision of the heart. The visible baptism, says
Augustine Visib^lem baptiserum habent and alien^. i. ^uireg^^m B^^ possessuri
non sunt. Donum tamen spiritus sancti proprium est eorum tantum, qui cum
Christo regnabunt in aetetn^^m. hoc de est omnibus malignis, etiam ^i Christi
baptismo baptize^tur, sicut Simon fucrat baptizatus. De unit eccl. c. 19.

Aug in Ps. 7. Omnibus baptizatis commune est lavacrum regenerationis, s^d ipsa
gratia non communis est omnibus.


, they also have who are strangers, that is, such as shall not possess the
Kingdom of God. but the gift of the holy Ghost is proper to them alone, which
shall for ever reign with Christ, this is wanting to all the wicked, though
they be baptized with the baptism of Christ, even as Simon Magus had been
baptized. And again. the laver of regeneration is common to all that are
baptized, but the grace of regeneration is not. For as Chrysostom Idem contr.
literas Petil. Chrysostom oper. imperf. hom. 5. in Mat. ^isunt qui cum tentati
fuerint superantur, and pereunt videntur quidem filij Dei facti propter aquam
baptismatis, revera autem non sunt filij Dei, quia non sunt in spiritu
baptizati. They seem to have been made the sons of God by reason of the
water of Baptism, but indeed are not, because they are not baptized in the
spirlt.
also says. Many are baptized with water, which are not baptized with the holy
Ghost. Neither is every one that is a member of the visible church, a true
member of Christ, or of the church invisible Many being in the visible church
which are not of the church invisible, who are among the faithful and elect,
as tares among the corn, or chafe among the wheat. Ang. contr. literas
Petiliani, lib 2. c. 105. Non ideo putandi suot esse in Christi corpore, quod
est ecclesia, quia sacramentorum ejus corporalites participes fiunt.
If it be said, that the visible church is the body of Christ; I answer, that
it has the denomination from the better part; as an heap, wherein is more
chafe then wheat, is called an heap of wheat; and a field wherein are more
tares and other weeds, then corn, is also called a corn field. But if we will
speak properly, Non est tevera corpus Christi quod non erit cum illo in
aeternum, De do^^ Christi l. 3. c. 32.
that is not in deed the body of Christ which shall not be with him for ever,
as Augustine says.

For if it were so, that every one that has the outward baptism, has also
the inward, and that every one that is made a member of the church, is also
made a true member of Christ; then it would also follow, that every one that is
baptized should be saved. For salvation is as well promised to the baptized, as
either regeneration, or justification. Mar. 16.16. 1. Pet. 3.21. Neither are
any regenerated, but such as are elected: nor any justified, but such as shall be
saved. If therefore it be true, that not all, which have the outward baptism,
have the inward; then it is as certain, that not all that are baptized, are
justified* as, that not all that are baptized, shall be saved.

Yea, but they that are baptized, have put on Christ,

Answ. Those that have been baptized into Christ, as the Apostle speaks,
Gal. 3.27.
that is, by baptism engrafted into him, have put on Christ. but not all
simply that have been baptized, have put on Christ, unless you mean
sacramentally. for as Augustine says De baptismo cont Donatist. lib. 5. c. 24.
Induunt Christum homines aliquando usque ad sacramenti perceptio^em, aliquando
and usque ad vitae sanct^ficationem, atque illud primum and bon^s and malis
potest esse commune: hoc autem alterum proprium est bonorum and piorum*
. Men put on Christ sometimes unto the receiving of the Sacrament, sometimes
unto sanctification of life; the former is common to all, but the latter is
proper to the godly.

. 3. Secondly, a distinction of the parties baptized.
we are to distinguish the parties baptized, that they are either adulti, such
as come to years of discretion (of whom properly this controversy is
undertood) or infants wanting the use of reason. As for those that are baptized
after they are come to years of discretion, it is certain, that no more are
justified, then do believe, by a true justifying faith. For Sacraments are as
seals annexed to the letters patents of Gods evangelicall promises, which
assure or conveigh nothing, but what is contained in the promise, and upon the
same conditions. And it is absurd to extend the benefit of the sacrament beyond
the covenant. Now the promise of the Gospel does not assure justification or
salvation to all, but only to those that believe. So GOD loved the world Ioh,
3, 16,
that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish but have life everlasting: when our Savior therefore sent his
Apostles and ministers into the world, committing unto them, the ministry of
the word and sacraments, saying; Go teach all nations, and baptize them. etc.
he adds as the sanction of their ministry Mar. 16, 6,
He that believes and is baptized that is, he that believes the doctrine by
you preached, and believing receives the sacrament by you administered shall be
saved: but he that believes not (whether he be baptized, or not) shall be
condemned. Again, the covenant of grace is only made with the heirs of the
promise, as I have showed before, Luk, 1, 7 3,
of which covenant baptism is a seal.

Here therefore is confuted that most pernicious doctrine of the Papists, that
the sacraments of the Gospel which they call the new law, do confer grace,
and that ex opere operato, to them, in whom not only there is no grace (for
then it were opus operantis) but not so much as any inward disposition or
motion of grace before hand. By which doctrine they have turned Christian
religion to a mere outward formality, consisting in outward rites and
observations. without any truth, or power of religion in them; according to
that prophecy of them. 2. Tim. 3.5. For all the degrees of salvation, which the
Lord works in the elect in this life, viz. our vocation, justification,
sanctification, are all ascribed to the sacraments and that ex opere operat^*
So that, among the Papists, he that is baptized, he is called, without either
illumination of the mind, or conversion of the heart, he is justified and
sanctified without either forth goeing before, (for by the sacrament they feign
the habit of faith to be infused) or ame^deme^t of life following after. As
touching infants, I say in the first place, that this controversy is not
understood of them, who neither are endued with habit of grace, neither are
able to produce the acts thereof, as not having as yet the use of reason. And
therefore being neither justified by faith, nor sanctified by the habits of
grace, cannot be said to fall from them. Secondly it is not necessary that
every one that is baptized should presently be regenerated or justified. But
the sacrament of Baptism is a seal unto him of the righteousness of faith,
which is the righteousness of CHRIST, either to be applied by the Holy Ghost, to
the elect dying in their infancy, or to be apprehended also by faith in them,
who living to years of discretion have grace to believe.

. 4. Thirdly we are to distinguish of the effects of baptism, The 3
distinction.
and of the time thereof. For it is not the effect of baptism to begin, or
to work faith, which in those of years, must go before baptism, ^^^ther can
infants though baptized, whiles they want the use of reason, actually believe,
but to seal to the baptized the righteousness of faith, and so to justify
sacramentally, which effect is not to be restrained to the time when baptism
is administered, but to be (...) to the whole course of a man's life, whe^soever
he shall believe and repent; As for the elect, which die before the use of
reason; the sacrament of baptism is the seal and means of Christ^
righteousness to be applied to the^e by the holy Ghost. For as some have been
sanctified from the womb, yea and some in the womb, so it is not to be
doubted, but that those infants whom God in their infancy intends to glorify,
he does bestow upon them his spirit, which is the spirit of faith, 2 Cor.
^.13. and the spirit of regeneration, whereby he does illuminate their minds,
and sanctify their hearts and every way prepare and fit them for his own
kingdom.

^^stinction.
Fourthly wear to distinguish between the judgment of charity, and the judgment
of certainty. For although in the general we know, that not every one that is
baptized is justified or shall be saved, yet when we come to speak of
particulars, we are to judge of them that are baptized, that they are
regenerated and justified, and that they shall be saved; until they shall
discover themselves not to be such. And so our book of Common Prayer speaks
of them, as the scriptures also teach us to speak of them that are baptized,
that they are regenerated and engrafted into the body of Christ, though perhaps
they be regenerated sacramento tenus, and engrafted only into the body of his
visible church: But this judgment of charity, is no matter of certainty, or of
faith but may be deceived.

The like judgment of charity our church conceives concerning all those that
d^^ in the bosom of the church, and depart this life in the profession of the
faith* so that not all are justified before GOD, or sanctified by saving grace,
who to us, judging according to charity, seem to be such.

The Papists confession.
. 5. Lastly the Papists themselves do teach, that the sacraments do not
confer grace, to him that comes to the sacrament, in the guilt of mortal
sin, or, as they speak, po^enti obicem mortalis peccati. But all that come
to be baptized, are guilty (if not justified before) of mortal sin, not
only adulti, who are of years, and have to their original sin added their
own personal transgression; but infants also, who besides their original
corruption, in respect whereof they are all naturally dead in sin, do also
stand guilty of Adams most heinous transgression, which without doubt was a
mortal sin.

You will say then, to what use does baptism serve? I answer, that the blood
of CHRIST 1. Ioh. 1.7.
does purge us from all our sins, as well mortal, as those which the Papists
call venial; that this washing of the soul by the blood of Christ is res
sacramenti, the thing signified by baptism, whereof the outward baptism is a
sacrament, that is, a sign to signify it, a seal to assure it to them that
believe, an instrument of the holy Ghost to apply it to the elect, and heirs
of promise. For there is no saving grace given, but according to Gods purpose
of grace given unto us in Christ before all times, and according to the
covenant of grace made with the heirs of promise.

. 6. But Bellarmine proves his assumption by the confession of his
adversaryes. His proof of the assumption
For first, as the church of Rome holds, that all infants are by baptism
truly justified, so the Lutheranes (as he calls them) do hold, (as he
reports) that all infants do by baptism receive faith.

Answ. The opinion of those, who are adversaryes to us, in this cause, as well
as the Papists, ought not to be prejudicial to us. For if they hold, that all
infants, when they are baptized, do receive faith and remission of sins: and
withal maintain, that they who are once endued with faith and have obtained
remision of sin, shall not fall away finally, though they may totally for a
time, because they shall be renewed by repentance let them consider, whether upon
their opinion it will not follow, Mat 16.16.
that all that are baptized shall be saved. For not only grace but salvation
also is promised to all that believe, and are baptized.

Secondly he alleges the judgment of Calvine, Martyr, and B^cer, who teach
that before, and without Baptism, the children of the faithful are borne holy.

Answ. They teach nothing in this point, but that which the holy Ghost in the
scriptures has taught, and is therefore most true, if it be rightly
understood. For whereas all the nations of the world are the Lords, and he is
the God of them all, Rom 3 29.
by creation, government and preservation; the visible church, after a
peculiar manner Exodus 19.5.6. Deuteronomy 10.14.15. Deuteronomy 7.6.7.14.2. Deuteronomy, 26.17.18.19.
is the people of God, chosen, set a part and sanctified to be an holy and
peculiar people unto himself: and he is their God, by a special covenant, and
they his people. By virtue of this covenant, the children of this people Romans
11, 16.
are an holy seed, though but one of the paic^^s be ^ believe ^ or professor
of the faith, asth^ Apostle teaches 1 Cor. 7.14. and as the Lord himself
professes, they are borne unto him. Ezech. 16.20.23.37.

But although the whole visible church be an holy and elect people, and their
seed be called holy* and borne to God: yet were it great absurdity, from hence
to infer, as Bellarmine does, that therefore every particular, either man or
child in the church, is elected unto life, and sanctified by the spirit of God.
For there is a double elction, and a twofold sanctity. There is an election of
a people to be the visible church, or Gods peculiar people, as Israel was; and
there is an election of particular men unto eternal life. There is a general
or common sanctity, whereby the visible church, and the members thereof are
called holy, and so to be esteemed of us; and there is a special sanctity,
whereby the faithful are truly holy in the sight of God, whereas therefore the
children of the faithful are holy as the Apostle says, because they are
within the covenant, therefore the sacrament of the covenant is not to be
denied to them, Just. l. 4. c. 16.
as Calvin proves, whom, notwithstanding this general holiness, he
acknowledges to be defiled with original sin, and to stand guilty of death
and damnation, until they be regenerated Ioh. 3.5.
by water and the spirit.

CHAP. XIII.
Three other reasons of Bellarmine.

. 1 HIS third reason, Because there are many heretics.
If faith cannot be lost, whence then are so many heretics in the world? for
this is the difference betwixt Pagans and heretics, that Pagans never had
faith, but heretics have had and lost it. His reason is thus framed.

All heretics have lost faith.

All heretics have been endued with a true justifying faith.

Therefore some which have been endued with a true justifying faith have lost
it.

First I deny the assumption, that heretics have had a justifying faith, and
co^seque^tly the proposition for if they never had the justifying faith, they
could not loose it. The falsity of the assumption is proved thus There must be
heresies says the Apostle 1. Cor. 11 19
that (...) those that are sound and approved Christians, who are endued with a
true lively justifying faith, may be known, namely by withstanding them, and
by standing steadfast in the truth, and on the otherside, that (...) those that
are unsound and not endued with says unfayned, may be discovered, by falling
into such heresies as sa^h^^ broacheth, therefore those, who are perverted with
damnable heresies, were never sound, never endued with faith unfeigned, as I
have showed heretofore out of Tertullia^ De prescript. advers. haeres. cl 3.
whereby the proposition is also proved to befalse, for heretics cannot be
truly said to have lost that which they never had. But Bellarmine after his
manner proves both. for, says he, this is the difference betwixt Pagans and
heretics: that Pagans never had faith, but heretics have had it, and lost it.

Answ. The faith which Bellarmine speaks of, is the doctrine and profession
of the Christian faith, which faith the Pagans never had, but heretics having
had it, that is, having professed them selves Christians, do err from the
faith, or (as the Apostle Tim, 2.17.18.
in the place alleged by Bellarmine, speaks) from the truth, that is, from
the doctrine and profession of faith, stiffly maintaining erroneous doctrines
contrary to the Catholic faith; which happens unto them, because they were
never (...), sound and upright Christians, nor endued with a true justifying
faith. For if they had been of us (that is, 1 Ioh. 2* 19
sound and upright Christians) they would surely have remained with us* but
they are departed from us, not only because they were not of us, but also that
it might appear that they were never of us.

And whereas Bellarmine thinks, that none can be heretics but such as loose
the faith which once they had: let him consider, that him self, and many other
heretics, never had any other faith, then that which now they have. For in
Popery, which is the sink and common sewre of many heresies, many are bredde
and borne, and therein live and dye; who, though they be as gross heretics
as ever professed christianity; yet they never had any other, but their
Antichristian faith.

. 2. His fourth reason. From admonitions and exhortations.
If the just cannot sin, to what end, are so many admonitions and
exhortations of the Apostles and Prophets, and of all the teachers of the
Church, s^ all ages, made to the people of God, that they should fear, that
they should take heed, and be careful. To what end has the Lord commanded the
Apostles and all the Church to pray, forgive us our sins, lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. To what end is penance, absolution, and
reconciliation of those that have offended, defended against the Novatians, if
the just cannot sin?

Here Bellarmine fights with his own shadow. For we confess more freely
then he or any of the Papists, (who dream of perfection in this life, and of
the perfect fulfilling of the law, yea of doing more then the law requires)
that the just may, and do often sin. But such is his malice and desire to
make us, and the holy truth which we profess, odious unto his hearers; lest
they should be converted and live, that against his own knowledge he charge
us with such things, as we are further from then the Papists them selves.

Indeed if he had objected (as truly he might) that there are admonitions in
the scriptures, that Heb. ^.1^
we should take heed lest at any time there be in any of us an evil heart and
unfaithful to depart away from the living God: that he, who thinks him 1.
Cor. 10.12.
self to stand, take heed lest he fall; that we should not quench the spirit,
1. These. 5.19.
that we should work out our salvation Phil. 2.12 Dicit Apostolus spiritum
nol^te extingue^e, non quia illie extingui pote^t etc Aug. de Bapt pa^valo. ad
Bonisac. ep. 19.
with fear and trembling, and such like, his objection would have had some
show of reason, and yet but a show. For first, the holy Ghost in these and such
like places, speaks to the whole body of the church, in which are many
unsound Christians, who though they think them selves to stand, yet are in
danger not to fall only, but also to fall away And therefore such admonitions
are necessary in the church of God, that men may beware of the leaven of the
Pharisyes, Luk 12.1.
which is hypocrisy; that men should take heed that they build not upon the
sand, lest they be but hypocrites and temporary professors: but that they
should build upon the rock, and labor to approve them selves upright and sound
professors, whose faith shall never fail. Secondly, such admonitions are very
profitable for the faithful and elect. For as the Lord has decreed, and
promised; that they shall persever, so he has appointed means, whereby they
should be kept and preserved from falling away; among which means, these and
the like exhortations, admonitions and comminations are not the least. For they
discover unto us our weakness in our selves, that we may not glory in our own
strength and worthiness; but may be taught to rely upon the power and promises
of God, and upon the mediation of our Savior Christ. And whereas godly fear
and vigilance are notable means to keep us in order, and to preserve us from
falling away; these admonitions serve to work in us this fear, and to stir us
up to vigila^cy, and to make us shake off all carnal security, and spiritual
drowsines. that we may accomplish our sanctification 2 Cor. 7.1.
in the fear of God* So that hereby the Lord performs his promise made by
the Prophet Jeremy Ier 32 40.
that he will put his fear into our hearts that we should not depart from him.
These admonitions therefore are not arguments to prove, that the faithful or
elect may fall away; but so many adjuments, that they shall not fall away.
Neither does the necessity of using means, which God has appointed for the
obtaining of any end, prove the possibility of missing the end, for as he has
decreed the end, so has he preordained the means, God had promised Paul Act.
^^.24.
that he and all that were with him in the ship should come safe to land, but
when Paul perceived, that the mariners, who are the ordinary means appointed
to that end, were about to make an escape, he told the captain, unless these
men stay, we cannot come safe to land. So the Lord has promised the faithful,
that they shall persevere: but unless they walk in the fear of GOD, they
cannot continue. wherefore as the Lord has promised perseverance as the end,
so he has promised to give us his fear, as the means and that we may be
endued with godly fear, he appoints such wholesome admonitions to be used.
wherefore such admonitions, though they argue, that in respect of our own
weakness, if we should be left to our selves, we might fall away; yet seeing our
perseverance is not grounded upon our selves, but on the immutability power and
truth of God, and on the mediation and intercession of Christ, they do not
prove, that we, whose perseverance is grounded upon such foundations, can fall
away. And to this purpose consider with me these examples. Our savior Christ,
Mat, 24.4*
bids the faithful and elect to take heed, that no false prophets or false
Christ's deceive the^, and yet in the same chap. V. ^4.25.
he notes it to be a thing impossible, that the elect should be so deceived.
Notwithstanding if they should not take heed, they might be deceived. Likewise
S. John 1. John 2 27.28.
exhorts the faithful to abide in Christ* may it therefore happen, that they
shall not abide in him? nothing less, for in the very next words going
before, he assures the faithful, that as the anointing (meaning thereby the
holy Ghost) which is true, had taught them; so they should abide in Christ.
Again Ioh. 15. our Savior Christ, De corrept. and gratia c 13.
who, as Augustine also observes, knew certainly that his disciples should
abide in him, yea he himself assures them, that they shall abide; for, says
he, Ioh. 15.16.
I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you go and bring forth fruit, and
that your fruit remain; notwithstanding he exhorts them Ioh. 13, ^.7.
to abide in him, and by promises persuades them so to do.

But to conclude this point. Bellarmine him self in an other place, answers
this reason taken from admonitions, etc. for he holds truly with us, that the
elect cannot fall away, and yet cannot deny, but tha^ to the elect, such
admonitions, exhortations, and threatenings are directed in the Scriptures. If
therefore it be objected against him, in the question concerning the elect, as
he objecteth against us, concerning the faithful, and the children of God (who
indeed are elect) his answer is this. De gratia and iiber arbitt. lib. 1.2.13,
That the crown of glory prepared for the elect before the creation of the
world, cannot be lost, notwithstanding God works by diverse means, that it
may not be lost. One whereof are fears and terrors, by which they are stirred
up to carefulnes and vigilance. therefore it is said to one, Apoc. 3.11
who was predestined, hold what thou have, lest an other take thy crown.
Because in very truth if he should not persevere in holding his righteousness,
he should loose his crown. But being by this admonition and commination put in
fear, he will without doubt very strongly hold that which he has, and by that
means he will at length attain to the crown, which as yet he has not.

. 3. In his fifth and last reason he endeavors to prove, Because our
assertion is, as he says, a doctrine of despair.
that our assertion, concerning the certainty of perseverance, is a doctrine of
despair. And it is thus to be framed.

That doctrine which teaches that a man is not truly justified, who is not
certain of his perseverance, tends to desperation. the reason whereof is,
because no man can be certain of his perseverance.

The Protestants doctrine concerning the certainty of perseverance teaches,
that a man is not truly justified, who is not certain of his perseverance.

Therefore the Protestants doctrine concerning the certainty of perseverance
tends to desperation.

As touching the reason of his proposition, we will consider, first, how he
expresses it, and secondly, how he proves it he expresses it in these
terms: if present grace and justification cannot be true, unless a man be
certain of his perseverance, so that he certainly knows, either that he
shall not fall (his words are, certo sciat se nunquam lapsurum) or that he
shall repent, how can it be that any man, who is of a sound brain, should
certainly hope, that he is truly just? In which words he greatly wrongeth us,
as i^ by our doctrine of perseverance we taught, either th^^ a just man is
certain never to sin any more (which assertion we utterly renounce, as being
further from it* then the Papists themselves, as has been showed) or that the
assurance, which we have of perseverance, were of certain science, and not of
faith.

His proofs are three. 1. that a man cannot certainly promise any thing to him
self, without rashness, concerning future events* therefore he cannot be
assured of his perseverance. I answer, that by natural knowledge we cannot
certainly foreknow future contingents. But if God, to whom all things are
present, and all things known as present, do fore tell or promise any thing,
which in it own nature is contingent; we must either undoubtedly believe it,
or else make God 1. Iloh 5.10,
a liar. But God (as has heretofore been showed, has foretold and promised
the perseverance of all the faithful and elect; which promises, if the Papists
be too wise to believe, they are too wise to be saved. His second proof*
because every just man sees both himself and others daily to fall into diverse
sins, even against conscience. that the just do daily fall into diverse sins
against their conscience, is a foul sclander against the generation of the
righteous; whose chief care is to keep their conscience clear and without
offense Act* 24.16,
both before God and man. neither does their daily falling into sin, prove
their falling away from God, and from his grace.

His third proof is a threefold testimony. the 1. of Solomon Pro. 26. or
rather. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth; the 2. of the Son of Syrach, c. 11-28. Judge none blessed
before his death: the 3. of S. James, c. 4.14. you know not what shall be on the
morrow. all which places are understood of future contingents in humane
affairs, not foretold, nor promised of GOD, for none of those do hinder, but
that notwithstanding the uncertaintie of future contingents, we are certainly
to believe the promises of GOD.

. 4. But come we to his assumption, The assumptio^
which though it be untrue, yet he takes for granted, as though in our
doctrine of the certainty of perseverance we did teach, that a man is not truly
just, that is not certain of his perseverance, which we no more teach, then
that a man is not truly elected, who is not certain of his perseverance. We
teach in deed, 1. that the perseverance of the faithful and elect is certain.
But in saying so, we do not mean, (as you have heard in the beginning of this
treatisse) that it is certain, certitudine subjecti, as though the faithful
and elect were always certain and sure of their perseverance; but that it is
certain and sure certitudine objecti; that is, that the perseverance of the
faithful and elect is certain in it self, whether they be assured of it, or
not, 2. We teach, that whosoever is justified before God, 1 Pet. 1, 10.
ought to give diligence, as to make sure his election and calling, so also his
justification.

3 We teach men from their justification and sanctification to conclude the
certainty of their perseverance; and that whosoever is assured of his
justification, may and ought to be assured of his salvation, and of hie
perseverance thereunto. But we do teach men from the certainty of perseveranca
to infer their justification; as though a man could not be just, or
justified, who is not assured of his perseverance.

4. According to the measure of our assurance of justification, is or ought to
be the measure and degree of the assurance of our salvation; and perseverance
which, as never in this life is so fully certain, but that somewhat still may
and ought to he added to it: so in them, that be but incipients in very small;
and in those that are under fearful temptations, and spiritual desertions, is
sometimes none at all.

This then is the desperate point, which we, teaching the certainty of
perseverance, do avouch: that by this doctrine of the certainty of perseverance
grounded upon the immurability, truth, and power of God, and upon the
intercession of Christ, those that do truly believe, may infallibly gather
sound assurance of their perseverance unto eternal life. Then which, what
greater comfort can there be in this life? And if this be a desperate doctrine,
what are we to judge of the doctrine of the Papists; who teach, that men,
though justified, cannot without special and extraordinary revelation be
assured, not only of their future perseverance or salvation, but not so much
as of their present justification^ and that if their justification were
certain; yet their perseverance, and consequently their salvation were
uncertain.

Others object that this doctrine makes man secure.
. 5. But contrary to this cavil of Bellarmine is the objection of others, that
this doctrine is apt to make men secure etc. whereunto I answer, that, as
there is a double feate, viz. a filial, and a servile fear, so there is a
twofold security, viz. spiritual and carnal. This doctrine, I confess, is
very effectual to free men from servile fear and to work in the^ spiritual
security, which is a notable fruit of a lively faith, which the Lord has
promised to them, who are redeemed by Christ out of the hand of their
spiritual adversaryes; namely Luk, 1.74.
that they shall worship him without fear of them, without servile fear I
say, of damnation ( for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus.) Ro^. 8.1.35.39 Tit. 2, 13.
and therefore in assured expectation of salvation. But it serves not to work
in men carnal security, or loosenes of life, which cannot stand with the
certainty of perseverance, or assurance of salvation. For the more a man is
persuaded or assured of Gods eternal love toward him, the more servently he
will love the Lord, and carefully obey him the more reverently will he fear
him, the more seriously will he set himself to please, and the more unwilling
will he be to displease him, and the more readily, when he has offended, will
he return unto him. Neither can there be any assurance of perseverance or
salvation, as of the end, where is not a settled purpose, and unfeigned care to
use those means, and to walk in that way which God has appointed to the end.
And we teach, that as the Lord has promised to the faithful the gift of
perseverance on his part, by the continuance of his favor toward us; so for
our parts, he has promised Ier. 32, 40.
to put his fear into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him. And
further we teach, that whosoever is renewed by the spirit of God, his will also
is regenerate: so that he has an unfeigned will, and a settled purpose, and
resolution to walk before God in the obedience of his will and to make
conscience of all his ways. And we teach with the Apostles Paul and John, Romans
6.14. 1 Ioh. 3.9.5.18
that sin, being in the faithful, by the work of regeneration, in some
measure morrified, can no more reign in them as servants of sin. And
therefore, if any man shall abuse this doctrine to carnal security, and
loosenes of life, he shall deceive himself, as hypocrites use to do; but he
cannot falsify this truth. His sinful example will not prove, that a
regenerate man may fall away from God but his falling away will prove, that he
never was regenerate, we teach with the Ap. John 1 Ioh. 2 19.
that in the church of God, there be two sorts of men professing the name of
Christ For some are in the church-visiole, that be not of the church invisible,
who are outwardly, in title, show, and profession christians, but not inwardly
and in truth, who are in the flock of Christ, as goats among the sheep, in
Gods field as tares among the wheat, that is to say hypocrites and uns^und
christians. These are compared in the scriptures to the foolish man Mat 7.^6.
that builds upon the sand, to the unwise Mat 2^.^.
virgins, which had lamps but no oil to the unfruitful Ioh 15 2.
branches in the vine, to the stony ground, Ioh, 8.13.
whereon the seed being cast, withers in time of heat to the grass or green
rash; Ioh. 3.11.
which has no moisture to the fige-tree Mat 21 19.
which had leaves. but no fruit. And concerning these men we teach two things,
as St. John does 1, Ioh. 2.19.
1. that they are subject to defection, and many times do fall away, of whom
he says they went out from us, but they were not of us. Secondly, that the
Lord permits such to fall away, that their former hypocrisy may be
discovered, or as he speaks, that it might appear they were not of us And in
this sense God is said to blot Ps. 69 28. Exodus 32 33.
men out of the book of life, in which according to their own conceit, and
opinion of others, they were written: when he makes it manifest, that they
were never written there in. For as Augustine says. ^n Ps 68.
we are not so to understand that phrase of speech, that God does write any man
in the book of life, and blot him out again, If man Pilate
said, what I have written, I have written, does God writ any man and blot him
out again? who^ he has written in the book of life, he has predestined
before the foundations of the world were laid, to reign with his son in life
eternal. And in the Apocalypse it is said* that all in the church should take
part with Antichrist, whose names were not written in the book of life* how
then (says he) are they blotted out thence, Apoc. 17.8.
where they were never written? This is said, secundum spem ipsorum quiz ibise
scriptos putabant this is spoken according to their own hope (and as he might
have added, according to the opinion of others judging according to charity)
who thought them to be written there.

And hereupon we infer most needful exhortations, and admonitions to our
Auditors, that they would not be hears only Iam. 1.2^.
of the word, but doers also: that they would not build upon the sand: that
they would not content themselves with the lamp of an outward profession,
wanting the oil of grace, that they would not be unfruitfu^l branches of the
vine, whose destiny is to be cut off, that they would not be like the stony
ground, sending out the grene blade of external profession, without taking
root downward, or bringing forth fruit upward. For those, which be in the
church, but not of it, are subject to detection, those that build upon the
sand, being hearers and not doers, in time of temptation, as it were of
tempest, are overthrown. the foolish virgins, whose lamps wanted oil, failed
before the bridegroom came, and are shut out* the unfruitful branches of the
vine are cut off, and cast into the fire^ the corn which grows on the stony
gronnd, when the heat comes, does wither away; the fig tree which had leaves
and no fruit, was accursed by our Savior Christ, the herb that grows
without moisture, Job. 8.11.12.13.
and the rush which is green without water, withers before his time, so are
they that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish.

To those therefore that are in the Church, but not of it, this privilege^,
which is peculiar to the upright, does not belong, neither are they to assume
it to them, unless they will perniciously deceive them selves.

But to the other sort of men, who not only are in the church visible; but also
are true members of the church invisible, that is to say sound and upright
Christians, this privilege of perseverance does certainly appertain. For they
build upon the rock, and therefore by no tempests of temptations shall their
building be overthrown, Mat. 7.24.25. Luke ^.15.
they receive the seed into good ground, and therefore wither not in time of
temptation, but bring forth fruit with patience: Ioh. 15.2.16.
they are fruitful branches of the vine, and therefore the Lord purges them,
that they may bring forth more fruit, and their fruit shall remain. Psalm
1, 3.
They are like the tree planted by the rivers of waters, which never fades,
but brings forth fruit in due season. Wherefore these men, as in the time of
their peace, they are to worship God in holiness and righteousness without fear,
Luke 1.74.
and in assured expectation of their salvation by Christ: Tit 2.1^.13.
so in the time of temptation (as the best are tempted) they should not be
daunted, as though God had cast them off, but in the assured persuasion of Gods
love continued toward them, (which they may gather as by the former tokens of
Gods favor toward them, and the former fruits of saving graces in them:) so
by their present desire of grace, and hatred of sin) they are to be encoraged
to return to their heavenly father, (who is ready to receive the^) with humble
confession of their sins, with hearty and unfeigned repentance for them, and
with the assurance of faith concerning the free pardon and forgivenes of them,
in and for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, three persons and one most gracious and most glorious God, be
ascribed all glory, praise and thanksgiving for all his mercyes and benefits,
and for all his goodness, both now and evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Christian Reader is entreated by the Author, before he read these
Treatises, to amend with his pen the faults which in his absence have escaped
in the printing of them.
The letters l. af. do signify, linea a fine, and there you are to reckon
from the botome of the page.

PAge 2, Line 15. (...) p 4. l.8. Moses. p. 9. in the title of the page. The
Parties to. p. 11. l, 13. oath. l. 20.. Christ. p. 13. in the title of the
page. The end of Gods Oath. l. a fine 8. (...). p. 14. l, 14. sinning: l. 11.
we see it practiced by. p. 19. l. af. 5. us, as that. p. 21. l. 22. who were
not. p. 25. l. 5. the keeping. l. 7, suck. l. af 6. to hope. p, 28. l. 6. The
thing p. 29. l, 17. that as men deprived l. 19. Covenant, by p. 31. l ult.
spiritual. p. 32. l. 20. captivatum. l, 21. adiutumque l. a f. 5. was, because
he did (...). p. 37. l. 10. they also are his sons, p, 39. l. af 4. enimyes.
p. 40 l. 21. God: p. 41. ad lin. penult. add in Margin. 1. Cor. 1.30 p. 42 l.
7 revived: p. 43. l. a f, 4. Deus est: l. penult. therefore without measure if
it were possible, we ought to love him. But though we cannot do so, yet we
ought to love him withal our heart. p. 49. l. 6.5.4.5. p. 55. l. ult that we
shall p. 58. l. 17. fruit: p. 59. Dele Chap. V l. p. 60. l. a f. 11. (...). p.
65. and 66. and 67. in the title of the pages Cap. 6. p. 68. in the title and
l. 1. read Chap. 7. p. 71. l. 14. commending l. 13. fear of God. p 75. l. 2.
by w. y p. 77.78.79.80, 85.86.87.88.89.90.91. in the title Chap. 8. p. 93. l.
5. Apostles l. ult. or of Know l. p. 99. l. 10 when men p. 101. l. a f 4.
formal syll. p. 104. l. af. 10. exception. p. 106. l. 5. Si credit -- non
sicut corpora -- Non l. 10. Epist. l. af. 6. conclusions, p. 108. in marg. l.
8. Ha^. 3.18. l. 10. John 20,28. l. 18. untruth: p. 113. l. 6. Ho^^ 14.2. p.
115. l. 6. particularly, 118. l. 10. mere vanities. p. 122. l. 9. Emeth 123.
l. 9. complete, l. 11.2. Chron. 15.12. p. 136. in marg. l. 6. (...) p. 142. l.
14. Inferiors p. 143. l. 3. as^ stat, p. 144. l. 12. de^e he p 153. l. li. dele
(...) l. 7. revellings ((...) l. 16. Evil) all within thi^ parenthesis should
have ben^set in the margent. And in the texts after revellings these words
should have immediately followed or rather ryotings, l 15. (and so l. 18.
compotations) all within this parenthesis should also have been set in the
margent, l. 18. and such like, of p. 163. l. 16. drawing forth p. 164. l. af.
5. an instr. p. 174. l. 2. seeming ^oath to p. 177. l 18, ^ffect. p. 181. l.
10, there is l. af. 5. (...) p. 182. l. 10. a moto p. 183. l. af. 11. then p.
188. l. a. f. 12. pretended p. 192. l. af. 3. for perpetui^y read ^ssiduity p.
193. l. af. 12. corrept. in marg. l. 8. De Corrept. l. 15. deleta l. 16.
iniquitate p. 197. l. 3. since I wrote this discourse, there l. 16.
sanctification. p. 198. l. 1. properly l. 5. omit I say, l. 7. order p. 201. l.
af. 10. As therefore men are first conceived before they be borne, and they are
borne before p. 203. l. af. 6. fide spe l. af. 4. Genev. in marg. l. 4.
regenerari. p. 208. l. 19. actual possession l. 21. hathever l. af. 7. are
actually 212. l. af. 3. thus it seems to be used John 14.1. p. 216. l. 17.
because they have not l. af. 4. et 5. (...) p. 217. l. 8. (...) p. 220. l. 18.
Hereupon p. 222. l. 3. in their own sense l. af. 12. matter. p. 223. l. 4. to
this new l. 10. salvation. p. 224. l. penult. dele for p. 225. l. 8. how the
ibid. direction l. af. 9. him p. 226. l. ult. truth marg. l. 1.1. Ioh. 2.1. l.
3. John 5.33. p. 227. l. 14. oppose, l. 19. thereof. p. 228. l. 4. dele of l.
af. 4. who, as l. penult. Papists 229. l. 17. er l. 18. (...) p. 231. l. 5.
actus. Page 236. l. 11. and yet l. 16, Convertuntur l. af. 3. fig^e 238. marg.
l. 13. crescendo l. ult. marg. Joan. 239. l. af. 13. Christians, l. af. 12. or
not. Marg. l. 1.2. Tim. 1.9. p. 241. marg. l. 6. Pro. 10.30. l. 13. pot^erint.
l. af. 5. avolent p. 242. marg. l. 3. decedere l. af. 12. solidari 243. marg.
l. 6. diceretur l. 14. filiorum l. af. 14. rudib. l. af. 9. operis imperfecti,
l. af. 3. for 11. in the text note * marg. l. af. 3. Moral. p. 244. marg. l. 1.
sterni l. 6. sanctitatem l. 10. ut quis l. 12. amittat p. 245. Marg. l. 1. Genesis
4.26. and 6.2. p. 246. marg. l. 17. vivificavit l. 18. aut ab eo ipso, aut l.
af. 8. whether p. 247. l. 6. as well. penul. or c^lling p. 249. l. 4. deserved.
p. 250. marg. l. 6. vocavit, l. 8. caepit p. 251. ad lin. 12. pone in Margen.
Act. 11.18. l. 14. salubrem l. ult. (...) l. af. 3. in the text read 2. Tim.
1.9. p. 252. marg. l. 21. and 24. quisquam l. 22. perit p. 253. marg. l. 11.
perseverantia l. af. ^7. recte ad lin. 11. in marg. pone Moral. in ipsa lin.
11. Charity marg. l. a f. 10. De triplici cohaerent. p. 255. l. af. 4.
vessels. marg. l. 7.9 Ephesians. 1.4. l. 10. Prosper p. 256. marg. l. 2. Lam. 3.22.
p. 257. l. 3. Psalmist marg. l. 7, Lam. 3.33. l. penult. Lam. 3.32. l. ult.
Habac. 3. 2. p. 258. l. 9. saved. p. 259. l. a f 7. perished p. 260. l. 4.
repentance l. af. 13. quod non ita p. 261. l. 18. worldly marg. l. af. 4.1.
John, 2.16. l. penult. Col. 3.5. p. 263. l. af. 5. u this marg. l. 6. art. 12.
p. 264. l. 4. fides est id. l. 6. signification p. 265. l. af. 9. is noe l. a
f. 7. is it. l. af. 5. have this marg. l. 6. (...) l. 7. Theoph. Oecum. l. 8.
(...) l. 11. apud Oecu^. l. af. 7. (...) l. af. 5. (...) l. af. 4. de quo l.
penult. Gennadius apud Oecum in 1. Cor. 13.2.266. l. 14. conversation. p. 267.
l. 3. as if there l. 13. special. l. 15. threatenings. p. 268. l. af. 3. God.
l. ult. or too * p. 268. l. af. 4. haec verba (I say some, unto the word
Arimathea) inclusive in the 3d. live of page 269, ponenda sunt in margin. p.
269. l. 3. of the rulers. l. 8. with John, 12.42, 43. p. 270. l; 15. faith. p.
271. l. 5.10 pur. p. 272. l. 13. forth fruit ma^g. l. 8. Gal. 5. p. 273. marg.
l. 7. credere p. 274. l. af. 12. dele was p. 276. l. 4. (...) l. 11. his fall
l. 14. concussum non excussum l. af. 10. of the members marg. l. 2.2. Tim. 1.6.
p. 277. l. 5. dele same marg. l. af. 4. doctrine facundia p. 278. l. 11. ever.
marg. l. 9, nequa^ quam. l. 15. 1. John, ^.27. p. 282. marg. l. 11. ex Deo. l.
18. vere p. 283. marg. l. 17. Romans 6.14. p. 284. l. 10. the same he nilleth l.
11.12. nilleth l. 20. sin. p. 286. l. 6. perpetrated p. 287. l. af. 3.
agritudines marg. l. 2. Romans 8.7. p. 288. l. af. 13. or of part. p. 289. l. af.
14. howsoever p. 290. l. af. 7. intercision p. 292. l. af. 13. transient. 295.
l. 4. be a total 296. l. 14. heads. p. 296. l. af. 13. too w, l. af. 7.
Augustine p. 297. l. 3. power: p. 298. marg. l. 5. chap. 2.5.4. p. 299. marg.
l. 5. p. 272. l 13. Abraham l. ult. arescit. ad lin. 16. in marg. pone Moral.
lib. 25. c. 7. p. 300. l. af. 5. of the H. p. 301. l. 6. removed l. af. 10.
John, 3.16. l. af. 11. Pet. 2.20. p. 302. l. 13. according l. ult. in g. marg.
l. penult perdurent p. 303. l. af. 10. son marg. l. 5. dona l. ult. (...) p.
304. l. af. 15. but I will marg. l. 4: De bono persever. l. 2. c. 2. talis ac
tantus erit tunor meus p. 305. l. 15. dried up. p. 306. l. 3. in respect
whereof dele comma. p. 307. marg. l. 2. potens p. 309. l. af. 8. separate marg.
l. 2. and 3. lib. 4. c. 3.. Altera l. 4. Dominus l 9. John, 17. l. 11. orat. 4.
contr. Arian. l. ult. c. 12. p. 310. l. af. 7. life, these p. 311. l. ult.
affliction marg. l. 2.12. p. 313. l. 11. (...) p. 317. l. 6. as we p. 318. l.
af. 4. once marg. l. 11. Ascet. lin. 2. cap. 9. p. 319. l. 11. ad finem marg.
l. 12. quaest. 52. ad Orosium. p. 321. l. 11. exclude p. 323. l. 3, faithful.
l. 8. thoroughly and wholly marg. l. 3. chap. 7.. 3. p. 324. marg. l. 2. Mar.
16.16. p. 325. marg. l. 4. John. 6.54. p. 327. l. 3. we proving marg. l. 1.
chap. 3.. 1. p. 329. l. af. 5. Charity marg. l. 6. chap. 6.. 2. p. 330. l. 6.
away. yea p. 345. l. 8. gifts l. penult. which is the company of the elect.
marg. l. 6. afferant l. 10.1. John. 2.19. l. ult. 22.24. p. 346. l. af. 4.
cooling p. 356. l. 15. chap. 3.. 1. p. 357. l. 12. never had marg. l. 1 chap.
3.. 6. p. 358. l. af. 14. to have lost justif. marg. l. 14. Espencaeus l. 16.
conscientia p. 366. l. 14. away from God dele fall p. 367. l. 5. remained with
us marg. l. pen. (...) p. 368. marg. l. pen. (...) p. ^69. marg. l. 4. forma p.
370. l. 12. within him p. 372. marg. l. af. 6. cap. 9. p. 377, l. af. 3.
diseased members. p. 379. l. 8. cadant: p. 380. l. 9. cantuque p. 381. marg. l.
15. vidit p. 382. marg. l. 3. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 16. p. 386. marg. l, 6. eos
p. 390. l. 11. or by p. 391. l. af. 12. Mediation p. 393. l. 4. Elect only
marg. l. 11. dimittit p. 394. marg. l. 2.1. l. 11. in Ps. 77. l. af. 8. sunt p.
397. l. 9. habits 399. l. 2. to the l. 7. transgressions l. af. 10. made p.
402. marg. l. 4. c. 3.404, marg. l. 8. illel. 12 c. 23. p. 408, l. 11.
perseverance and salvation of p. 409. l. af. 12. we do not.


