A DISCOURSE OF THE STATE ECCLESISTICALL OF THY Kingdom, in relation to the
Civil.

Considered under three CONCLUSION With a DIGRESSION discuss some ordinary
Exceptions against Ecclesiastical Officers.

By C. D.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TVRNER. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EALRE Of Salisbury, Viscount Cranburne, Lord
Cecyll of Esendon, Knight of the most Illustrous order of the Garter, and one
of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
MAY It please your honor to accept this present discourse as an
acknowledgment of your Lordships favor toward

your observant Chaplain, Calybute Downinge.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. marg. for text, read tit. p. 15. marg. Clayman, r. Clapmar. p. 17. l.
15. with state, r. with the state. p. 21. l. 28. sic stantibus, r. exstantibus
p. 35. l. 18. ordinar. r. ordinario. p. 39. l. 1. add a farlo. p. ib.
Angliterra, r. Anghtlterra. p. 52. l. ib. 506. r. 56. p. 54. marg. Hallandes
affairs. p. 55. l. 8. Common, r. Cannon Law. p. 57. l. 18. Conatus, r.
Canutus. p. 59. marg. Francum, r. aerarium. p. 67. l. 24. vacant
prudentissimus, r. vacant; sed prudentissimus. p. 94. l. vlt. dele Othobone
upon.

CONCLUSION I. That the present State Ecclesiastical is most convenient, and
best agreeing with the Civil.
WIth what care and cost States and Kingdoms, which uphold and derive all
happiness to man, as he is a sociable and a feeble creature, should be
preserved, none will deny; especially since they are so subject to decay, and
the causes of their corruptions so many. Senec. 117.
For the best tempered commonwealth is not of any constant continuance, but
full of changes, and those at last, will after much interchange, drive it to a
full and fatal period. It must therefore be the care of the present age, to
see that it receive no detriment while they are in it: for they may be so
orderly, as to work no distemper, but conserve it in health and wealth, or at
least keep it from decaying so fast, that having some space to fall in, it may
recover, or they have time to leave it, and not fall with it, nor that fall
upon them. Now the best, and all that the passing, present generation can do,
is either to keep things in primitive order, or to reform them to it. The
first of which is difficult to continue, the other dangerous if long
discontinued. Yet Kingdoms must be conserved, by the same means they were
first established. This labor, and care then will be to best purpose bestowed
upon those parts which are most necessary, and uphold the rest as essential
and fundamental, being the principles of the intrinsicall, Polybius hist. lib.
6.
original good: (...), or upon those that secure these, (...). Now that which
is the only infallible ground of these, must needs be principally respected by
those that are undertakers for the public good; and that ground is true
religion. For though ill manners are per accidens the cause, or rather the
occasion of making good laws, yet they are better in the executing, best when
they are obeyed. Now good manners cause obedience, and religion naturally
begets good manners. But religion cannot subsist without public exercise and
action, and so the requisites of it are times, places, and some persons who
ought to be set apart, and wholly and only employed in it; and they must be in
the commonwealth. Therefore seeing it is necessary to have a religion to
preserve the commonwealth, it is by consequent as needful, to have preservers
of religion, that may not overturne the commonwealth by overruling religion.
Wherefore the choice of them need to be such, that seeing they must be in the
commonwealth of necessity, they may be of the commonwealth for universal
safety. And yet they are to be distinguished by state, and order, to avoid
confusion; nor does their distinction enforce any such form, after which they
must govern, as may be inconvenient to the public civil state, whereby they
are to be governed. The care then of the wisest must be either to preserve, or
restore that form of the Clergy, which is most agreeing with the Civil
State, and that will be the means to prolong the age of the state, by
preserving concord amongst societies; which, though at last it come to an end,
yet it may out-last our days, that we be not unhappy in the ruin; for it is
not the infelicitie of States which have long flourished to decay, or be
destroyed, but the unhappiness of those men, whose hap it is then to live, and
not when they did flourish. Now every form of a Clergy will not fit, Guic
hypor Poli^
but according to diverse countries, they have been several, suiting to the
times, places, and people. The first was the original, domestical discipline
in private families, before God made choice, and actually separated a nation to
himself. Then followed the Leviticall National regiment, compounded and
composed of, and according to the ceremonial and judicial Laws. Both these
forms were not only by divine permission, but also by injunction; yet not
perpetual nor universal. Neither of these then are the government we must
choose, because that manner of exercising religion is antiquated. We must then
consider of a form, which may be conformable to the present practice of true
religion, in relation to Gods revealed Will, which may withal be suitable, and
sorting with this present state, that so they may uphold each other; which
form, though it be not according to Gods express mandate in some particulars,
yet it is not against it, but with his permission of approbation in all points.
Now in this choice, we must consider our own form of Civil government, and
whether that were imposed upon us by conquest, or by our own consent; if by
free consent, and of long continuance, it will with more ease and desire be
preserved, and with greatest danger altered; if by conquest, the more Charters
of privileges are granted to us under it, the more it is endeared to us, and
esteemed happy; but our form of state is a free Monarchy, erected and
protected by free consent, and of long continuance, not imposed but confirmed
and reformed to the first freedom by a happy conquest, and endeered unto us by
many Charters of wholesome privileges. Therefore we must seek or keep such a
form of state Ecclesiastical, as may best accord with our form of Civil
policy,

. 2. This present State Ecclesiastical is the form that best agrees with the
Civil State. That it is not against the Law of God, I will not go about to
prove, because I hope none will question it: neither that it was the primitive,
and should still be the government of the present visible Church, because that
is already proved without all contradiction by many most judicious and
orthodoxe Divines: But my undertaking is (as far as God shall give me
understanding) to discourse, how it is most agreeable with this Kingdom. All
States have always endeavored, as to have a religion, so to frame the
exercise of it according to their own dispositions: but some with more doting
indulgence, have at last changed it into that which they were most naturally
disposed to, and did not alter and order their inclinations by it. As the four
grand Monarchies, the Chaldean with whom the Persian may well be joined, these
turned the acts of religion into philosophical considerations, enquiries, and
explications of nature. The Egyptians (a principal branch of these Monarchies,
and from whom some think the Chaldeans were derived, and that Belus Neptuni
Libiaeque filius in Babyloniam colonos ex Aegypto traduxisset, Diodorus Siculus
Biblioth. lib. 1.
and ex iis Sacerdotes quos Chaldeos Babylonii vocant, qui more Aegyptiorum
astra observant, etc.) These Egyptians naturally (...), superstitious in
religion, curious in mysteries, transformed religion into all kind of
superstitions, and by trying conclusions and chymicall experiments upon it,
conceited the substance of it into unexpected phansies, furthered by mimicall
expressions, leading into, and leaving in mystical mazes. The Grecians by
nature (...), intelligent, able to find out, and loving to contend, drew
religion into disputes, and would believe no more than they could find out by
search of reason, and apprehend by force of fancy; and that they obstinately
maintained, by a wanton working wit, which they might with more ease do,
seeing their language was so happy for expression. The Romans by nature
inclined to dominion, fitted the frame of their religion to a Monarchical
form under the Pontifices; Cujaci^ Origin lis,. 1
yet they seemed to seek a Monopoly of all the Gods in the world: (for they
received and worshipped the Gods of all the nations they conquered.) These
nations framing religion to these ends, August Civit (...) 20. cap
had a form of government, under religious persons, suitable to further,
contriue, and compass by all means, their particular purposes, and therefore
they gave them power, of a most large extent, yea they were ruled by them; for
the Chaldeans were originally Priests, and (...) a priest, Synesiu 126.
and a Prince were all one with them. So the Magi amongst the Persians, the
Priests of Apollo at Delphos amongst the Grecians did what they would. Pomp^
Orig. I.
And the Romans were led by their Pontifices and Augures, but it was whither
they would, namely to a Monarchy. We having not the ends of these nations in
our religion, must not use the same form of Clergy. For I conceive the aim
of the best and wisest with us, is to preserve the Church and Commonwealth
together. Now that cannot be, where the state of the Clergy governs, but where
it is governed. Our aim being such, let us consider what form will be best
governed under this Commonwealth. There are but three distinct forms of
Ecclesiastical government in Christendom, as the Monarchical,
Aristocraticall, Democraticall; of these, the Aristocraticall is most
conformable to the rule of this Realm. In proving of which assertion, I will
not only insist upon the proof of past and present experience, that it is so,
but discourse in reason why it should be so. And first in opposition to the
other forms of Ecclesiastical government: what they are likely to produce,
woeful experience has long since felt in the one, and what we may expect,
upon probable conjecture, from the other, is not to be desired by any that
understand, and love the happiness of this Civil State. For all their
principles, fundamental in their grounds, of augmentation in their growth, of
conservation in their height, (...). Polybius lib. 6.
and of reparation in their decays are most dangerous for this Monarchy, and
the causes of their corruption would be so incorporated into the body and
bowels of the Civil State, that if it fall not before them and into their
hands, they would go near to pull it down with them when they fall. Not so
speak of their power, which they must have, and the exercise of it, either in
an ordinary and lawful course, or by indulgence or usurpation, and the manner
of their proceedings in the execution of it, what instruments they use in
counsel and action, how much they trench upon the power, undermine the
government, countermine the proceedings, countermand the edict, and confront a
Monarchy, I leave it to wise and active men to consider.

. 3. First to speak of the Monarchical, which is now the Papal government.
How this Monarchical form has heretofore agreed with this State, all know;
and it is not likely that it should now so well accord with it, because the
reasons of that little agreement then, the present particular interest, in
which this State used that Monarchy, are ceased; for then we aimed to enlarge
our dominion by the right of succession in France, by the right of conquest in
Scotland and Ireland. But the causes of disagreement still remain, and are in
their part aggravated to an utter opposition; so that as before it was
dangerous, so now it is a desperate case to re-entertaine that form of
Clergy, which can and will rule us, and must necessarily alter, and so work
the ruin of the present state. Under this form this Kingdom was no
Monarchy, but a Province, under a forreiner, an usurper and a tyrant. This was
our best condition when that Clergy ruled us, though as favorable as they
could, or did any Monarchy in Europe. The laws and privileges of the land
were continually broken and infringed by them, especially those laws that did
most immediately uphold the Kings prerogative. Against them they continually
promulgated particular edicts, for the decrees were too general to be applied
to occasions, and therefore they added the decretals, so called, because they
gave wings to the decrees for quicker dispatch. And we shall find, Duare^
benefici^ Prooem
that most of the Decretall epistles, which concern Jurisdiction, were written
to English Prelates. And (as I conceive) some reason might be, because the
laws of this land are more contrary to the Canon Law, than the laws of any
other States in Christendom, being they are more ruled by the Civil Law, from
which the Canon is derived, and so more causes might arise here amongst us,
either out of the contrariety of the Laws, or out of the narrower extent of
the Common Law, and also partly out of the ignorance of the proceedings of this
State, which was then likely to be most, because intercourse and intelligence
with Rome for that time was abridged; (for Henry 2. being then at variance with
Thomas Becket, who was sheltered by the Pope Alexander the third, permitted not
any Legate to reside in the kingdom; but as soon as Vivian was arrived, he
was questioned, and that by the Bishops of Winchester and Ely, how he durst
land without the Kings special license.) And partly they writ the oftener to
English Bishops, because they suspected them, and justly, to be more partial
for their Prince, than the Prelates of any other kingdom, as appears by their
readiness to examine this Legate, and also by an epistle Decretall of
Alexander the third to the Bishop of London, Lib 4. t^^t. 17. c^p. 7. qui filij
legitimi. Sarisburiensis de nugis curial: lib. 7. cap. 24
who then was Gilbert Foliot (a man much commended by Matthew Paris and John
Sarisburiensis) in that epistle he curries favor with him in a cause which
he knew was of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and was so judged here in the Kings
court, (as appears out of Glanvill then Lord chief Justice) I think in the
very particular case. Glanvill, lib. 7. cap. 15. Ad Regem Angliae pertinet de
possessionibus iudicare. Johannes de Parisijs contra Bonifacium octavum. cap.
12.
But he feared, seeing the Bishop could do so much with the King, and would
do so much for his King, least he should find some way to entitle it to the
Crown: and he had good reason to fear, since the Bishop had so often in the
Kings behalf opposed Thomas Becket and him. These may be some reasons why the
Popes sent so many epistles into England, and I am the more confirmed in them,
because I find they were for the greatest part written by the most
Pragmaticall Popes, who busied and bestirred themselves most in setting up
orders, and new fresh Fryes, and fraternities of Friars; and in pulling down
the powers both of our Kings and Bishops: to wit, from those seven Popes (who
were the thirds; and I think the worst of their names, I am sure of their
predecessors.) As for the most part they were written from Alex. 3. Lucius
tertius, Vrbanus tertius, Clemens tertius, Coelestinus tertius, Innocens
tertius, and Honorius tertius; these men did and undid very much, because they
were active and lived long. If then this form of Clergy was thus prejudicial
to our state before it was opposed and incensed by the statute of Proviso and
Praemunire, and cast off by the Kings just re-assuming their power, (which
shows that all their right was nothing but our sovereigns wrong;) surely now
we are not to expect so much favor from them: and therefore as the State then
thought it necessary and right to casheere it, and brought their purpose fully
to pass; so it is now more necessary and just to keep it out, since it is
infinitely increased in tyranny, since that unhappy, unadvised, ill advised
conventicle at Trent.

. 4. Those nations shall have the best use of that form, who propound a civil
state as large as their Ecclesiastical; and to whom he has first sought too
for assistance: and withal are able to overrule it. For after Iustinianus the
last of the true Roman Emperors, and Gregory the last of the good Popes, that
See claue to Phocas; who named the Pope Universal Bishop, that he might
proclaim him Catholic Emperor. But when in the next Centurie the Eastern
Emperors were infested with Saracens war, began to pull down images as some
cause of the wars, which the Pope endeavored to set up again: then by the
second Council of Nice, whether because they did him wrong in disobedience, or
rather because they could do him no good; the Greek Pope Zachary fell off to
the French before the next Centurie. And then Pipin used him to confirm, not
to confer his new atchived Kingdom; for in those days they gave no such
power, neither did Pope Zachary claim it: for he deposed not Childericke, but
consented to the deposing, which was by the Peers of France; neither did he
set up Pipin in his room: but they that deposed the other only sent to Rome
to have Zacharies advise in it, Bulla (...)
because it might pass more plausibly in the world by the consent of so grave
an Oracle: as it has always been good wisdom to wind in the conscience of
one who is esteemed an upright Judge, for the countenance of an unusual cause
humorously undertaken by the first Author; especially there being then a
faction amongst the Bishops of France: Baron nal. (...)
so that this inquiry of his judgment in point of fact did non submit to any
claim of right. And Gotefridus Viterbrensis affirms, and Baronius confesses,
Francos non Zachariae paruisse decreto, Baron nal. (...)
sed acquievisse consilio: and there is great difference betwixt an absolute
injunction, and a politic advise, which is only an answer out of discretion
and left to discretion, implies no obligation of necessity. But this is
without question, Pipin being ambitious of the Kingdom, and desirous to cover
and color it with religious ends, used the Pope to countenance and compass
his design; who would not withstand him, being engaged to him for protection
and by bounty, or which is likelier, he durst not, being too much in his
power. But howsoever it was, he clave fast unto the French for that Century:
especially to Charles the great, the repairer of the Western Empire; from whom
the Caroline succession continued till Otho the third. But then the French
Kings being distracted by wars at home, Augustinus de A^cona de potest.
Papae: quaest. 37. Art. 5.
could no more assist them: Gregory the fifth an Almaine transferred it to the
Almaines, chose those seven Electors, but they agreed not well together: after
the Almaine Pope was dead and Italians succeeded, they presently began to
quarrel with the Emperor, and to send challenges of right into Italy; knowing
that the Emperor was not able to do much for them in giving them as the
French had done, and perceiving he was more unable to hold from them that
which they would have: Segebertus ^hron. passim.
so that the Emperors were continually imbroiled by them, being not able to
rule them, decreasing as fast as they rose. Then the opposition betwixt many
particular Popes and Emperors, as betwixt Gregory the seventh and Henry the
fourth, and Alexander the third with Frederick Barbarossa, was very strong.
But after it grew to such a height that they were settled into factions of
separations, as the Ecclesiastiques and Imperialists, especially in Italy;
Nabrigensis hist. Anglicana lib. 4. cap. 13.
which the Italians quickly perceiving, because earnestly desiring the
Emperors power over them to be looser, began to make use of the Papal present
opposition to procure their full liberty: Abbas Vnspergensis chron. passim.
and therefore these factions were most strong there. Yet that grand faction
distinguished by many formalities, was principally maintained under the names
of the Guelfs and Gibellins, which swallowed up all the private and petty
family factions of Italy. As the Vrsini in Rome were Guelfes, Mat hist. Ann
the Collonensi Gibellins, the Vberti in Florence were Gibellins, the
Bondelmonti Guelfes, and so it was in Naples, Venice, Millaine: which strife
continued hot till Boniface the eight, who perceiving how much his predecessors
had gained upon the Emperor, and saw but little more for him to get; began to
practice the like domineering humor upon the other Potentates of Christendom,
sending his letters of claim to the Kings of France, England, Scotland,
Denmark, Poland, Hungary. But being opposed by Philip le Beau King of France,
he did fly back to the Emperor for succor, who then was Albertus, the
first Emperor of the house of Austria (for though his father was Emperor, yet
he was not of the house of Austria, neither of the old Marquesses nor late
Dukes, but Earl of Hansburg, who had conquered the Dukedom of Austria for his
son.) This Boniface the Spaniard first began the faction betwixt the Kingdom
of France and the house of Austria, by giving the Kingdom of France to
Albertus. These two better agreed then any, because the Pope had taken off the
Emperor from seeking his own right in Italy, by employing him as his
champion to enlarge his dominion in other Kingdoms: and partly because the
Emperor had good hope to continue the Empire in his family, as it has near
four hundred years. From which time the Emperors and Popes disagreements
were not so frequent, but only when some French favorers were Popes, and they
sat at Avinion, as Clement the fifth with Henry the seventh, and during the
times of the Councels of Constance and Basil. But by reason of the schisms in
the Roman See, they did one another neither much good nor harm, until the
time of Alexander the sixth, a Spaniard, who was exactly ambitious, a great
lover of his country, and one that did much for it. Anonymus Hisp. in vita
Alex.
For he joined with Ferdinand the first Catholic King, helping him to subdue
Spain, and therefore first brought in the Inquisition Contra los Iudios y
mores, que le aviantornado Christianos, which Caranza Archbishop of Toledo,
says Ferdinand, conceived himself bound in conscience to use, by virtue of an
oath taken with an imprecation by one of his predecessors in the fourth
Council of Toledo, Baronius Annal. An. 637.
which Baronius so much commends. This Pope also bestowed upon him the then
discovered Indies, with many other favors, and for his sake, and in opposition
to the French, he was as fast a friend to the House of Austria, as his deep
dissimulation would suffer him; Philip. Cominoeus, lib. 8.
and the rather, because they had lately matched with the House of Burgundy,
which much weakened the French force, and strengthened their factions. Thuanus
hist. lib. 4.
But then most when Philip, the heir of the House of Austria and Burgundy,
incorporated himself with Spain. So that I will conclude these things
considered, that this form is only safe and convenient for those kingdoms
that propose conquests, and can rule it as the protectors of it.

. 5. So then seeing this Clergy is not for us, I will consider of the other,
which for distinct proceeding, we may call Democraticall. When the three Prime
Potentates of Christendom, were Charles the fifth, Henry the eighth, Francis
the first, such as deserved and desired to have all the sovereign power that
could of right belong unto them, and yet were contrariwise usurped upon, and
deprived of all their eminent supremacy, in those things that most concerned
them; and perceiving (some beginning to question the Pope) a course of
relieving themselves, they began to urge a Council for reformation, not only
in doctrine and manners, but also in point of Ecclesiastical government. But
it was so long urged by them, to no purpose, that Henry the eigth advisedly
wrote to the other; That seeing the Pope had so long put it off, Histo. Trid.
and now intended to hold it within his own territories, it were the best
course for every one, to reform his own Kingdom, and he did so with the advice, consent, and desire of the Church and Stat^ representative. No sooner
was a reformation in any degree settled, but presently it was excepted against
by some that favored the Church of Geneva, as not fully reformed, because not
agreeing with their new neat platform; and that was urged upon us, as the only
Apostolical government of the Church. But I marvel how such an exact
government should be so suddenly framed, or else which is more strange, that
they could so conceal their happy invention; as that Francis the first, a King
of France, that searched into his government as much as any, should not know of
it. For I am very much deceived, if he had not been much mistaken, knowing of
this project, to desire the Council might be held at Geneva, being it was
Diametrically opposite to the Roman. But our State had no reason to receive
it. Hist. Trid.
For though it was necessary, not only in reason of State, but also out of
conscience, that (after we perceived the indisposition of the Roman Clergy to
reform themselves, (which they seem to hold impossible.) For though every
Cardinal takes an oath in the vacancie, yet it cannot bind him when he is
Pope; we should then perform our duty, especially seeing it stood with the
public good.) Yet neither of these considerations did engage us to accept of
such a form of Clergy, as seemed to run a clean contrary course, seeing we
propounded not an innovation, but a reformatioa; that being as dangerous, as
this was necessary, it could not here be entertained without an universal
innovation. Now all stirring changes are dangerous, especially when the body of
the commonwealth is full of diseased, discontented humors. Because all
alteration sets the humors a working, and one humor being a-foote, stirs up
all the rest, either alluring by sympathy, or provoking by antipathy; and when
they are once a-foote, it is to be feared, that they will not only disburthen
the body of malignant oppressing cru^^ties, but weaken it in the most
principal parts, causing it to receive a disposition to the like distemper,
upon every small distaste. But it is most dangerous to innovate in that part of
a commonwealth, that is most essentially active, and has been lately
recovered, especially if the matter proposed do minister any cause of relapse.
Both which seem too true in this new discipline, which gave an occasion to the
Clergy to revolt in the denying the supremacy, which they lately
acknowledged. And being a foreign French devise, might seem to come within
the compass of a praemunire for intrusion. as well as that of the Church of
Rome for usurpation. But this was only propounded, not brought in, and that by
men who were by some believed to be faithful to our State. And it may be, they
had no dangerous aim in it, yet it would have been very dangerous for our
kingdom, since it did necessarily induce an alteration in the profession and
practice of the laws, which by reason of their long use, are as it were
naturalized, into the manners and disposition of our nation. (...). Arist.
Rhetor. l. 2. cap: 11.
It must necessarily have conferred ruins upon our schools of learning and
hospitals of charity, razed the foundations of our Churches, confounded
divisions of parishes, changed the right and custom of paying tithes, with
many such miserable inconveniences, which were so in the Apostles times of
miseries, in persecution. So that the State then would not venture to try
conclusions upon it self, by this new receipt, but chose rather to feel the
supposed pain, than to take the pill: and yet it has subsisted, though not in
that height of health, which that form of government promised; yet in such a
good competent continuance of reasonable well, that the present state also had
rather endure the worst of the disease, than make the best use of the remedy.
And if it must have made such a change in the entrance, what would it have done
in the continuance? how would it have agreed with this Monarchy, that must
have entered with such oppositions? so that I need not to say much to discard
it, for it has enough in it at the first sight to keep it out. And I
confess, that if I would, I cannot say much of it with any confident
certainty, because indeed I do not know, neither do I think that any of them
do, or at least ever have set down, in positive and plain terms, the whole
frame and face of this platform, as they would have it received in this
Kingdom. But as much as I conceive of it, and at the best and purest, it is a
mixed Democraticall discipline, and it is not likely, that a dissolute
Democracie should long agree with this Monarchy. It is not my intent here to
discourse of the nature of a Democracie, Clayn Arc.
that I should show the manifold consequent, coincident inconveniences, that
do naturally flow in with it, and follow it (notwithstanding that Machivell in
many of his discourses upon Livie, does prefer a Democracie before any other
form, but rather wittily, out of a Paradoxicall contradicting humor, than
wisely, out of the weight and worth of sincere, sage, and serious arguments.
And Plato says thus much for it, in his Idaea of a Commonwealth, Plat^ lib. 5
(...) inter iniquas formas optima, inter legitimas deterrima. For if it begin
to degenerate into an Ochlocratie, (as I cannot conceive it possible, but it
must, considering that liberty is the end and excellency of it) then it turns
to a most headstrong, intolerable tyranny. For I am not of their opinion,
that hold it a contradiction, that where a Democracy prevayles, there can be a
tyranny. For the Ephori of Sparta, were as the Tribunes of the people of Rome,
chosen by the people, and out of the common people, and the conservators of
their liberty. Yet I think there are but few that discourse of these Ephori,
but they conclude, and condemn their government of tyranny. They cast
Pausanias into prison, and Thucidides says, that they usurped that power over,
and against their Kings, for they put Agis junior to death, Plato de leg. lib.
4.
as Plato, (...), and they were set up to restrain their Kings. It is a hard
matter to keep that liberty within its limits, in any commonwealth, where it
has the supreme government, and therefore with much difficulty will it submit
to be governed by a free Monarchy, especially a Democracie of that new nature,
which makes the same persons civil subjects, and ecclesiastical superious,
those lay Elders that are neither Ministers nor Magistrates, and yet must be
governors in the Church, whose jurisdiction does destroy the nature of a
Monarchy. For all public government in the Church, derived from Christ, the
fullness of it, is either Prophetical, Sacerdotall, or Regal; and they assume
not any of these, but the Regal, which is given in charge to supreme Christian
Magistrates in a Monarchy; and therefore, if they derive not this power from
him, they establish a regiment against him. So that if his power, does not
include theirs, they exclude his; and he having no supereminent power over
them, as they impeach his right, so they will enlarge their own liberty, till
it be dissolved into a loose licentious libertinisme: Polybius hist. lib. 6.
(...), (as Polibius well expresses it.) And if they did not thus, it were the
greater virtue, seeing they must have such power limited by laws left to
discretion. And they would find it a hard peeece of patience, to abstain and
contain themselves within such bounds of obedience, as this State necessarily
requires. Can men that profess themselves popular pass plausiblie and please
the vulgar if they do not to their utmost uphold them in their highest
insolences? Tull^ 2. co^ Agra
Tullie found this impossible when as he withstood the people in Lege Agraria,
for they cast him off, and clave to Rullus, who would be popularis though it
were but in populatione: and as it cannot stand with the power of our
government, so it withstands the honor of our governor, debasing the majesty
of a Monarchy into a popular paritie, without respect of His most sacred
person. In this it is truly Democritall; for as it was received for liberty,
so it must be vpheld by equality: (...) cannot be fully free without (...),
Poly^ lib. 6
and I cannot then conceive how any could apprehend it as a form likely to
agree with state; so that this government at the best would be like the
spleen in the body, which is the subject of the dregs and settlings of the
humors, as a Democracie is la feccia della plebe, Gui^ Hist.
and as the spleen being not able to move it self is not troublesome, so
long as it is not pressed upon by the heart, but permitted full and equal
liberty, nor disturbed by a Flatus hypocondriacus (...), but once moved (...)
affectes the head and heart with turbulent distempers; Hipp notio
so in a Democracie as long as they have all at their loose list, and are not
compelled to keep within compass, but apprehend themselves equal to the
highest in all respects, and are not moved by some sedicious spirit, they are
quiet enough; Nam multitudo, sicut mare, per se immobilis est, Livi Psalm (...)
Ide^
but if once they perceive that any go about to oppress or cross them in
their false and fugitive liberty (as they are very suspicious upon the least
cause) they presently are ready, but tentare magis quam tueri libertatem: and
if any one dare but begin to blow a Trumpet of sedition, (as they do not
easily) statim ferox erit si non ad bellandum, saltem ad rebellandum. I do
confess that this form of government may be of good use in some states at
some times, as in a popular state where these Lay Elders may be both Church and
City Burgesses; as the Democraticall Helvetians approved it: so also as for
the enlarging of a Monarchy, Machivellus, l. 1. cap. 5.
the Monarchical is best; so for the settling of a Monarchy, that
Democreticall may be safest, and so may be the best government when a state is
not settled but newly erected: for then it is not safe to use severitie a^ when
our state was not fully settled. Martin Mar-Prelate dared to vent his
discontented humors in salt rumors, Curtius Histor. lib. 5.
as men in rheumes: In novo and precario imperio no^statim jugum rigidum
cervici imponendum, but it is good taming them by degrees, for then a
Magistrate has little power to command, much less to restrain; and therefore
it has bin found the best course to let the^ take their course: for Mos est
vulgo, Tacitus Histor. lib. 1. Livius lib. 11. Histor.
mutabili subito, and tam prono in misericordiam, quam immodicum saevitia
fuerat, and so by indulgence find lascivire magis plebem quam saevire. And I
am persuaded that this discipline was only chosen for that time when the
Apostles were under persecution, and there were no Christian Magistrates to
repair to for justice: then they appointed some to judge betwixt brother and
brother. But it does not appear that they were Ecclesiastical Judges,
certainly no such lay Elders in the Apostles times as the Separatists now plead
for, but rather civil arbiters to make agreement betwixt them in civil
controversies, 1 Cor. 6.4.5. Histor. Con. Trid. lib. 3.
(as may appear out of the place) though the author of the History Council.
Tridentini make that a ground for Episcopal jurisdiction. For the Apostles had
no reason to delegate the cognizance of spiritual causes, because in those
days they were so few, and needed no proof to them; because they had the gift
of discerning of spirits, and of knowing of secrets, having the gift of
prophesying. And I do not believe that it can be proved that they gave
commission to any to receive accusations, (which is much less then to give
judicial censures and decisions) to any but to the Bishop of Ephesus: 1 Tit
but I intend not to enter into controversies, neither need I, seeing so much
has been already written in that point to good purpose by many most reverend
Fathers of our Church. But to return to my intended discourse; this state of
the soveraigntie of these seniors I grant to be of some use in free Cities in
time of tumult; and so I do believe Mr Calvin intended it, yielding to a
popular party, and not as an universal perpetual government for all truly
reformed Churches. For though such a wise respected man as he was, might
during his time preserve it in the same correspondent conformity to his
proposed pattern, (as Polibius says) the Thebane Democracie (...); it stood
not by the good temper of their policy, Polyb
but by the virtue of their governors (...): so might it be said of the
Geneva Church government, that though for the transgression of it many were the
rulers of it, being a Democracie: Pro. (...) Nil m prodest curari lunt. Senec^
Mach^ lib. 1. ^
yet by a man of understanding and knowledge, the state thereof was prolonged;
for he could do much to appease seditions, as Franciscus Bishop of Volterra
sooner settled a tumult in Florence by his grave presence, then the Magistrates
could by the weight of their authority. It is plain then out of this that
has been spoken, that this government by popular Presbytery is not for this
state.

6 Neither of these being convenient, and there is but another, and it has
always been the government in this state; it must necessarily follow without
any more proof, that this is most agreeable with the Civil. Those that are no
well willers to our state have struck at our Church government, with which
there is such a happy hearty unity, as dare bid the world do as she would
be done to (as that absolute Statse-man the Earl of Salisburie replied.) And
it is no marvel, since it is not only the primitive ancient government of the
Church in general; but the only form also that ever was received in this
state, according to the ancient laws of this Island, though it seem to be
brought in under Henry the eight, when it was only reformed from the evils,
and restored to the former state: for our Clergy was never of right subject to
the Pope, neither as he was Patriarch to the West, nor in his province. And
this Aristocraticall form has most happy qualifications that dispose it to
the peace, profit, honor, and safety of this state: I could now wish with
Tully when he was to write against Democraticall Agrarian laws, Ad Atticum,
l. 2. epist. 3.
Vtinam Theophrastum (...), etc. Vbi multa scribuntur (...). After this
Kingdom with many others had long labored under a lingering consumption, being
continually sucked, and in a manner exhausted by the continual supplying of
the Popes Exchequer, which drew away the vital spirits, weakened the sinews of
war; causing extensions and convulsions: and farther also in respect of
domestique peace, it had not a just proportion of power to exercise its only
civil and lawful authority: insomuch that many who should have known what in
possibility of state might be done for a recovery of a temporalitie,
distempered and distressed by the malignant humerous power of an usurped
spiritualitie, like a fever in the spirits caused by obstruction; (...).
Hippocrat: lap. 5. prog.
All those men gave it over for desperate, some conceiving the disease
incurable in its own nature, because, that non obstante the help of so many
strong statutes and purging provisoes, the distemper was as violent, and more
virulent then before; and they saw no safe and certain course of preventing
physic, for it was so far spent, as that it seemed to have passed the period
of curing: but as when men are brought to a desperate point they will try
conclusions, and they that drive them to it do often repent it; so the Pope
putting and passing our state upon desperate hazards, forced it to try its
strength, which is soon found; necessity driving, and opportunity drawing:
Acerrima virtus est, quam ultima necessitas extundit: Senec^a men. l
and so it cast such an unreasonable unruly rider, who thought, and so did all
christendom, that he had sitten closer and faster upon our skirts, and would
not believe that it was possible for a Parliamentary power representing the
state, ever to have been able to dissolve the great Abbeys, though they durst
fully resolve it; until they saw them begin with the little ones; then they
had reason to grant it possible: Arist. R lib. 2. c
(...). Yea they found it fully finished, and that on such a sudden, that as it
wrought admiration in the beholders, so it procured safety to the actors. For
in actions of that nature, haste only makes good speed. That the event of this
action was good, is proved by the deliverance of the state. But for the action
in it self considered, as I do not commend it, so I will not condemn it,
because I am not able to sift and search into the circumstances of it; but I
will only say thus much of it, That actions that aim at, and make great
alteration, though to the best, do seldom keep a just mediocrity, especially
in respect of that part of the commonwealth, which is the subject of the
alterations: as a strong, stirring Chymicall spirit-purge does in a natural
body, that stirs up more than should be moved, and purges out good, as well
as ill humors. But no sooner was our State thus delivered from under the
tyranny of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy, but it as soon pitched upon the
Aristocraticall government, as suitable and fitting best with the
weale-publick. And as all the Christian world did then in sincere judgment of
State rebus sic staantibus approve their choice, so we have ever since found
the happy effects of it, in the safety, honor, and treasure of the State.
Consider it first, how it wrought little or no alteration in the receiving,
being according to the laws, taken by their own choice, restrained with the
limitations of the Civil State. For all the turmoyle and tossing tumult, was
only in casting out the other form, as a privation, before the induction of a
new form in natural bodies. It was received without force, as most natural
to the Civil State, and no other could have been brought in with such
certain good security of the state: for the Monarchical that time could not
be received, Histor. Council. Trid. lib. 2.
but either upon their repentance of what they had done, and by procuring of a
pardon from the Pope, (as it was in Queen Mary's days: and do but consider,
how evil that was for the State) or else by help of foreign force joining
with domestic rebellion, as was often attempted. But this was not any thing
safe for the kingdom, as is already proved. And for the Democraticall
discipline, there was great and certain danger in receiving of that, for it
could not possibly be conceived to be received, but with a schismatic
sedition, since it was approved but by a faction. Now do but consider, how
dangerous seditions are in an ancient kingdom; if it were now a settling,
happily the vigor of youth would bear it out, as one maine reason (as I
conceive) why the Roman Monarchy was not ruined by those four first grand
seditions, was because it was but secunda aetas, and quasi adolescentia: Lucius
Florus lib. 1. cap. 22.
But when a State is growing old, seditions are desperate courses to procure
changes, though it be for the best. For though the events of them be but
doubtful, yet the deciding-place is certain of loss. But for this present
form, as it re-entred without a State-earthquake, without any shaking of the
ground of the Civil government, so it has ever continued peaceable, and a
pacifier of growing differences, being the middle State of three, carrying it
self as a moderating mediator betwixt the King and the Subjects. And all this
good, and much more proceeds from the temper of the form of government. For it
is the only form fit to be under this Monarchy, because it will only be
easily ruled and ordered by the State, when as both the other will rule where
they are entertained, although after a diverse manner; one having dominion over
the Civil, the other without it. But this is under the Civil, in relation to
the head; and in it, in relation to the body. And as it is easily ruled, so it
will not easily be disordered, as the other will, though they should submit to
be ruled for a time, till they be able to resist. For ambition is so
perniciously provident, that it will be something able to resist the power of
its opposite, to get from under it, before it try to go about it. First,
taking care not to be oppressed, before it endeavor to oppress; for all the
branches of rebellion, are rooted and hid in the depths of dissembled
disobedience. But this is not so inclined; for if any form of policy
degenerate, it must be either into a Tyranny, an Oligarchy, or a dissolute
Ochlocraty. Now an Aristocracie cannot be immediately dissolved, either into a
tyranny, or a tumultuous popularity. And it is not easy to conceive, how it
should by any means, by the course of State corruption, ever degenerate into a
headstrong popularity of it own accord, without external force. And as
little reason there is, why this should advance it self to a tyranny, by
turning the Church into a court, Earl (...) bury hi^ to scan^ papers.
and religion into a vassal to ambition; for it must be reduced and restrained
into an Oligarchie: and there is no great reason in this point, to fear the
Clergy in this kingdom, all things considered. It is true (as all Historians
and Politics observe) that an Aristocracie is subject and prone to be
corrupted into an Oligarchie: But do but observe the end of an Oligarchie, and
you will find, that an Aristocracie can have no such aim; for their end is,
to grow rich, as the States of Venice and the Belgic provinces, and their
counsels drive at that end, Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. c. 8.
(...); and according to this end, and this counsel to it, he that will
prevail in persuading with them, must deliberate, Sen. Suasor. 1.
in libera civitate, non vt apud reges, quae delectant, sed quae prosunt
suadenda sunt. But our Ecclesiastical Aristocracie is not to be so persuaded,
having no such counsels, because not the same end; only they may be rich, if
they did desire it, because being poor, they are a fit subject of wealth. The
poverty of this Clergy has charmed it against active ambition, so that one of
the Optimates do not look higher than his peers, set with him in equal
power and honor, in relation to their several Diocesses, though the power of
jurisdiction be in some cases larger, in the provincial Prelate, Nemo nostrum
Episcopum se Episcoporum esse dicit, Augustinus contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 1.
neque tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem, collegas suas adigit: so
that per accidens, the impoverishing of the Clergy in Henry the eight, when it
seemed in the eye of some too rich for the Civil State, did this good, to
preserve them from an Oligarchie; even as to take so much blood away in a
plurisie, as to bring a man to a deep consumption, is a probable preservatiue
against dying of a burning fever. So that alteration of this State is not much
to be feared, in respect they have no reason to alter it; and withal it is not
easily altered, if they had this or any other ground to do it. For an
Aristocracie in it self considered, is a government of a most constant,
continuing constitution, especially, when it is mixed and tempered with a
Monarchy. For the reason of its constancy is not only the slownesse of the
motion, either to augmentation or diminution, like a great engine moving with
many joints, in which point a Monarch will much advantage in advancing and
setting faster forward, if not their deliberations, yet their determinations;
and with ease and speed stay all their errors and declinings, while they are
but in the breedings, beginnings, and begettings; but then also the force of
their factions (which breaking out, are the common ruin of Aristocracies) will
be abated, as it may be seen in the Spartane and Venetian States, opposed to
the Athenian and Florentine. For these had an Aristocracie without a Monarchy,
and were continually tossed with seditions and factions. As that long lasting
faction of the Guelfes and Gibilines, which could never be fully taken away,
but by the ruin of one party, when as the Venetians their neighbors (whose
Duke was then not a Simulachrum imperij) kept the faction out of their
commonwealth, though they did declare themselves sometimes on one side, and
sometimes on another, lest they should have been hated of all, as negligent
neutrals; but they did not nourish the faction amongst themselves, but
maintained it in other Countries, as they would do wars. But the State of
Millaine could never be free from it, until it was extinguished by Francisco
Sforza, Paulu^ hist. lib
(who was a free Prince, though an usurper) so that the mixture of a Monarchy,
and the predominancie in an Aristocraticall State, does not only make it
actiuely more able to offense, but more passiuely powerfully defensive, not
only by preventing preservations from domestic dangers, but also by
recovering it out of them. And our present State Ecclesiastical is thus mixed.
Bellar summ^ cap. 3.
(for I do not urge a strict Aristocracie; (...) (as Aristotle) and therefore
has the best means of conservation in respect of the forme^. And it has one
more prevalent preservatiue in the Optimates themselves, which is, that they
are strongly disposed to this kind of government, not only by being of quiet
contemplative natures, but also Academicall College government, which does
first possess them and fully please them, is Aristocraticall, having the
proper aim of that form of government; Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 28.
(...), discipline according to law, is the end of that form of government.
And they then that aim at that, are most likely to preserve it, by persevering
in their intentions; when as others that will devise new platformes, and
platform discipline, and will seem wiser than the laws, do suddenly subvert
or disturb this most safe and settled form of government. Thucydides l. 3.
Witness the Athenians and the Florentines, who being of a stirring
over-actiue temper, and always doing, though it were to the undoing of things
well done, changed this form of State seven times, which corrupting
transmutations, I hope Machivell their Countryman does not call and commend
under the terms of reformation, Machivellus lib 3. c. 10.
and reduction to their primative principles, without he will grant their prime
original order, to be raised out of confounded confusions. When as the
Venetians, who have been calm and cold, and constant in provident
proceedings, have kept to the same form without any fundamental alterations,
and that because they will be ruled by laws; whereas the Florentine is so
overweeningly wise, that he thinks he should Emperour-like rule and make laws
(...). Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 11.
So that Bodinus judgment of them, and the Neopolitans is true; and approues
him to be a most rational statist; Bodinus de repub. l. 5. c. 1.
Dignos se esse imperio singuli arbitrentur ad populare imperium, magis quam
Optimatum inclinati. But suppose this government should be disordered, it is
easiliest reformed again, which is a point of very great safety, it may be
done without any stirrs of tumults, and speedily, for it has not that power to
resist authority, which the other two forms have; and that because it uses
not the means they do to procure it. For the Monarchy of the Church of Rome,
and the Democraticall discipline, stir up the vulgar, and rely and rest upon
them for assistance, and defense, and therefore they endeavor to woo and win
their hearts, that they may use their hands and purses: yet they do it diverse
ways. As the Romanists, amongst many other ways, they get into their hearts
at their ears by auricular confessions, they hold them by their ears, and by
their eyes; they fascinate their fond fantasies with superstitious ceremonies,
exquisitely intricate, full of mystical and magical mazes, broached by
fancy, continued and countenanced by fables, consisting in the massy
materiality of bodily exercise, as may be seen in the austerity and State of
an Austrian penance, or in a Pontifical procession, where all is done with
such concealed secrecy and silence, that nothing is prostituted to be polluted
by the unsanctified view of the vulgar. Thus by fear mixed with delight in
superstition, they can lead them as they list, and engage them in their
quarrels, and bequeath to them their dangers they have pulled upon themselves.
The Disciplinarians are not only endeered to them, for the form and frame of
their government, and for their novelty, but they make use of superstition also
to hold them, and to have them at their beck; but in a course clean contrary
to the other, for they undo all the other have done, in point of ceremony,
without consideration, whether it be good or bad and that out of a
superstitious rage, as the other did out of fear: (for superstition is
grounded upon either of those passions.) And as their fear was mixed with
pleasure in the end, so theirs is mixed with profit, when in the destroying of
superstition they enrich themselves with the spoils, and save charges in
ornaments. Which profanesse of theirs, is in some respects worse than their
superstition, and it many times ends in Atheism. For though they were
consecrated after a false manner, yet they were dedicated and devoted to the
true God, and should not be profaned to common uses, but sanctified by a new
and true consecration, as well as the Churches wherein they were. Thus those
forms of Church Government have power to withstand the reforming rod of
authority. But our present State uses no such means to stand out a rebellion,
because if it offend, it rather proceeds out of weakness than wickedness,
from scholasticall indiscretions, that deserve rather pity than punishment.
For it is not likely, that they would disturb the State, who shall certainly
lose that little they have by it, rather than get more. I find, that amongst
those Prelates that have troubled and turmoyled kingdoms, Peter's pretended
successors have only gained, by fishing in such troubled waters. And as they
can have no end worth their stirring, so their natural inclination is not so
perniciously pragmaticall, they are far from the tricks of tumbling
projecters, and all actions proceed either from our general end, or particular
inclination; and this inclination is fortified and confirmed, if not formed and
framed by their studies, which have a great influence into the disposition. I
have not in this discourse, entered much into the commendation of an
Aristocracie in general, preferring it before a Monarchy, partly because I
fear, lest some should serve me as Castellanus, a French Phisolophy reader
(who, as I conceive, was Ramus his Tutor) served his antagonist Bigotius. For
when Francis the first was desired by some of his Nobles, to read Bigotius his
Disputations, Castellanus told his Majesty, he was an Aristotelian, and
Aristotle preferred an Aristocracie before a Monarchy, Thuanus, hist. l^b. 6.
and so took off the Kings affection from him. But he might be so excused,
because I do not believe it was Aristotle's judgment, but his policy, to
dissuade all others from affecting it, that his Master Alexander might effect
it. But I did purposely forbear it, because it was not my proposition, that an
Aristocracie is simply a more convenient form of State than a Monarchy; but
that this Aristocracie is more convenient for this State at this time,
considering that it was received with an universal consent and desire of all,
and has its right according to the laws; is most easily ruled by them, not
easily nor suddenly disturbed or disturbing; and most easily reformed if it be
disordered: so that I may now undeniably conclude, that the present state
Ecclesiastical is most convenient and best agreeing with the Civil.

A DIGRESSION DISCVSSING Some ordinary exceptions against Ecclesiastical
Officers.
THough none be more loath and fearful to come within the lists of
controversies; yet seeing all that I have already positiuely discoursed, is not
only controversed but also contradicted by these exceptions; I resolved to
dissolve and dispell them, least they should by a dark reflection cloud my
clear proceeding. And I am not a little confidenced in my purpose, when I
consider whose cause it is that I undertake, even the most able advocates of
the Church, such powerful pleaders as are infallibly sufficient to defend both
their cause and me their poor defendant; for they are absolutely able (if
their conscience would but dispense with their understanding) to make a bad
cause if not good, yet to put it in a good case by making it plausible, so that
I am encouraged to undertake it with this consideration; that where I am found
weak and wanting, they are sufficient and ready to succor and supply; if they
shall apprehend the exceptions peremptory and pertinent, and any impeachment to
their practice and power. As they that have made trial of their strength have
found, D. Couzius his apology for proceeding in high Commission.
though they were of the strongest and most popular party, which they the more
wondered at, since they knew they had but few friends, and themselves small in
number, especially in the beginning of the reformation when there was such
scarcity of Civilians, that the Universities took little notice of their
degrees or profession, or the Courts of their practice: but now we have a most
happy and hopeful increase, and it were to be wished that the land were more
stored with able Civilians, though they ^^e not pragmatiques; I mean that the
knowledge of the Civil law were more regarded, though the practice keep but
the same degree of respect; for then should we have more able Commonwealths
men at home, and more absolute Statse-men abroad; for all the nations round
about are ruled by the Civil law, as we are by the Common law: only they have
some particular decrees, manifestations, and sanctions, as we have statutes
and Acts of Parliament; and so by that law the treaties we make for matters in
question are to be decided by that law that which is determined by
consultation, and agreed upon, is to be concluded: so that it must needs be,
that he that is well seen in the Civil law is best able to treat with them
with more honor and less danger to the state, for in them there is only the
fear and danger of perfidiousnesse, whereas the other may want honesty and
ability both, though their instructions be never so punctually accommodated.
And this is one maine reason (as well as the Popes power) why many Deanes,
Bishops, and Lord Chancellours, who were Doctors of the Civil law were sent
Ambassadors, when the Nobility had not so much law and learning as now they
have; so that for this last present age we have not lost so much in treating
with France where the Civil law is most practiced, Com^ 11. li
as to confirm or continue the proverb which I find mentioned in Phil. de
Cominaeus; Paectio nulla inter Gallos and Anglos -- in which the French did not
get the better, adeoque proverbio dicitur apud Anglos, quoties cum Gallis
proelio certaverint, victores plerunque fuisse, quoties vero cum illis pacti
sint detrimentum semper aliquid accipisse, which was most verified from the
time of Edward the 3. to Queen Elizabeth, but it is probable their
overreaching was much helped forward by dishonesty, where they found any
little want of ability: but grant it were the disability of our agents,
especially in the ignorance of the proceedings and advantages of the Civil law
in bu^^^es of trans-action wherein the French were defendants and passive; yet
it was not any honorable advancement to them, though it were some small
disadvantage to us: for it is a disgrace for a Prince to stand strictly upon
terms, tricks, and turnings of law in the interpretation of treaties; as
Maurice Duke of Saxony told Charles the fifth, Carolus Molinaeus cons^^lio
secundo in causa Philip. Land. grave: Hassiae.
when contrary to agreement, he detained Philip Landgraue of Hessen; at ego
(says he) te tanquam Imperatorem, non tanquam iuris-consultum and legistam,
volo pactiones and foedera interpretari. But since treaties are too often so
interpreted, it is in all probability a great assurance of safety in treating
to understand the Civil law, at least in the proceedings; and hence it is as I
conceive that in France and Italy it is so much esteemed; so that in France
most of the ancient Nobility were students in it, and had amongst other
privileges, that they may take the degree of Bachelour at law in three years,
as it is plain in the pragmaticall sanction; which particular is also
confirmed by the Concordata Galliae, Prag. sanctio tit. de collationibus.
Concordat Galliae tit. idem.
by Leo the tenth; Bacchalaureo iuris Civilis si ex utroque nobilis, triennium
satis erit. In Italy also it has been highly esteemed, especially in the
first re^^iving of it under Lotharius secundus, in the year 1125: for he found
a copy of the Digest and gave it to the Pisans, which was then called litera
Pisana; but when the Florentines took Pisa (as Laurence de medicis told
Politian) it was translated to Florence and made Pandectae Florentinae; Angelus
Polit. epist. lib. 1. estist. 4.
ibi vero in curia loco celeberrimo summa religione servatur: and they did not
use in those days in the first erecting of their Dukedom, to esteem any
thing which they found not beneficial for the state. But I leave the
commendation of the knowledge of the Civil law to those that know it better,
and have found the help of it in long public practicing; and betake my self
to my undertakings, to discard some exceptions against the professors of it,
who are Officers practicing in Ecclesiastical affairs.

They are excepted against by some that are of the faction of irregular
Protestants; Exc^
that though the Church of England approve not the Geneva discipline, yet the
principal point is practiced in it; in these our Lay Elders: thus they seek
to defame our government by reporting it to be confused and wanting
uniformity. But to di^^^^ and discover this groundless exception, the very
supposition whereon it is grounded is absolutely false; for though we will not
deny that our Ecclesiastical Officers be Lay men, yet we will not grant them
to be Elders of the Church: we have no such Church Burgesses, neither do they
take any such Eldership upon them, since they know full well that it belongs
only to spiritual persons; which they confess and profess they are not: as
that profound Civilian Dr Couzins, D. (...) his a^ proce^ high sion. cap. 2
we are no spiritual persons as some term us, but Ecclesiastical: now in
my understanding there is as much difference betwixt a Spiritual person and
Ecclesiastical, as betwixt Ecclesiastes and Ecclesiasticus; the one of which
is Canonical, the other Apocryphal; though he be a Canonist, I dare without
any scruple grant them to be Lay men, not only because it takes away the
ground of the exception, but also because it is not any hinderance to their
being Ecclesiastical Officers; for the Cannon law which is very strict in this
point admits a threefold division of Ecclesiastical persons; as primo, in
sacris; secundo, in sacris and sacerdotio; tertio, nec in sacris, nec
sacerdotio, vt monachi and legistae ecclesiastici: and such do the chiefest
among them account themselves, for they are well contented to go for Commons
in the high court of Parliament. Yea a most eminent Chancellor of late
refused when his Bishop would have chosen him a member of the Convocation
house, and that because he held himself a Lay man; and so they live in our
particular Parishes as other Lay Parishioners, paying Church dues, and are
alike subject to the jurisdiction of their appointed Pastors in foro
conscientiae; and in thus doing they do declare their exact knowledge in the
Cannon law, and pure practice of the Civil: for by the Common law where
Doctores divini and humani are opposed, Guymer Comment: in prag: sanction:
proaemio. Brissonij Lexicon. 11.
Doctors of the Civil law, yea and Cannon also are counted humane, and Lay
Doctors: for the Clergy (as Brissonius defines it out of Suidas) is (...). But
fully to cast of this exception, I deny them to be Elders of our Church; for
Elders here I understand in relation to Church government, and in that sense
there are no Elders with us in our Church but Ordinaries; and our
Ecclesiastical Officers are not Ordinaries, neither do they usurp any such
power; but their modesties are many times forced to take the title and tune of
the title from some obnoxious fawning Clergy men, who are more sordidly slavish
then they would have them: so that though of discretion they will not say to
them as Tyberius did to the servile senate, Tacitus Annal. lib. 3 Extrav. fol.
22. tit. execrabilis,. caeterum. Linwood lib. 1. de sequestrationibus. S. Thom.
Smith de repub. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 8.
O homines ad servitutem paratos, yet they cannot choose but think so, for they
know that by the Cannon law there is no Ordinary June but a Bishop, per
Ordinarios jure intelligimus Episcopos, neither any by privilege and custom
but a Deane, or an Archdeacon. And they do as fully understand that in this
Church there are none but what the Cannon law allows: as S Thomas Smith in his
discourse of the Commonwealth of England, says, by an Ordinary we understand
a Bishop, or sometimes an Archdeacon or a Deane, who are so by privilege; or a
long prescribed custom. Now they are not Archdeacons nor Deanes as I would
they were, and many of them have been heretofore, as Petrus Blesensis
Archdeacon of Bath, who was Chancellor of Canterbury, and Chaplain to Henry
the second: for then this exception and all others would be of no force. But
they are now no such Ordinaries as are Church Elders with us, I will grant them
in a large sense to be Ordinaries, Cor pr^ tit.. Gla
(as Guymerus the pragmatique) Ordinarios late volo collatores beneficiorum,
and patronos Ecclesiasticos, (as Glanvill calls Patrons) advocatos Ecclesiae,
in such a large sense it is properly extended to these Ecclesiastical
Officers; but Ordinaries properly they are not, and that appears out of the
offices they execute in relation to these Ordinaries, for they are their
Deputies, Deligates, Vicars, Officialls, or Commissaries, which are officers
distinct and derived from their Ordinaries: of all these the Bishops Vicar has
most reason to be termed an Ordinary, and yet he is none; not only by the
Civil law which makes him a minister of his Ordinary, Vicarius est qui suo
Ordinan subministrat, Bri ver^ Pra con ve^ Par tali dict Du^ spec 1. t^ dele
Sir Ri^ of (...) and
but also by the Cannon law, (as Prateus) Vicarius and Ordinarius
distinguuntur, nam vicarius est quasi servus in peculio: (or as Suidas calls
him) a substitute, (...); and Panormitanus, jurisdictio Ordinaria non
extinguitur per mortem illius qui dat, jurisdictio vicarii est suspensa
suspenso Episcopo, and Durantus affirms as much; Vicarii nequeunt officia sua
exercere Episcopis eorum excommunicatis, and therefore they do well in
clayming no such power; as Sr Thomas Ridly learnedly discovering the original
and reason of their practice in the Church, concludes, that Civilians or rather
Legists who were anciently called Church Lawyers, or Ecclesiecdici, were
brought into the Church to direct Bishops; and the Chauncellours at this day
are the very same in office with them, being assistants of the Bishops in their
jurisdiction. Sir con tion jest^
And Sr Francis Bacon in his cautious consideration of Church government,
agrees with him in the approbation of a Bishops being attended by his
Chancellor, who should be learned in the Civil law for his better
instruction in points of formality, in the proceedings and courses of their
Courts: And for the same purpose should Deanes and Archdeacons have their
Officialls and Commissaries to enable them to run through the multiplicity of
causes, to cut off or shorten delays, which in all business, especially
Ecclesiastical, are tedious and odious: and indeed none are more able in this
case to assist them, and reduce causes into order, brevity, and paucity; as
Thomas Aquinas says, Thomas. Aquin. praefa^^ to his sums.
he compiled his sums to compose and compound controversies, take up and take
away all questions. And therefore I do not a little wonder at Dr Cowell who
was a most able Civilian, that he should account Commissaries or Officiales
foraneos, only useful in petty peculiars, D. Cowel. interpreta^^ verb.
Commissary. Duaren. de benef. and officijs Eccles.
exempt from the jurisdiction of the Archdeacon, otherwise to be superfluous
and a needless vexation and oppression to the Country: surely he meant it of
some such scandalous Courts as Duarenus (another learned Civillian) complains
of. Auditoria Vicariorum and officialium Episcoporum, quaecunque profana
tribunalia, imposturis and strophis forensibus, long superant: but let him
think what he will, I am sure we see of what good use they are, and yet they
are not Lay Elders of the Church.

Excep. 2. Is, that the power of jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, cannot be
granted to Civilians, that are mere Laymen.

I could soon answer this exception, by denying them to be mere Lay men, and
so I would, if I had no other way to avoid it. But I am willing to give them
satisfaction, and not to cavil, and therefore will answer punctually: and that
I may so do, and they so apprehend it, let them but consider with me a
twofold power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Linwood. lib. 5. tit. ne
praelati vicar. verb. ad firmam.
Ordinary, and Delegate; the later and lesser of which, may be lawfully granted
to them; especially, if we admit the differences and degrees of their
commission, which are approved and practiced in our Church government; both in
relation to the power that grants them, and in respect to the extent of the
grant. First for the power granting them, they are all originally derived from
the Crown; but some have their power more immediately, as the high Commission
have it under the broad Seal: others receive it more mediately, from their
Bishops, Deanes or Archdeacons: so for the largeness of the Commission, which
is ad vniversitatem causarum tanquam Ordinarius, as the audience of high
Commission (and not without good reason, since no cause is to be there
determined, at least not sentenced, without the consent of four of the Quorum,
which must be, as I am informed, Bishops:) There is also a special Commission
of Oyer and Terminer, in some particular causes; and lastly, a Commission,
which, according to Law, is restricta ad instantia, Linwoo^ tit. de verb. of^
alis.
which Linwood Official of Canterbury says, does belong officialibus
principalibus, which we call Chancellours: Yet I do not believe (by his
leave) that they are so restrained, as to a bare cognition, without a
definitive sentence, though the phrase, that is used to express business of
instance, be, matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance; for, Cognitio non est
jurisdictio, Cujaci^ orig. Iu^. Cons^
especially now since the Laws have ordered, that if they be not in sacred
orders, they must be assisted by a surrogate, who is a Minister, and he is to
pronounce sentence as principal Judge; which practice has made some of
opinion, that anciently they were assistant to the surrogate, as assessours;
which seems probable, because the exact knowledge of the Law is expected from
an assessour, not from the principal Judge (according to the most conscionable
Casuists:) Ignorantia juris non est peccatum in judice, sed est in assessore,
Navar^ Iudicis.
as the Masters of the Chancery, who are assessours to the Lord Chancellor or
Keeper, there is required exact knowledge, though not in the superior Judge,
as in the assessors of the Praetor amongst the Romans: Cuj^cius obser. lib. 23.
c. 40.
Si Praetor per imperitiam iuris iniquum ius statuerit, non punitur; assessor
eius punitur, quia adsessor se pro iurisperito agit.: So that though this
opinion be not true, because surrogates are not of such antiquity; yet I
persuade my self without any doubt, that they were, and still are tanquam
assistentes assessores Episcopis and Archidiaconis; though they have also a
delegated power. And this kind and degree of Ecclesiastical power may be
granted to them, though they be mere Laymen; and I believe our Church would
not have disliked the Geneva government so much, if they would have chosen such
for their Lay-Seigniours, as had knowledge in the Ecclesiastical Laws; as if
Doctor Hottoman, professor there, and Reader of the Civil Law, had been
joined with reverend Beza, then Divinity Reader.



This Exception is not peremptory, but dilatory and declinatory, full of
impertinent surplussage, urging nothing, or that which is false; for no man
will undertake to answer what they do, but what they should do: iure nostro
Ecclesiastico, I am sure iure nostro Canonico Anglicano, publicly known, and
by the old Canon Law which may here be practiced, (where it is not contrary to
the Laws of the Land) they are not to exercise any such power, 25. Hen. 8. c.
3. Summa bullarij in Pio 4.
as does personally belong to a Bishop, either as he is Dioecesane, or as he is
Ordinary, in puris spiritualibus: neither do I find, that ever any Vicar did
usurp or desire any such power, but only Cardinal Wolsie, who desired
Clement the seventh suo vicario universal in Francia, in ^ng^^terra, and in
Germania, mentre stava in prigione, Guic^. hist. li
his Vicar general in France, England and Germany during his imprisonment;
which he could not do by Law, being his Ordinary and suspended, if not ab
officio, yet a beneficio: and if it had been lawful, yet the Pope had
betrayed his weakness much to grant it, with that condition, during the time
of his imprisonment; for the Cardinal would without doubt have endeavored to
keep him there still, to continue his vicarship. And moreover this, I find
that by the Canon Law, sede vacant, the Deane or Chapter is successor, or
rather administratour to the Bishops in their jurisdiction, and guardian of the
spiritualties; and no marvel, for they are called fratres Episcopi, Cardinales
Papae; they can dispense in causis Episcopo reservatis, and call Convocations,
Laeliu^us de p^ capitu
to which the Bishops Vicar may not be admitted; and possunt condere and
revocare statuta. And during the life of the Bishop, the Archdeacon is his
Vicar iure (as Zerola) vicarius natus, Zerola Episc. Archi^
(as Hostiensis) which they understand in respect of jurisdiction in
spiritualibus; for not they, but the Archipresbyter is Vicar in divinis, which
is, in spiritualibus, in relation to the power of order: So that you see, they
take not any such ordinary power upon them, but leave it to the Bishops, and
their most natural and lawful Vicars in that power; Form^ tattor^ ^ensis.
and yet they may be their Vicars in Pontificalibus (as the Canonists express
it) which is, in those causes that belong to their Sees, as they have peculiar
and prerogative Courts; and such may be Laymen according to the most moderate
modern Decretists; Syndicos (says Duarenus) sieve defensores, Duar^ officijs
l. 1. c.
and apocrisiarios sieve responsales laicos posse esse; though by the old Canon
Law Vicarius Episcopi debet esse Clericus. And it is counted one of the
insolent rare actions of the Popes, causas Ecclesiasticas Laicis delegare: This
jurisdiction they may have without any trenching upon the office of a Bishop in
his personal jurisdiction, which I conceive ^^nnot be delegated to a lay
person; Durand. de orig. Iuris. Eccl. Con. 2.
being that jurisdiction, whereby he does exercise and execute his correctiue,
coercitiue, coactiue power, which is the instrument of his pastoral paternall
care over his Clergy, and proceeds from the power of consecrated order, and is
inseparably united to it: which power, I find fully, yet briefly expressed by
St Cyprian, speaking of a contumacious Deacon to his Bishop; Cypr. Epist.
Rogat. Episc.
he advises the Bishop, vigore Episcopalis cathedrae aut deponas eum aut
abstineas, either to degrade or suspend him; neither of these will a Lay
delegate do; yet I grant he may suspend, if not ab officio, yet a beneficio.
And for their visitations, which are an act of ordinary jurisdiction, they
perform them not ex officio, but by a special commission. And for the form
and force of their inquisition in them, it is not general concerning the
doctrine and manners of the Clergy, but directed and restrained according to
the Bishops Articles, Formula visit. Dioecesis Coloniensis.
and without requiring an oath of the party presented; visitatores
interrogabunt absque exactione iuramenti; yet I do not disaproue that an oath
should be required upon a fame, because it respects as much the purgation, as
the conviction of the jurant.

And for the sentence of excommunication, which some make the process of
spiritual Courts, in point of contumacy; I am not able, I confess, fully to
satisfy in that point, but I dare subscribe to what judicious Bishop Bilson
says of it, to clear it; who, I am sure, could and would say as much in the
behalf of Ecclesiastical officers as any Bishop of his time, who speaking of
the power of Excommunication, De perpetua guber. Eccl. cap. 14.
says, Nequaquam sibi clavium potestatem assumunt, sed poenam ob contumaciam
infligunt, qua omnes illae animadversiones continentur, quae legibus in eos
sancitae sunt, qui claves Ecclesiae temere contemnunt, quocunque nomine
appelletur, sive suspensio, sive condemnatio, aut excommunicatio nil refert,
dummodo ne potestatem hanc divino, sed humano iure sibi vendicent, nil causae
tunc est, quin Iudices civiles delinquentem in poenam Canonis incidisse
declarent. But the maine ground of these, and such like exceptions, is, because
Civilians are not in orders with us, as most Canonists be beyond the Seas,
(though they have no title, and are but Presbyteri Vtopiani, as Duarenus calls
such) if then our Ecclesiastical officers were all in orders, as some of them
are, then they could not with any reason except against them for Laymen, no
more then they can against the Pontificiall Canonists, who have far more
Ecclesiastical power, especially the modern Legists, and are as able to judge
of heresy, as the Duke of Bavaria under Zachary, who condemned Virgilius
Bishop of Saltzburge of heresy, because he affirmed, Aventi^ nal. lib.
that there were Antipodes; when as Isidorus Hispalensis was not condemned for
holding hell to be at the Antipodes, Tho. Aq suppl. qu Art. 9.
near three hundred years before. Yet these are the only men that are now
judges of heresy, which makes modest Melchior Canus complain, Melchio^ lib.
8. c^
Non video quonam consilio in cognitione haereseos, parts postremae, ne dicam
nullae theologis permittantur; jurisconsultis vero vel primae, vel etiam omnes.
When as with us, 1. Eliz.
not our Chancellours nor Commissaries, nor our Bishops alone may determine of
heresy: and yet I believe any of them have as infallible assurance of truth,
as immediate vocation, commission, assistance by inspiration, as all they; but
only they are in orders, ours are not; as the twelve auditors of the
overruling Court of the Rota are the Popes Chaplains by their office, (as
Lelius Zecchius de auditoribus Rotae) and so are those irrefragable
referendaries: and the Popes find great good in having them in orders; for you
shall not find, but the Canonists have always stood for the Popes prerogative;
but only in Concilio Pisano Guicciardine says) they that were for the
Council which was called against Julius secundus, by some of Lewis the
twelfthes faction, Guicc. hist. l. 9.
Che de canonisti autoritata del convocare i Concilii, nelle risedere
solamente, persona del Pontifice. But it was not so much the Canonists, as one
principal one, which was Philippus Decius of Millaine, where the Council
began, Car. Mol. annot. in Decij Consil. 37.
who defended the cause, as appears out of Carolus Molinaeus his Annotations
upon Decius counsels; so that the Popes knew what they did, when they showed
and granted so many favors and privileges to the University of Bononia; as
Gregory the ninth dedicates his Decretals to Bononia, so Boniface the eight his
Sext, and John the two and twentieth his Clementines, and Extravagants; thus
they are formally qualified by orders; and because our Ecclesiastical officers
are not so, some take and make these exceptions: so that I will conclude this
brief Digression, with this wish, not altogether void of hope: I would more of
our learned Civilians were Divines, Abbas Panorm. Lect. in Decr. 120.
or more of our judicious Divines Civilians, Cum Theologia and Ius Canonicum
fraternizent.

THE SECOND CONCLUSION. That under the dominion and protection of this Civil
State, this State Ecclesiastical is most likely to enjoy all those rights that
can any way belong unto it.
THough they that sit at the tops and stearnes of States, amongst all their
great and grave cares, do little regard the opinion or censure of private men,
since they are no bound to give a reason of their laws, no^ an account of
their actions, their administration being absolute. Yet if by these laws,
privat^ persons deserve and suffer public punishment, not onl for offering
private wrongs, but also for with-holdi^ particular rights: surely these
lawmakers and Administrators of justice, that will not suffer injuries
unpunished, will be so far from doing wrong, though it be but to poor and
private men, that they will fear, though they cannot fly the suspicion of it,
and be as careful to observe a just and geometrical proportion in the
distribution of dues and duties. Now if private and common subjects are not
only secure from injuries, but also according to due desert publicly
regarded, and rewarded for their particular service to the commonwealth,
though their aim be but at their own personal and private profit; one may
safely conjecture, that the public and politic parts and pillars, the
distinct and settled societies of that State shall be as strongly secured from
detriment by wrongs, and as freely and fully favored by advancement in rights.
Yea it may be fully presumed, where a State is so framed, that they are all
united in one head, without dependence and subordination to each other. As in a
Monarchy, which with an equal impartial proportion, gives protection,
distributes rewards; when as if their union and communion be continued by a
collatorall relation, and mutualitie of members, their equality of power and
desert would breed emulation, if not envy and indignation, and make them
ungrateful to each other, if they be not injurious. (...) Arist. lib. 2. c. 12.
As it is where the government is Aristocraticall, which may be seen in the
envious ostracismes of the Athenian, Ephesian, Venetian States: Thucydides
historicus in exilium pulsus erat, quae fortuna optimo cuique Optimatum Athenis
accidere solet, (as Paulus Iovius says of the Venetian commonwealth. Cicero
de Orat. lib. 2.
) Neminem temere ex Optimatibus qui vel insigni virtute, vel spiritu in
gerendis rebus, caeteris antecellat, potentem and clarum fieri patiuntur.
Iovius Histor. lib. 1. Machi vel. disc^r. l. 1 c. 29.
So that it is but a perverse and peevish paradox in Machivell, to hold, that a
princely Monarch uses to be more ungrateful, than free and popular States,
when as they either return malice and mischief in reward of singular merits;
or if suspicion, which he makes one ground of ingratitude, do not make them,
at least to suspend them by a relegation; yet avarice, which is his other
ground, will make them really ungrateful, though formally they pretend a
reward. For if they give any thing, it will not be worth the taking, in statu
populari and liberis civitatibus, praemia liberalitatis plus habent honoris
quam vtilitatis; they bestow nothing but vain, vanishing, Bodi^ pub^
empty, and aerie titles, which are blown up, blown out, and blown away with
the breath and voice of the vulgar that gave them, so that they do him that is
gratifyed no right and real good: Aris^ 2. ca^
(...); it is not gratifying to give things that are contemptible, for no man
will confess that he has need of them, but these toyish titles do men more
harm then their ingratitude could. For titles without proportionable estates;
do not only fall under the miserable succor of other men's pity, but are
also a temptation to provoke all men to contemn them. But one maine reason of
this difference in rewarding is, that Aristocracies respect themselves in it,
when as a Monarch to whom all give due and loyal respects, does powerfully
protect and royally reward with respect to all. But as all our modern
Monarchies are distinguished into societies, as in some Kingdoms there are
five States; Thesa^ Apotel
as in Denmark, France, and in Britain three, which as they are subordinate
and inferior one to another, so the supreme Governor does regard and respect
them with different degrees of favor and care, with consideration of what
consequence they are to him, and so proportions pensions, and of what need they
stand of him; and so affords protection, searching into the several
circumstances of their employments and abilities, as of what use they are in
point of necessity, utility, and honor. Now all these three States are
necessary, profitable, and for honor of the Prince, but not equally at any
time, nor constantly at all times; neither in respect of peace or war,
domestique or foreign: so that as one state does make it self more necessary
in relation to an extraordinary time of need, so another may be more
profitable in the continual supplying of ordinary expenses: and the third may
be more for the honor of a King, both in ordinary and extraordinary actions.
Now a King that preferres his honor before his profit, at all times will more
respect that state which stands strongest for his honor at all times, then
that which is more profitable at all times; so will he more esteem that which
certainly supplies his ordinary continual charges, then that which may be
more necessary, si coelum ruat, upon an extraordinary unlooked for occasion:
because wisdom is not employed in preventing, and providing against what may
be in possibility, but against what is likely in probability: so that in the
natural body though there be more continual intercourse and mutuation of
needful supplies reciprocally betwixt the head and the heart, especially from
the heart: yet those external members that are nearest united to the head,
have more external honor, as the eyes, the ears: so in the body politic,
there is a constant interchange of succors and supplies between the state
Civil and Ecclesiastical, His Majesty's instructions to the Bishops. 1626.
yet the state of the Nobility especially taken for the Council, is of
highest assistance, which are as it were the eyes and ears of the King in
public providence and intelligence, (...). Zetzes Histor. Clibias. 1.
(as Dion Chrysostomus) (...).

These principal Peers that are so closely united to the head, that they
communicate with it in the most secret and serious advisings, deservedly enjoy
the fairest fortunes and favors; for it is great reason that Kings should
heap and bestow upon the watch-towers of the state the greatest and highest
honors in the state: that as they are nearest, so they may be dearest, being
his right trusty and well beloved Councillors. And their employment is no more
immediately eminent then the trust of it troublesome and dangerous.

2 And the next state in high estimation with Christian Protentates, and with
many the most esteemed in all respects is their Clergy, the state
Ecclesiastical; upon which they have heaped favors to the very exhausting of
their treasures. Tac^ lib. 2
Imperium amore religionis semetipsum exhausisse, etc. I am not able to reach
the reason in point of state, of that extraordinary extravagant large
liberality: but thus much I am able to compass and conceive, and shall
endeavor to make it plain; that whatsoever right and reason any King in
Europe has had for this 400 years to uphold his Clergy, and confer favors
and honors upon it; our present supreme head of our Civil state has all
that right, and more reason to be as royally indulgent to our present state
Ecclesiastical, as none can deny: but as he that has chiefty of power over
the whole body of the Commonwealth, may rightly and justly favor, bestow
rewards, privileges and power upon any public society, or private person in
the same: so none will affirm that all that have supreme power have the same
equality of right, to endow with privileges, or enrich with rewards; because
that all do grant that all Kings have not Dominion in the same equal altitude
and latitude, and so cannot so highly advance in privileges, least they
surmount their petty prerogative: nor so largely give them power and revenewes,
lest their extention shorten their own. And the grounds of this inequality
are diverse, in handling of which I will neither follow Machivell, nor Iunius
Brutus; because I find them to run into two extremes, the one granting it
to all out of the looseness of a wanton wit; the other denying it to all,
being carried by the stream of innumerous particular authorities; and that
because, as the other wanted conscience, so he wanted experience: or rather
because Machivell lived when all Princes in Italy claimed and usurped equal
and full power, and so writ what they did, not what they should do; and Brutus
might endeavor to diminish the power of all, because he would not have the
French King have so much, which he might think too much for the present: if
he considered it with the times before Lewis the eleventh, wherein as the
Peers and Parliaments had too much, so the Kings had too little: so that their
difference of Dominion is not according to that fulness Princes can make it
when they are once in possession of a Kingdom; nor according to that
diminution wherewith disloyal subjects impair it, when they threaten and
raise a rebellion; but it is according to the several means whereby they
attain or obtain their Kingdom. Now all supreme Dominion in a Monarchy is
attained by conquest or succession, or obtained by election: Kings that come to
it by the right of conquest may have as much power as they will take; they make
their own Charters: those that come to it by succession have as much power as
their ancestors, accepting of such laws as they find; those that have it by
bequest, Cujacius observe. lib. 7. cap. 7.
and are adopted heirs (for adoption is good by last will and testament) have
the same right that a natural successor has, if the adoption stand good.
Hottoman. illustr. quaest. 1.
As the Kingdom of France was given to Edward the third by Charles the sixth:
but those that are called to it only by election, their power is restrained
and curbed with cautionary conditions, and stands limited by them.

Now if all these have great power in their supreme government, by any one of
these rights to attain a Kingdom; surely he that has it by all these rights
conjoined, has more power then any has that is entitled to it but by one,
Brissonius de Regno Persico. lib. 1.
especially by election. But our present gracious Sovereign has it by lineall
succession from an absolute Conqueror, which was confirmed to his father of
pious memory, by the Nuncupatiue will of his sacred predecessor, Anno Iacobi: A
just recogni^on of an undoubted succession.
who then adopted him, and all was made sure unto him by the elective assent of
the supreme Nobility, without any crosse-course conditions, (as falls out)
when the soldiers or people elect. And as it is plain that he holds by all
these, so I do conceive I could make it appear, that most Kings in
Christendom hold primarily and principally but by one of these, and that of
least power. But that I am loath to touch the ticklish and tender titles of
foreign Potentates; neither will I speak any thing of them as their states
now stand, but only in a word show what anciently they were: for in my poor
judgment their government may be as good and lawful, if they have had the
power and opportunity to cast off and free themselves from these bridles and
curbes of government: for not the most limited power, but the best rectified is
safest both for Prince and people.

3 To show then how it was with them heretofore, and to begin with the Empire
after it was translated to the Almaine. Long has that Empire continued by the
election of the high Chamber of the Septem-viri, the seven selected Electors
of Germany; and some of the best Emperors have so well liked it, that they
have not only been willing to take the promissarie oath containing diverse
strict conditions, but have also granted them new free Charters; and large
prerogatives; as Charles the 4. in his Bulla aurea, and so held so loose and
light a hand over them, that one of the Electors, the Bishop of Ments, in the
Council at Franckford, said, the government was Aristocraticall, which might
be well taken if he meant it with reference to the Council. Clap Arca lib. 5
Com^ 10. (...) Gra^ cia l. man^ Guic hist. Iere^
The Kingdom of France seems not to have been anciently so absolute and
unrestrained as now it is, for the twelve Peers of France, qui sunt ut in
Germania principes electores, had not only royal privileges, and did not owe
simple subjection, but respective homage; and had a regal authority in their
several Provinces, and the command of the chief forces: but also had the
power, if not to elect their King, (as Nauclerus says) and as it seems true,
because they have deposed them; yet to determine, when there is no great doubt
who shall succeed: and their setting always upon an heir male (which is the
course of elective state) shows it to be somewhat elective; for the
restraining of it to the heir male, did not primarily proceed from the Salique
law, because many of their Kings have been Lorraines; Hottoman. apollogia
Catholica.. 6.
which Dukes, (the French Civilians say) do not observe, nor are under the
Salique law: but if it be not elective, it seems not to be so clear a
succession, because it is a masculine feud entayled upon the heir male: yea
the predominant extravigant power of the Parisian Parliament seems to
intimate, that the ancient state was not so free and absolute a Monarchy; for
they called in the Kings edicts, sent forth the contrary: and no appeal lay
from their sentence. Contra illud tantum supplicare licet, a petition of right
only was permitted; Gymerus Comment. in prag. sanct. tit. de autoritate
Conciliorum.
so that this state which is most absolute of all others, seeemes to have been
anciently not so free and uncontroleable in its government, as a free Monarchy
ought to be. The next is the Kingdom of Spain, which has of old been so
disquieted with the continual incursions and invasions of the Moors and
Saracens from the South, and Goths from the North, that it has scarce time to
settle, as water tossed. But when it did pitch upon the form of a Monarchy,
it was elective, as appears out of the Council of Tolledo; Con^il. Toletan.
5. cap. 3.
Si quis ad Regiae Majestatis pervenire fastigia ambit absque electione
nobilitatis Anathema sit: yea and in their latter days their form of
inauguration, does import and imply the same: for thus it runs, Nos qui vale
mos, tanto comme vos, y podemos mas quae vos, vos elegemos. Hieronymus de
Blanca de Hist. ^egamine.
Rey, con estas, y estas conditiones, intra vos, y nos: yea and the Justice of
Aragon has had as much power as ever the Parliament of Paris; as in plain,
not only in their unlimited immunities, but also the power they used against
the Kings edicts: as may be seen in their writs, called los manifestados, y
iure firmos; from which power, Idem Thua
though the Inquisition have freed the Kings since Fardinando: yet I do not
conceive how that state should be more free then before, because it is under
the power of a tyrannical Inquisition. So that the Kings of Spain had done
more providently in preventing their prevailing greatness, if we consider
their domestique freedom in government; though their advancement may advantage
them to bring foreign states under their servitude. But it was hard to hinder
them from at least so much power as they were able to take from the other, so
that Tullie had no great reason to ask Atticus, (and that in Greek as a
secret, Ad A 9. ep
not to be understood of any that should intercept his letters) (...), few
doubt it, and this may be most unquestionable with Spain, witness Naples and
Millaine. These Inqiusitors are like Ephori in the Spartaine republique, whose
Kings are observed to have the most restrained power: Thu^
for the chief of these Inquisitors has a great power over the King in his
own Court. Inquisitor generalis, qui Aulam Regiam sequitur, These lit.
cum adjunctis conciliarijs Ecclesiastici ordinis potestatem contra ipsum Regem
vsurpari potest: so that by all this it is plain, that the Spanish Monarchy
has not long been a free Monarchy at home. But that which makes most, to
prove these states not absolute, is because an appeal will lie from any of
them to the Optimates and orders of their Kingdoms, for extrema provocatio is
one principle; inter summa iura imperii: Clap Arc^ lib.
In imperio tamen Germanico, (vt testantur pragmatici) ad sacram and supernam
Cameram provocatur, apud Gallos ad octo curias matores, apud Hispanos ad
quatuor curias; even as a general Council is above the Pope being elective.
As for the other states of European Monarchies, without all question they are
at this present elective; as Poland which made their King Miecislaus send
Lampartus Bishop of Cracovia to Pope Benedict the seventh, vt Regem se
Polonorum and posteros suos esse iuberet, Herbert. histor. Poloniae lib. 1.
sed ea res propter iustas causas, ad aliquod tempus dilata fuit: yea, it was
never obtained, but it still continues elective; Moderata est principis
Poloniae potestas, Thuaenus hist. lib. 50^.
quia non naturae legibus in paternum regnum succedit, sed communibus
suffragiis senatorii and equestris ordinis and publica exclamatione nobilitatis
eligitur. Hungary also is elective, although the Spaniard has intailed it upon
the match with the Infanta, which will easily be cut off, and suffer a
recovery into the former freedom. In Hungaria liberam habent electionem,
Cominaeus lib. 10. Coment.
and inde ab eius morte proceri Budae convenient: I might show the like of
Denmark, but no more of that, I know not how this may be taken; but I hope
well, because in this I deliver only what is licenced intelligence, even as
Honorius and Theodosius did interdict, ne alicuius regni arcana scrutarentur;
Guiccardino Hypomneses Polit. 106.
but it was with this Proviso: Legatus tamen reversus omnia narrare debet.

4 These instances are sufficient to prove that our present Prince has most
irresistable power, and so most unrestrained right to favor, and freely bestow
immunities, privileges, and revenewes upon any single society, or singular
person within his Dominions. Now the next thing to be prooved is, that as he
has more right to show favor to what state he will; so he has more reason
then they all to favor his Clergy most. This government of our King is not
more free in it self then it is freely and willingly sustained; which shows
that it is the ancient equal, and as it were the most natural government of
this Island, and therefore the power is most right; because naturallized by
custom when as in other Kingdoms, yea in many petty particular states; that
little power they have improoved by force, they keep and exercise by the same
means. Hence it is that they dare only trust forrainers to be their guards:
as the French have the Scots, and Suitzers; the Dukes of Florence, the low
Dutch, which choice does either proceed from tyranny in the Kings, or
perfidiousnes in the nation, (...), as for instance, Arist. R 1. cap.
the first Dukes of Florence were esteemed no less, for it was libell-wise
written over the door of Cosmus, De Medices (the first Duke) where he was
sick, and took physic, qui Medice vivit, misere vivit, which they understood
of the Medicean tyranny, both in respect of his fears, and their wrongs in
his oppression. And in this age there were some, that would have brought an
Italian guard into France and Scotland, but it was when they aspired to usurp
them both; Thuan^ lib. 23.
Guisiani Italorum custodias quod assuetis negotiis suis, non satis fiderent,
adhibent, sui potius quam regni, aut regis munimento; when as our Kings have
found out by long experience that to be true, which Dion Chrysostom told
Trajane the Emperor, Dion Ch (...).
(...), so that they regard no guard, but the love of the subject. But to
return: It is no small encouragement to me, before I argue it in any point,
and a strong argument for me, that a sacred Sovereign has and does prove it
true, in his most royal and religious practice. For I do not believe, that
there has been any Emperor, Monarch, or Potentate since Charles the first
and the great, that did ever so truly and constantly favor, and carefully
protect a poor Clergy as he has done. But let us consider what great reason
of this favor there is: wherein I will not search vainly into his Majesty's
particular reasons, for I should not be able to find them out, because a Kings
heart is not to be sounded and searched by a private head, that is not able to
conceive the height of their ends: but I will discourse of it a he is our
King; ^f from a single relation, there do arise as singular respect, surely a
double portion of respect will follow a double relation. Now this
Aristocraticall Clergy have not only relation to their Prince, as he is a
crowned King and they his lawful subjects, but also as he is the Lords
anointed, defender of the faith, according to his just title (as his Majesty
pleases to speak in his declaration before the Articles.) For they also are
the Lords anointed, delivering that faith; and the Primate of them, the
immediate instrument of his consecration; so that as by the crowning, they are
by right his subjects, so this annoynting of God, superinduceth a brotherhood
betwixt Kings and Bishops (as Sr Francis Bacon in his Book to King James) for
this relation is only ancient in our Kings amongst the Princes of
Christendom; for though, as our Sovereign is crowned by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, so the Emperors when they were Kings of France, began to be
anointed and crowned by the Archbishops of Mentz, Collen, and Trier, as they
were Emperors; and by the Archbishop of Rhemes, as they were Kings of France.
Yet the Kings of France of the first line, at least, were not anointed (as one
of the freest Historians confesses) De la primiere Lignee oinct ny sacre a
Rhemes. Girarddu Hallon des affo^^es l. 2.
And though the Kings of Spain are crowned by the Archbishop of Tolledo, the
Kings of Denmark by the Archbishop of Vpsale, the Kings of Polonia by the
Archbishop of Guesire, the Kings of Hungary by the Archbishop of Strigon,
the Kings of Navarre by the Bishop of Pampolune, yet none of them were
anciently anointed. Now it cannot be denied, but as this real relation does
more peculiar and appropriate the State Ecclesiastic to our King, Vid. Legibus
saucti Edvardi.
so it makes him not only the supreme head and governor, but also the chief
guide and guardian: for by it he is more than a mere Layman; he is a mixed
person, having supreme Ecclesiastic as well as Civil government, Reges
sancto oleo vncti sunt spiritualis iurisdictionis capaces. Which sentence was
applied to our King, in the time of Edward the third: 33. Ec^ Aid l^ Gryme 12..
And Guymer in his Comment on the pragmaticall sanction of France, is
peremptory quod Reges inuncti non sunt meri Laici; and adds, inde Reges
Angliae conferunt beneficia. So that by this is there some addition granted to
the power of Princes over the Church. Though the old gloss upon the
Clementines avouch, quod vnctio nil addit ad potestatem Imperatoris, which the
Gregorian edition of the Common Law did well to dislike, Cleme^ tit. 6. Regis.
but they should have done better, not to have given a worse. And if it add to
their power over the Church, then as they have more right by it, so they have
more reason from it to do what good they please for the Clergy. So that, do
but consider the quality and qualifications of our Kings person, to do for his
Clergy, and you will say, he has greatest reason of any Prince. Consider
again the reasons on the part of the present State Ecclesiastical, and you
shall find, that they deserve more of their Prince, than any Clergy these
four hundred years.

. 5. But I must presuppose before that will be granted, that our Monarch of
great Britain has not any reason to give or bestow means and revenues upon
any foreign State Ecclesiastical. No Prince has reason to bestow ^is free
favors upon any, over whom he has (for the present) no right to rule, nor
has heretofore promised it, neither by himself, or by his predecessors, and
thereby bound himsesfe to farther and favor them. So that, though the Roman
Clergy does claim and clamor for revenues and privileges from our King, yet
as they have no right to claim them, so they have no reason to expect them:
for they are so far from being his deserving domestic subjects, that they
are his deadly enemies, though they be imbred and homebred. They have not then
any right; for neither our K. nor any of his lawful predecessors, did ever
bind themselves to any such performances. Later and better learned writers of
the Romish faction, finding by the careful and curious examination of sundry
passages in infinite interpreters, how hard a thing it was, to prove their
universal supremacy in temporalibus, by direct evidence out of Gods word,
resolve to prove it by Charter-grant, and privilege from Princes pieties, as
Augustinus Steucus (Librarian to Pope Paul the third) sets down the claim the
Pope laid to all the kingdoms in Christendom, grounding all from the
particular grants from the Kings, but especially Boniface the eights letter of
Demands. As for instance, from Constantine the first and the best, one Phocas
the first and the worst, from the universal gifts of those universal
Emperors, they ground a general right in all kingdoms. The Bononian
Canonists deal cunningly, and seem to deal ingenuously, playing the
sophisters more than the sycophants in this point, discoursing of this donation
of Constantine; for they lay it down as a presupposed presumption in the Law:
That there is such a true deed, notwithstanding there be no mention made of it
in any part of the sincere Civil Law. Sed quae notabiliter fiunt, specialiter
notanda sunt. But they never question it de facto, but enquire quo iure, and,
an sit revocabile; and since they do not full affirm, that he gave it up ^
will not so much as show the falsitie of it, but refer all to the most
judicious and modestly moderate amongst them. But for Phocas his grant, Cov^^^u
vias (...). quest. c. 1 mem. 9. Decius Consil. 130.
a faithless usurping tyrant, I leave it to be judged of, by those that choose
to measure claims and titles, by the line of equity, and not by the Last of
ambition. Yet thus I will infer against it, that a Charter granted as this
was, chiefly upon a ground of cunning, with a purpose to maintain a plot, by
party, which was undertaken and begun by fraud, might have been after
revoaked by himself, or anulled or repealed by his successors. And farther I
say, that though this grant were authentic in all points, yet the Popes could
have no right to this kingdom by it, because this kingdom was excluded from
the care, protection and providence of the Roman Empire, near two hundred
years before Phocas. For Aelius L. Lieutenant for Valentimanus in the parts of
France, Poly^ cap. 1
sent word to the Britains, that they were to look for no more aid from the
Empire, which was fallen into faction, scarce able to support it self, being
thus abandoned, all laws did free them from duty and dependence. Baron nal. 4
But to make these general grants the stronger, they pretend particular grants
from our own Kings, as from Ina King of the West Saxons, that was indeed
religious, and from King John, that was impious, as well sans foye, as his
title was sans terre (as the King of France, Math 1216.
Philip the second said) Johannes nunquam fuit verus Rex; neither of these
bind our State; for ^he Peter Pence contributed to Rome by Ina, are called in
the laws of Conatus, Larga Regis benignitas: and in the abstract (which is the
best of the confessors and conquerours decrees) Regis Eleemosynae, which
imports not due nor duty, but charity, and the Popes to be his beads-man, not
the King to be his homager. There were many manifest nullities in King John's
grant, for he had no right to hold the Kingdom, and if he had held it by
right, yet he could not grant any thing in prejudice of the whole State,
without the consent Regni vniversitatis, (as Matthew Paris terms the
Parliament) and a third mullitie is in the force of the grant, where,
whatsoever is passed in the body of the grant, is resumed by this proviso in
the conclusion, Math. ibidem
Salvis nobis and haeredibus nostris, Iustitiis liberalitatibus and regalibus
nostris: which being luckily inserted salues all, and makes it absolutely void.
But the maine grant which Baronius relies upon, is a donation from Ethelulphus
King of the West Saxons which seems very lawful, if it were (as he says)
salubri consilio Episcoporum and Principum, Baron. Annal. Anno. 854.
but yet that deed (if we free it from being forged) was void, if you do but
consider amongst many other things, the incompetencie and incapacitie of the
person, to whom the deed was made. Now Baronius is peremptory, that it was made
to the immediate successor of Leo the fourth, which according to all the
truest writers of the Popes lives, was John the eight, which they conclude was
a woman fu vna donna natio de Inghilterra che vacata la sede Apostolica, Petro
de Mexia della silva cap, 9.
per la morte di Leon quarto, fu eletta per sonno Pontifice di Roma (as Petro
de Mexia) and Boccacio de las mugeres illustres: the King might perhaps have
done much for his country woman, if he had known it, but she was not capable
to receive such a deed to her use, and therefore, the Iurists have reason to
make this question, Hottoman. quaest. illust. 17.
Vtrum acta Iohannis octavi in papatu rata esse debent: And if what she did
was void, what was done for her i^ not firm, being it was given, supposing
she was capable. So it is plain, that this engine is not able to uphold this
claim, being so loose, and hanging together in the joints like sick men's
dreams, showing their inconsiderate inconstant humors, their proofs being as
weak as their imagination is strong, all standing upon slender supposals,
particular interest, making partial. But they have another ground for a
presumption of their right, because some poor oppressed Princes have desired
to hold their kingdoms from them, as some usurpers sought to obtain dominions
by their gift, who depose Kings, that they may dispose of their kingdoms. But
this is nothing, and they stand not upon it, but when they have nothing else to
say. I do not by this go about to deny, that our Kings have been bountiful
Benefactors to the Roman Clergy, but this only I stand upon, that they have
no reason to continue so still, since they were never lawfully bound to it.
Neither do I deny, that any Prince should confer favors upon some foreign
Ecclesiastical State with this caution, that he be not prejudiced by the
kindness, and may have so good use of their thankfulness: As suppose any
Prince should be called into Germany, or Italy, Dies nu^ transit, (...) aliquod
p^ fecerit, s^ vt Aera^ non eve^ (vt de Se^ Lampr.
or any other kingdom, by an oppressed State Ecclesiastical, that Prince may
do royally to invest them into their former spiritual possessions, and yet
never impoverish or inslaue his own kingdom to them, and also bind them to
him for protection. Thus did Pipine, Charles the great, Lodovicus pius, they
releeved the Roman Clergy, and bestowed very much upon them in large
territories, but they gave them nothing in France, but only what they
recovered for them in Italy: it is then evident, Guicc li hist. Ita^
that our King has no reason to bestow honor or power, revenues or
privileges upon any foreign State Ecclesiastical; and it is as plain, that
he has the greatest reason of any Prince in Christendom to bestow them all
upon his own domestic Clergy.

. 6. The Nobility and the Clergy are the prime pillars of a Monarchy, and the
Communaltie is the ground whereon they stand. And this they well know that
intend the ruin of it, for they will be sure to strike at these two props,
knowing that then it will fall, and the ground and foundation remain to them
to erect anew; (as Ball a Mass Priest, Chaplain to Wat Tyler, advised his
chieftane to destroy all the Clergy and Nobility; so Garnet did the Traitors
in the powder plot, (as the Earl of Northampton well observes:) and therefore
Philip the second of Spain, who was seldom in an error about the upholding
or enlarging a Monarchy, advises his son Philip the third, to stick fast to
the Clergy, los Clerigos amigo, as I have been; but yet so, as you disregard
not the Nobility, otherwise they will hate you, and envy them, and ruin all.
Now if the Kings of Spain have reason so highly to favor their Clergy, as to
fear, least their kindness to them, should kindle indignation in the
Nobility; surely our Prince has more reason so highly to succor his Clergy,
as that it may not be the object of the contempt of the vulgar. For the Clergy
of Spain and all the Romish faction are not simply subject to them, but deny
Civil obedience always to their Prince, where Canonical obedience commands
the contrary, or privileges above it; when as our Clergy, are as true
subjects as any State, and renounce all obedience to any other Potentate. So
that this hearty adherence to his Majesty, is one reason, yea they bestow all
their labors in Gods service, only in dominions expect favor from none but
his highness; and they are more beneficial to their King than any Clergy in
Christendom to his native Prince, or any State in this kingdom to the Crown.
For though the revenues of other Clergies, as of Spain, be infinitely above
ours, Nicholaus Ol^ev^^ de regno Hispaniae.
as one of their Historians, Opes Ecclesiasticorum paene aequales sunt
secularium vna cum Regis. Yet they are not so constantly beneficial to the
King, but to the Pope: and if the King get any good sum or subsidy out of
them, it is either la cruzada, or tenths called el excusado, granted to him by
the Popes indulgence; or if he cannot procure a Bull of faculty, he must get
all they give by striving and force (as Cardinal de Ossat in his letter to
Henry 4. Ossatns epist. 274.
of France speaks of Philip the thirds sacrilege.) Rex Hispaniae omnem
argenteam supellectilem Ecclesiarum and Ecclesiasticorum sacrilega manu
vsurpare tentat: when as our Clergy, which have not the tyth of the tenth part
of that means is not only now and then profitable in small matters. And if
Francis 1. believed that for a great kindness from Pope Leo the tenth, in their
conference at the interview, to have the tenths of Ecclesiastical livings in
France for one year; Guicc. hist. lib. 12.
as Guicciardine in a judicious sleighting of the favor: Promise se il
Pontifice, al re dargli faculta, di riscuotere, per un anno la decima delle
cheise, del Reame, de Francia that the King took the proposal into
consideration, and communicated it to his Council; who thought it a great
benefit if he might have them, non secundum antiquum valorem beneficiorum,
Concord^ liae tit. d libus.
but as they are improved; surely a far greater benefit it is to have the
tenth every year: Subsides most years, and first fruits the first year, and
that not according to the present value which is much fallen from the ancient
revenewes, but according to the Popes books, in most, when as Ecclesiastical
preferments are abated half in half. So that as all other states are more
charged, so their revenewes are improved accordingly; but the means of the
Clergy is much impaired, and yet their charges increased in many things; in
all things keep the old rate, so that notwithstanding the poverty (as S
Nicholas Bacon at the Council table) we have no reason to exact or expect any
subsidy from the spirituality, who are so exhausted; yet it is constantly the
most beneficial state of this Realm to the Crown, both in ordinary and
extraordinary revenewes. In these two considerations amongst many, we see they
deserve much, and there is one thing that makes it more safe for our King to
bestow greater honor and privileges upon them, then any other Prince; which
is, because he has not the reason to suspect them of ambitions aspiring to a
Monarchy, since they have cast off their Church Monarchies, as the Romans
never suspected any of a tyrannical usurpation, after they had by one consent
cast out the Kings: so that though the Pope seem to favor the Clergy upon
good reason, yet our King has as much, and this reason more then the Pope
has, for he has not only all the power of jurisdiction the Pope had over
them, 1. Eliz.
but also the revenewes also the Pope had from them: and yet is without fear
and danger of being rebelled against by them, or dis-throned. But in one thing
it is more capable of a royal Potentates bounty and protection, then any
foreign Clergy is, in respect of its own Civil supreme head, or any state
in our own Kingdom is of our King; and that is, that it is so poor and
obvious to injuries, that it will make the ordinary bounty of a Prince
magnificent, and make his power long, and delight to protect such an innocent
state, being neither able to resist, nor strong to endure and suffer wrongs:
thus from the power of Dominion passes the influence of protection.

THE THIRD CONCLUSION. That all the rights and respects that the state
Ecclesiastical enjoyes or desires are originally derived from their relation
and dependence on the Civil.
HE that has public power and an opportunity to do a great good turn for
endearing a private friend that depends upon him, will have much ado to
forbear to do it, though the weal public suffer some detriment by it. Yet
if his friend do so much tender the public good, that he will not desire any
thing to the prejudice of it; surely then the public person out of his
engagements and respects to the public good, will leave off his present
purpose and pleasure his favorite in some things that may do him good, and the
Commonwealth no harm. Even so our supreme Regent of great Britain, has
great and transcendent power, and never wants an opportunity to do good, and
bestow favors upon the well deserving state of the Clergy; and it were
impossible for him to hold his royal bountiful hand, if this Clergy should
not in all its petitions; consider the public good, apprehending it self as
a member of the Civil state. And hence it is, that though the King has more
power then I believe was ever tried, or can be defined, to do his Clergy
good, yet they have not any thing conferred upon them; which is not according
to the laws, customs, and liberties of this Commonwealth. All that the state
Ecclesiastical enjoyes, belongs to it as to a principal member of the body
politic; and is derived to it from the supreme Civil head on which it does
depend, and in whom it is united to the Civil state. It is no debasing or
derogation to a spiritualitie, to be thus subject to the Dominion of a sacred
Sovereign; for though servitude according to the Civilians proceed not from
the law of nature, but of Nations, or at lest from nature corrupted, (as the
Schools) yet orderly subjection and superiority proceed from the instinct of
pure nature: for in Heaven there is order amongst the blessed Angels, and in
the state of innocence there was superiority, not only betwixt man and all
other creatures, but also betwixt man and woman; and had they lived in Paradise
till there had been father and son, there should have been Patria potestas,
or else the fifth Commandment is not moral: and when there had been many
families, there must necessarily have been Regiae potestas, or else the best
and most happy life must have been without the greatest happiness of life,
which is order. Now the superiority of our Prince over his Clergy is not an
enslaving tyranny, but a sweet and a lawful Soveraigntie, which government as
it is due, so it is our duty to obey it; for government and obedience are
relatiues of equal extent. And as it is no disparagement to the state
Ecclesiastical to be subject to our supreme Magistrate, so it is great
benefit to the Clergy, and a satisfaction to the Laytie, that all the rights
and respects that they enjoy or desire, are derived from that Prince whom both
so willingly obey.

2 All that the state Ecclesiastical does enjoy or claim, may be reduced to
these two heads; of power, and of honor: and they derive these from one sole
supreme governor, who is fully qualified by his personal eminent authority,
to transfer and confer these rights and respects to them, and upon them:
for as these two the power and honor of the Clergy are inseparably derived
from the supreme Sovereign, then in being, and not communicable to any other
state: so the particular powers and regalities by which they are more
especially conveyed; are inseparably and incommunicably appropriated to his
royal person. As for instance, the power of the state of the Clergy is
originally derived from his Ecclesiastical supremacy, the honors from his
laws and royal prerogative. All Kings I confess have not Ecclesiastical
government, and that because many give up their right; some know it not, as
many of our Kings for many years were bereaved of it, in whole, or in some
principal parts, by giving and granting to the Pope an inch in breadth with
them, and he taking an ell in height above them. But when the first defender of
the faith Henry the eighth was weary of the weight of that intolerable
usurpation, especially when he perceived that the Popes ambition soared upon
the wings and wind of the spiritual supremacy, to a temporal superiority;
The King like Julius Caesar, that he might fully recover into his power the
temporalitie, potestatem Pontificiam, Jacob origi^. 9.
cum Caesaria potentia coniunxit: he resumed the Ecclesiastical power,
finding that it was impossible in the course of the modern policy of the
Popes, to be supreme agent in temporal affairs, while they were the highest
in spiritual government; especially since these powers cannot rest really
divided in a Monarchy, though they be really distinct in a Monarch being a
mixed person. So that the statutes in the vicesimo quinto of Henry the eighth,
and primo of Elizabeth, which determinately set down this power of supremacy,
are not laws inductory of a new, but declaratorie of the ancient authority of
our Prince, with the solemn signification of their reas-sumption. And our
sacred Sovereign does not alone take this power for his right, but many other
Potentates in Christendom that have not so much reason: As the Kings of
France, Spain, Thesaurus Polit. Apoteles. 50. Guiceiardino hist. lib. 4.
Denmark, Poland, Hungary, and Sicily: which three last states have more
nearer dependence upon the Pope then any in Europe; for Sicily has been held
of him as a spiritual feud, as Poland and Hungary were both in one Popes
days. Benedict the seventh converted from Paganism, Herbert. histor.
Poloniae lib. 2. cap. 7.
and one would think, and so it seems wholly at the Popes disposal,
especially in spiritual affairs. Yet in Sicily the Kings of Spain do not
only claim supremacy of over-seeing, but also superintendencie in doing in
Ecclesiastical employments; Baron. Anal. Anno 1209.
and the Kings of Poland, whose power is moderated by the limits and conditions
of an election; Thuanus hist. lib. 56.
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos coenobiarchas dicunt, suoque arbitrio eligunt: and
the Kings of Hungary do use the same power, and with as much reason (in a
Canonists opinion) as we do, for though they cannot de iure, yet, Reges
Angliae and Hungariae conferunt beneficia and privilegi^ Papae. Guymer.
Comment. prag. sanct. tit. de Innatis.
The Kings of France have always been at defiance with the Pope for this
power, renewing continually pragmaticall sanctions in defense of it, especially
in the time of Charles the seventh, therefore called Carolina sanctio:
Duarenus pro liberate Eccles. Gallicanae.. 4.
which was of that force by virtue of that approbation of the free Council of
Basile, that it curbed and casheered the Popes power, causing them to impeach
it by appealing from it almost in all causes; which Pius the second perceiving,
solicited Lewis the eleventh the son of Charles, to abolish and repeal that
sanction, Concordat. Galliae Leonina Constit.
being enacted in a seditious schismatic conventicle, which he well approved
for a general Council when he was a private Aeneus Sylvius, Secretary to
Frederick the third. The King for the present called it in, but his wisdom
presently found the mischief, and rewarded Cardinal Balve very well for
urging him to it; as the Popes Legate, Prot^ gis ad cil. (...) apud histor Phili
lib. 9 Conc^ Guic^ hist. (...)
Rex Cardinalem Balvam in carcerem detrusit ob detrimentum, consilio suo
emergens; and with so much displeasure, that Philip de Comynes says,
Cardinalis Balvensis carcerem horrendum excogitavit in quem inclusus primum
erat and quatuordecem annos detentus, non obstante Pontifice Romano. The Kings
of France were ever after stout in the defense of that sanction, till Francis
the first; in his interview with Leo the tenth, did remit the force of it in
the Concordata Galliae; which made his serious Secretary Budaeus say,
Palladium Galliae proditum esse. Budae lib. 5
The Kings of Spain in Casteile have some limited spiritual power, by a late
privilege of Adrian the sixth, granted to Charles the fifth; but when they see
their time, Mar^ della
they take so much as shall serve their turn; as Philip the second seized upon
the temporalls of the Archbishopric of Tolledo, (the Bishop Caranza being
apprehended for suspicion of new heresy) and when Sixtus Quintus sent to him
to undertake a war against England, and told him that he would remit to him
all the revenewes that arose of that Bishopric, sede vacant prudentissimus
princeps respondet se nil de suo Pontifici largiri: Thu^ lib. 7
and though at home his power is but what he pleases to take, yet in other of
his territories it is lawfully as large as another Princes; as in Burgundy and
Belgia he has the same right the King of France once had, as Charles the fifth
made a statute of Mortmanie. Nullis personis Ecclesiasticis, vel locis sacris
licet vllam rem immohilem, These lit. 4
absque principis licentia acceptare, vel habere. And Philip the second his
son publishing the Council of Trent in the Low Countries, did not let it
pass in all points with the full strength of an Ecclesiastical law, but
restrained it with an express clause of special privision, that it should in
no wise prejudice or diminish any privilege the King enjoyed touching
possessary judgments or Ecclesiastical livings, or concerning nomination
thereunto. Boter. Heroic. quast. lib. 1.
But I will not now enquire whether our Prince has such a supreme power iure
positivo Pontificio; I am sure it is iure divino Apostolico: and supposing such
a power, I will for more distinct proceeding, consider the several streams
and strings of this Ecclesiastical power; and how they flow and are fastened to
the head and top of Soveraigntie, paralleling them in the several parts and
points of this honor, discovering how they are annexed to these powers, and
how they arise, are raised and stand by his Majesty's laws and Regal
prerogative.

5 All power Ecclesiastical is either power of order, or of jurisdiction,
Durandus de origin jure Civ. conclus. 2.
and both these depend upon the power of supremacy. For though these powers of
order and jurisdiction be immediately derived from Christ the mystical head of
the Church, in respect of their institution, commission, internal
qualification, and deputation to persons to perform them; yet they are
mediately derived from our Prince, the ministerial head of our particular
Church, in relation to their execution. For the power of order cannot be
lawfully exercised in these dominions, without the license and permission from
the power of jurisdiction; which power is originally derived from the Kings
dominion, 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
over Ecclesiastical causes and persons. So that it is plain in general,
that they are dependant on his Crown and supremacy: To omit the jurisdiction
in foro conscientiae, that depends upon the power of order, I will for a more
particular view of this dependent derivation, consider the several proper acts
and works of this Ecclesiastical supremacy, which (as I conceive) may be
reduced to these four. The first work is reformation of the Church in
Doctrine, manners, and ceremonies. The second is convocations of Councels and
Synods, for the reformation. The third is promulgation of the laws and edicts,
proceeding either from his Highness pleasure in public declarations, or the
Canons and constitutions decreed or confirmed in his Councels. The 4th is, in
receiving of appeals, and giving definite, determinate decisions,
restitutions, and deprivations belonging to causes and persons Ecclesiastical.
Now all these acts have their effects in the power of jurisdiction; for the
reforming power of it, is ordinarily and perpetually derived to Archbishops and
B. de iure, to Archdeacons and Deanes, de consuetudine, to be executed by them
in their Provincial, Trienniall, and Annual visitations: but it is
principally restrained to the correction of manners. This power is
extraordinarily ad tempus granted to the Church representative in Convocation.
It is not turned into a running regencie, rolling round to every particular
Presbyter, though it be not an ordinary standing court, the calling of which
is the second work of supremacy. To this Convocation thus called, there is
given power and license, to deliberate of, to order, and do all such things as
shall concern the settled continuance of the doctrine and discipline of the
Church of England, obtaining his Majesty's royal consent in the proceeding and
determinations (as it is plain in his Highness declaration.) And the laws
they make, take their first force from the work of his promulgation. But
before I proceed any farther, I must of necessity take a little time (though to
some it may seem an impertinent parenthesis) rejoycingly to consider the
gracious countenance, our pious Prince so freely shows to this
discountenanced, disabled house of Convocation. Little did any think, (no not
that able absolute Statesman, the last Lord-Chancellour, though wished it)
that his Majesty could have been so fully and faithfully informed of the
ancient power and privileges of it, as to think of restoring them, seeing not
only in the opinion of the people, but also in the practice of the lower house
of Parliament it has been long dismembered from that high Court, and lost all
the power and privileges as escheated to the same, insomuch, that it is
questioned by some, whether ever it was a member of the Parliament or no. But
it seems his Majesty did soon apprehend it to be an essential part of it,
and upon a short search discovered, that though heretofore it was a member,
whose nerves were wrested, distorted, distracted and racked from its natural
head, by extention to a foreign: yet there was no dissolutio continui (as the
Physicians speak) from the head, and therefore not from the collateral
members; and seeing it was but a discontented discontinuance that did cause it
to be suspected and suspended, it being now again contracted and knit most
firmly to the head, is united as closely to the members, and may safely
exercise and enjoy all the power and privileges that did of right belong unto
it, with the Parliament; for though it was no reason, that it should have the
privileges of the Parliament, when it was distracted from it, and assembled
without it by virtue of the Popes Legates writ, and so the power and purpose of
it was foreign, and justly came within the compass of a Praemunire, for the
Clergy then was no true member of the commonwealth, and so the Convocation
cut off from the Parliament; yet when as it is now assembled with it by the
same writ of the King, and the Parliament is not complete without it, being
one of the three Orders, and that State which makes it have competent power in
matters Ecclesiastical, that it is not a mere temporal Court, and that in
the judgment of those that had least reason so to esteem it; for we find 1.
Philip. and Mariae, c. 8. 1 Phil. and Mar. c. 8.
That the Legate of Julius the third took great care to have Statutes
repealed, made against the Popes supremacy, wherein he granted them to be
authentically made, and consequently, that they had Ecclesiastical power to
enact them, otherwise by reason of nullitie, they had been cancelled and
abrogated in themselves. And Antonius de Florebellis, an Italian Prelate in his
Panegyric, de restituta religione in Anglia says, it is done honorifico
vniversi Anglorum consilii decreto, in which speech, Florebe^ rat. ad Marian
he supposed their power to decree it, which he would not have done, if he had
held it to be a mere temporal Court; and he must necessarily have so
accounted it, if he did not reckon the upper and lower Convocation Houses, as
members of it, exercising equal power with equivalent privileges. As it was
plain in a particular example in that Parliament; Fox Act page 16
for when Archdeacon Philpot was questioned for some words that passed from
him in the Convocation House, he pleaded, that he was privileged to speak
them, since the Convocation was a member of the Parliament; and this plea was
not refused, but neglected. For they were not ignorant what was enacted by
Henry the sixth, to wit, that all the Clergy, 8 Hen.
which be called to the Convocation by the Kings writ, shall fully use and
enjoy all such liberties, as the great men, and Commons of the Realm have,
that are called to the Parliament. And as they had some privilege, so it is
plain by a Statute vicesimo quarto of Henry the eight, 24. He^
(though now abrogated) that they had once as much power in their receiving
appeals from inferior Courts Ecclesiastical, when it was a Praemunire to
appeal to Rome, or elsewhere. The words of the Statute, printed in the year
1550, are: The party grieved, may appeal to the spiritual Prelates, Abbots,
Priors, and Proctors, convocate by the Kings writ, in Convocation. So that the
restitution of the Convocation, was a worthy consideration in his Majesty,
seeing it is as nearly and dearly annexed to his supremacy, as the Parliament
is: for his Majesty having two capacities of government in him, the one
spiritual, the other temporal, by both these he has supremacy, and this
supremacy is chiefly exercised in the calling, presedencie, and dissolving of
the great assembly of the three States, which high Court is not competently
correspondent to both those powers in the King, unless the Parliament consist
collectiue of spiritual and temporal persons, which it has anciently (if the
Book De modo tenendi Parliamenti be authentical) for he makes the upper
House consist of three States, the Kings Majesty, the Lords spiritual and
temporal; and lower of the Knights, Ridleys view of Ecclesiastical Laws.
Procurators for the Clergy, and the Burgesses; which both answer the Kings
mixed supremacy. So that as he is supremus Iustitiarius totius Angliae, in
relation to the temporalitie; so he is supremus, or (as Constantine truly
entitled himself in the Council of Nice) (...), Eusebius in vita. lib. 3.
in respect of the spiritualty. But to return to my present promise, and
purpose, which was to show how the acts of supremacy have their effects in
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, derived to the Clergy: And I am now to show,
what effect the power of promulgation of laws has, which is in consenting,
confirming, and publishing the Ecclesiastical Laws which are agreed upon in
Convocation (not excluding the advice of the Parliament, because the State
Ecclesiastical is not an independent society, but a member of the whole:)
hence it is, that they are called the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, by which the
Clergy is ruled in spiritual causes, according to which they exercise their
jurisdiction in foro exteriori and contentioso; hence it is, that for this last
age, the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm have so well agreed with the
Civil, because they pass not without the assent of the supreme governor.
And it were much to be desired, that Christian Princes would not only permit
laws to be made, and give force to them by their authority, but also that they
would vouchsafe their personal presence, to be Presidents in all assemblies
for that end, for then they would proceed and conclude to better purpose. As
Isidorus Pelusiota writes to the Emperor Theodosius the younger, to be
resident and president in the Council of Ephesus: (...): which is, that if he
would be pleased to take so much time, as to be present there, he did not
fear, that any thing that should pass, could be faulty; but if he leave it
all to be done by turbulent suffrages, (...); Isiodoru^ lus. lib. 311.
Who can free that Synod from scornful scoffings? his counsel was safe and
seasonable, because the cause of fear was very probable and eminent. For in a
Council, where there is a Monarchical authority, a supreme power in one,
there will be more dispatch in deliberations, more expedition in executions,
than where multitudes of equals sit alone, for they will be many of them
over-wise, and most over-wilfull to agree in one point; when as every singular
person will broach his particular project, and propose it as a public law,
with resolution to be a recusant to all their laws, if they will not be
Protestants to his: and so it comes to pass too often, that they are forced to
yield to one another, or else no law should pass. Hence is that multiplicitie,
uncertainty, confusion and contrariety of laws in some diseased States, than
which nothing discovers a State to be more desperately declining, though they
are good in their particulars; for they show the multiplication of ill manners,
which per accidens begot them, and they are likely to make them worse, because
they being appointed to amend them, are disappointed and disabled by their own
cross contrarieties. As in a natural body, over-growne and over-flowne with
ill humors. If a Philosopher that considers only a body neither sick nor
well, gives that which is good. (...) (...), (as Hippocrates calls it) and when
he has done an Emperick come that considers it as sick, but he knows not of
what, nor the temper of the constitution, but boldly and blindly gives one
medicine to all, for all diseases, and at last the judicious Physician come and
consider it as it is, and know what to do, he must first undo all the other
have done, before he dare administer that which should first have been taken,
and by this time, the body is either past cure, or desperate conclusions must
be tried to recover it. Therefore happy is our State Ecclesiastical, in whose
Convocation our supreme Sovereign is President, so that the Laws passing with
his royal consent, are certain, and easy to be obeyed, by reason of their
rareness and paucitie, which makes them pertinent, distinct, and free from
confusion. And therefore I do not a little marveile at learned Baronius,
Baronius Annal. Anno. 528.
that since he does not deny Iustinianus the Emperor the power of making
Ecclesiastical Laws, he should so scrupulously and busily inquire, what
should move him to meddle with the making of them; when as I do not doubt, but
the Clergy then might request him to it. This last act of supremacy, is to
receive appeals, and give determinate decisions, and this has its effect, and
is exercised in the Ecclesiastical Courts. And they do not exercise any
power, that is not derived from this supremacy, either immediately, or
mediately. So that as the laws they execute, are the Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws, so these Courts are the Kings, and all the processes and courses
approved by his Majesty's Laws. Therefore now there is no ground for a
praemunire in them, though the words of the Statute run (to Rome or
elsewhere) for by (elsewhere) seems to be meant, the Romish power,
Babylonem^ Gallicam, vt Petrarch. epist. 123.
or Court, which was not then at Rome, because the Popes seat was then at
Avignion in France, and not our Bishops consistory: For I believe, that
Statute was made to free them as well from the foreign usurpation, as any
other of the King Courts, as the pragmaticall sanction of France does, which
was of the nature, and in imitation of it about the same time, by Charles the
seventh, brother-in-law to Edward the third. But however it was then meant, I
am sure it cannot extend to them now, unless we will deny the Kings
supremacy over all causes and persons Ecclesiastical; and then they are not
the Kings Courts; but if we grant the Kings supremacy, we must deny that any
of his Courts can incur a praemunire. A prohibition, I grant, may lawfully
lie there, because it is safe for the whole State, that every jurisdiction
should have its bounds, and keep, or be kept in them. But yet I will not say so
in general, but we must admit them with distinction of prohibitions, one of
Law, another of Fact. Now that prohibition which is of Law, according to the
express words of the Statute, (which are commonly large enough) is the
prohibition that is lawful, as for a prohibition of fact, which is by a
sophistical suggestion sucked and squeezed out of the copy of the libell,
without judgment of the Kings Courts upon it, in my opinion is not right, and
is many times the cause of wrong, either in injustice or delays; yea and in
abusing of the Statute with the Kings Courts. For the prohibition of law, the
most I conceive it inferres is, to make all the proceedings void, Coram non
Iudice. But if I might know, what degree and quality of offense it is, for a
Court temporal to hold plea of a mere Ecclesiastical cause, I should more
easily apprehend the scandalous nature of the ground of a prohibition, which it
may be, is the same with a writ of error in the temporal Court; since that a
consultation does not ensue upon that, but after a prohibition grounded upon a
suggestion. So then, all the proceedings of these Courts, have their power from
this last act of supremacy, as well in primative processes of inquisition, as
in punitiue processes of execution. As this authentic authority is most seen
in the proceedings ex officio, which are not only, nor always by oath, (as
many are mistaken.) These are by immediate commission, where an Ecclesiastical
cause is criminal, and prosecuted as criminal: And so also the utmost
punitiue process Ecclesiastical, which is a writ de Excommunicato capiendo,
is evidently derived from the Kings power, and issues immediately from his
favor to the Church, that it may be more easily obeyed, Johan. de Paris. de
Potestate Reg. Concl. 1.
and is diverse and variable in sundry governments, and executed by temporal
power, being nothing of the nature of the spiritual excommunication, but an
accession concessa permissione ex devotione Principum (as Johannes de Parisiis
says against Boniface the eight.) As for the judgments of Bishops
consistories, as they are derived from the power and law of Christ the great
Bishop: so they are like the judges of them, who are rather arbiters and
amicabiles compositores (as Panormitane) then Judges, ruling by the austerity
of authority, so that poor defendants may fly to them, as to their altars,
who are Ministers of the altar: and in this sense, that which Architas speaks
is most true, Arist. Rhet. lib. 3. c. 11.
(...), Idem esse arbitrum and Aram. And though they have no forcing power, but
from the King, and no power of any force against the King; yet the greatest and
best Kings have yielded to them in their advice, not as Prelates, but as they
are Fathers in God, (as Alexander the great said to his father King Philip)
(...): Dion. Chrysostom. (...).
far unlike the Bishops of Rome, who will rule the highest Princes, and yet
profess themselves servants of servants; which makes me call to mind, the
observation of the wisest King Solomon, Proverb. 30.
that one of the chiefest instruments whereby the earth is shaken, is, a
servant that rules over Princes. And as they usurp rule, so they usurp the
sword of temporal Princes, and carry it in the spiritual scabbard; and
drawing it, do more hurt in their passion, then they can help by their
privilege; when as they found it soberly and orderly put up by St Peter when
Christ was at his elbow to heal the greatest wound that he could make. Thus
is it somewhat plain, how Ecclesiastical power is derived from the King, as
he is supreme head in lawful and full authority over all causes and persons;
which double power in my conceit, the custom of the ancient Persians at the
death of their Monarch does fully and fitly express, for the laws are silent:
Brisso^ Regn^ lib. 1.
(...), yea and their (...) their holy eternal fire which every one worshipped
in his private house as his household god, was put out when the Emperor died.

4 The next thing which I promised to declare, was how the honor of the state
Ecclesiastical is annexed to the power by the Kings laws and royal
prorogatiue. The honor of the Clergy is contained in revenewes and
privileges, (...) A^ lib. 1.
which are united to their powers of order and jurisdiction; which powers
although we should grant that simply considered in themselves, they are not
distinguished jure divino; yet I am sure none will deny that they are distinct,
quoad extensionem, permissione and approbatione divina, as Johannes de Parisiis
does distinguish the power given the Apostles into six parts, in respect of so
many several acts of execution, the fifth of which is potestas dispositionis
ministrorum, secundum quosdam quoad determinationem jurisdictionis
Ecclesiasticae ut vitetur confusio. Ioh. de cap. 1
And as they are thus distinct according to the execution, and stand so
confirmed by the positive laws of the land; so they have distinct portions and
privileges according to the same laws: yet after a different manner,
especially in respect of the portion. For the power of order which has
maintenance of diverse kinds, as tithes, oblations, Gleabland and mortuaries
holds them all according to the laws of this land, as due to the Clergy, for
executing the power of order, but by different acts of these laws; as
Mortuaries are permitted, and Gleablands granted, Tithes and Oblations
confirmed, and all constrained to be paid. Now tithes that are only confirmed
by the Kings positive laws, are supposed to be due by some other law of
higher nature then the Kings, which is not any foreign law, Bellar. de Cler.
lib. 1. cap. 10.
as Ius Ecclesiasticum (as Bellarmine calls the Cannon law) it must be then by
law divine; or immediately arising from supernatural and moral
considerations, which law we grant to be positive; yet not merely human,
Hooker Eccles. Polit. l. 1.. 15.
nor changeable in respect to us: and they must necessarily run into many
gross errors, that take only such laws for positive as are invented by men;
and thence conclude them mutable. And therefore I presume that the learned
Seldom does so understand the positive law, by which he holds tithes to be
due, not in opposition to divine and moral; but as specially diverse from it
(as it partly appears in the whole drift of his history) where I do not
believe that any can find that he ever delivers his judgment, denying them
to be jure divino: so that in my apprehension, and I hope not against his
intention, he may do the Church much good in his relating what wrongs the
Clergy in all ages have sustained. For his history is only de facto, what has
been done; he gives not his judgment de iure what ought to have been done,
which if he had, he would assuredly have pronounced for them; and this I am
forced to believe, when I consider his exact general knowledge, and the
reverent respect he bears to authentic antiquity. I do not in this
confess that they are not iure divino, because I affirm not them to be due by
the law of Moses, that is no direct consequence upon my proposition; for not
only the judicial law which was the commend, and I believe in most points is
still the counsel of the most wise God (especially in this particular where
the ground of the command is moral) does proportion a tenth part as necessary
then to be paid; and though the same necessity binds us not now, yet the
correspondencie of the conveniencie (as I conceive) does hold us as strongly to
it as it did that state. For I see no inconvenience in tithes-paying in our
state more then in theirs, but only they were brought home unto Priests (which
only exception Mr Cartwright makes against tithes: Annot. i^ Test. 7.
) But I stand not only upon this, but I am also partly persuaded, that they
were confirmed by Apostolical approbation, though it be not in express words
so set down. For though the Apostles did all preach the Gospel, yet they did
not all write, neither did those that did write commit all to writing which
they did teach: 2 These.
for St Paul advises the Thessalonians to keep the traditions they had been
taught either by word or epistle. And therefore it is freely acknowledged by a
famous Orthodox divine of our own, non omnia esse scripta in libris voteris
and novi Testamenti, Whittak^ Bellar. q^ cap. 6.
quae Apostoli aut docuerunt aut fecerunt; sed fatemur Apostolos ritus and
consuetudines sanxisse, non autem scripsisse; hence it is probable, that they
might by consent confirm them, because it was not only a custom and a law
then in force, and they did not delight to innovate, but upon necessity: but
also because we do not find one word of their abrogation or alteration. Yea
it seems to me that the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews entitles the
Ministers of the Gospel to them by a more particular right, Heb. 7.
(as Bishop Andrews calls it) jure Benedictionis, for it is not only said
that Abraham paid Melchizedeck tithes as he was the highest Priest, Benedixit
tantum v^ vatus ex ^tione, sed perior ex ^ritate.
but that he received them and blessed him; which implies blessing to be the
duty he performed for them. And whatsoever we hold of these tithes, I assure
my self the Primitive Church did so conclude, otherwise they would not with
such a general consent have bound themselves to that means and portion of
maintenance. I speak of the Church in statu pacato, it was otherwise with them
I confess in statu perturbato, in persecution; but not out of good choice, but
hard chance: For observe but from the first general Council of Nice, (not to
reckon upon Provincall Synods, because they do not bind our state but only in
point of doctrine and example) peruse them till the last of the Lateraine, and
you shall find they are plain and peremptory. And not only in the acts which
in some Counsels are erroneous, (as in the second Council of Nice) being the
seventh general, there is a Cannon very particularly passed with a general
consent; so in the Council of Lateraine under Innocent the third, Balsomon
council. Nicen. secundo can. 12. Council. Later. 4. can. 54.
where it is particularly set down, that the English Ambassadors were present.
There is a Canon that runs thus, Statuimus quod solutio decimarum praecedat
exactionem tributorum. We have national Counsels also as at most Coronations
of the Kings before the conquest, and also immediately upon the conquest; and
many general Charters wherein tithes have been confirmed to the Clergy, and
that with solemn vows and imprecations, which dedication to God, if there be
no other divine right, puts the detainers of them into Ananias and Saphira's
case; Acts 5.
because that though while it was wholly with them, it was their own; yet when
it was thus separated by their solemn vows, then sanctified by the solemn
act of Bishops; not only ratifying the Founders vow, but consecrating them
with the Church to divine uses, the nature, property, with the propriety was
changed. So that I will conclude from these premises, that the positive law by
which tithes are due to the Clergy, is not merely humane but mixed and
preternaturall, because it binds men as they are members of the supernatural
society of the Church visible: and because they have bound themselves by it in
divine considerations. But yet they are enjoyed by the confirmation and
constraining power of the Kings laws: And were it not for the laws, as they
are an undoubted due, so they would be a perpetual debt with many; and that
out of several grounds: some desiring to have stipends in stead of tithes, do
too willingly remit them for a sufficient stipend though it be uncertain,
especially to their successors. But I hope this ground will never be general,
as long as this Kingdom is a Monarchy, for if it is a misery of free Cities
and Democracies, Arist. (...) 4. cap.
(...) -- yet I must needs confess that at the first original of Vicarages
they had but stipends, but it was unjust; Linwoo^ cio Vica roch.
Vicarii stipendio sunt contenti, which was but a permitting provincial
constitution. Another means whereby the due payment of tithes is impeached,
is, the customs of many places: which are lawful and laudable with these
conditions; if they were not the inventions of men, but begotten by time, and
if they be as reasonable as ancient; Cujaciu^ pus Vlpi^ 10.
nam debent esse tam necessariae continuatione quam rectae in ortu: and where
the law is defective, for customs against law are void by the Civil law, if
they be not expressly confirmed by the supreme power. With these conditions
let customs be enjoyed. L. Sacra Q. de leg
But the next pretense is prescription against tithes once paid, and that we
may admit with his limitations; as that it extend not to those things that
cannot be alienate, that are annexed to the Crown, Dier. rep 31^1.
or if it stand not contra statutum postea editum, and be granted upon a good
custom, and the person qualified, to possess the thing claimed; for lawful
prescription cannot proceed without as lawful possession. The want of these
lawful limitations made the Council of Laterane under Alexander the third,
condemn and control the grand prescription of Clyentary tithes continued
from Charles Martellus. Duarenus nef. l. 6. (...)
The taking away of which shirking shifts made many devise another, which
privilege is either of societies or persons, granting immunities from payment
of tithes, which pretense of all others (as far as I understand) cannot be
made good by the most favorable forced interpretation that may be; for they
are void and nullified according to all the restraining Provisoes that bound a
privilege. For they were granted against the law of God and nature, not only
besides it; there are some revoked by the same power that granted them, as
Innocent the third in the fourth Council of Laterane. And in this particular
Kingdom Henry the fourth made many statutes to restrain those privileges
granted to the Friars, 4. Hen. 4. c. 7.
especially providing that none should have any de novo; but that which proves
them void in this Kingdom, is, that not only the particular persons, but also
their whole societies are dissolved and distroyed; and so they are expired and
extinguished with them: Bartolus in D. Q. Sodales. tit. 24. Idem ibidem.
Destructo Collegio pereunt privilegia, especially when their revenewes are
confiscate, and non privilegiatus praescriptione, non succedat privilegiato.
But when other means began to be restrained, they procured appropriations and
annexions of benefices presentatiue, not only in point of patronage, but also
they took the whole due without discharging any of the duty; which last and
worst pretense I will not deny but the wit of man may make it plausible, yet I
am sure it will never be pleasing to the will of God. Monks and Friars were
the authors of these immunities and appropriations, (to omit customs and
prescriptions, because they do not so much wrong, and have more ground of
right:) I do not accuse the Monks who lived in the first five hundred years
after Christ, who lived holy, and labored in their callings, and had no such
privileges: Neither do I condemn Benedict who was the father and first
founder of all that professed a regular life in a sequestered cloister in the
Western Church. Hospinianus de origin Mona^hat.
For he had good reason so to do, considering the tumults and many broiles
that fell out under the government of Justinian, and by reason of the
continual incursions of the barbarous nations into Italy. But when he was thus
shut up, many resorted unto him, admiring his devotion; at last they took
rules from him, and grew into a fraternity of the Benedictines: and from them
sprang many other orders; who living a life far different from other men, bred
great wonderment in all, and that admiration procured adoration of their
profession, and made those that were able bestow great revenewes upon them: Yea
they did so dote upon them, that after a while they endowed them, if not with
the greatest, yet I am sure the best and fattest part of their Countries;
insomuch that most of the most pious Princes of Christendom were forced to
make a statute of Mortmaine, (like Moses, Exo.
who made the first statute of Mortmaine) for these revenewes which they
possessed were in a dead hand, that did no good to the Commonwealth. Whence we
may observe that this statute was rather for the benefit of the Commonwealth,
then made out of the dislike of the Church means; especially since these
Friars were not of the Clergy, but mere Laymen; and the Clergy had as much
reason to desire a law for Amortization as the Commonwealth, because as they
had conferred lands and goods upon them, (for not only Princes, but Popes were
taken with admiration of them) so they were also more charged with the
public, and had less means. And this statute gave the occasion to them to
procure privileges and immunities from payment of tithes. For though at first
for a time they came to their Parish Churches, yet when they procured to have
Churches or Chapels of ease for their fraternities; then they obtained under
Alexander the third in the Laterane Council, when he condemned prescription,
Dua^ nef. l^
to be confirmed privileged from payment of tithes of those lands which they
tilled themselves; when as Adrian the fourth our countryman, his immediate
predecessor had revoked or restrained the immunities granted to them by
Paschall the second. Flavius Chen. Compend. Bulla tom. 1. Paschal.
But when Innocent the third, who loved to be doing and undoing, restrained
the grant of Alexander the third, which they perceived did much prejudice their
plentiful profit, they procured dispensations from the Pope to have parsonages
appropriate to their houses in more great abundance. For I deny not but some
were annexed before, as to the Abbey of Crowland, and others; yet these were
granted more by the Popes license then the Princes authority. And then began
the Schoolmen to entangle the right of tithes, and their curiosity and their
covetousness enabled them, and put them upon it: for when under Innocent the
third, they multiplied into multitude, (as there were sixteen orders set up in
that Century) and he limited and lessened their revenewes, they sought to
maintain that by right which before they had obtained by wrong, and retained
by protection and privilege. Then began the contention between the Schoolmen
and the Cannonists about the right of tithes; and I conceive Innocent the third
to be of the Canonists part, because he was the first great advancer of them in
the Church, and no free friend to the Friars. This I have conceived by
comparing Church histories with the Cannon law, especially Decretalls: these
wrongs of the Clergy were so brought in and vpheld, so continued in our
Kingdom till Henry the eighth of famous memory; who either intending a
reformation in religion, seized upon the revenues of religious houses; or
aiming at their revenewes set upon, rather then finished a reformation,
confiscated them to his use, as escheated as their lands were, and seises upon
their appropriations which were not theirs; but morgaged as it were in
commendam to them, and he possessed the Crown of them, and sold them to
private men; which hold them by as much right as the Monasteries did, and no
better. Though some would willingly persuade themselves that they hold them by
as right and just law, as they do any purchased inheritance; for they say,
though they were once spiritual, yet now they are made temporal, and lay-fees
by the laws of dissolution; especially in the two and thirtieth of Henry the
eighth. It is true that those statutes apply diverse law terms, (I will not
call them mere law fictions) to those things that properly belong to temporal
inheritances, and have made them demandable by original writs, and given order
of conveyance, by deed, fine, and act of Parliament; which act, as it is
bootelesse, so it is contumacie in any private subject to question: only thus
much I hope I may say without general offense, since I conceive it the truth,
and yet not all the truth; I do not yet understand how that can be made
manifest to be a free Parliament in that point. For I do not believe, that
the lower House did either propose, or generally approve it, though they
assented to it. Neither do I think, that King Henry the eight did freely
propound it out of his own choice, but that the necessity of the present time
did put him upon it. And I hope he intended to call it in, if he had lived. As
Dionysius the King of Syracusa in Italy, when his treasure waxed too short for
a great employment: (...): Poly^ Strat
he commanded to take the treasures of Asclepius his temple, and to proclaim
them to be sold in the market, as profane and common commodities, which the
Syracusans were very eager to buy, because they had Church-bargaines. But when
he had gotten what his necessity required, he presently sent forth an edict,
(...), that if any one had bought those devoted treasures, they should again
restore them to the Church. This course had been somewhat just, if he had let
them enjoy the treasures, until they might have regained by them what they
cost, (as perhaps most purchasers of Impropriations have.) But that which most
hinders me from apprehending it to be a free pure act, is, because the most
active and spiritual part in Parliament, was pitifully passive in it, it was
at best mixed by reaction in the patient Clergy, who did neither absolutely
obey, nor resolutely resist, but silently suffer that to pass, which was not
right; and therefore the act was not free from wrong. Neither do many of the
judicious sages of our law so fully approve of it. Consideration 6.
Yea Sr Francis Bacon in his considerations of the Clergy of England,
dedicated to King James of peaceable memory, confesses, that he was of
opinion, that all the Parliaments, since the twenty seventh, and thirty one of
Henry the eight, stand obnoxious and bound in conscience to God, to do
somewhat for the Church, to reduce that patrimony; or, that since they have
debarred the Church of her dowry, they should make her a competent jointure.
Which opinion of his, is more ingenious, in my apprehension, and advantageously
pertinent than theirs, who only enveigh against the Parliament, and Henry the
eight the head and ruler of it: which act (admitting the necessity then that
urged him to use the power of Ecclesiastical dominion) is not altogether
inexcusable, (though this reformation did more wrong to the Clergy, than the
conquest:) For what he was to do, was to be done in haste; and in that
routing-rush of reformation, who could expect but the part corrected, must
needs be for the time, near to utter ruin; though happily, if the author of
the reformation had lived to finish it, amends would have been made in some
measure. But Henry the eight did rather put down the Roman Church, than set up
ours; as Alexander the great pulled down the Persian Monarchy, but set not up
the Grecian. But to pull down one was the only way to set up another; as
Aristotle rooted out all the opinions of the former Philosophers, to set up his
own; or as Hypocrates, who being their (...) (as Zetzes in his Chiliads) he
burned the books of all the ancient Phisicians, to set us his own, Chil. 155.
or theirs as his. So that if a public reformer begin once to alter, he must
of necessity, for the time, stir, if not remove more than he first intended,
especially if he be crossed and curbed by an adversary, that stands strongest
by that part which needs reformation, and by that in it, which will best help
him in the performing of it. For he that will prevail against an incroaching
enemy, that has a party in his kingdom, must be sure with all apt industry,
to observe and oppose him in his counsels, by bereaving him of his counselors
and agents, either by taking them away at once, or putting them as exiles from
him, or pulling them to himself, which is the safest and honourablest course.
Now the Pope, who was the absolute insolent adversary to Henry the eight, stood
by the Monkish part of the Clergy, and chiefly by their rich revenues; and
therefore, it behoved the King, either to reconcile them to himself, or
utterly to ruin them (as fell out because they rebelled.) And in the
persecution of them, he ran a clean contrary course to the Pope. As I
remember, when Cyrus took Babylon, he drew Euphrates dry, and made all land;
And Xerxes when he went against Athens, would have made all sea, Dion. C (...)
(...): So Henry the eight made all Lay and land, when he intended to be free
from the usurpation of the Pope, and the Pope made all spiritual and his See,
when he aimed at his absolute unrestrained extravigancie both in See and
Scepter. This heat and height of opposition made the King proceed too far,
which, I believe, he did somewhat perceive, in that he did retract in some
particulars, from the first course: As in erecting some Episcopal Seats, and
more Cathedral Churches, out of the ruins of Monasteries and Priories. And in
that he made of the appropriation of Royston, 33. Hen. 8.
a Parish Church. And I presume, he might have proceeded farther, if he had
not been soon after cut off by death, and hindered by profane and sacrilegious
instruments while he lived, who, I persuade my self, were the same men and
means, that tried to procure the dissolution of the Bishopric of Durham by
act of Parliament, during the nonage of Edward the sixth. So that the
unhappiness of Henry the eight, is, because men judge by the event, not
knowing the intent (as Paulus Iovius exclaimes of him. Iovius de vir. illust.
) In my mind, he may be well paralelled with Charles Martellus, the Champion
of the Church, who, when he defended the Pope, was the first that was called
Christianissimus among the French Kings, by Gregory the third; yet he was the
first that robbed the Clergy in France, by giving Clientary tithes, Baronius
Anno 759.
which they call feudall to his followers: yea and he deposed the Archbishop
of Reemes, and disposed of the Bishopric to one Miloeo Caualeire. So Henry the
eight had first the title of the Defender of the Faith, for publishing a book
against Luther, Bellarm. de script. Eccles.
which ( Bellarmine says) Roffensis wrote, and presently after fell foul upon
the Clergy. So that, (I believe) the Pope repented of the title, and was
ready, no^ to give him so good a title, as his predecessor Julius the second
gave Lewis the twelfth of France, in his Bull, which Guicciardine notes to
proceed of malice, Guicc. hist. l. 11.
Nella nominon dolo, non piu Christianissimo, ma illustrissimo. But let him be
as bad as they will make him, yet I dare excuse him, as Baronius does
Martellus, and say of him as Guicciardine said of the Popes, Guicc. Hypomn.
Polit. 123.
that he was an honest man, because he was not more wicked than most men. I
have in this as far as I am able with a good conscience, cleared our State
from the foreign fame of sacrilege. But I cannot free particular men from it,
which have no pretense for what they detain, or take from the Clergy, but
only that they are not convinced that there is such a sin as sacrilege; and
that because they hold not tithes due iure divino, and that because they desire
still to hold them by the law of the land. And that they may more colourably
continue it, they hold no such sin as Symonie, that the presented may make a
symonaicall contract, whereby they are confirmed and corroborated in their
sacrilegious usurpations. But I will not dispute the point, whether there be
any such sin as Symonie, in relation to a private presentation without
respect to orders taken with it. But I am sure, none will deny, but where is a
symonaicall contract, there is perjurie in the Instituted. As for sacrilege, I
grant it is not easy for men that are guilty of it, to be convinced that it is
a sin. For sins of omission cannot so quickly and sharply, touch the
conscienee, because they are the breach of an affirmative law, which does not
so strongly check the vice, as inform to the duty; especially when pleasure
or profit have bribed the judgment. For I fear, some hold stolen tithes, the
sweetest part of their inheritance, as it is said by the Epicures; Zetzes Chil.
7
(...): who doting upon voluptuous sweet delicates, called honey the tenth part
of the Ambrosia; and perhaps that sect set up the trade of Bee-mongers in
Athens, (as Synesius) (...). Synesiu^ 136.
So I am afraid, the tickling sweetness of tithes, is the cause, why the smart
and sowrnesse of sacrilege is not felt, nor tasted. And therefore, in my
opinion, Thom. (...) q. 155.
Thomas Aquinas does well, to make sacrilege, speciem luxuriae; so that it may
be a sin, and yet they never be convinced of it. I am sure, not only the
ancient Fathers of the most pure primitive Church, but even the godly Emperors
did esteem it a sin, and that in a high degree, that when they granted
general pardons at Easter, and other solemn tim^s, they excepted sacrilegious
persons: As Theodosius the great, Theod. tit. de Indulg. Crim.
ob diem Paschae, quem intimo cord celebramus, quos reatus astringit, carcer
inclusit, solvimus; attamen sacrilegus maxim a communione istius munieris
separetur: So also Gratian and Valentinian; Religio anniversariae observationis
hortatur, vt omnes periculo carceris, and a metu poenarum eximi iubeamus: verum
eos excipimus, quos scelera graviora compulerunt, Theod. eodem tit.
vt qui sunt sacrilegi and sepulchri violatores. So in many of the Novels;
(...), upon Easter day set all persons free (...), Harmenopulus Promp. Iur.
Civ. l. 6. tit. 5.
but if any be guilty of sacrilege, set him be kept still in hold. So that you
see, it was reckoned inter extraordinaria crimina in those days; and so it
would be thought with us, if profit did not blind the judgment in the payer
of tithes, and indiscreet covetousness lead many Clergymen to make no
distinction betwixt free and friendly compositions with a bountiful Patron and
sacrilege. In my poor judgment, the Canon Law is but just, Quicunque c. 6.
q. de Iur. Patronatus.
in decreeing, that Si patronus Laicus ad inopiam fuerit redactus, he must
have some competent sustenance from the incumbent, especially if he have not
been sacrilegious, and so by Gods judgment brought to it. And I do conceive,
that this may be, notwithstanding they do not charge any parsonage with
annuitie rents, which is prohibited by the statute of Elizab. 3 Eliz. c. 2.
Thus it is plain, that the revenues and maintenance of the Clergy are
possessed by the Kings Laws, and may be demanded as due by them.

. 5. The other part of the honor of the Clergy, annexed to the power of
order, is in privileges, and immunities, by which this power is exercised with
more ease, delight, and respect; and, as it were, with the whole man without
distraction. Now all the privileges the Church does enjoy or desire, arise,
and are raised by the Kings laws, and royal prerogative. As that
ancient-often-confirmed Magna Charta does fully confirm all former privileges
of the Clergy. Mag^ ta cap
And that was then favor enough, for then they had privileges to a surfeiting
surplussage, but now the Clergy stands in more need of them, and they humbly
expect them only from the favor of their Prince, who has a plenitude of
power, to grant more and larger privileges, than ever they will desire. For
all privileges are granted in relation to some Law, and the power of an
absolute Prince is above all Laws, (as Dion Chrysostom told just Trajane)
(...): Dion (...) (...) (...) Cujac vat. li^
or as the same Counselor to the same Emperor, (...): which Cujacius
explaines and limits to coactiue correctiue Laws, which Dion says, began in
Augustus days, (...): Dion
none of the ancient Romans were freed from laws, (...), that is from the
necessity of obeying. And I do believe, that the Scriptures (seeing that they
say more for the right of Kings, than any book in the world) do, if not fully
set down this power, yet permit it with approbation in some cases, especially
for the public good of the Church, which, I am sure, is a far more
conscionable and commendable course, than to accommodate religion to serve the
turn of the State (as that judicious Amiratus upon Tacitus) Bisogna accommodar
la ragione di stato alla religione, and nan la religione, alla ragione di stato.

Our King then being a most absolute Monarch, has this prerogative, and from
that we have and hold our privileges, not from that written prerogative,
abstracted out of Fitzherberts Abridgement, by Sr William Stanford, whereby the
Kings Exchequer has many privileges, and peculiar processes (as the Civilians
call them privilegia fisci, fiscus (...) habet. Cujaci^ serve. l. 2
) But from an unwritten unrestrained right of dominion, whereby he has
plenarie power, not only to make legal propositions of validity, or void in
their first institution, or to interpret them either by declaring them to be
corrected in some points and cases, especially if he correct them by a more
particular express pressing law, as he may correct the law of nature by the
law of nations; the law of nations, by the law of arms; the law of arms, by
the law of particular Leagues; and all by the power of dominion: or restrain
them in respect of some persons, or public societies; but he may dispense also
with them, since some penal statutes are made with relation to his power of
pardon after the act; therefore it is not so much to exempt them from being
obnoxious to the punishment, by pre-interpreting that it was not intended to
extend to such persons; for so the privilege is not against law, but besides
it, or above it. Yea there are statutes dispensatorie; as that of the
plurality, and non recidencie which the Archbishop of Canterbury limits by his
approbation. Eccl. Anglicanae Canon. 41.
And privileges must necessarily be where there are multitudes of statutes,
which be so strict in point of injunction, as if the makers of them had not
considered, that politic laws must be made with respect to moral
possibility, as what men may do; and yet the punishment of their
transgression is not expressed, but left to the pleasure or displeasure of the
King. But these are not the privileges that the Kings royal prerogative does
grant, as immunities and impunities, for then the laws should be only
punitine, if there were only use of protections and pardons: but as laws are
also remuneratiue, so Princes have power to reward after a priviledging manner,
and chiefly in our Kingdom, where it seems to be on purpose omitted by the
written laws, and left to the Kings pleasure and power; especially concerning
Ecclesiastical persons, who have most need of them, and may now as freely
enjoy them as any other persons. For though heretofore it was prejudicial to
our Kings to grant privileges to all Ecclesiastical persons, when they were
so increased in multitudes, and overgrowne in magnitude for the whole Kingdom,
and the Popes would confirm them as irrevocable: yet now they are but few in
number and small in power, and the King may call them in when he pleases. This
want of these privileges has been the cause of much evil in the Church, and
the more they are impeached by those that profess themselves the maintainers
of the Kings peace, laws, and royal prerogative, the more will the state
Ecclesiastical run to ruin. And they are much infringed in our
Universities, which I am forced to complain of, with fear, lest that fall out
which happened to the University of Prague; which was utterly ruined by
Charles the fifth, taking the privileges away at Don Le^is desire. Whereas
Francis the first of France fearing and favoring the University of Paris,
restored all the privileges which Lewis the eleventh had taken away upon a
just ground of sedition, Dino hist. (...)
which has made it to reviue and flourish ever since. But there are some
politiques that hold it a needless thing, to be any way indulgent to silly
Scholars, Cuja^ sent. 1. tit
as Cujacius says out of Galen, that they expressed weak men under the title
of scholastici: they make mere (...), John a noakes of them, but the fault is
in themselves according to the French Proverb, Qui se fait brebis le l^up la
mange: For though the Clergy be weak of it self, and tempt the contemners
of it to overtop and over-turne it: Yet since we have a pious prudent Prince,
that is royally ready upon the first appeal, to protect and relieve his poor
Clergy: we are not to be pitied, if we neglect to implore his supreme
assistance. And thus it is something evident how the honor of the Clergy
annexed to the power of order, is granted and sustained by the Kings laws and
royal prerogative. I must now in brief show the like of the honor annexed to
the power of jurisdiction.

6 The power of jurisdiction which I do here intend, is not that deligated
power which is in Bishops, Vicars, or Officialls; nor that power Archdeacons
and Deanes enjoy, either by custom or privilege: but that ordinary power
which is in Bishops. To this power of jurisdiction there is honor annexed by
the laws of this land, and the Kings royal prerogative: which I divide as
before, into revenewes ordinary, and privileges; the revenewes are their
temporalls, and part of the perquisits, called the Census Cathedraticus: the
first of which are given and granted by the Kings royal bounty, and confirmed
by the laws; the other are set down and approved by the same laws. Bishops
temporalls are annexed to their sees by the Kings gift, Stanford praerogat.
cap. 1.
and are as it were their Gleab, but are indeed their Baronies which they hold
of the King in capite, and perform services for them; and therefore they are
as it were wards to the King during the vacancie: quae ratione Baroniae (as
Linwood) ad Episcopum spectare possunt, Linwood de immunitatib. Ecclesiae.
Duarenus de beneficijs. l. 3. c. 11.
Dominus Rex custodiam habet; (as Duarenus says of the Kings of France)
Princeps quam diu vacat Episcopalis seeds, feudorum lege, praediorum omnium
administrationem suscipit. But these temporalls are not to be restored till
consecration, and so seem to be annexed to the power of order in Bishops;
Augustinus de Ancona de potest. P. P. quaest. 22. Art. 9.
for their consecration (according to the scholasticall Canonists) is but
perfectio characteris, which they at first received when they took the order
of Priesthood, and so seem not properly annexed to the power of jurisdiction:
for before consecration, upon election and confirmation they may exercise the
power of jurisdiction, though not of order. Episcopus electus and confirmatus
potest exercere quae sunt jurisdictionis, Panormitan. in Decret. Ver. Cons.. 6.
non quae sunt ordinis Episcopalis ante consecrationem, (as Othobone upon
Linwood) suspendere potest a beneficio, non ab officio; Linwoo^ de consti^
Glanvil cap. 10.
quia ab officio suspendere, est a potestate ordinis ordinaria. But Justice
Glanvil seems to intimate that they were restored, when they were but Lords
elect, because electi ante consecrationem homagia sua facere solent, but
whether it were de jure or de gratia (as the learned in the Common law
distinguish,) I leave to them to determine; and think it great happiness for
the Bishops, and the great honor of our modern Kings, that they are so fully
restored at all, since they have as much power, and may pretend as much reason
to seize the temporalls into their hands as well as others. -- But our Royal
Sovereigns pious Father, 1. Jacob.
set a good example to his Majesty to follow; for in the first year of his
reign he enacted a statute to prevent all diminution of Episcopal revenewes,
though it were to alienate them to the use of his Crown: yea though it were
but in exchange for impropriations, (a course which was too common in Queen
Elizabeth's days,) instead whereof our Kings have out of royal indulgence
given some licenses for Mortmaines. If this redress had come before they had
been too much impaired: Bishops would not have desired so many Commendams, nor
Rectors of Parishes made use of the statute of plurality. To their revenewes
in these temporalls, there are many honorable privileges annexed, as they are
Barons; So that Bishops have the privileges of Barons in the Parliament, and
that upon good ground, since they hold of the King, and perform the services
belonging to them; Matthew Hen. 2.
(as Matthew Paris) Episcopi de rege tenent in capite Baronias, and faciunt
omnes consuetudines regis, and sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse iudiciis
regis cum Baronibus. Now the Bishops (especially since the reformation) are
ready and willing, not only to take the oath of homage, which some denied
heretofore, as Thomas Becket, and Glanvill, who was the chief Justice, seems
to countenance it, by saying Episcopi consecrati non solent Domino Regi
homagium facere de Baroniis suis, Glanvil. lib. 9. cap. 1.
sed fidelitatem. The present Clergy I say is not only ready to take the oath
in the old favorable free form, [salvo ordine,] but as it is now more
strictly obligatorie by putting in these words, [in verbo veritatis;] and
leaving out the former. Which oath may be taken without any suspicion of
Symonie, (as Panormitan) Homagium, vel fidelitas ab Episcopo praestari possit,
citra periculum Symoniae: and Cajetaine the learned schooleman does in this
agree with this ancient able Cannonist; Cajetan in secund. secunde. q. 184.
art. 5.
Episcopus legitime iurare potest Homagium quoddam vel fidelitatem, quia nil in
isto iuramento continetur, circa curam animarum; for that is taken in relation
to their temporalls which they have from the Kings favors; not in relation to
their consecration, which they have from the qualifying grace of God, which was
well expressed anciently in their style [Dei gratia Episcopus] and now by
[providentia divina,] so that seeing they perform the same services, they may
enjoy the same privileges with the Barons. Now as all privileges, so these
that they enjoy common with them, are besides and above the common course of
law. For instance, as they are Assessors in Parliament, they may appear by
Proxy; as they are witnesses, they may swear only Visis Evangeliis, verbo
sacerdotis; as Barons, by their honor; and when they are at any time
Delinquents, they should be tried by their Peers, (if they were tried as
Bishops, and not first degraded;) and so some have been tried, until one
appealed from them to the Pope. And good reason in those days they had, (if
not now) to be so tried, because many of the Bishops of those times were of
the Princes of the nobility; (as may be seen in Bishop Godwins Catalogue of
Bishops:) so that when Peers were Bishops, why should not Bishops be Peers.
It seems in Richard the seconds days they were so accounted, for when he did
make up the number of the twelve Peers of the land, he chose Brentingham
Bishop of Exeter one of them, which (I conceive) he would not have done if he
had not been a Peer before: and I am the rather persuaded so to think,
because Richard the second extends the statute of Scandalum magnatum, to
Bishops as well as Dukes, 2. Rich
Earls and Barons under the title of Peers of the land. Besides these
privileges which they have as they are Barons, the Kings of this land have
been pleased out of their Princely favors to bestow many freedoms upon them,
especially on the Archbishop of Canterbury as amongst other ordinary and
known, Stamfo^ rogat. c.
one against his Majesty's written prerogative, as that the land held of that
Bishop shall not be Ward to the King. And I believe the high estimation of that
See abroad might move them to it, for they are not only styled Primates of
all England, and Metropolitans, Duaren^ gradibus cap. 9. Laelius Z^ statu Leg
but Patriarchs; Patriarchae minorum gentium sunt Cantuariensis, Aquiliensis,
Biturgiensis, and Gradensis, and the most lawful Legates of the Apostolical
See: Legati nati dignitas Archiepiscopatui Cantuariensi, Remensi, Eboracensi,
and Pisano annexa est. This foreign respect might move them more particularly
to honor them, though they have always most highly favored Bishops in
general, in so much, that they have made them not only a sacris, but a
secretis, which is safe for a King, and no distraction to a Bishop in his
calling; Lipsius A^ 3. Polit.
with Lipsius limitation interesse eos posse imo debere, sed rarenter cum de
rebus plane seriis agitur, and quae tangunt vnivers^^ statum; then should not
Princes need to forbid Bishops the Court without they were sent for, (as
Baronius says, Justinian was feign to do). Thus I have brifely discoursed,
Baron. A^ Anno 528
though not fully discovered some thing of the relation betwixt the state
Ecclesiastical and the Civil; which I have done without advising in any thing
to an alteration, or devising any thing for innovation; and with submission to
the license of authority and the judgment of the learned.

FINIS.

