DUPLYES Of the MINISTERS and PROFESSORS of ABERDENE, TO The second ANSWERS of
some REVEREND BRETHREN, Concerning The LATE COVENANT.

If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth: Let
them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.

IEREM. 15.19. Honor all men: Love the Brotherhood: Fear GOD: Honor the King.

1. PET. 2.17.

Printed in Aberdene, by Edw. Raban, 1638.

coat of arms or blazon

TO THE UNPARTIALL READER.
IT may be you have not, as yet, heard the true relation of our proceedinges,
and carriage, toward those two Reverend Brethren, who came lately hither, to
recommend to us, and our People, the LATE COVENANT: We declare therefore to
you, That we hearing of their coming, and intention, and being of a contrary
mind, resolved, that before we should give consent, that they should preach
to our People, we would propone to them, by way of certain DEMANDS, the
chief reasons which made us to be averse from their proceedings; promising to
admit them to our Pulpits, if they should give us satisfaction, concerning the
LATE COVENANT. We intended not to Print these DEMANDES at the first; but
afterward considering how much our People might be confirmed by them, in
that pious resolution which they have, to continue in the obedience of the
Laws of this Church and Kingdom, concerning EPISCOPACIE, and those things
which were concluded in PEARTH ASSEMBLY; we thought good to put them to the
Press, but determined not to make use of them, by divulgating them, except we
saw that our people stood in present need of them; which indeed came to
pass: for upon Friday, the twenty of Julie last, these Reverende Brethren
came to this Town, and having that same night received our DEMANDES in writ,
they returned their Answers unto them on Saturday following, late in the
evening: but they came not to our hands, who replied unto them, until Sunday
in the morning. Neither had we leisure to read, or consider, until both the
Sermons were ended in our Churches. Wherefore we did meet together that day,
at four hours afternoon, that we might peruse them. And at that same time,
hearing that these Reverend Brethren had preached in audience of dyverse of our
people, conveaned in the court of a noble man his lodging, not having obtained
our consent thereto, and in their Sermons had used a form of Answering to our
DEMANDES, which they did publicly read, affirming, that they had given full
satisfaction to us, in a written coppie of their Answers, which they had sent
to us: and by that means, had labored to dissuade and draw our People from
their obedience unto the Articles of PEARTH, and the Laws of this Kingdom
ratifying them: we knowing how insufficient their Answers were, to give
satisfaction to any, who would duly ponder our DEMANDES, gave license to the
Printer to divulgate them, and the next day did write our REPLIES to their
Answers, intending to put them to the Press on Tuesday. But we were
earnestly entreated by a noble Man, to send back to them the copy of their
Answers, that they might revise and perfect them, and also to delay the
printing of our REPLIES until Friday following. Which we willingly granted.
But wherefore this was desired of us, you may conjecture; seeing they neither
added, nor diminished, nor altered any thing in their Answers. Upon the next
Friday at night, we gave our REPLIES to the Printer: and to these Reverende
Brethren, who returned not to this City, until Saturday following, we sent a
copy of our Replies in writ, on the Lords Day: unto which we received not
their Answers, until they came from the Press, to wit, on Tuesday the
fourteenth of August: that is, eyghteene days after they had received our
REPLIES. What success these Brethren had in their Sermons, which they preached
here, upon two several Lords Days, it is sufficiently known: neither have
they reason to talk so much of it as they do, in their Preface to the Reader.
The first of these Days, some few who were thought to be that way inclined
before, subscryved their COVENANT: But the next Lords Day, they scarce
prevailed with any at all. And a great many, who heard them both these Days,
professed, that they returned from their Sermons, more averse from the
COVENANT, than they were before. Now good Reader, we present to thee our
REPLIES, to their second Answers; which for shortness cause, we have called
DVPLYES: we pray you consider them vnpartiallie. And if you reap any
benefit by perusing them, let it not be ascrybed unto us, but to the
invincible force of divyne Truth. We conclude with Zorobabell, saying*
Blessed be the GOD of Truth: And let all the People shout, and say, Great is
Truth, and mighty above all things.

TO OUR REVEREND BRETHREN Mr ALEXANDER HENDERSON And Mr DAVID DICKSON.
THat your Answers, Reverende and Dear Brethren; have not in any degree
satisfied us, we impute it not to your weakness, whom we know to be able
Men, and much exercysed in the matters debated betwixt us: but we impute it to
the weakness of your cause, and to that inabilitie which is in all men, as
well as in you, to bear out against the Truth. We are sorry that ye are not
so respective, and favorable, in your judgment of us: for ye playnlie
declare in your Preface, that ye suspect us of prejudice: and that for two
reasons. The first is, that our Demandes, which ye conceaved had been
meerelie intended for you, were published before your coming in Print: as
also, that our REPLIES were Printed before we received your last Answers to
them. Whence ye conclude, that we were rather aiming at victory, moved
thereto by prejudice, than at satisfaction by searching of the Truth. This
reason is grounded upon a mistaking: for although our Demandes at the first, were
intended for you only, yet afterward we resolved to Print them, as also our
REPLIES, (the Printing whereof did nowayes depend upon your second Answers,)
not for love of contention, nor desire of victory, (GOD knows) but for such
reasons, as we have expressed in our Preface to the impartial Reader, whom
we hope we have satisfied in this point. Your other reason is, that the
grounds of your Answers to us, have proven satisfactorie to others; who for
Age and Learning, are pryme men of this Kingdom: and to whom our modesty will
not suffer us, to prefer our selves. Far be it from us to be so
presumptuous, as to prefer our selves to so many Learned and worthy
Divynes: and as far be it from us, to measure the soliditie, and
sufficiency of your Answers, by the Habilities or Induments of these, who
have acquiesced in them. If this your reason were good, the Papists might more
probably accuse us of prejudice, (as indeed they vnjustlie do) because your
Answers to our Arguments, have proven satisfactorie to many thousands of
those, who for profunditie, and subtilitie of wit, are inferior to none of the
World: but we regard not this slender motive, remembering these words of our
Savior, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because Thou have
hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes:
even so, O Father, for so it seemed good in Thy sight. Besides, if ye compare
the Divynes, Ancient and Modern, who are of our judgment, with these who
favor your opinion, either in number, or in the excellency of their gifts, ye
shall find that in this, the advantage is greatly ours. In the mean time ye
shall know, that we can bring far better reasons to free our selves of
prejudice, than these which ye have brought against us: to wit, the soliditie
of our Arguments, which have put you to such straytes, (pardon us to say that,
which every one who has eyes, may see) that oft-tymes ye do not so much, as
attempt to answer them, being glad to pass them by, with the show of an
Argument in contrarium, or some other like shift: our humble and earnest
attestations, in calling GOD, the only competent judge; as witness of our
sincerity, in the inmost thoughts of our soul; our seriously professed
Resolution, to concur with you, if we should get satisfaction from you: the
Modesty, Ingenuitie, and Peaceablenesse of our wrytings to you, and on the
contrary, your too great disdainfulnesse and asperitie in your second
Answers; bewraying not only the weakness of your minds, far by our
expectation, but also the weakness of your cause to impartial Readers, who
ascrybe this to the pungent force of our Answers; judging, that they have made
you somewhat more choleric, than you were before. To this we will add the
great reluctance, which some of the most Judicious Subscribentes did find in
their Consciences, before they subscrybed your Covenant; together with the
Limitations, and Reservations, wherewith they subscrybed it; evidentlie arguing
their strong apprehension, of the dangerous ambiguitie and haske sounding of
the words of the Late Covenant: so that even these who are now joined with
you, have been much affrighted with those things which terrify us. As for
your Protestation in the end of your Epistle, that ye can no more be brought
to our mind, than ye can be drawn from the profession of our Religion, as
it has been reformed, sworn, etc. Although this imports no small prejudice,
possessing and overruling your minds; yet looking to the invincible force of
that Truth which we maintain, we even yet hope that at last it shall
prevail with you* especially considering that our controversy is not
concerning the reformed Religion; whereunto we as sincerely adheare as any
who-so-ever, but concerning the equity of that form of Covenant which ye
lately made. Wishing you and all others, to adheare truly and sincerely, to
the same true Religion; and to all the duties which in it are recommended to
you: we most humbly, and earnestly pray the Almighty GOD, to pity His
Church in this Kingdom, and to unite all our hearts in Truth and Peace, in
these most dangerous days: which although they be to you days of gladness,
as ye profess, yet to those who love the peace of Sion, and the tranquillity
of this Kingdom, they are Sad and Melancholious days, in respect of the
black clouds of GOD'S wrath, hanging over our heads, and threatening us with
storms of fearful Calamities: which we pray the Almighty GOD to avert.

THE FIRST DVPLY.
IN our Disputes against the Papists, (which have been frequent, and by GOD'S
grace not unfruitful,) as we have learned, that to multiply objections
against the Truth, is a thing easy, as ye say, but fruitless and vain: so
also we have learned, that to multiply Evasions, against solid Arguments
brought for the Truth, is a thing no less easy, but altogether unprofitable:
which we pray you take heed to. How forcible are right words? but what does
your arguing reprove? JOB 6.25.

2. Ye say, that our objection, against your calling, and the warrant of your
coming to us, was framed and published in Print, before it was proponed unto
you, and ere your Answer could be had. Indeed our DEMANDES were at the
Press at your coming, that they might be in readiness; but were not
published, before your selves in your Sermones did publicly read them, and
dispute against them, in audience of such of our People as were there present
for the time; albeit that written copy of them was delyvered to you only, and
not at that time communicated by us to any other.

3, Your Authority which ye acclayme, is neither from his Majesty, nor
warranded by Act of Parliament, nor by the Lords of his Majesty's Counsel,
nor by any National Synod of this Kingdom, nor by any Judicatorie
established in it. And both in your first Answer, as also now again ye
profess, that ye came not hither to usurp the Authority, of any Civil or
Spiritual Iudicatorie. As for your multitude, (which ye call almost the
whole Kirk and Kingdom) it being destitute of Authority foresaid, makes
no warrant of ordinary calling. Therefore, ye seem to pretend an
extraordinary calling from GOD, alleging an extraordinary necessity at
this time, which truly we see not in any such degree, as may deserve and
warrant so great a change from the received order, which is publicly by Laws
established in this Kirk and Kingdom. That saying of the Apostle, Let us
consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, which ye
allege for your extraordinary employment, imports not an extraordinary
calling, but an ordinary duty, to be performed by all Christians, according
to their Callings.

4. The Word of GOD, and the Canons of Counsels, do so permit to Pastors, the
care of the whole Kirk, as they must remember to do all things, Decently
and in Order, and not to interpone themselves in their Brethrens charges, and
against their will. And praised be GOD, there was not any Combustion, Error,
or Confusion, in these places of our charges, as ye do allege: Neither did
our People stand in need, of such help from you. And if ye mean the
Combustion of our National Kirk, we do think your remeede not convenient;
as being, in our judgment, not agreeable to the right way of Truth and Peace.

5. Whereas ye allege, that if some members of this Kirk, had not cared
more kyndlie, in this time of common danger, than others have done, the whole
body had been ere now dangerously, if not desperately, diseased; We
answer, That we most heartily wish, any disease of this Church, to be
tymouslie prevented and cured. But withal we wish this to be done without a
rupture, and such a dangerous division: chiefly seeing our Church is not
infected with any such Erroures, nor is in such dangers, as may give just
occasion, of so fearful a division: which in it self is a sore disease, and
from which in holy Scripture, we are often, and very earnestly dehorted.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in his Epistle to Novatus, recorded by
Eusebius, Lib. 6. Historiae Cap. 37. worthily says, You ought rather to have
suffered any thing what-so-ever, for avoiding of cutting asunder the Kirk of
GOD: and Martyrdom for keeping the Kirk from Schism, is no less glorious,
than which is suffered, for not committing Idolatry. And in my opinion also it
is greater; for in suffering Martyrdom for not committing Idolatry, a man
suffers for one, even for his own soul; but here a man suffers
Martyrdom for the whole Kirk.

6. Ye affirm, that we have no reason to complain of your carriage, here
toward us, in respect ye for your Sermones preached to our People, made
choice of vacant hours, that they might attend the ordinary times of
Worship. But indeed this satisfies not our complaynt: for we justly
complained of your preaching to our People, without our consent, at any hour;
and of your laboring, to make them Subscrybe the LATE COVENANT, before ye had
given satisfaction to us, concerning the equity of it.

7. Ye reprove us for these harmless words of a Confoederation, and
Negative Confession. That little Confession, was long ago called Negative, a
part majore. And as for that other word, it is well known to all those who
are expert in our Mother Tongue, and in the Latin, that Covenanting, and
Confoederation, do signify one, and the same thing: and therefore, both these
words are alyke respectfull, in our judgment. Whereas ye say, that your
COVENANT is made with GOD, and do call it His COVENANT: and likewise for
justifying your swearing, and Subscrybing thereof, do bring some places of
Scripture, wherein mention is made of a COVENANT, and Oath, betwixt GOD and His
People; we shall then allow the same name, and respect unto your Covenant,
when ye shall make it manifest, that your Covenant in all points therein
contained, has no less warrant from the written word of GOD, than that
Covenant which the Israelites did swear in the days of Joshua, (IOSHVA 24.
verse 25) and in the days of Jehojada the Priest, (2. KINGS 11. verse 17) and
in the days of King Asa, (2. CHRON. 15. verse 15) and that which is mentioned
by ISAIAH, 44. verse 5.

8. As we are still informed, that some have fled the Country, and some have
Subscrybed for fear; so no Pastors in our knowledge have gone to Court, for
the causes alleged by you. We do not presume to judge of the Consciences of
men, and we wish you to judge more charitablie, of these Reverende Prelates,
than ye do. The occasion of this present storm was pretended to be the
Introduction of the Books of Service, and Canons, and the high Commission.
These causes are now removed; and yet the storm continues so vehement, (as
ye seem to grant) that the Bishops have just fears warranding their flight,
to save their persons; which we judge to be too great violence, for any such
cause, against persons in so sacred a calling.

9. We shall assuredly, (by the grace of GOD) still contribute, as ye
desire, our prayers, and all other means agreeable to our consciences, for
extinguishing of the present Combustion. And for that effect, every one of us
shall secretly, and humbly, mourn before the LORD, and shall search and try
our ways, and turn unto the LORD. And as we have already humbled our selves
publicly, with Fasting and Mourning for that effect, so are we ready in
time to come, to do the like, when it shall be indicted or allowed by
Authority, according to the established order in this Kirk and Kingdom. Yea,
also we are ready to join with you in the Late Covenant, so soon as we
shall receive satisfaction to our consciences, concerning the lawfulness
thereof; which as we have protested before, so do we yet protest, and
profess.

10. The Reasons which ye touch in your first Answer, for proving that we
might without just offense to any, join with you in Subscrybing the Covenant,
are sufficiently answered in our first Replye. For, First, It is not yet
discerned in a National Assembly, whether your Interpretation added to the
Old Covenant, be in all points sound or unsound; and therefore we have
reason to think, that this New Covenant, is not substantiallie one with the
Old: chiefly seeing it adds to the Old Covenant, not only your
Interpretation of it, but also a promise of forbearance of the practice of
Pearth Articles, until they be tried in an Assembly; and lyke-wyse a Band of
Mutual Defense, by force of Arms, made without the King's privitie and
consent. Secondly, Your inference of Mutual Defense, against all persons
what-so-ever, drawn from the words of the Old Covenant, is meerlie invalide.
For nothing was pactioned or promised in the old Covenant, without the King's
Majesty his privitie; but the Band of Mutual Defense, against all persons
what-so-ever, in this your New Covenant, is without the command or consent of
the King, to whom only the Sword is given in this Kingdom, immediately by
GOD. See to this purpose the words of King JAMES the sixth of blessed Memory,
in his book entitled, The Law of free Monarchies, in the English edition of
his royal works, at London, Anno 1616. Page 206. That which ye add
concerning the General Band, is also little to the purpose, for that Band had
the King's warrant, where-as his Majesty does now forbid your Covenant.
Thirdly, Although the former Oath subscrybed, did appertain only to the persons
of the subscrybers, all the days of their lives; yet you have in your
Interpretation, extended the Obligation thereof, to the present and succeeding
generations in this land, without any warrant either from Public Laws, or
from the words of the Oath it self: which also is a Substantial Difference
betwixt that Oath, and your Late Covenant. Where-as ye allege, that the
warrant which the Old Covenant had from King, Counsel, and Assembly,
remains virtuallie, and was never yet discharged; we answer, it remains
not, and that because King JAMES of blessed Memory, disalowed that little
Confession, in respect of the inconveniencie of the multitude of Negatiues, as
is clear by his Majesty's words, published in the Printed sum of the
conference holden at Hampton Court, Anno 1603. And no former Act of Counsel,
made in the time of any former King, does sufficiently warrant our
consciences to Subscrybe any Oath now, which seems to us to be disagreeable
to the Act of Parliament; and which our present Dread Soveraygne LORD, the
King's Majesty, by his public Proclamations; and other Intimations of his
Royal pleasure, forbids us to Subscrybe. And as for the Acts of these two
Assemblies, which did injoyne subscription to the said Little Confession, they
were Relative to the King's Mandate, which is now expyred by his own
declaration, and with his Royal breath, according to that common Maxim: Morte
mandatori: expirat mandatum. Extra. De officio and potestate judicis delegati,
Cap. 19. relatum est in glossa. For the injunction was given for that time
only, as we conceive, being warranded by the words of these Assemblies.

11. These that were suspect of Papistrie amongst us, have not been urged by
us to Subscrybe that Negative Confession; but only some Articles relative to
the National Confession. And as for such as receive degrees in Philosophy, in
our Colleges, they do swear only to the true reformed Religion, as it is
publicly professed and preached, according to GOD'S word, in this Kirk of
Scotland, and established by public Authority, with a general Abjuration of
all, both Popish, and other Haeresies contrary thereto. And those who receive
degrees of Divinity, do more expresslie swear to the Orthodoxe
determinations of the Ancient Catholic Kirk, as is evident by the words of
the Oath, whereof the tenor follows.

Ego A. B. sancte and ex animo coram omniscio and omnipotente Deo confiteor and
profiteor fide^ eam quae de sancta Trinitate, and Mediatore Emmanuele a sanctis
Patribus in sex primis O Ecumenicis conciliis, contra Pauli Samosateni,
Sabellij, Arij, Macedonij, Apollinaris, Nestorij, Eutychetis, and
Monothelitarum haereses proposita explicata and defensa est, esse vere
Christianam, orthodoxam, Catholicam, ex sacris Canonicis scripturis haustam;
Symbolum quoque sancti Athanasii vt similiter orthodoxum me recipere. Item me
ex animo detestari haeresin Pelegianam, ejusque reliquias Semipelagianas, and
eas haereses quae Imaginibus aut vlli merae creaturae religiosam concedunt
adorationem. Item, me monarchiam Papae Romani in vniversam Ecclesia^, and ejus
cum in spiritualibus tum in temporalibus primatum, and judicij Papalis in
religionis controversiis infallibilitatem, tanquam antichristiana deliramenta
rejicere, omnesque etiam alias haereses tum olim invectas, tum recens sub
Romani Pontificis tyrannide natas anathematizo. Agnosco Spiritum sanctum in
Canonicis V. and N. Testamenti scripturis per Prophetas, Eva^gelistas, and
Apostolos loquentem, esse nobis vnicum, supremum, infallibilem, and ordinarium
omnium de fide vitaque Christiana controversiarum Iudicem. Et S. scripturam
Canonicis V. ac N. Testamenti libris comprehensam esse vnicam, certam,
stabilem, perfectam, totalem regulam fidei vitaeque Christianae, tum quoad
textum, tum quoad interpretationem authenticam seu divinae authoritatis; and
hanc quae hodie in Ecclesia Scoticana palam and publica authoritate ex sacro
DEI verbo proponitur de credendis, sperandis, amandis, doctrinam esse
orthodoxam, Catholicam. Et ipsam hanc Ecclesiae Scoticanae doctrinam, me ad
extremum vsque vitae meae halitum constanter per DEI gratiam professurum and
pro mea vocatione defensurum sancte promitto, juro. Insuper almae huic
Vniversitati cui hunc scholasticum (docturae Theologicae) honorem debebo, me
nunquam ingratum futurum, sed semper ei ex animo fauturum, ejusque commoda,
pie, serio, sedulo, fideliter promoturum sancte etiam coram eodem omniscio and
omnipotente DEO promitto, juro.

We, who were graduated here, did swear this Oath, and now, for satisfaction
of others, we all do sincerely attest God, that we do, and shall adheare to
it, constantly, all the days of our life.

12. Ye do again object to us, that we have presumed to disallow your
Explanation of the Late Covenant, which has been publicly allowed by his
Majesty's Commissioner: adding thereto, that we will have the Kingdom guilty
of Combination against Authority, and that we will not have the King to be
satisfied; whence ye infer, that our dealing is more suitable to Papists,
and such incendiaries, than for us; who desire to prove good Patriots, in using
all means of pacification. But certaynlie ye wrong us: for what was done by
his Majesty's Commissioner, anent your Declaration and Explanation of your
Covenant, is evident by his Grace own letter, lately written to us of that
matter; whereby his Grace has declared, that he was nowayes contented
therewith, and that his Majesty has not received any satisfaction thereby.
The same is evident also, by his Grace own Manifesto, prefixed to our DEMANDS,
your first Answers, and our first REPLIES; reprinted at Edinburgh, by his Gr.
special command. To the which Manifesto, or Declaration of his Majesty's High
Commissioner, we remit the READER, for his full satisfaction, in this, and
some other points of your ANSWERS.

13. We intend not to bear upon you* and your associates, (who take to your
selves the name of the Kingdom, here in this your Answer) guiltiness of
Combination against Authority, as we have protested and declared, in the end
of our former REPLIES: but in the tenderness of our Consciences, we do
vprightlie signify to you our scruples, which hinder us from approving or
Subscrybing your COVENANT. And we are so free of that odious imputation, of
taking part with any Incendiaries, or imitating any proceedings of that
kind; as we heartily wish, and shall endeavor, to prove good Patriots, and
Christians, in such evident love of Truth and Peace, as it shall be manifest,
that we neither have been, nor shall be Authors, or Fomenters, of this
miserable Combustion.

14. Ye are sorry, ye say, That we should account your Covenant, to be a
Confoederacie against the Truth* and ye affirm, that ye labor with men, to
join with you in sincerity, and not through humane fears. Now, REVEREND
BRETHREN, in the fear of GOD, laying aside all humane fear, we do
sincerely declare, that if we thought your Covenant, in all points agreeable
to the Truth, we should make no opposition thereto. And we do heartily
wish, that according as ye do here profess, so indeed no man be threatened
with worldly terroures, to go your way. We aim indeed, at the same end
which ye profess, to wit, at the Truth and purity of Religion, and peace of
Church and Kingdom: But we are not as yet persuaded, that your way is lawful
and convenient, for attayning to this end.

THE II. DVPLY.
WE desire all troubles to be prevented by allowable means, but are not
persuaded to reckon in that number, this your Covenanting, and Conventions,
which we esteem to have been the occasion of much trouble. As concerning
your question, whereunto ye so earnestly require our Answer, to wit,
whether we would have received the Books of Service and Canons, or used such
means, as ye have used for avoiding them? ye shall know, that if we had
been of your judgment, concerning those Books, we would neither have
received them, nor yet used any means unlawful for opposing of them, (such
we think your Covenant and Conventions, prohibited by Authority to be,
until we be better informed) but would have used humble supplication to his
Majesty, for removing those evils: and if we had found no remeede thereby,
would have resolved, according to the practice of Ancient Christians, either to
flee his Majesty's dominions, or else patiently to suffer what-so-ever
punishment it should have pleased him to inflict. In the mean time, concerning
those Books of Service and Canons, we rest content with his Majesty's
gracious Proclamation: and if heere-after our opinion of them shall be asked
by Authority, we shall sincerely and impartially declare it.

2. Your urging of us again, with the saying of King JAMES, forces us to
manifest his meaning by his own words, perhaps contrary to your wish or
expectation. That most wise and religious King, near the beginning of his
Book, concerning the Powder Treason, writes expresselie, that such a rising
up of the body, pro aris, and focis, and pro patre patriae, ought to be
according to every ones calling and faculty. Which words at least do
import, that the moving of the Politic body, in whole, or in part, ought not
to be against the will and direction of the head. This is clear by that which
the same King has written in his Book entitled, The true Law of free
Monarchies, where by many strong Arguments, he does at length demonstrate,
that in a free. Monarchy, (such he proves this his Ancient Kingdom of
Scotland to be) the Subjects for no occasion or pretext what-so-ever, may take
Arms, without power from the King; and much less against him, whether he be
a good King, or an oppressor; whether godly, or ungodly; although the People
have might and strength humane. And comprehends the sum of all his
discourse concerning this matter, in these words following. Shortly, then, to
take up in two or three sentences, grounded upon all these Argmentes, Lo^d.
edit. anno 1616. page 200.201.
out of the law of GOD, the duty and alleadgeance of the people to their
lawful King: their obedience, I say, ought to be to him, as to GOD'S
Lieutenant in Earth, obeying his commands in all things, except directly
against GOD, as the commands of GODS minister; acknowledging him a judge set by
GOD over them, having power to judge them, but to be judged only by GOD, whom
to only he must give count of his judgment. Fearing him, as their judge;
loving him, as their Father; praying for him, as their Protector; for his
continuance, if he be good; for his amendment, if he be wicked; following
and obeying his lawful commands, eschewing and fleeing his fury in his
unlawful, without resistance, but by fobbes and tears to GOD, according to
that sentence used in the primitive Church in the time of the persecution,
P^eces and lachryma, sunt armae Ecclesiae: that is,
Prayers and Tears, are the arms of the Church.


3. Ye told us before, and now again do repeat it, that the first part of
the Act of Parliament 1585, is relative to another Act in Queen Mary's time,
forbidding Bands of Manrent. We knew that sufficiently before ye told it,
and passed by that part of your Answer, as not pertinent for our Argument: so
that ye needed not now again, to put us in mind of it. But we may justly
challenge you, for not answering that which we objected, concerning the second
part of that Act; for it reaches farther, than that Act made in Queen Mary's
time, and of new statuteth and ordains, That in time coming, no Leagues or
Bands be made amongst his Majesty's Subjects of any degree, upon what-so-ever
color or pretense, without his Highness or his successoures privitie and
consent, had and obtained thereto; under the pain to be holden and execute as
movers of sedition and unquyetnesse, etc. Whereunto also is consonant the 131
Act made in the 8 Parliament of King James the sixth, Anno 1584; where it is
statuted and ordained by the King and his three estates, that none of his
Highness Subjectes of what-so-ever quality, estate, or function they be of,
spiritual or temporal, presume or take upon hand to convocate, conveane, or
assemble themselves together, for holding of Counsels, Conventions, or
Assemblies, to treat, consult, and determinate in any matter of Estate,
Civil or Ecclesiastical (except in the ordinary judgments) without his
Majesty's special commandment, or express license had and obtained to that
effect, under the pains ordained by the Laws and Acts of Parliament, against
such as unlawfully convocate the Kings Liedges. And where-as ye find fault,
that we dispute from the Act of Parliament, and that we do preciselie
adheare to the letter of the Law, we pray you to consider, that the nature of
this question leads us to the Act of Parliament. Beside, it seems strange,
that ye should challenge us in this kind, since for justifying of your union
(as ye call it) ye have amassed a great number of Acts of Parliament, and
inserted them in the book of your Covenant. We omit the missapplying of these
Acts, which were made against Popery, and not against all these things, which
ye do now resist as Popish. Neither can we perceive, how these Acts of
Parliament adduced by you, to justify your union, prove that point. More-over,
some of these Acts cited by you, as namely, the 114 Act made in Parliament
Anno 1592, in so far as it is against Episcopal Government, and all other of
that sort, are expreslie rescinded by a posterior Act made in Parliament Anno
1612. How could ye in a legal Dispute, for justifying your union, produce
rescinded Acts, as if they were standing Laws, and pass by the posterior
Acts, which are yet Laws standing in vigor, whereby these other Acts are
rescinded? (...) i. e. Constitutiones tempore posteriores, potiores sunt his
quae ipsas praecesserunt. ff. de constitutionibus Principum, L. 4.

4. We do adheare in our former Replye, not only to the letter, but also
(according to our conception, without prejudice of better information) to the
very reason and life of the Law. The sentence cited by you, to wit, XII.
Tabularum fragmenta. de officio consulis. Regio imperio duo sunto: iique
praeundo, indicando, consulendo, praetores, judices, co^sules appellantor:
militia sumum jus habento, nemini pavento. Salus populi suprema lex esto.
Salus Reipub. suprema lex esto, or the safety of the Commonwealth should be
the chief Law, serves for a good direction to Rulers, in making or changing
of Laws, or in judging according to them: whence in the Laws of the 12
Tables, these words are applied to this purpose. This is observed by King
James of blessed Memory, in his often mentioned book of the true Law of free
Monarchies: For albeit, says he, that I have at length proved, that the King
is above the Law, as both the author and giver of strength thereto; yet a good
King will not only delight to rule his Subjects by the Law, but even will
conform himself in his own actions thereunto, always keeping that ground,
that the health of the Commonwealth be his chief Law. And where he sees the
Law doubt some, or rigorous, he may interpret or mittigate the same, lest
otherwise summum jus be summa injuria: But this sentence does no ways
warrant Subjectes to refuse obedience to standing Laws, against the will of
the Supreme Lawgiver, who is a speaking Law. For this were to open a door to
all confusion, which would not prove the safety, but the ruin of the
Commonwealth. As for that which ye said before of the General Band, and
Confession of Faith, and which here again ye do allege for your Covenant,
we have signified our opinion thereof, in our preceding DVPLYE. The responses
and verdicts of Juris-Consults concerning your Covenant, are not known to us,
nor yet the reasons and inducements, which moved them to give out their
declaration in your favoures, as ye allege.

Of OBEDIENCE, due by Subjects, to AVTHORITIE.
5. The point touching Royal Authority, is not so full of thorns and rocks
as ye give out, if men would be pleased vnpartiallie to hold the plain and
patent way, laid before us by holy Scripture, and by Orthodoxe Antiquity,
and by many Eminent Divynes in the reformed Church, and learned Politickes;
which we shall here make manifest, after the vindication of those three
famous Theologues, (Whitaker, Bilson, and Rivet) whom ye would have the Reader
to esteem favorers of your opinion.

6. Doctor Whitakers words against William Raynold, translated into English,
out of the Latin Edition at Oppenheme, Anno 1612. Page 51. are these, He
relates the tumults and troubles, which were raised for Religion, in Germany,
France, and Boheme: as if that one thing were sufficient to condemn them,
because once they did oppose themselves, and resisted the violence offered to
GOD'S Truth, and to themselves: Where-as notwithstanding, Faith, Oath, and
public Edicts, and finally the Laws themselves gave them warrant to do the
same. I will not say more of this matter, which is nowayes pertinent to the
present purpose, especially seeing not only their just Apology, but also the
Edicts of the Princes themselves have liberated them from the crime of
rebellion. By these words of Doctor Whitaker, which ye have cited, the Reader
may easily perceive, that he does nowayes maintain or allow taking of
Arms by Subjects, without warrant of the public Laws, and approbation of
the Prince; but excuses what was done in those wars, by the allowance of the
Laws and Edicts of Princes.

7. So also Doctor Bilson, in his Book entitled, The true difference betwixt
Christian Subjection, and unchristian Rebellion, printed at Oxford Anno 1585,
Page 382. in the words cited by you, declares evidentlie, that he speaks
of such Republickes and States, as have defenses warranded by fundamental
Covenant, in that Government. But what is that Doctors mind, concerning the
duty of Subjects, in a free and absolute Monarchy, is evident by his own
words in that same book, Page 380, where disputing against a Jesuit, he
says; War for the Catholic Religion, is both lawful and honorable, you
say: you must add, of the Subjectes against their Prince, or else you range
clean besides our question. We strive not what causes may lead Christian
Princes to make War on their Neighbors, but whether it be lawful or
tolerable for the Subject, to bear Arms against his natural and absolute
Prince. You prove, which is nothing to our purpose. But, Sir, in this
enterpryze, the person must be respected as well as the cause: Be the cause
never so just, if the person be not authorized by GOD to draw the Sword, they
be no just nor lawful Wars. Private men may not venture on Wars, unless
they be directly warranded by him that has the Sword from GOD. And again in
that same book, Page 502, Our Savior for teaching his, that they should be
brought before Kings and Rulers, and put to death, and hated of all men for His
Name sake: adds not, as you would have it, and he that first rebelleth, but,
he that endures to the end, shall be saved; and again, Not with violence
restrain them, but in patience possess your own souls. This is the way for
all Christian Subjects to conquer Tyrants, and this is the remedy provided in
the New Testament against all persecutions, not to resist powers, which GOD
has ordained, lest we be damned: but with all meekness to suffer, that we
may be crowned. And Page 513. he shows, that manifold forms of
Commonwealths, make diverse men speak diverslie of the Magistrates sword.
And Page 518. he pleads, that the Subjects in England, have not that lawful
warrant, to draw the sword without consent of their Prince, as the Germans
have without consent of the Emperor; and this discourse he prosecuteth in
some following pages.

8. The same is the meaning of Doctor Rivet, (as we take it) in his
Commentary upon the PSALM 68; where he distinguishes between an absolute
Principality, and such a Principality as is only Conditional, Pactionall,
Conventionall. Of this second sort are to be understood, his words of just and
necessary defense. But of the absolute Principality speaking in that same
place, he recommendeth to Subjects, rather suffering of Martyrdom. And this
to be his meaning, appears more clearlie by his last declaration concerning
this question, in his late Treatise entitled, Jesuita Vapulans: where being
pressed by an adversary, he handles this question of purpose. In the mean
time, we wonder very much, that ye have not directly answered to these
remarkable words of Doctor Rivet, alleged by us in our Replye, wherein he
playnlie averreth, that the doctrine of Buchanane, Knox, and Goodman,
concerning Subjects resisting their lawful Princes, is not approved by any
sound Protestant. We expected from you, a full and particular Answer; and now
again we would gladly hear, whether ye approve the judgment of Rivet,
concerning that doctrine of these writers, or not.

9. Thus having vindicated these three divynes, which ye allege for you, we
come now to those Testimonies which we promised, for clearing of the
playnnesse of the way touching Authority. First, it is evident by holy
Scripture, that it is unlawful for Subjects in a Monarchical estate, (such as
is this Kingdom of Scotland) to take Arms for Religion, or for any other
pretense, without warrant and power from the Prince, and Supreme Magistrate.
For the Scripture teaches us, that the SWORD belongs only to the KING, and
to them who are sent by him, ROMANS 13. 1. PET. 2.13.14. That we ought to keep
the King's commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of GOD, ECCLES. 8.2.
And, that we should be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake; because the Powers that be, are ordained of GOD: Who-so-ever,
there-fore, says S. PAVL, resists the Power, resists the ordinance of
GOD: And they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, ROMANS 13. In
the words of the Apostle S. PAVL, there is a remarkable opposition betwixt
Subjection and Resistance, (...) and (...); implying, that all military (...),
whether Defensive, or Offensive, if it be against the Superior Power, which
GOD has set over us, is forbidden. In like manner we read MATTHEW 26.52. that
all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Now certain it is,
that in a Free Monarchy, Subjects have not the Sword from GOD, except by the
hand of the King, to whom only GOD has immediately given it. And therefore
who-so-ever takes the Sword without his warrant, has just reason to fear the
foresaid warning of our Savior. Many other places of Scripture might be
adduced to this purpose, which for brevitie we omit, and do proceed in the
next rowme to some testimonies of ancient Fathers, and other writers.

10. Tertullian, in his Apologeticke, Chap. 30. and 33. and 37. tells us,
that the ancient Christians in his time, although having an heathen and
persecuting Emperor, did honor him, as chosen of GOD, and second from GOD,
and first after GOD; and did choose rather to suffer, than to make resistance
by force of Arms, although they lacked not number, and strength to do it.

11. The like example have we in that renowned Thebaean Legio^ of 6666
Christian Souldioures, called Agaunenses, from the place of their suffering,
who without making resistance, as they had strength of hand to have done,
suffered themselves rather to be slain, for their Christian Profession, by
the Officers of Maximian the Emperor, executors of his cruel commandment
against them. This fell out in the 18 year of Diocletian, as Ado Viennensis
writes in his Chronicle, which was the year of GOD 297, as Cardinal Baronius
reckons in his Annalls. And of that their Christian cowrage, and pious
resolution, Venantius Fortunatus, an ancient Bishop of Poictiers, has left
unto us these Encomiasticke lines, in the second Book of his Poems, Biblioth.
Patr. Tom. 8. Edit. 4. Page 781.

Queis, positis gladiis, sunt arma e dogmate Pauli,
Nomine pro CHRISTI dulcius esse mori.
Pectore belligero poterant qui vincere ferro,
Invitant jugulis vulnera chara suis.
12. Gregory Nazianzen, in his first Oration, speaking of the Persecution by
Julian the Apostate, when the Christians were more in number, and stronger in
might of hand, to have made open resistance, if they had in their consciences
found it agreeable to their Christian Profession, declares playnlie, that they
had no other remedy against that Persecution, but patient suffering for
CHRIST, with gloriation in CHRIST. (...).

13. S. Ambrose, having received imperial commandment, to deliver the sacred
Houses, or Churches, to be possessed by the Arians, declares what he thought
convenient to be done in such a case; to wit, neither to obey in that which
he could not perform with a good conscience, nor yet to resist by force of
Arms. His words to the people, (CONCIONE 1. contra AVXENTIVM) are these; Why,
then, are ye troubled? I shall never willingly leave you. If I be compelled,
I can not gayn-stand. I may be sorry, I may weep, I may sigh. Against Arms,
Soldiers, the Goathes also, my Tears are Arms: For such are the Guardes of
a Priest. Other-wayes I neither ought nor may resist. Quid ergo turbamini?
volens nunquam vos deseram, coactus repugnare non n^vi. Dolere potero, potero
flere, potero gem^re; adversusarma, milites, Gothos quoque, Lachryma mea arma
sunt. Talia enim munimenta sunt sacerd^ti^. Aliter nec dib^a nec possum
resistere.
And in the second Book of his Epistles, and 14 Epistle, to his Sister
Marcellina, speaking of that same purpose, he says; Non ego mi vallabo
circumfusione populorum. -- Rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus. -- Tradere
Basilicam non possum, sed repugnare non deb^^.
I shall not fortify my self with a multitude of people about me. -- We
beseech, O EMPEROVR. we fight not. -- I may not deliver the Church; but I ought
not make resistance.

14. Such also was the doctrine and practice of many other great Lights,
which shyned in the days of Julian the Apostate, and in the days of the
Arrian Emperoures, and Gothicke Arrian Kings.

15. S. Augustine, writing of a lawful War, acknowledges that only to be
lawful, which has authority from the Prince. For it is much to be regarded,
Interest enim quibus causis, quibusque authoribus homines gerenda bella
suscipiant: ordo tamen ille naturalis, mortaliam paci accommodatus hoc poscit,
vt suscipiendi belli authoritas, atque consilium penes Principem sit. Aug. Lib.
22. contra Faustum, Cap. 75.
(says he) for what causes, and by whose authority, men undertake Wars:
But that natural order, which is accommodated to the peace of mortal men,
requires this, That the authority and counsel of undertaking War, be in
the power of the Prince.

16. The imperial Laws do say the same, ff. Ad legem Juliam majestatis. Leg.
3. Eadem lege tenetur, and qui injussu Principis bellum gesserit, delectumve
habuerit, exercitum comparaverit. Et Cod. vt armorum vsus inscio Principe
interdictus sit. Nulli prorsus nobis insciis, atque inconsultis quorumlibet
armorum movendorum copia tribuatur. These are the words of the Emperoures
Valentinian and Valens. Et Cod. de re militari, Leg. 13. Nemo miles. Nemo miles
vel sibi vacet, vel aliena obsequia sine nutu principali peragere audeat, etc.

17. BODIN, in his first Book de Republica, cap. 10. Number. 155 and 156. ( Page
244. Edit. Latin. 4. Vrsell. Anno 1601.) reckons among the proper rights of
Majesty, the right and power to make War: and this he shows to
appertain, in a free Monarchy, to the Prince only.

18. To this meaning says Peter Martyr; As concerning the efficient cause, it
is certain that War may not be made without the authority of the Prince.
For Paull says, that he bears the Sword: therefore he may give it to whom
he wills, and may take it from whom he wills. Loc. Com. Class. 4. Cap.
16. 2. And a little after, to wit, 7. he recites and commends a saying of
Hostiensis to the same purpose.

19. CALVIN, in the fourth Book of his INSTITVTION, in the last Chapter of
that Book, disputes the Question at length, and by many strong Arguments
evinceth, and concludes, that it is no-wayes lawful for Subjectes, to resist
their Prince by force of Arms; whether the Prince be Godly, and just; or
ungodly, and unjust in his conversation, and commandments: and, that
no-thing remains to Subjectes in such a case, but to obey, or suffer. Where
understand, that Fleeing, is a sort of Suffering. Neither are his words
subjoyned in the 31 Sect. to wit, I speak always of private men, etc.
contrary to this. For first CALVIN in this Dispute, indifferently uses the
names of private men, and Subjectes: And therefore, in the 33 Sect. at the
beginning of it, he terms those of whose duty he disputes, Subjectes.
And in-deede, who-so-ever is a Subject, is also, in respect of the supreme
Ruler, Hugo Grotius, de jure belli and pacis, lib. 1. cap. 4. number. 6.
a private man. Although Magistrates, who are under the King, be public
persons, in respect of their inferioures; yet being considered, with relation
to him that is Supreme, 1. PET. 2.13. they are but private. As in Dialecticke,
an intermediate genus, although in respect of the inferior species, it be a
genus; yet in relation to the superior genus, it is but a species. All POWER
OF GOVERNING, is so subjected to the supreme Power, that what-so-ever is done
against the will of the supreme Ruler, is destitute of that Power; and
consequently, is to be esteemed for a private act. For, as we are taught by
the Philosophers, ORDER can not be, but with a reference to that which is
first. Averrces ^* Metaphys. comment. 6*
Hence KING JAMES, in his Book Of the true Law of free Monarchies, PAGE 206.
affirms, that all the people are but private men, the authority being
always with the Magistrate. Secondly, this is manifest from the very words
of CALVIN, in that same 31 Sect. for there he excepteth none from the
necessity of obeying, or suffering, when Kings command things unjust; but
only popular Magistrates, appointed for restrayning the licentiousness of
Kings. Now, where such Magistrates are erected, it is certain, that a King,
in such a Commonwealth, has not the supreme power: For if he had the
supreme power, none could force him, since an Inferior can not force his
Superior. This can not be done, but only by him, who is Superior, or at
least aequall. Thirdly, this is clear also by the examples adduced by CALVIN;
namely, the Lacedaemonian Ephori, the Roman Tribunes, and the Athenian
Demarchi. When the Ephori were set up in Lacedaemon, the Kings of Lacedaemon,
were but Kings in name, See Hugo Grotius, de jure belli and pacis, page 66
where he cites sundry ancient Authors.
and had not the Supreme power, as it is confessed by the Learned. So when the
Tribunes had their full power in Rome, the Supreme power was in the people:
and in like manner it was in Athens,, when the Demarchi had power. Therefore,
from this no-thing can be inferred for the lawful resistance of Subjectes, to
a Monarch, or King, properly so called. Fourthlie, CALVIN applying this to the
Kingdoms that now are, says no more, but that peradventure the three
Estates assembled in Parliament, have that fame power, which the forementioned
Ephori, etc. had. Here it is to be marked, that he says only,
peradventure it is so: which can be no warrant to a man's conscience, in a
matter of so great importance. For he that resists his Superior by force of
Arms, should not only think, that peradventure he has power, but should
be assuredly persuaded, that he has power so to do. When there is no more
said, but that peradventure such a thing is, it may be as reasonably said,
Peradventure such a thing is not. Neither does he give this power even
peradventure, but to the the three Estates assembled in Parliament. Hence the
learned RIVET, speaking of CALVIN his mind in this place, Rivet, in his
Iesuita vapulans, cap. 13.
says, that he gives no power to people over Monarchs, properly so called.
The same also is observed, concerning CALVIN his mind, by Albericus Gentilis,
in his third Royal Dispute.

20. The same doctrine also is delivered by King JAMES of blessed Memory, in
his Book entitled The true Law of free Monarchies, by Hugo Grotius in his
first Book de jure belli and pacis, CAP. 4. by Leonhartus Hutterus, in his
common places, Loc. 32. CAP. 3. Johannes Gerhardus in the 6 TOM. of his common
places, in his Treatise de magistratu politico, NVM. 483. where he discourses
accuratelie of this matter: Zepperus in his 3 Book de Politia Ecclesiastica,
in the last Section of the 13 Chapter, PAGE 573. Edit. Herborn. 1595. Albericus
Gentilis, in his regal disputations, disput. 3. de vi civium in Regem semper
injusta. John Bishop of Rochester, in his work written against Bellarmine, de
potestate Papae in rebus temporalibus, LIB. 1. CAP. 8. CLASS. 2. Where he
adduceth a cloud of many more Authors. M. Antonius de Dominis, in his Book
called Ostensio errorum Francisci Suarez, CAP. 6. 27. Ioannes Angelius
Werdenhagen, I. C. in his Politica generalis, LIB. 3. CAP. 10. QUEST. 14.

21. By these Testimonies we intend not to lay upon you, or any of our
Contrymen, any imputation, or to take upon us to give sentence concerning
their proceedinges: but only being invited heereto by your last Answers, we
thought it our duty, to signify to the Reader, that many Ancient and late
Famous Writers are not of that opinion, either to think the question touching
Authority, so full of Rocks and Thorns, as you call it, or yet to favor
such a defensive taking of Arms, as you think to be alleged by Whitaker,
Bilson, and Rivet.

22. Now to prosecute what remains of your Answer: whereas ye say, that
when ye justify your Covenants and Conventions, ye mean not only the last
and most remote ends, but the nearest and immediate; we pray you tell us what
ye mean by the nearest and immediate end: if ye mean the object it self,
(which the Schoolmen call finem intrinsecum and proximum) then the
lawfulness and equity of the matter, vowed and promised in the Covenant, is
all one with the goodness of the end of it. Whence we infer, that seeing
the matter promised by you in this your Covenant, to wit, your Mutual Defense
against all persons, none excepted, is in our judgment unlawful, and
forbidden by a lawful Authority; the end, of your Covenant is meerelie
evil: but if by the nearest end ye mean any thing which is diverse from the
object, then we still affirm against the last part of your first Answer, to
our second DEMAND, that Conventions, and Covenants, and all other actions, are
to be esteemed and judged of, first or principally by the equity of the
object, and then by the goodness of the ends of it, whether they be fines
proximi, or fines remoti.

23. We do not join with the Papists, blamers of our Reformation, (as ye
seem to bear upon us) because they hate and oppugn our reformed Religion,
which we love and defend. Neither do we take upon us to censure the
proceedinges of our Reformers: but we strive, by the grace of GOD, so to
carry in our own time, and to walk wyselie in a perfect way, as our
adversaries the Papists, may get no advantage to plead for their
unwarrantable doctrine and practices, by any pretense of our example.

THE III. DVPLY.
IN your third Answer, passing lightly from our REPLYE, ye fall into some
unexpected digressions, concerning the Service Book and our thoughts thereof:
we esteem it a matter beyond the compass of humane judicatorie, to sit upon
the thoughts of other men. As for those outward expressions, which ye allege
upon some of us, of not seeing erroures in that Book, or groaning for it; ye
shall understand, that such multiplicitie of Popish erroures, as was alleged
by some of you, to be in that Book, was invisible to some of us. Although to
enter in a particular examination or consideration, of every point and
sentence in that Book, is not now time nor place. Neither did any of us
profess groaning for that Book in particular, but for an uniformity of
Divyne Service throughout this National Kirk, and a more perfect form than
we yet have, that the public Service were not permitted to the several
judgments, and private choice of every Minister and Reader. Which also was
thought convenient by the National Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, holden
at ABERDENE, Anno 1616.

2. Whether that Service Book (now discharged) contains any Innovation of
Religion, or any thing contrary to the Protestant Religion, (as ye allege)
we do not dispute now. But we do assuredly believe, the piety and
sincerity of his Majesty's intention, ever to have been, and still
constantly to be, as it is graciously declared by his Majesty's late
PROCLAMATION. And we are certaynlie persuaded, that his Majesty has given
order, to discharge all the Acts of Counsel, made anent the Canons, and
Service-Booke; and are credibly informed, that They are discharged by Act of
Counsel, [at Holie-Rood-House, the fifth of Julie last] according to the order
given by his Majesty. Also, we see no such just cause of Fear, as may import
your alleged Necessity of Covenanting; seeing his Majesty will not press
any thing of that nature, but in such a fair and legal way, as shall
satisfy all his loving Subjectes: and, that he neither intends innovations
in Religion nor Laws; as we declared in our former Replye, to which ye have
not sufficiently answered. Neither was it necessary, for removing of any
just Fears, that his sacred Majesty should disallowe that Service-Booke, as
ye require; but it was sufficient, to discharge it, in manner foresaid.

3. Ye do conclude your Answer unto our third Replye, with an uncouth and
incredible Position, whereof ye bring no proof at all, but only this bare
Assertion; Who-so-ever profess themselves, to be perfectly satisfied with
the PROCLAMATION, do proclayme in the ears of all the Kingdom, that they are
better pleased with the Service-Booke, and Canons, than with the Religion, as
it has been professed in this Land since the Reformation. This your Thesis,
is so evidentlie weak, that we need no more for the over-throwe thereof, but
to oppose thereunto this our plain and undeniable Antithesis; Who profess
themselves to be perfectly satisfied with that PROCLAMATION, where-by the
Service-Booke is discharged, and the Religion professed in this Land since the
Reformation, is established, do proclayme in the ears of all the Kingdom,
that they are better pleased with the Religion professed in this Land since the
Reformation, than with the Service-Booke, and Canons.

THE IV. DVPLY.
YE alleged a before, and now again do affirm, that we have mistaken
your Interpretation of the Old Covenant, as if it had been given out
Judiciallie by you, and, as if ye had intended to enforce it upon others. To
free your selves of this imputation, ye said in your first Answer, that ye
intended only To make known your own meaning according to the mind of our
reformers, and in charity to recommend it to others. Hence we inferred in our
REPLYE, that ye ought not to obtrude your Interpretation upon us, nor molest
any man for not receaving the same. To this now ye say in your second
Answer; Although you neither use threatenings, nor obtrude your Interpretation
upon us, yet we must pardon you, if ye match us not with the greatest part of
this Kingdom, in whose name, by all fair means ye recommend it to us.
Truly, Brethren, we are not offended with you, for preferring the judgment
of so many, to our judgment, who are but few in number: neither need ye to
crave pardon of us for this. But concerning these fair means, and that force
of reason whereby, ye say, ye recommend your Interpretation of the Old
Covenant to us, pardon us, if the experience we have, both of your wrytings
and proceedinges, make us to oppose this your assertion. For in your wrytings
we expected indeed, but have not found that force of reason, whereof ye
speak: and as for the proceedinges of those who have subscrybed your Covenant,
we of all men have least reason to believe that they use no threatninges,
seeing we hear daily so much their threatenings against our selves.

2. Where-as for clearing of that which ye said before, concerning the mind
of our Reformers, ye affirm, that The authoritatiue judgment of our
Reformers is evident, not only by the Confession of Faith ratified in
Parliament, but also by the books of Discipline, Acts of General Assemblies,
and by their own writs: First, we marvel, how ye can say, that the private
writings of Master Knox, and others, who with him were instruments of that
great work of Reformation, have public authority to obliedge the Subjectes
of this Kingdom. The legislatiue, and obligatorie power of the Church, is
only in Synods or conventions of Bishops and Presbyters, and not in particular
persons expressing their minds apart. Next, this Church in the former age, by
abrogating the office of Superintendents, established in the first book of
Discipline, has declared, that the statutes and ordinances contained in those
books, are not of an authority perpetually obligatorie, but may be altered
or abrogated by the Church, according to the exigencie of time. The same
likewise is manifest by the abrogation of summarie excommunication, which this
Church did abolish, although it was established in General Assemblies, wherein
Master Knox, and other Reformers, were present. We need not to insist much in
this, seeing so many of you, who are Subscribents, mis-regarde the ordinances
of our Reformers, praefixed to the PSALM BOOK, concerning the office of
Superintendentes, or Bishopes, Funeral Sermones, and set forms of Prayer,
which they appointed, to be publicly read in the Church. Hence the Reader
may perceive, that ye have no warrant for your Interpretation of the Old
Covenant, from the authoritatiue, and obligatorie judgment, of the Reformers;
seeing ye can not ground it upon the Confession of Faith ratified in
Parliament. As for those other Means mentioned by us, to wit, Scripture,
Antiquie, and consent of the Reformed Churches; that they truly make for us,
and against you, the impartial Reader may perceive, by these our Disputes.

Whether or not Episcopacie, and Pearth Articles, be abjured in the Late
Covenant.
3. As for the second Miss-taking mentioned by you in your Answer, we did
show in our Replye, that in your Covenant, Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie,
are abjured. And for proving of this, we asked of you, what ye meaned by the
recoverie and liberty of the Gospel, as it was established and professed
before the fore-sayde Novations? and what is that period of time, to which your
words there have reference? that is, Whether it be that period of time, when
the Service-Booke, and Book of Canons, were urged upon you? or if it be the
time, when Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, were received in this Church? But,
truly, your Answer to this, is no-wayes satisfactorie, nor has so much as a
show of satisfaction. For ye are afraid to express that period of time, lest
ye be forced to grant, that which we before objected. And yet your speech
bewrays you: For seeing ye answer only to that which we said concerning
the last of these two periods, we collect, that by the recoverie of the
liberty and purity of the Gospel, as it was established before the fore-sayd
Novations, ye mean the reducing of the Policy of this Church, unto that
estate in which it was, before Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, were
established. And hence we infer, as we did before, that in that part of
your Covenant, ye condemn and abjure Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, as
contrary to the Purity and Liberty of the GOSPEL.

4. Ye seem to answer, that in that part of your Covenant, ye condemn not
PEARTH Articles, and Episcopacie, but those Abuses and Corruptions, which have
accompanied them; such as the Superstitious observing of days, cessation from
work on those days, Feasting, Guysing, and the gross abuses, which have
entered in the Sacrament, upon kneeling before the Elements: and, that in
respect of these Abuses, we who allow Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, may
swear without prejudice of our cause, to recover the Purity and Liberty of
the Gospel, as it was established, and professed, before these Novations.

5. But, first, let any indifferent, or impartial man, who knows the state
of our CHVRCH, judge, whether or not it be lyklie, that your Vow, of the
recovering the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel, as it was before
Episcopacie, and Pearth Articles, were introduced, imports only an
Intention of removing of the Consequentes of Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie,
and not of the removing of those things themselves? Truly, we are
persuaded, that they who know the state of this CHVRCH, and your mind,
concerning these things, will think this your Gloss of your own words, to
be violent, and excogitated for cluding our Argument.

6. Secondly: Who can think, that ye, and others, Contryvers of the Late
Covenant, who condemn Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, as much as ye do the
consequentes of them, have only vowed, to remove their Consequentes, and not
remove themselves?

7. Thirdly, is it possible, that any can promise and vow, to labor for the
curing of so many, and so great pretended diseases of this Church, (we mean
these abuses which ye say, have accompanied Pearth Articles and Episcopacie,)
and in the mean time promise, and intend nothing concerning the removing of
the causes of them?

8. Fourthlie, how can we, without great prejudice of our cause, acknowledge,
that these gross abuses mentioned by you, have entered in the Sacrament, by
kneeling before the Elements? (ye should have said at the receaving of the
Elements) for seeing Kneeling at the receaving of the Sacrament, is confessed
by us to be a matter indifferent; if in our Oath, we acknowledge these gross
abuses to have entered in upon Kneeling, it will probably follow in the
judgment of some, and in your judgment, who recommend this Oath unto us, it
will follow infalliblie, that Kneeling for the evil consequences thereof,
ought to be removed. Do ye not here cunningly deal with us? For although ye
urge us not, as ye say, to swear and promise the removing of Kneeling, yet
ye urge us, by your own confession, to promise the removing of these abuses
occasioned by Kneeling: which being acknowledged by us, ye will then take
upon you to demonstrate, that Kneeling it self ought to be removed: for ye
hold it for a Maxim, That things indifferent, being abused and polluted
with Superstition, should be abolished. We can not sufficiently marvel, how
ye who are of this mind, can say to us, that we who allow Pearth Articles
and Episcopacie, may swear to recover the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel,
as it was before, etc. For ye mean, that we may do so, without prejudice of
our cause. But we have already shown, that according to your judgment and
doctrine, if we swear that which ye would have us to swear, our cause shall
be much prejudged, yea, utterly lost.

9. Fiftlie: How can we swear, to remove these gross abuses entered in upon
Kneeling, as ye allege; seeing we think, that no such abuses have entered
in upon it? Yea, our people, try them who please, will show, that they are as
free from all erroneous conceits, concerning that holy Sacrament, as any
living in these Congregations where Kneeling is daily cried down.

10 Sixtlie, as for these abuses and corruptions, reckoned up by you, as the
consequentes of the observation of Festival days, to pass by that which
before we marked concerning Kneeling, to wit, that the granting of this were a
great prejudice to our cause, some of these are not abuses at all, as,
cessation from work. Again, some of them have not come in upon the
observation of the Articles of Pearth, as Guysing, and Feasting, (ye mean
excessive Feasting, for otherwise it is not an abuse) which only fall forth
on Christ-mas Feastivitie. For sure we are, that these abuses have not come by
the anniversarie commemoration of CHIST'S Nativitie, in the which by the
ordinance of Pearth Assembly, all Superstitious observation, and Profanation
of that day, or any other day, is prohibited, and appointed to be rebuked.
This the Reverend and learned Bishop of EDINBVRGH, in his defense of the Act of
Pearth Assembly, concerning Feastivities, PAGE 63. proves, because (says
he) we have lacked preaching upon Christ-mas day, these fifty seven years
bygone, in our Church, yet Riot, Profaneness, Surfeit, and Drunkenness, have
not been wanting.

11. Seaventhlie, as for Superstitious observation of days, (whereof hitherto
we have had no experience) we marvel, that ye can reckon it, amongst the
Consequentes of the observation of days: seeing in your judgment, it is all
one with the observation of days. For ye think the observation of any day,
except the LORD'S Day, to be, in the own nature of it, Superstitious, and
Will Worship.

12. As for the last part of your Answer to our Argument, concerning the
fore-sayde period of time; where ye allege, that many Corruptions, of
Popish and Arminian doctrine, have entered in the Kirk, etc. we ask you,
Whether ye design here an other period of time, than ye did before? or if
ye design only this selfsame period of time, (in the which both the
fore-sayde Practical Abuses, and these Doctrinall Corruptions, have entered
into this Church, accompanying, a ye allege, Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie?) Or, last of all, If ye design no period of time at all? If ye
take you to this last, professing, that ye have here designed no period of
time; then ye answer not our Argument, where-in we particularly, and
expresslie posed you, concerning that period of time, unto which your words
cited often before, have reference. If ye design the same period of time, then
look how ye can escape our praeceeding Arguments, concerning that period of
time.

13. But if ye design an other period of time, then we ask you, Whether it
be prior, or posterior, to the period of time already mentioned; to wit, the
time praeceeding the bringing in of the Articles of Pearth? Ye can not say,
that it is posterior to it: for ye complained of Arminian Corruptions, even
before Pearth Assembly; branding some of the most Learned of our Church, with
that Aspersion. And of Popish Corruptions of Doctrine, ye complained, when
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, were established. For the Doctrines, of the
lawfulness and expediencie of these things, are, in your judgment, meerlie
Popish, and Antichristian. Neither can ye say, that it is prior to the
fore-sayde period of time: for the time praeceeding the in-bringing of Pearth
Articles, comprehends all that tract of time which interveaned betwixt the
Reformation, and Pearth Assembly.

14. But we will yet more evidentlie convince you, by two other Arguments,
drawn from that part of your Covenant, of which we are now speaking, and from
the words of this your Answer, to our fourth REPLYE; for first in your
Covenant ye promise, and also will have us to promise with you, To forebeare
for a time, the practice of Pearth Articles, until they be tried, as ye say,
in a free Assembly. But this forbearance imports a manifest prejudice, and
wronging of our cause: for this is a fore-acknowledgement, either of the
unlawfulness, or else of the inexpediencie of the matters, concluded in Pearth
Assembly. For wherefore ought we in this exigence of the Church, to forbear
the practice of Pearth Articles, rather than of other Rites of the Church,
except for some greater evil comprehended in them? This will appear more
evident, if we shall consider the reason alleged by you, Page 17, wherefore
we ought now to forbear the practice of these Articles: to wit, because in
the case of Scandal, and sensible fear of Superstition, we ought to do so.
Now this case of Scandal is not in your judgment, a temporary, but a
perpetual consequent of Pearth Articles. For ye think it will ever
scandalize the Papists, as if we were approaching to them: Likewise ye think
every one of them, and especially Kneeling, to be inductiue to sin, ex
condition operis, by the very nature and quality of the work it self.
Whence it follows, that they are necessarily and immutablie scandalous; for
what-so-ever agrees to any thing, in respect of the nature of it, it agrees
to it necessarily and immutablie. If therefore we in this respect, swear the
forbearance of Pearth Articles, we shall be holden to forbear Pearth
Articles, not for a time, but for ever.

15. Next, we pray you consider, what is meaned by the foresaid Novations, in
that part of your Covenant, wherein ye promise to labor to recover the
Liberty and Purity of the Gospel, as it was before the foresaid Novations.
Certaynlie these words can not be understood of Novations to be introduced,
and which have not as yet entered unto our Church. For the Liberty* and Purity
of the Church is not as yet lost, yea, not impared by them, and so needs not
to be recovered by the removing of them. They must then be understood of the
Novations mentioned in the Parenthesis of your Covenant; that, is of all
Innovations already introduced by Authority, and their alleged
Consequentes, which ye promise to forbear, until they be allowed, and tried
by a free Assembly. Hence any man may conclude, that although in your
Parenthesis, ye promise only to forbear these Novations for a time, yet in
the words immediately following, ye condemn and abjure them. For the
recovering of the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel, as it was established
before the foresaid Novations, imports manifestly a removing of all these
Novations, which either in themselves, or in respect of their consequents, are
contrary to the Purity and Liberty of the Gospel. But all Novations
already introduced, are in your judgment of this kind, and there-fore your
Vow, of the Recovering the Liberty and Purity of the GOSPEL, imports a
removing of all the fore-sayde Novations.

16. To conclude this Argument: Ye may see, that we have pryed no more
narrowly into the expressions of your COVENANT, than we had reason; and have
labored, not to scarre our selves, and others, with mere shadows, as ye
affirm.

Of our ARGUMENT, Ad hominem, and the weak Retorsion of it, by the Answers.
17. Now we come to our Argument, or Syllogism, AD HOMINEM, which has so
pinched you, that ye have not attempted to answer to any of the Propositions
of it. Our intention in that Argument, was to prove, that whether Pearth
Articles be abjured in the Late Covenant, or not; Yet ye (who came hither, to
give us satisfaction concerning the Covenant) can not, with a safe conscience,
aver, or declare to us, that they are not abjured in it. This we did
evidentlie prove, reasoning thus: What-so-ever Rites are abjured in the Old
Covenant, they are also, in your judgment, abjured in the Late Covenant. But
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, are, in your judgment, abjured in the Old
Covenant: ERGO, they are, in your judgment, abjured in the Late Covenant: and,
consequently, if ye deal sincerely with us, ye must aver, that they are
also abjured in the Late Covenant.

18. To this ye say, first, that what-so-ever be your judgment, as ye are
particular persons, yet, at this time, ye were to be taken, as Commissioners
from the whole Company of Subscrybers. Truly we did take you so; and did
think, that ye who were Commissioners from such a Multitude of good
Christians, would have told us your mind sincerely, concerning the full
extent of the Late Covenant; and, that ye would neither have affirmed any
thing as Commissioners, which ye do not think to be true, as ye are
particular persons; nor yet would have labored, so to ensnare us, as to have
bidden us subscrybe a Covenant, reallie, and indeed, in your judgment,
abjuring those things, which we, with a safe conscience, can not abjure. For,
in your judgment, PEARTH ARTICLES, and EPISCOPACIE, are most reallie abjured
in the LATE COVENANT, although ye playnlie affirm the contrary, in your
Answers to our fourth, fifth, and sixth Demand. And (which is much to be
noted) in your Answer to our tenth Demand, ye affirm, concerning your
selves, That ye, in this Late Covenant, have promised only Forbearance of
Pearth Articles. We wonder much, how ye can say so. For who-so-ever by their
Oath have tied themselves to a Confession, in the which they firmlie believe
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, to be abjured, those have indeed abjured
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie. But ye in the Late Covenant, have tied your
selves by your Oath, to the Little Confession, or Old Covenant, in the which
ye firmlie believe, Episcopacie, and Pearth Articles, to be abjured: Ergo, in
your Late Covenant ye have abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie: And not
only ye, but all those who are of that same mind with you. Whence we
inferred, in that tenth Demand, That none of you can vote freely in the
intended Assembly, concerning PEARTH ARTICLES, and EPISCOPACIE.

19. Secondly, ye say, that if others of the Subscribents, who are of our
judgment, (that is, who are not persuaded that Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie, are abjured in the Old Covenant,) had come as Commissioners at
this time to us, our Argument AD HOMINEM, had been anticipated, because it
would not have been pertinent for them. But ye are deceaved, for we have
ever looked principally to these, who were the first Contryvers of the Late
Covenant, or had special hand in it, that is, to your selves, and to others,
who these many years bygone, have opposed Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie,
as Popish corruptions, abjured in the Old Covenant; and consequently have, in
this Late Covenant, (in the which that former Covenant is renewed) by your own
personal Oath, abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie. If then that other
sort of Commissioners had come unto us, we would have said to them, that we
can not swear the Late Covenant, because Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, are
in it abjured. And this we would have proved by the like Argument AD HOMINEM,
that is, by an Argument grounded upon the judgment of the contryvers of the
Late Covenant: as ye may easily perceive.

20. Thirdly, ye say, that we have perceaved the insufficiency of our
Argument, because we objected this to our selves: that seeing we think
Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, not to be abjured in the Old Covenant, we
may Subscrybe the New Covenant, in the which that Old Covenant is renewed.
Truly ye might have alleged this, if we had propounded that objection,
and had left it unanswered. But we answered it* and brought some reasons
(which ye wyselie did pass by, perceaving the force of them) to show, that
we can not convenientlie subscrybe your Late Covenant, notwithstanding of our
Judgment, or rather Opinion of the meaning of the Old Covenant. We say
Opinion: for to speak truly what we think, we doubt, and so do others
with us, concerning the meaning of some parts of the Old Covenant, touching
matters of Ecclesiastical policy, and have not so full a persuasion in our
minds concerning those parts, as may be to us a warrant of our Oath.

21. Fourthlie, where-as ye say, that it was not for us to inquyre in your
private opinion, concerning the meaning of the Late Covenant, in that part of
it, where it tyeth us to the inviolable observation of the Old Covenant, nor
was it necessary for you, to make it known to us; We answer, that we
inquired not your private opinion, but the common judgment of all those, who
with you these twenty years by past, have accused us of Perjurie, for the
alleged violation of the Old Covenant, sworn by our Praedecessoures. And
truly we had more than reason to do so; because we most justly feared,
that ye, who have so often accused us of Perjurie, for practicing Rites and
Ceremonies abjured, as ye allege, in the Old Covenant, sworn by our
Praedecessoures, would much more vehemently; yea, also with a greater show of
probability, accuse us of Perjurie, for violation of the Old Covenant, sworn
and ratified by our selves in this Late Covenant, if we should stand to the
defense of Pearth Articles in time to come. It became us therefore, for
eschewing of this inconvenient, to inquyre of you, and you also sincerely and
playnlie to declare to us, whether or not we may Subscrybe and swear the New
Covenant, as it includes and ratifieth the Old, and yet be reallie free from
all abjuration, or condemning Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie? And likewise
whether or not ye, and all others who are of your mind, will hold and
esteem us free from abjuration of them, not-with-standing of our subscrybing
of your Covenant. These Questions require a punctual Answer. For if our
subscrybing of your Covenant, may either import a real Abjuration of Pearth
Articles, or if it may make you to think, that by virtue of our Subscription,
we are reallie, and in-deede, bound to reject them for ever; neither can we,
with a good conscience, subscrybe your Covenant; neither can ye, with a good
conscience, require it of us.

22. Fiftlie, from our refusing to subscrybe the Late Covenant, in so far as
it renews the Old Covenant, or Little Confession; because that Confession,
according to your Interpretation, or conception of it, imports an Abjuration
of Pearth Articles, ye collect, first, that upon this ground we would not
have subscrybed the Late Confession any time bypast. Secondly, That we can
not swear the Confession of any Church, no, not the Articles of the CREED,
Petitions of the LORD'S PRAYER, nor Praeceptes of the ten COMMANDMENTS, in
respect of the diverse Interpretations, which men give of them. We answer,
first, that since the Little Confession, is not of Divine Authority, and since
the Humane Authority which it had, has these many years bygone ceased,
(as THE PEACEABLE WARNING, Lately given to the Subjectes in SCOTLAND, proves)
we would have refused our Subscription unto it, ever since we heard, that it
imports an Abjuration of all Rites, and Ceremonies, which were not received
in our CHVRCH in the year 1681; except we had gotten some Evidence to the
contrary, sufficiently satisfying our minds. Secondly: As for the CREED,
LORD's PRAYER, and ten COMMANDMENTS, your Argument taken from the variety
of men's Expositions of them, is far from the purpose. For, since we are
persuaded, that the Author, or Penne-men of THEM, neither intended, nor yet
delivered any thing in them, but Truth: and that their Expression is
authenticke, we are bound to embrace, and receive them, not-with-standing of
the variety of Interpretations, which men give of them: neither is it lawful
to us, to refuse our Subscription, or Assent, to them, what-so-ever be the
judgment or assent of those who require it of us: being always bound to
acknowledge the infallible Authority of them, even when we doubt of the true
meaning of them. Thirdly: As for any of these later Confessions of Churches,
if the case be such, as now it is in this particular of this Late Covenant,
that is, if we be not bound by any standing Law, to subscrybe it, and if it
be so liable to the variety of Interpretations, that it may probably import
that which we think to be contrary to the TRVETH, and if these who require
our Subscription, be, in our judgment, Opposers of the Truth, in any point
contained in that Confession, and may make advantage of our Subscription,
alleging, that we are tied by it, to consent to their Doctrines, or
Practices: we may justly, in such a case, deny our Subscription to that
Confession, for the ambiguitie of it; and much more may desire those who urge
us to subscrybe it, to declare unto ^s, before we give our SVBSCRIPTION,
Whether, or not, that CONFESSION, in their judgment, will tie us to their
Doctrines, and Practices.

23. Last of all: In modesty, as ye say, but with a jesting complement, ye
present unto us, a Dish* of our own dressing: ye mean, the like Argument, AD
HOMINEM; which is this: The Rites and Ceremonies which are not abjured in the
Negative Confession, are not abjured in this Late Covenant: But the Rites and
Ceremonies, which were concluded in Pearth Assembly, are not abjured* as ye
say, in the Negative Confession, made anno 1581; therefore they are not abjured
in this Late Covenant. The first Proposition, as ye say, is evident, because
in the Late Covenant we are bound no farther, concerning the Negative
Confession, but to keep it inviolable: And there-fore, what Rites are not
abjured there, are not abjured here. Lyke-wyse ye say, that the second
PROPOSITION can not be denied by us, in respect these twenty years bygone,
we have thought our selves free of Perjurie, not-with-standing of the Oath
made 1581, and of our conforming our selves to the Ordinance of PEARTH. Good
Brethren, ye have retorted this. Argument very weaklie upon us. For, first,
we flatly deny the Major of your Syllogism; and withal do repel the
confirmation of it. For although Pearth Articles, were not abjured in the Late
Covenant, in so far as it renews the Negative Confession; yet they may be,
and, as it is already proven, they are abjured in that other part of your Late
Covenant, where ye vow and promise, To recover the Liberty and Purity of
the Gospel, as it was established and professed before the fore-sayde
Novations-Next, as for your Minor, or second Proposition, we suspend our
judgment of it, until we be better informed and advysed: doubting, as we
said before, concerning the meaning of those parts of the Old Covenant, which
concern matters of Rite or Ceremony. Neither does the confirmation of your
Minor trouble us; for we have thought our selves free of Perjurie these
twenty years bygone, not for any certain persuasion which we had, that
Pearth Articles are not abjured in the Old Covenant; but because we did not
personally swear that Covenant, and are not tied to it, by the Oath* of those
who did Subscrybe it: which we are ready to demonstrate by irrefragable
Arguments. Ye see then your Argument retorted upon us, pearceth us not at
all: and the Reader, may perceive that our Argument has been so forciblie
thrown upon you, that ye have not taken upon you to answer any part of it.
If ye had had evidence of the Truth for you, ye would not only have retorted
our Argument, but also by answering it punctuallie, shown, that it strayteth
not you: and if ye had been exact Resolvers, ye would not have gone about to
have satisfied us with a naked Argument in contrarium.

24. Before we leave this point, that it may be known to all, what reason
we have to insist in this our Argument, AD HOMINEM, and that we have proponed
it, not to catch advantage of you, but to get satisfaction to our own minds,
concerning the COVENANT, and your sincerity in urging us to Subscrybe it, we
will collect out of that which has been already said, some INTERROGATORIES,
which we pray you to answer punctuallie, if ye intend to give us
satisfaction. The first is, Whether or not your declaration of the extent of
the LATE COVEMANT, to wit, that it extends not it self to the abjuration of
Pearth Articles, be not only VERA, true in it self, but also VERAX, that is,
consonant to your mind, and to the mind of the chief Contryvers of it? The
reason where-fore we propone this question, ye will perceive by these that
follow. Secondly, seeing ye and others the chief Contryvers of the Old
Covenant, have been ever of this mind, that Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie,
are abjured in it; we ask, Whether ye all tying your selves by this LATE
COVENANT, to the inviolable observation of the OLD COVENANT, have tied your
selves to it in all the particular points, which ye conceaved to be contained
in it, or only in some of them? Did ye by mental reservation, except any
part of that OLD COVENANT, or in particular did ye except that part of it, in
the which, Perpetual continuance in the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church
is promised? Or if that part was not excepted, did ye put any new gloss upon
it which it had not before? And if ye did not, whether or not ye renewing the
Oath of perpetual observation, of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church,
as it was Anno 1581, have not only reallie, but also according to your own
conception of that part of the OLD COVENANT, abjured all Rites and Ceremonies,
added to the Discipline of this Church, since the fore-sayde year; and
consequently, the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacie? Thirdly, seeing ye so
confidentlie aver, that Pearth Articles are abjured in the Old Covenant,
how can ye deny them to be abjured in the New Covenant, except ye
acknowledge a substantial difference, betwixt the Old and New Covenant?
Fourthlie, if ye grant that they are reallie and indeed abjured in the Late
Covenant, how can ye faythfullie and sincerely say to us, or to any other,
that they are not abjured in it? Fiftlie, how can ye, and all others, (who
with you have reallie, and also according to your own conception of the Old
Covenant, abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, by renewing of it) voice
freely, in the intended Assembly, concerning these things; seeing ye are
tied by your Oath, to condemn and abrogate them? Sixtlie, How can we concur
with you in an Oath, wherein we are infalliblie persuaded that ye have
abjured Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie? Seaventhlie, If we concur with you
in that Oath, will ye not (as we objected in our REPLYE, but ye have not
answered it) think us bound by our Oath, to condemn Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie? And will not ye think your selves bound in conscience to tell
us, and all others, that which ye think to be truth, and may make much for
your cause, to wit, That the words of the Covenant have but one sense, and
that in that one sense Pearth Articles are abjured?

25. Ye, and all others, may now see, how injustlie ye said, That we
would have the Covenanters, against their intention, And whether they will or
not, to dis-allowe, and condemn Pearth Articles, and Episcopal Government,
lest they be tried in a free Assembly. God knows, how far we detest all
such dealing, and this vindication of our two Arguments (we added also a
third, but ye have swallowed it) brought by us, to prove, that Pearth
Articles, and Episcopacie, are abjured in your Late Covenant, will
sufficiently clear us of this imputation, to all impartial Readers.

26. We did not only allege, as ye say, that your Supplications to his
Majesty were fully satisfied, by the last PROCLAMATION; but grounding an
Argument upon your Answer, to our fourth Demand, we reasoned thus: If in all
your Supplications, ye have only sought the removing of the Service-Booke,
Book of Canons, and New High Commission; not complaining of any other
Novations, already introduced: And, seeing his Majesty has granted this
unto you, what reason have ye to say, that his Majesty has not satisfied
your Supplications? This our Argument, ye have turned to a mere Alleadgeance,
lest ye should have troubled your selves, with answering it.

Whether, or not, we may forbear the practice of PEARTH ARTICLES, until they
be tried in a FREE ASSEMBLY.
27. We come now to the consideration of that, which your COVENANT, by your
own confession, tyeth us to; to wit, The forbearance of PEARTH Articles,
until they be tried in a free Assembly. And first, where-as ye say, That
the urging of the Service Book, is a sufficient reason for forbearance of
PEARTH Articles, till an Assembly; we profess, that we can not see the
equity, and force of this reason. For the Service-Booke may be holden out,
albeit Pearth Articles were not forborne at this time; yea, although they should
never be removed. And the more obedient, Subjects were at this time, to his
Majesty's laws allreadie established, the greater hope might they have of
obtaining their desires.

28. Ye bring 2 Arguments, to prove the lawfulnes of the forbearance of
Novations already introduced. One is, that the Articles of Pearth establishing
them, were concluded only for satisfying the King, and not to press any man
with the practice of them: And because the Act it self (ye mean the Act
concerning Kneeling) gives warrant, to forbear the practice of them at this
time, when the memory of Superstition is revived. But this reason does no
ways satisfy our consciences. For, to begin with the last part of your
Answer; THE MEMORY OF SVPERSTITIOVS CELEBRATION OF THE LORD'S SVPPER, is not
renewed in this Kingdom, for ought we know. And, if ye mean, that it is
renewed by the Service-Booke; suppone that were true, yet, ye know, the
Service-Booke is discharged, by the Act of Council, at his Majesty's
commandment. Secondly, the Act of Pearth, gives no warrant to forbear
Kneeling, upon every suspicion or apprehension of Superstition, reentring unto
this Church. Your Argument, which ye brought to prove this, from the narratiue
of that Act, in your Answer to our nynth Demand, is confuted most playnlie
by us in our Replye to your Answer: and we shall again speak of it in our
DVPLYE, to your second Answer concerning that Demand.

29. As for the other two parts of your reason, they are contrary to the very
words of the Acts of Pearth Assembly. The first part is contrary to the
Narratiue of all these Acts, wherein no mention is made of satisfying the King,
but of other motives taken from the expediencie, or utility of the matters
themselves. The second part is contrary to the tenor of the Decision, or
Determination of these Acts: in the which by these formal words, The
Assembly thinks good: the Assembly ordayneth: Kneeling in the Celebration
of the Sacrament, Feastivall days, etc. are enjoined.

30. We hear of a childish, and ridiculous concept of some, who think that
these words, The Assembly thinks good, importe not an Ecclesiasticke
constitution, but a mere advyse, or counsel. This apprehension proceeds
from ignorance: for that phrase is most frequentlie used by Counsels, in their
decrees. In that Apostolic Council, mentioned ACTS 15, the word (...), and
(...), are expresslie used, verse 22.25.28. In the Council of Ancyra, Can. 1.
and 2. the word (...) is used. In that Great and first O Ecumenicke Council of
Nice, Can. 5, ye have these words; (...), Can. 8. (...), Can. 11. (...). In
the third Council of Carthage, Can. 1.2. and 3. the word placuit is used, and
in codice Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae Graeco-Latino passim habetur vox PLACVIT
(...). And from the Greek word (...), the Decrees of the Apostolic Council
were called (...), Act. 16.4- Yea, also the Civil Decree of Caesar Augustus,
LVKE 2. verse 1. is called (...), edictum, placitum. And in the Civil Law,
the Constitutions of Emperoures, are called Principum placita, Instit. de Jure
naturali,. 6. and 9. Quod Principi placuit, Legis habet vigorem, says
Vlpianus, ff. de Constit. Principum, Lege 1: Where Quod Principi placuit,
signifies as much, as Quod Princeps constituit.

31. Your other Reason, (which ye bring to prove the lawfulness of the
forbearance of Pearth Articles) is, That it is lawful to swear the
forbearance of a thing indifferent, in the case of Scandal, and sensible Fear
of Superstition, in others. Yea, ye think, that by doing so, ye have sworn
Obedience to the Commandment of GOD, which forbids the doing of that
where-by others may be scandalized. This Reason moves us no more than the
first: For, as for your fear of farther Superstition, it is now groundless,
and causeless, in respect of the gracious Promises contained in his Majesty's
PROCLAMATION. But although it were a fear justly conceaved, and although the
eschewing of an Evil justly feared, be a thing good, and desirable; yet we
ought not, for the eschewing of it, disobey the lawful Commandments of our
Superioures. For this were to do Evil, that Good might come of it; which the
Apostle condemns; ROMANS 3. verse 8.

Of SCANDAL; and whether or not we may deny Obedience to the Laws of our
Superiors, for fear of Scandal causleslie taken?
32. As for that other motive of Scandal, for which ye allege, that we who
think the matters concluded in Pearth Assembly, to be indifferent, and
lawful, may swear the forbearance of them; we pray you, tell us, What kind
of Scandal it is, which, as ye allege, is taken at the practice of Pearth
Articles? Ye know, that passive Scandal, is either procured by the enormitie
or irregularitie of the fact it self, (to wit, when either it is a Sin, or
else has a manifest show of sin) or else it is not procured, but
causeleslie taken by some, either through malice, or else through weakness.
Now, which of these two sorts of Scandal whould ye have us to acknowledge,
in the practice of Pearth Articles? If the first, then ye would have us to
condemn Pearth Articles, before they be tried in a free Assembly: which is
contrary to your Protestation, and no less contrary to our Resolution. For,
if we acknowledge any enormitie in the practice of Pearth Articles, ex ipsa
condition operis, we shall be holden to condemn them, and abstain from
them for ever.

33. If ye will have us to acknowledge, that the Scandal following upon the
practice of Pearth Articles, is of the second sort, that is, is causeleslie
taken; and, that for such a Scandal, whether it be taken through weakness,
or malice, we ought to abstain from the doing of a thing indifferent,
although it be enjoined by a lawful Authority; (for ye generally affirm,
that all things, which are not necessary, and directly commanded by GOD
Himself, ought to be omitted, for any Scandal what-so-ever, although it be
causeleslie, yea, and most maliciously taken, and that not-with-standing of
any humane precept, or law, enjoying them. See the Dispute against the
English Popish Ceremonies, Part. 2. Cap. 8. Sect. 5. and 6. Item Cap. 9. Sect.
10.) then we protest, that we differ so far from you in this point, that
we think, that for no Scandal, causeleslie taken, can we swear such a
forbearance of Pearth Articles, as ye would have us. And we marvel from
whence ye have learned this strange, and most haske Doctrine, that for
Scandal, causeleslie, yea, maliciously taken, a man may totallie, and
absolutely, deny Obedience, to the Laws of Superioures.

34. The Author of the Dispute even now cited, alleges for his opinion, some
Schoolmen, acknowledging the truth of it: and he names Cajetane, and
Bannez, who (says he) affirm, that we should abstain, even a
spiritualibus non necessariis, when Scandal aryseth out of them. He might
have cited for this tenet, Thomas, and all his Interpreters, (even although he
had been but slenderly acquaynt with them) as well as these two: For they all
do say so. But truly he much mis-taketh them, when he alleges them for
his opinion. For, first, none of them ever taught, that we ought to abstain
totallie and altogether, from any spiritual duty for the Scandal, either
of the weak, or malicious. Secondly, when Thomas and others following him,
say, That bona spiritualia non necessaria sunt dimittenda propter Scandalum,
they speak directly de eis quae sunt sub consilio, non vero sub praecepto, of
matters of Council, and not commanded by any Authority, divyne or humane:
and the most which they say of them, is, that such things sunt interdum
occultanda, vel ad tempus differenda, that is, may at some times, and in some
places, be omitted, for eschewing the Scandal of the weak. Thirdly, the
most accurate Casuists, and Jnterpreters of Thomas, differ much about this
question, Whether or not, things that are commanded by positive Laws, Civil,
and Ecclesiastical, may be omitted at any time, for eschewing Scandalum
pusillorum, the Scandal of the weak. Dyverse of them deny this, to wit,
Navarrus, in Manual. Cap. 14.. 44. Vasquez, Tom. 5. Tract. de scandalo, dubio
primo,. 5. Becanus in summa Theologiae, Part. 2. Tom. posteriori, Tract. 1.
Cap. 27. Quaest. 5. Ferdin. de Castro Palao, in opere morali, Tract. 6. Disp.
6. Punct. 16. Duvallius, in 2 am 2 ae Divae Thomae, Tract. de Charitate,
Quaest. 19. Art. 5. And for their judgment, they cite Thomas, Durandus,
Almainus, Anton. Florent. and many others. Fourthlie: Those of them who
think, that things commanded by humane Laws, may be omitted in the case of
Scandal, admit not, as ye do, such an omission of the thing commanded, in
the case of Scandal, as is conjoined with a flat Disclayming of the
Authority of the Law. For they tell us, that we ought not, for any Scandal
of the weak, deny Obedience to the Precepts, or Laws, of our Superioures,
when-so-ever all other Circumstances being considered, we are tied, or
obliedged, to the obedience of them. The omission, then, of the thing
commanded, which they allow, is only a partial and occasional
forbearance, and not a total abstinence from Obedience, or disclayming the
Authority of the Law. See Valentia, Tom. 3. Disp. 3. Quaest. 18. Punct. 4.
and Suarez, de triplici Virtute, Tract. 3. Disp. 10. Sect. 3.. 9.

35. But the forbearance of Pearth Articles, which ye require of us, is
conjoined with a flat disclayming of the Authority of all the Laws which
established them. And ye will have us to forbear these Articles, at this
time, when all the particular Circumstances, which we ought to regard, being
considered, we are tied to Obedience of them; especially, if we look to the
will and mind of the Lawgivers, and of our present Superioures. We justly
say, that you will have us to disclayme, all-to-gether, the Authority of these
Law: For who-so-ever resolve, and determine, not to practice Pearth Articles,
until they be tried in a New Assembly, and established by a New Parliament;
these are purposed, never to obey them, except they be tied by new Laws and
Acts, concluded in a New Assembly, and Parliament: And, consequently, are
resolved, never to regard and obey the Laws or Acts of Pearth Assembly,
and the Parliament 1621, which established these things. But so it is, ye
would have us to resolve, yea, to promise, and swear, not to practice Pearth
Articles, until they be tried in a New Assembly, and established by a New
Parliament: ERGO, ye would have us to promise, not to practice Perth articles,
except we be tied, or obliedged, by New Laws, to practice them: and,
consequently. would have us, never to regard, or obey, the Acts of Pearth
Assembly, and Parliament 1621.

36. This kind of forbearance, to wit, which is conjoined with a plain
disclayming of the authority of the Laws made by our Superioures, can not be
excused with your pretense of Scandal causeleslie taken. This we prove:
First, by a position granted by your selves, and so evidentlie true, that no
man can deny it. The Author of the Dispute, against English Popish Ceremonies,
Part. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 4. says, That it were Scandal, not to obey thb Laws
of the Church, when they prescrybe things necessary, or expedient for the
eschewing of Scandal: And, that it were contempt, to refuse obedience to the
Laws of the Church, when we are not certaynlie persuaded, of the
unlawfulness or inexpediencie of things commanded. Now, if such a refusing of
obedience, be both a Contempt, and a Scandal, it follows manifestly, that
no man for eschewing of Scandal causeleslie taken, ought in such a case to
refuse obedience. Hence we reason thus: who-so-ever are not persuaded of the
unlawfulness or inexpediencie, of the things commanded by their Superioures;
and on the contrare think them to be expedient ad vitandum Scandalum; these
ought not for eschewing of Scandal, refuse obedience to the laws and
ordinances of their Superioures. But so it is, we are neither persuaded of the
unlawfulness, nor of the inexpediencie of Pearth Articles: yea, on the
contrary, we think that the Acts of Pearth Assembly, enjoyneth things
very expedient for eschewing of Scandal: ERGO, we ought not for eschewing of
Scandal causeleslie taken, to refuse obedience to them. The Major of this our
first Argument, is already proven. The Minor is conform to the light of our
own consciences, as GOD knows: and therefore so long as we are of this
mind, we can not deny obedience to the ordinances of our Superioures, for
any fear of Scandal causeleslie taken.

37. Secondly, that which may be removed by information or instruction, can
not be a warrant to us, of a total abstinence from the obedience of Laws,
or, which is all one, of an avowed disclayming of the Authority of them. But
the Scandal of the weak, taken by the practice of Pearth Articles, may be
removed by information, or instruction: ERGO, it can not be a warrant to us,
of a total disclayming of the Authority of the Laws, whereby these Articles
were established.

38. Thirdly: If for Scandalls taken, especially by the Malicious, we may
disclayme the Authority of a Law, then we may ever disclayme the Authority
of all Laws, of the Church or Estate. For there is nothing commanded by Laws,
but some, either through weakness, or through malice, may take offense at it.

39. Fourthlie, We ought not for eschewing Scandal causeleslie taken, to
injure or offend any man, by denying to him, that which is due to him, and
therefore we ought not, for eschewing Scandal causeleslie taken, to offend
and injure our Superioures, in Church and Policy, by denying to them that
obedience which is due to them. The antecedent is clear by many examples. For
if a man be Excommunicated, shall his Wife, Children, and Servants flee his
company, and so deny to him these duties which they owe to him, for fear
that others be Scandalized, by their keeping of company with an Excommunicate
Person? And if they may not for eschewing of Scandal, abstain from these
duties, which they owe to a private person, much less may we abstain from
that obedience, which we owe to our Superioures, having public charges in
Church and Policy, for eschewing of Scandals causeleslie taken by others.

40. Fiftlie, What if the thing commanded, be enjoined by the civil
Magistrate, under pain of death, and by Ecclesiastical Authority, under
pain of Excommunication, shall we for fear of a Scandal causeleslie taken,
which may be removed by information, or for the Scandal of the malicious, who
will not be informed at all, abstain from the doing of a thing lawful and
expedient, enjoined by Authority, and by so doing, incur these most grievous
punishments of Death Temporal, and Spiritual? We believe, that your selves,
who speak most of Scandal, would be loath to take such a yoke upon you.

41. Sixtlie, The denying of obedience, to the lawful commandments of our
Superioures, is forbidden in the fifth COMMANDMENT, and consequently it is a
sin. Shall we then for a Scandal causeleslie taken, deny obedience to our
Superioures, and so incur the guiltiness of sin? Ye commonly answer to
this, that the Negative Part of the fifth COMMANDMENT, which forbids the
resisting of the power, ROMANS 13. VERSE 2. and in general the denying of
obedience to Superioures, is to be understood with the exception of the case
of any Scandal taken by others. For if we see, (say ye) that any may, or
will take offense, at the doing of that which is commanded by our Superioures,
we are not holden to obey them: and our denying of obedience to them in such a
case, is not forbidden in that COMMANDMENT.

42. But, first, we ask, what warrant ye have to say, that the negative part
of the fifth Commandment, is to be understood with the exception of the case
of Scandal, more than other negative Precepts of the second Table? Secondly:
As men may take offense, either though weakness, or malice, at our doing of
the thing commanded; so they are most ready to stumble at our denying of
Obedience to the lawful Commandments of our Superioures: For they will take
occasion, by our carriage, to do that, unto which by nature, they are most
enclyned; to wit, to vilipende Laws, and the Authority of their Superioures.
Shall we, then, for the eschewing of a Scandal causeleslie taken, not only
refuse to our Superioures, the duty of Obedience, which they crave of us; but
also incur an other Scandal, and that a far more perilous one. Thirdly:
We have already shown, that the negative part of the fifth Commandment, is
not always to be understood with the exception of the case of Scandal
causeleslie taken. For, Wives, Children, and Servantes, must not deny
Obedience, and familiar conversation to their Husbands, Parents, and Masters,
which are excommunicated, for fear that others, through weakness, or malice,
be scandalized there-at. Fourthly: As ye say, that the Precept concerning
Obedience to Superioures, is to be understood with the exception of the case
of Scandal causeleslie taken; so we, with far better Reason, say, that the
Precept, of eschewing Scandal causeleslie taken, is to be understood with
the exception of the case of Obedience peremptorlie required, by our lawful
Superioures, as we shall show in our next Argument.

Whether the PRECEPT of OBEDIENCE to SVPERIOVRS, or the PRECEPT of eschewing
SCANDAL, be more obligatorie?
43. Last of all: When a man is peremptorlie urged by his Superioures, to obey
their lawful Commandments, and in the mean time fears, that if he do the
thing commanded by them, some, through weakness, shall be scandalized, by his
carriage; in this case, he is not only in a difficulty, or strait, betwixt
the Commandment of Man, and THE COMMANDMENT OF GOD, who forbids us to do
that where-by our weak Brother may be offended; but also he seems to be
in a strayt betwixt two of GOD'S Commandementes; to wit, betwixt that Precept
which forbids the doing of any thing, where-by the weak may be
scandalized, and that other Precept which forbids the resisting of
Authority; and tells us, that who-so-ever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of GOD. Now, seeing GOD'S Precepts are not repugnant one to
another, neither does GOD by His Laws lay upon us a necessity of sinning,
out of all question, in this case, we are fred from the Obligation of one of
these Precepts: and that which does not so strictly tie us, or is less
obligatorie, must needs give place to the other, which is of greater
Obligation. Ye commonly say, that the Precept of Obedience to humane
Authority, must give place to the Precept of eschewing Scandal, although it be
causeleslie taken: And, to confirm your Assertion, ye say, that the
Ordinance of a Superior, can not make that fact to be free of Scandal, which
other-wayes would be scandalous; and, that a fact, upon which any Scandal
follows, ought not to be done for the Commandment of Man. Whence ye
collect, that, in such a case, we ought not to regard, or obey, the
Commandment of our Superioures.

44. This your Reason can not be good, because we can easily retort the
Argument, and say to you, that in such a case we ought not to regard the
Scandal causeleslie taken by our weak brethren, so far, as to deny
simply, and absolutely, Obedience to our Superioures for it; and that because
the sin of Disobedience ought to be eschewed: and no Scandal of weak
brethren causeleslie taken, can make that fact, not to be the sin of
disobedience, which other-wayes, that is, extra casum scandali, would be the
sin of disobedience. For it is certain, that (laying aside the case of
Scandal) to deny Obedience to the Ordinance of our Superioures, enjoining,
and peremptorlie requyring of us, things lawful, and expedient, is reallie
the sin of Disobedience. Ye will say, that the scandal of weak brethren,
may make that Fact, or Omission, not to be Disobedience, which otherwise
would be Disobedience; because we ought not for the Commandment of man, do
that where-by our weak brother may be offended: and so the Precept of
Obedience binds not, when offense of a weak brother may be feared. On the
contrary we say, that the lawful commandment of Superioures, may make
that Scandal of our weak brethren, not to be imputed unto us, which
other-wayes would be imputed unto us, as a matter of our guiltiness; because
we ought not, for fear of Scandal causeleslie taken, deny Obedience to the
lawful Commandments of our Superioures.

45. Again, ye say, that when Scandal of weak brethren may be feared, the
Precept of Obedience is not obligatorie, in respect the thing commanded by our
Superioures, although it be in it self lawful, yet it becomes inexpedient, in
respect of the Scandal which may follow upon it. Now, (say ye) the
Ordinances of our Superioures are not obligatorie, when the things commanded
by them are inexpedient. We, on the contrary, say, that when our Superioures
require of us Obedience to their lawful Commandments, the Precept of
eschewing Scandal, is not obligatorie; in respect we ought not, for Scandal
causeleslie taken, omit necessary duties, which GOD in His Law requires of
us: In which number, we most justly do reckon, THE DVETIE OF OBEDIENCE,
which we owe to the lawful Commandments of our Superioures.

46. As for that which ye say, that when Scandal may be taken at the doing
of the thing commanded, then the thing commanded becomes inexpedient, and so
ought not to be obeyed; that ye be not more deceaved by this error, we
pray you mark, that a thing commanded by our Superioures, in Church, or
Policy, may be two ways inexpedient, to wit, either in respect of some
particular Persons, who through weakness or malice do stumble at it, or else
in respect of the body in general, because it is contrary to Order,
Decency, and Edification. If the thing commanded be inexpedient the first way
only, we may indeed, in such a case, for eschewing the Scandal of the weak,
forbear the practice of the thing commanded hic, and nunc, in some particu^ar
places, and times: provyding always we do this, Without offense of our
Supericures, and without the Scandal of others, who by our forbearance may be
made to vilipend the Authority of Laws. But we, can not in such a case
totallie and absolutely, deny obedience to a Law, as we have already
proven. Neither is your Argument brought to the contrary valide, in respect
we ought more to look to the utility and benefit, which the body of the
Church may receive by the thing commanded, and by our Obedience to our
Superioures, than to the harm which some particular Persons may receive
there-by.

47. If the thing commanded, be in our private judgment inexpedient the
second way, we ought not for that to deny Obedience to the Laws of the
Church; for when the inexpediencie of a thing is questionable, and probable
Arguments may be brought pro and contra, concerning the expediencie of it, we
have sufficient warrant to practice it, if the Church by her public decree
has declared, that she thinks it expedient. Your error, who are of the
contrary mind, is very dangerous, and may prove most pernicious to the
Church, for it makes the Church obnoxious to perpetual Schism, and
disconformitie in matters of external Policy: in respect men ordinarily are
divyded in judgment, concerning the expediencie of these things. Suppone,
then, that in a Synod consisting of an hundredth Pastors, threescore of them
think this, or that particular Ceremony to be expedient for the good of the
Church; and in respect of the plurality of their voices, make an Act to be
concluded for the establishing of it, shall the remnant forty, who are of the
contrary judgment, deny Obedience to the Act of the Synod, because they are
persuaded, that the thing concluded is inexpedient; and shall they by doing so,
rent the body of the Church? Truly, if we were all of your mind, we
should never have Peace nor Unity in this Church. Ye will say, perhaps, that
this our Argument, is Popish, and leads men to acquiesee, without trial, or
examination, in the Decrees of the Church. We answer, that in matters of
faith, the truth where-of may be infalliblie concluded out of GOD'S word, we
ought not, without trial, to acquiesce into the Decrees of the Church. And in
this respect we dissent from the Papists, who ascrybe too much to the
Authority of Counsels, as if their Decrees were infallible. But in matters of
Policy, if we be certain, that in their own nature they are indifferent,
and if the expediencie of them only be called in question, seeing no certain
Conclusion, concerning their expediencie, can be infalliblie drawn out of
GOD'S Word, which has not determined, whether this or that particular Rite be
agreeable to Order, Decency, and aedification; we ought to acquiesce into the
Decree or Constitution of the CHVRCH, although it be not of infallible
authority: and that partly because it is impossible, that other-wayes we can
agree in one Conclusion, concerning matters of this nature; and partly,
because if we deny Obedience to the Decree of the CHVRCH in such matters, our
Disobedience shall prove far more inexpedient, and hurtful to the CHVRCH,
than our Obedience can be.

48. Seeing, then, what-so-ever ye have hither-to said, concerning the
Question proponed by us, may be easily answered, with a retortion of the
Argument, upon your selves; that we may eschew all such Logomachie, we must
take some other course, and try which of these two Precepts is in it self of
greater moment, and obligation: for thence we may collect, which of these two
Precepts does obliedge us in the case foresaid; the other giving place to
it, and not obliedging us at all, in that case. If ye say, that the Precept
which forbids us to do that where-by our weak brother may be scandalized,
is in it self more obligatorie, or does more strictly tie us to the
obedience of it, as being of greater moment, ye must bring a solid Reason for
you, which we think ye will hardly find. We know ye say, that the
Precept concerning Scandal, is more obligatorie, and of greater moment;
because it concerns the loss of the soul of a Brother: But this Reason is
not valide; first, in respect our Brother, if he be scandalized, by our
Obedience to our Superioures, sins not by our default, who do obey: For our
carriage, in giving Obedience, is such, as may rather aedifie our Brother.
Secondly: The Precept which forbids Disobedience, concerns the loss both
of our own souls, and of the souls of others, who may be entysed to that
sin, by our denying Obedience, to the lawful commandments of our Superiors.
Thirdly. If that Praecept of eschewing Scandal, causeleslie taken, do so
strictly obliedge us, when our Superioures require Obedience of us, it may
happen, that a man shall be in an inextricable perplexity, not knowing
whether he shall obey, or deny Obedience to the Commandments of his
Superioures: in respect he may fear the Scandal of the weak, whether he
obey, or deny Obedience. For, as we said before, many are most ready to
be Scandalized by our denying of Obedience to our Superioures, in things
lawful, and otherwise expedient: and that because we by nature are most
unwilling to be curbed, and to have our Liberty restrained, by the Laws of
our Supeperioures. For this cause (as Calvin judiciouslie notes, Instit. Lib.
2. Cap. 8.. 35.) GOD to allure us to the duty of Obedience to our
Superiouree, called all Superioures, Parents, in the fifth COMMANDMENT.

49. But we, with good warrant, do aver, that the Precept which forbids
resisting of the Civil power, and in general the denying of Obedience to the
lawful Commandments of our Superioures, is of greater obligation and moment.
And, first, we prove this by an Argument taken from the dyverse degrees of
that care, which we ought to have of the Salvation of others: for this care
tyeth us to three things; to wit, first, to the doing of that which may be
aedificatiue, and may give a good example to all. Secondly: to the eschewing
of that which may be Scandalous, or an evil example to all; that is, to the
eschewing of every thing, which is either sin, or has a manifest show of
sin. Thirdly: To abstain even from that, which although it be lawful, yet it
may be, to some particular persons, an occasion of sin. Of these, the first
two are most to be regarded, in respect they concern the good of all, which
is to be preferred to the good of particular persons. Hence we infer that
the Precept of Obedience to Superioures, which prescrybeth an Act aedificatiue
to all, because it is an exercise of a most eminent and necessary virtue, is
more obligatorie, and of greater moment, than the Precept of eschewing
Scandal, causeleslie taken, by some particular persons.

50. Secondly: That the Praecept of Obedience to our Superioures, is of
greater Moment, and consequently more obligatorie, than the Precept of
eschewing Scandal; is evident by these reasons which are brought by our
Divynes, to show where-fore the fifth Commandment, has the first place in the
second Table: to wit, first, because it comes nearest to the nature of
Religion or Piety, commanded in the first Table, whence (as your own Amesius
notes in his Medulla, Lib. 2. Cap. 17.. 13.) the honoring and obeying of
Parents, is called by profane Authors, Religion and Piety. Secondly: This
Precept, is the ground and sinewe, (says Pareus, in his Catecheticke
explication of the fifth Precept,) of the Obedience which is to be given to all
the rest of the Precepts, of the second Table. Two reasons are commonly
brought of this: One is, that all Societies, oeconomicke, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, do consist and are conserved, by the submission or subjection
of Inferioures to Superioures, which being removed, confusion necessarily
follows. The other is, that the Obedience of this Precept, makes way to the
Obedience of all the rest. For our Superioures are set over us, to the end,
that they may make us to do our duty to all others. And consequently our
Obedience to them, is a mean instituted by GOD, to procure our Obedience to
all the rest of the Precepts of the second Table. Now, would ye know what
follows out of this, let your own Amesius, whose words are more gracious
unto you, than ours, tell you it: Seeing (says he, Cap. citato,. 6) humane
society has the place of a foundation or ground, in respect of other duties,
of Justice and Charity, which are commanded in the second Table of the Law:
therefore these crimes which directly procure the perturbation, confusion, and
eversion of it, are more grievous than the violations of the singular
Praecepts. Now we subsume: the denying of Obedience to Superioures, injoyning
such things as in themselves are lawful and exdient, directly procures the
perturbation and confusion of humane society. And therefore it is a crime
greater than the violation of other particular Praecepts of the second Table.
For this cause, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in his Epistle ad Novatum,
cited before, declaring how much the unity of the Church (which is most
frequentlie marred by the disobedience of Inferioures to their Superioures,)
ought to be regarded, says, that Martyrdom suffered for eschewing of
Schism, is more glorious, than Martyrdom suffered for eschewing Idolatry.

51. Thirdly: These offices, or duties, which we owe to others, by way of
Justice, are more strictly obligatorie, than these which we owe to them,
only by way of Charity. And consequently, these Praecepts which prescrybe
Duties of Justice, are of greater obligation, than these which prescrybe
Duties of Charity only. But we owe the duty of Obedience to our
Superiors, by way of Justice, and therefore it is more obligatorie, than the
duty of eschewing Scandal causleslie taken, which is a duty only of
Charity. The Major, or first proposition of this Argument, is clear of it
self, as being a Maxim not only received by the Scholastickes and Popish
Casuists* but also by our Divynes. See your own Amesius, in his Medulla; Lib.
2. Cap. 16.. 58.59.60.61.62.63. where he not only proponeth this Maxim, but
also proves it by two most evident examples. The Minor is likewise clear:
For, first, the duty of Obedience, which we owe to the public Laws of the
Church and Kingdom, belongs to that General Justice, which is called
Justitia legalis. For the legal justice, as it is in Inferiors, or Subjects,
it is a virtue inclyning them to the Obedience of all Laws, made for the
benefit of the Commonwealth, as Aristotle declares in his 5 Book of the
Ethickes, Cap. 1. Secondly: Debitum obedientiae, the debt of Obedience, which
we owe to our Superioures, is not only debitum morale, a debt or duty, unto
which we are tied by moral honesty, and GOD'S commandment, but also debitum
legale, or debitum justitiae, (quod viz. fundatur in proprio jure alterius) a
debt grounded upon the true and proper right, which our Superioures have to
exact this duty of us; so that they may accuse us of injury, and censure us,
if we perform it not. There is great difference betwixt these two sorts of
debt; and the last is far more obligatorie, than the first: As for example, A
man owes moneys to the poor, by a moral debt, but to his creditor he owes
them by a legal debt, or debt of justice: And therefore, he is more strictly
obliged to pay his creditor, than to give alms. Such-lyke, by moral
honesty, and GOD'S precept also, a man owes to his neighbor, a pious
carfulness, to impede sin in him, by admonition, instruction, good example,
and by omission even of things lawful, when he foreseeth that his neighbor
in respect of his weakness, will be scandalized by them. But his neighbor
has not such a right to exact these things of him, neither can he have
action against him, for not performing of them, as our lawful Superioures have
for our due obedience.

In what sense the Administration of the SACRAMENTS, in private places, was
thought indifferent in PEARTH ASSEMBLY.
52. In our Replye we professed, that we can not abstain presently from
private Baptism, and private Communion, being required to administrate these
Sacraments to such persons, as can not come, or be brought to the Church.
Hence, first, ye take occasion to object to us, that the state of the question
concerning Pearth Articles, is quyte altered, in respect we and our
associates, did ever before allege the question to be of things indifferent,
but now we think them to be so necessary, that although the General Assembly
of the Church should discharge them, we behoved still to practice them: We
answer, first, that the Assembly of Pearth has determined nothing, of the
indifferency or necessity of these things. Secondly: If any who allowed
these Articles, did at that time in their discourses and speeches call them
indifferent, they meaned only, that in the celebration of these Sacraments,
the circumstances of place and time are things indifferent of their own
nature: or, which is all one, that we are not so tied to the administration of
them in the Church, and at times appointed for Sermon, but we may celebrate
them in private houses, and at other times. But judicious and Learned men, even
then thought the denying of these Sacraments to persons, who can not come, or
be brought to the Church, to be a restrayning of the means of grace,
altogether vnwarrandable by GOD'S word. Whence ye may collect, whether or not
they thought it to be unlawful. Thirdly: Ye have no warrant from our
Replye, to say, that we would not abstain from private Baptism, and
Communion, although our National Assembly should discharge them. For as we are
very unwilling to omit any necessary Duty of our Calling: so we carry a
singular respect to lawful Authority, and to the Peace, and Unity of the
Church; abhorring Schism, as the very Pest of the Church. But of this we
shall speak hereafter in the thirteenth Duplye.

53. Next, ye say, if we have the same judgment of Kneeling, in the
receaving of the Communion, and of Feastivall days, it comes to pass among
us which has been incident to the Church in former ages, that things have
been first brought in as indifferent, then urged as necessary. Certaynlie,
Brethren, none are so guilty of this, as your selves, and your associates: for
ye have now made some things to be esteemed necessary by your followers,
which have been accounted indifferent, not only since the Reformation, but
these fifteen hundredth years bygone. And in some other things, which the
ancient Church did wyselie forbid, ye do now make the Liberty and Purity
of the Gospel to consist. As for us, we stand as we stood before, and do
yet think Kneeling in the receaving of the Sacrament, and the five Feastivall
days, to be Rites indifferent in their own nature; but indeed very
profitable, and edificatiue, if Pastors would do their duty in making their
people sensible, of the lawfulness and expediencie of them.

54. We are of the same judgment concerning Confirmation, which CALVIN,
writing upon HEBR. 6. 2. acknowledges, To have been undoubtedly delyvered to
the Church, by the Apostles: and with the same Author, in the fourth book of
his Institut. Cap. 19,. 14. we wish, That the use of it were again restored:
so far are we from that partial dealing with the Articles of Pearth, which
ye object unto us. What has moved our most Reverende Prelates, to abstain
hitherto from the practicing of it, we know not: they can themselves best
satisfy you in this point. And we modestly judge, that this omission has
proceeded from weyghtie and regardable causes. It was sufficient for us, to
have a care of our own duties, in our particular stations. But the urging and
pressing of that practice upon the Bishops, requires higher Authority, than
ours. In the mean time, ye know the Bishops never disclaymed the Authority of
that Act of Pearth, concerning Confirmation, or of any other of these Acts, as
ye have done, who have been hitherto professed and avowed disobeyers of them
all. Wherefore we wish you, hereafter not to bring this omission of the
Bishops, in the matter of Confirmation, as an Argument for that forbearance of
Pearth Articles, which ye require of us: for there is a great difference
betwixt the omission of a duty commanded by a Law, and an avowed, or
professed, yea, sworn disobedience of the Law.

55. Last of all, whereas ye say, that we, by maintaining the necessity of
private Baptism and Communion, do condemn the practice of this our Church,
from the Reformation, till Pearth Assembly, and put no small guiltiness upon
other Reformed Churches, who use not private Baptism and Communion at all, but
abstain from them as dangerous: we answer, that we have, in all modesty,
proponed our own judgment, concerning private Baptism, and private
Communion, neminem judicantes (as CYPRIAN said of old, in consilio Carthag.
in praefat.) nor taking upon us, to censure or condemn the practice either of
this Church, in times preceding Pearth Assembly, or of other Reformed
Churches. We can not indeed deny, but we dissent from them: and if this be
a condemning of them, we may no less justly say to you, that you condemn
the Practice and Doctrine not only of our Reformers, in the particulars
mentioned before in this same DVPLYE, but also of dyverse Reformed Churches,
and of the Ancient Church, as we declared in our sixth DEMAND, and shall again
speak of it in our sixth DVPLYE.

A DEFENSE OF OUR DOCTRINE and PRACTICE, concerning the Celebration of BAPTISM
and the LORD'S SVPPER, in private places.
56. Ye desire us, wyselie to consider, whether the desire which our people
have of Baptism and Communion, in time of sickness, be not occasioned by
prevayling of Popery, and through a superstitious conceat that people have of
these Sacraments, as necessary to salvation. We are loath to come short of
you in duties of charity, espciallie in good wishes; and therefore, we
likewise wish you, wyselie to consider, whether the neglect of these Sacraments
in the time of sickness, which is in many parts of the Kingdom, proceed not
from some want of a sufficient knowledge, and due esteem of the fruits of
these High and Heavenly mysteries.

57. It is well that ye acknowledge, that we minister these Sacraments in
private, as necessary only by the necessity of the commandment of GOD; but
with all ye conceive, that our people imagine, or seem to imagine them to be
so necessary means, as that GOD has tied his grace to them. We desire you
to judge charitablie of those who are unknown to you; and with all we
declare, that neither we do teach our people, nor do they think, for ought
we did ever know, that Baptism is so necessary a mean unto salvation, that
without it God can not, or will not save any: yea, on the contrary, we are
confident, that when Baptism is earnestly sought for, or vnfeygnedlie
desired, and yet can not be had, the Prayers of the Parents, Ambrose in
obitum Valentiniani. See Doctor Field in his 3. Book of the Church, CAP. 32.
and of the Church, are accepted by GOD, in stead of the ordinary mean, the
use where-of is hindered, by unavoidable necessity: and so in this we depart
from the rigid tenet of Papists. On the other part, we likewise teach, and
accordingly our people learn, that BAPTISM is the ordinary mean of our
entrance into the CHVRCH, and of our REGENERATION; to the use where-of, GOD,
by His Commandment, has tied us.

58. If the Commandment of our SAVIOR, MATTHEW. 28.19. Go ye, there-fore,
and teach all Nations, baptizing them, In the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, tie not Parents to seek Baptism to their
Children, and Pastors to administer, when it is sought, then have we no
commandment at all, for baptizing of Infantes, which is an Anabaptisticall
absurdity: But if Parents and Pastors, are tied by this Commandment, then
Parents ought to seek Baptism, to their dying Children, not baptized before:
(for then, or never) and Pastors must accordingly perform that Duty then,
which is incumbent upon them. This is that which KING JAMES of blessed memory,
in a Conference at Hampton Court, page 17, reports himself, to have
answered to a Scottish Minister, while he was in Scotland: The Minister asked,
If he thought Baptism so necessary, that if it be omitted, the Child should
be damned? No, said the King; but if you being called to baptize the Child,
though privatelie, should refuse to come, I think you should be damned.

59. Ye say, (to avoyde the strength of this Argument) that the necessity of
the Commandment, stands only for Baptism in public; and, that no
Praecept requires Baptism, but when it can be had orderly, with all the
circumstances thereof: whereof ye say this is one, that it be administered in
the presence of that visible Kirk, whereof the Children are to be members.
Thus, first, ye condemn as unlawful the administration of Baptism even in
the Church, Godfathers, and Godmothers, being present, if the whole
Congregation be not present there; and the like doctrine we find in others,
also cited on the Margin, Altar Damascen, page 828. and 853. Re-examination
of the Assembly of Pearth, page 227.
which sounds so harshlie in the ears of some of your own adherentes, that
they can not be persuaded that this is your doctrine. Secondly: The
commandment of CHRIST tying us to Baptism, has no such addition either of
the presence of the Congregation, or yet of the material Kirk. This belongs
but to the Solemnity, and not to the necessary lawful use of Baptism. Where
GOD has tied this solemnity to Baptism, ye can not show by holy Scripture:
but where GOD has tied us to Baptism, we have already shown. It is true,
Solemnities should not be lightly omitted: but the Law says, When evident
equity requires, ^n regulis ^uris, leg. 42.
they may be dispensed with: for according to that same Law, That which is
chief and principal, should not be ruled by that which is accessorie, but
contrariwyse. As for the place of Baptism, we may say of it, as Tertullian
says of the time thereof, in the 19 Chapter of his Book of Baptism, Every
day is the LORD'S, every hour, day, and time, is fit for Baptism: it may
want of the Solemnity, but nothing of the grace. Neither is such a number, as
ye require to be present, necessary in this case. Our Savior has taught
us, MATTHEW. 18.19, That if two shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that
they shall ask, it shall be done for them, of His Father which is in Heaven:
For, says He, where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am
I in the midst of them. We beseech you, therefore, Brethren, to take heed,
that ye prescrybe not to men's consciences, Rites of necessity, without clear
warrant from God's word, by which ye will never be able to prove the
necessity of this circumstance required by you in Baptism.

60. The practice of the Prtmitiue Church, both in the Apostles times, and
thereafter, agrees with this doctrine and practice of ours. Saynct PHILIP
baptized the Eunuch on the way, ACTS 8. ANANIAS baptized Saul in a private
house, ACTS 9. Saynct PAVL baptized the Iaylour in his house, ACTS 16. If ye
answer as others do, that the necessity of the infancy of the Church,
excused the want of the presence of a Congregation: we replye, that the same
necessity is found in the cases whereof we speak: for as impossible it is
for a dying Infant, who about Midnight is at the last gasp, to enjoy the
presence of the Congregation, as it was impossible for any of the
aforementioned, the Eunuch, Saul, or the Jaylour, to have had a Congregation
present at their Baptism, yea, more impossible; and why should there not be
the same effect, where there is the same reason?

61. The Practice of the Ancient Church, in this, is also clear for us. This
is manifest from the 76 Epistle of S. Cyprian, from the Oration of Gregory
Nyssen, against them who delayed their Baptism, from S. Basil, Gregory
Nazianzen. Orat. ^0.
in his 13 Homily, which is an Exhortation to Baptism, Tom. 1, from Gregory
Nazianzen, in his 40 Oration, whose words we have cited upon the margin.
Hence although two set-tymes were appointed, (...). Upon these words, NICETAS,
his Interpreter, speaks thus; Baptismum suscipe quamdiu minime circum te
pugnant is qui te baptismi aqua tingare parat, and qui poecuniarum ^uarum hares
futurus est. Ille videlic^^ studi^se agens atque contendens vt ea quae ad vitae
exitum necessaria sunt, suppeditet, hoc est, vt te salutari aqua tingat and
dominicum corpus impertiat, hic contra vt testamento hares scribatur.
for Solemn Baptism, yet the case of necessity was ever excepted. This is
clear by the fore-sayde Testimonies, as also by these following, Siricius
Epist. 1. Cap. 2. Tom. 1. Council. Gelas. Epist. 9. ad Episcopos Lucaniae, Tom.
2. Council. Conc. Antisiodor. Cap. 18. Tom. 2. Conc. Matiscon. 2. Cap. 3. Tom.
2. Council. Conc. Meldens. Cap. 48. Conc. Triburiens. Cap. 12. Council. in
Palatio Vernis Cap. 7. Conc. Wormatiens. Cap. 1. Tom. 3. Council. The learned
Causabon, in his 16 Exercitation, considering all this, says, Woe to them,
that in the administration of this SACRAMENT, deny their duty to dying
Infantes, under pretense of I know not what Discipline. To this same purpose
the learned Martin Bucer, in the 15 Chapter of his Censure of the ENGLISH
LITVRGIE, considering Baptism of sick Infantes privatelie, says, In this
Constitution, all things are holilie set down. This same Practice also is
allowed by Doctor Whitaker, in his Book against REYNOLDS, Page 48.

62. The Congregation, say ye, where-of the Child is to be a member, has
interest in this, and there-fore ought to be present, no less than at
Excommunication, where-by a rotten member is cut off. In this case of
necessity, there is no prejudice either to the Child, or to the Congregation,
through the want of the Congregations presence: for there is no neglect, nor
contempt of the Congregation in this case, or of any of the members thereof:
and the Child by Baptism, though privatelie administered, is ingrafted into
CHRIST, and so being joined to the head of the Church, becomes also united
unto the Church, which is His Body. If Excommunication require the presence of
the whole Congregation, because the power of binding and loosing, is delyeered
by CHRIST to every particular Church, or Congregation, collectiuelie taken as
it is affirmed in the Dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies, Part. 3.
Cap. 8. Page 182, then it is not alyke with Baptism, the power where-of is
committed to the Pastors of the Church, MATTHEW. 28. But although that ground be
not true, as we think it is not, yet Excommunication is done in presence of
the People. For this censure may not be inflicted, but only for public
offenses; and therefore must be publiekc, as the offense is, That others also
may fear, 1. TIM. 5.20. and have no company with the delinquent, that he may
be ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. and so your similitude holds not.

63. As for the administering of the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, we say it
is most profitable, for comforting of the Souls of men, fighting with the
terroures of Death; and that the case may fall out, wherein they most ardentlie
desire it, and consequently, that Pastors who are the Stewards of GOD'S House,
ought not to deny to his Children, so hungring and thirsting in this conflict,
that heavenly refreshment: which we are not ashamed, with the ancient
Fathers, to call, (...), or Viaticum, though ye seem to condemn this. It is
manifest by the writings of the ancient Fathers: Justine Martyr, in his 2
Apology: Eusebius, in the 6 Book of his Story, 36 Chapter, and others, that
the Sacrament was administered to sick persons privatelie. Concilium Nicenum,
Can. 13.
The famous O Ecumenicke Council of Nice, in the 13 Canon, and second part
thereof, appoynteth the same, or rather confirms the ancien Laws
there-anent. The like we may see in the 76 Canon, (...) etc.
of the fourth Council of Carthage. See Balsamon also, upon the 20 Canon of
the Council of Carthage, where speaking of dying persons, he says, That the
LORD'S Supper should be carefully administered unto them; and Baptism, if
they be not baptized. Hence Bishop Jewel, in his Dispute against Hurdings,
PAGE 32. says, That certain godly persons, both Men and Women, in time of
persecution, or of sickness, or of other necessity, received the Sacrament in
their houses, it is not denied. The Ancient Fathers also call this Sacrament
viaticum, or a provision for our journey. So the Fathers, in the fourth
Council of Carthage, speak, Canon 78. So Gaudentius in his second Treatise on
Exodus. So in Saynct Basil his Liturgy, we find this PRAYER, that the
participation of these sacred things, may be the viaticum of eternal life. So
Council. Vas. 1. Can. 2. So Paulinus in vita Ambrosii. Whence Causabon, in his
answer to the Epistle of Cardinal Perron^, PAGE 49, says, The Church of
England not only distributeth, the mystical bread to the faithful in the
public Congregation, but also administrateth to dying persons this viaticum,
as the Fathers of the Council of Nice, and all Antiquity, Balsamon his words
are, (...).
call it.

64. Learned Calvine was of this mind: Many and weyghtie reasons, says he,
Epist. 361. move me to think, that the Communion should not be denied to
sick Persons. ZEPPERVS, in his first Book of Ecclesiastical policy, and 12
Chapter, has these words of this matter, One thing remains yet to be
resolved, to wit, concerning the Communion of sick persons. Albeit some think
otherwise, yet it seems, that the holy Supper may not, nor ought not, to be
denied to them that seek it. For if it was appointed for the confirming of our
faith, and increase of our Communion with CHRIST; if we ought by the use of it
to testify our faith and study of repentance; why should they be depryved of
so great a good, who fight with long d^seases, or are in danger of their life?
When does Satan labor more strongly to shake and brangle our faith, than
when we are exercysed with bodily diseases? When do our consciences tremble
more, and stand in need, of the most ample corroboration of faith, than when
we find that death is knocking at the door, and that we are called to
compeare before the Tribunal of God? HIERONYMVS ZANCHIVS, is of the same mind.
Thus he writes in an Epistle of his to John Crato, Physician to the Emperor,
I have nothing to say of the question proponed by you, but that I subscrybe to
your judgment, provyding this be done when necessity requires, and it be
administered to them, who through sickness, cannot come forth with others in
public. For since CHRIST denies this to none of his Disciples, how can we
refuse it to sick persons, who desire it before they depart hence, and that
not out of any Superstition, but that their minds may be the more comforted,
and raised up? MARTINE BVCER, in the 22 Chapter of his fore mentioned censure,
considering that part of the LITVRG^E, where-in the administrating of the
Communion to sick persons is set down, says, Things here commanded, are
agreeable anough to holy Scripture: for it avayleth not a little, to the
comforting of troubled Souls, to receive the Communion of the LORD. Yea, he
has written a particular and most devote Treatise, directing Pastors how to
administer the Communion to sick persons: and yet, we trust, ye will not
call him a Papist, since he was so hateful to Papists, that after he was
dead, they raised up his bones, and burnt them. PETER MARTYR, writing upon the
tenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the CORINTH. speaking of the LORD'S
Supper, has these words, They say it must be given to sick persons: I
confess, says he, but the mystery may be celebrated before the sick
persons. It is to be remarked also, that often-tymes it falls out, that some
persons are affixed to their beds by sickness, for the space of five or six,
yea, ten years, or more: And how can we deny the comfort of this holy
Sacrament to those all that space, especially when they earnestly long for it?

65. This doctrine and practice of ours, tends not to the contempt of the
Sacraments, (as ye would bear upon it) it is plain contrary: for by this
practice, we show, how much we reverence the Commandment of GOD, and how
highly we esteem of his ordinances, which we so earnestly seek after;
whereas on the other part, the practice of others, leads people to the
contempt of the Sacraments, because they are moved there-by, to think, that
there is no such necessity and efficacy in them, as Scripture, and the
consent of Christians, has ascrybed thereunto. As for other abuses, rehearsed
by you, as fruits of private Baptism, since you bring no proof for what ye
say in this, we oppone our just denial, to your bare and unjust assertion.

66. Lastly, ye advertise the Reader, that ye think not the material
Churches, but the ordinary meetinges, necessary to the lawful administration
of the Sacraments, lest any should conceive that ye entertayne a
Superstitious conceat of places. We think, ye might have spared this
advertisement: for we find, that they who oppugn our doctrine and practice in
this point, are so far from being in danger of the extremity mentioned by
you, Altar Damascen, page 341. dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies,
PART. 3. CAP. 1. SECT. 2. Re-examination of the Article^ of Pearth, page 143
that on the contrary they teach, that the Church is a Place no more holy,
than any other, and that it may be indifferently used to sacred or civil
uses: which in our judgment is not agreeable, either to holy Scripture, or to
sound Antiquity. See Eusebius in his Ecclesiasticke History, Lib. 10. Cap. 3.
Chrysostom. homil. 36. on the first Epistle to the CORINTHIANS, S. Augustine, in
his first Book of the city of GOD, Cap. 1. Codex Theodasianus, Lib. 9. Titul.
45. de his qui ad Ecclesias confugerunt. Conc. Gangrens. Can. 21.

THE V. DVPLY.
THE indifferent Reader may perceive, by our former DVPLYE, that your ANSWRE to
our first exception, taken from the obedience, due to Authority, and from our
judgment, concerning the administration of BAPTISM, and the LORD'S Supper, to
dying persons in private places, has not given satisfaction.

2. We asked of you, in our fifth DEMAND, how we can Subscrybe the Negative
Confession, as it is propounded by you, without contradicting the Positive
Confession, approved by Parliament, holden Anno 1567, since the Positive
Confession, CHAP. 21, declares, that Rites are changeable, according to the
exigencie of time, and consequently that no perpetual Law, may or ought to
be made of them, and the Negative Confession makes a perpetual Law,
concerning the external Rites of the Church; at least according to your
judgment, who urge the Subscryving of this Covenant and Confession upon us?
We urged farther in our Replye, that the Late Covenant binds us to the Old
Covenant, made Anno 1581; for by your Late Covenant, ye profess your selves
bound to keep the foresaid National Oath (as ye call it) inviolable: and
that Old Covenant, or Oath, binds us to the Discipline which was then; and
that Discipline comprehends all the external Rites of it, (as ye have in
all your Wrytinges professed, especially in that late Book entitled, The
Dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies: whence in your Sermones, and
printed Books, since the Assembly of Pearth, ye have been still accusing us
of Perjurie.) So from the first, to the last, the Late Covenant binds us to
the Policy which was then; and consequently, makes a Perpetual Law,
concerning the RITES of the CHVRCH, as if they were unchangeable.

3. Your Answer to this Argument, is not sufficient, nor to the purpose. 1.
Ye put off, without any Answer, that which we allege out of A Dispute,
against the English Popish Ceremonies; and, in stead of answering, wish, that
what we have thence, or from any other Treatise of that kind, were kept to
another time. Pardon us, that we wish greater ingenuitie, and a more direct
Answer. Consider the words of that Treatise before cited, Part 4. Cap. 8.
Sect. 8. No man amongst us can certaynlie know, that the Discipline meaned and
spoken of in the Oath, by those that swear it, comprehends not under it
those points of Discipline, for which we now contend, and which this Church
had in use at the swearing of the Oath. Shall we, then, put the breach of the
Oath in a fair hazard? GOD forbid. The same we find to be the judement of
others also, who have opposed the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopal
Government. Since, there-fore, we desire to be resolved, concerning the
right meaning of the Negative Confession; lest by it we contradict the
Positive Confession, approved in Parliament: Had we dot reason to propone this
Difficulty to you, who require our Subscription, and came hither, to resolve
our Scruples? If ye condemn the judgment of these your Brethren, who were
Authors of these Treatises, why do ye not openly profess, that ye, and the
rest of the Authors of the Late Covenant, disallowe it? If ye do approve it,
as we have great reason to think ye do, since ye have still opposed the
Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacie, and do expresslie refer us to those
Treatises, in your nynth Answer: How do ye not see, that, with a good
conscience, ye can not require us, to swear, and subscrybe, that which ye
know to be contrary to our mind? Remember, we pray you, the words of the
former Treatise, in the place before cited, Put the case, it were doubtful and
questionable, what is meaned by the word DISCIPLINE in the OATH; yet pars
tutior, the safer way were to be chosen; which is affirmed there to be this:
That the points practiced by us, are abjured in the Negative Confession.

4. Secondly: where-as ye say, That none of you would refuse to swear the
Short Confession, because we have expounded some Articles of it contrary to
your mind* we replye, that this Answer satisfies not: for your swearing the
Negative Confession, not-with-standing of the contrary Interpretation of them
who differ in judgment from you, shows not, how the apparent Contradiction
betwixt it, and the Positive Confession, objected by us, is reconciled by you
the propounders and vrgers of it. More-over, If we did urge you to subscrybe
the Negative Confession, when in the mean time we were persuaded, that our
Interpretation of the Articles thereof, were contrary to your judgment; we
were bound to labor to inform your judgment, before we did exact your Oath:
and, consequently, by the law of Charity and Equity, ye are obliedged, not
to require our Oath, till first ye do that, which is sufficient, to make our
judgment conform to yours: which as yet ye have not done.

5. Thirdly: Ye say, Your desire is, that both of us keep our meaning of
the Negative Confession, according to our diverse measures of light, and only
promise Forbearance: which, ye say, we may do, because that we think the
points controverted, to be indifferent: we answer, That ye still flee the
point in question: for it is an-other thing for us, to keep our meaninges, and
another thing for us, to swear a Covenant, when we are not persuaded of the
truth thereof. Ye might, and may still enjoye your meaning for us: but how
we can keep our meaning, and subscrybe your Covenant, we see not; since we
think the one repugnant to the other. Neither is it Forbearance only that is
required, as we have shown before; nor yet can we swear Forbearance, the Law
standing still in vigor, and Authority requyring Obedience. Lastly: We
think not all the points contraverted, to be indifferent, as was before
declared.

6. Thus it may appear, how ye have dealt with our SORITES, as ye call it.
The like dealing we find anent our DILEMMA; the Horns whereof, (as ye
speak) ye labor to turn against our selves, by asking, To which of the
members of the Distinction, we refer Pearth articles and Episcopacie? If, say
ye, they were abjured in the Negative Confession, we are perjured for the
practicing of them: and if left indifferent, by that Confession, we may,
not-with-standing of that Confession, forbear the practice of them. First,
Your Question is not pertinent: For the Distinction is not ours, but yours. And
to what purpose is it to you, to know, to what member of your Distinction, we
refer the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopacie? Secondly: There is no
strength in either of the Horns of your DILEMMA: For, by turning it wrong, you
have made it your own. The one Horn is, That if the Articles of Pearth, and
Episcopacie, be left indifferent, by the Short Confession, we may forbear
the practice of them. First, This meets not the Horn of our Dilemma, which
was, if we be not tied, by the Negative Confession, to the omission of these
things; then why have ye, in all your Wrytinges against us, exprobrated to
us, Perjurie, for violating of the Oath contained in that Confession? To this
no word by you is answered here. Secondly: Suppone these things were left
indifferent by the Negative Confession; yet may we not forbear the practice
of them: because, since that Confession, Laws have passed on them; which
remaining in vigor, require our Obedience, as we said before.

7. The other Horn of your Dilemma, is, that if these points were abjured for
ever, before Pearth Assembly, then we, who practice them, are perjured. To
which we answer, That it follows not: for we never did swear to that
Negative Confession. And there-fore, though these points were abjured
there-in, yet are we free from all guiltiness of Perjurie. And, in the mean
time, ye have not resolved, how he who is persuaded, of the lawfulness of
those points, can swear the Negative Confession, if by it the Swearer be
tied, to the abjuring of those points, which was the other part of our
Dilemma. Thus, if ye will consider rightly, ye may perceive, that, our
Dilemma stands vnmoved, with the Horns of it still toward you. Ye farther
insinuate, that our Reasons, are not solid and grave, but velitations of such
a sort as ye looked not for. Let the judicious Reader, pronounce his sentence
of this; only we wish, that ye had chosen rather to satisfy, than to
contemn our Reasons. That which ye here again add, concerning the change
of Commissioners, is answered in our fourth DVPLYE.

8. To give light to your former Discourse, ye subjoyne a Distinction of
Discipline, into three members: First, ye say, It is taken for the Rule of
Government of the Church, and Censure of Manners, by Office-bearers appointed
by CHRIST: and thus, ye say, it is unchangeable. Secondly; For Constitutions
of Counsels, and Acts of Parliament, about matters of Religion: And thus, ye
say, it is alterable, or constant, according to the nature of particular
Objectes. Thirdly: For the ordering of Circumstances, to be observed in all
actions, Divine, and Humane: and so ye say it is variable. First by these
Distinctions, the matter seems rather to be obscured, than cleared. For ye
do not express, in which of these senses the Discipline mentioned in the
Negative Confession, is to be taken, which was the point required of you.

9. Secondly: Ye seem by this Distinction, to entangle your selves yet more.
For, first, if ye take the name of Discipline, in any one, or any two of
these senses, what say ye to these following words of your Dispute against
the English Popish Ceremonies, Part 4. Cap. 8. Sect. 8? The Bishop does but
needleslie question, what is meaned by the Discipline where-of the Oath
speaks. For howsoever in Ecclesiastical use, it signifies often-tymes, that
Policy, which stands in the censuring of Manners; yet in the Oath it must
be taken in the largest sense; namely, for the whole Policy of the Church.
For, 1. The whole Policy of this Church, did, at that time, go under the name
of Discipline: and those two Books wherein this Policy is contained, were
called The Books of Discipline. And without all doubt, they who swear the
Oath, meaned by Discipline, that whole Policy of the Church which is contained
in those Books.

10. Secondly, when that Little Confession was framed, the Government of the
Church was only by Presbyters, and not by Bishops: and, there-fore, if ye
think, that the name of Discipline, in that Confession, comprehends under it
the first part of your Distinction, (which, as we conceive, ye will not
deny) ye may easily perceive, that we are urged by you, to swear, and
subscrybe, against our Consciences; since we think the Rule of the
Government of the Church, which then was, to be changeable; and, that the
Government was lawfully changed, by following Assemblies, and Parliamentes,
from Presbyters, to Bishops.

11. Thirdly: If these Constitutions of Councels, concerning Objects
alterable, mentioned in the second member of your Distinction, be one, and the
same, with ordering of variable Circumstances, mentioned in the third member;
why have ye distinguished the one from the other? But, if they be different,
then ye grant, that Ecclesiasticke Constitutions, may be made concerning
some alterable matters of Religion, which are not bare Circumstances; which is
repugnant to your ordinary Doctrine; See the Dispute against the English
Popish Ceremonies, part. 3. cap. 7. sect. 5.
where-by ye maintain, that nothing changeable, is lest to the Determination
of the Church, in matters of Religion; but only Circumstances of Actions. We
can not see, how ye can maintain this Doctrine, and yet oppose the
Determinations of the Church, concerning Ceremonies, which are indifferent.

12. We had reason to inquyre your judgment, concerning Rites or Ceremonies,
which are not of Divine Institution, whether they be lawful, or not, though
ye still shun the declaring of it. Since by your Covenant, ye intend a
reformation of Religion, and a recovering of the Liberty, and Purity of the
Gospel, as ye speak; if ye in your judgment, condemn such Ceremonies, (as
ye insinuate) we can not expect, but that, if ye obtain your desires, all
such Rites shall be expelled and condemned, especially since by this your
Late Covenant, ye tie your selves to that Old Covenant, where-in ye
disclayme and detest all Rites brought into the Church, The late Confession of
Helvetia, cap. 27. Confession of Bohemia, cap. 15. English Confession, art. 15.
Confessio of Auspurg, art. 15. art. 7. Confession of Wirtemberg. art. 35.
Confession of Sweueland, cap. 14. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10.. 30.
Oecolampadius Epist. Lib. 4. page 818. Zepperus Polit. Eccles, page
138.142.143. Zanchius, in quarium Praeceptum, Melanchthon, in many places, etc.
without the word of GOD. Now, we can not concur with you, for promoving
this end, because such a judgment, is plain contrary to ours, yea,
contrary to the universal judgment and practice, of the Ancient Kirk,
repugnant also to the judgment of the Protestant Churches, and most famous
Divynes therein, as may appear by the quotations on the margin. But if ye
be of the same mind with us, and think, that there are some Rites of that
kind lawful, why do you hide your mind from us, and others, since the
acknowledgement and manifesting of this Truth, would be no small advancement
to your cause, by removing this great offense?

Of Matrimonial Benediction, and Godfathers in Baptism.
13. As for solemn blessing of Marriage, we asked, what warrant ye had for
it, by Praecept or Practice, set down in GOD'S word. In your Answer ye
insinuate, that it is a blessing of the people commanded in the Law, and more
playnlie we find this set down in the Dispute, against the English Popish
Ceremonies, PART. 3. CAP. 2. SECT. 10. Yet plain it is from Scripture it
self, that Matrimonial Benediction, ought to be given by a Pastor, for GOD
has commanded His Ministers, to bless His people, (NVM. 6.) First, who ever
before you, did ground the necessity of solemn blessing of Marriage upon
these words, NVM. 6.23. Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, saying, On this
wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them: The LORD bless
thee, and keep thee: etc. Learned Melanchton, was not so well versed in
Scriptures, as to see this. For he says in his Epistles, Page 328. Ye see
that the Rite of the Ancients is, that the Brydegroome and Bryde, are joined
before the Altar, in the sight of GOD, and with the incalling of GOD. Which
custom undoubtedly has been ordained by the first Fathers, that we may
consider that this conjunction was appointed by GOD, and is assisted by Him.

14. Secondly: By this commandment of GOD, to bless the people, NVM. 6.
either there is a necessity laid upon the Church, to bless Marriages
solemnlie, or not. If ye say, there is not a necessity, then there is no
commandment of GOD there-anent, for it is necessary to obey GOD'S
Commandment. If ye say, there is a necessity, what say ye then to your
Friend Didoclaue, who in his Altar of Damascus, Page 866, affirms, that
neither the presence of the Congregation, nor blessing of the Minister, is
necessary to this action? And if ye dissent heere-in from him, ye are holden
to prove your opinion, by a necessary consequence from holy Scripture, which
we are persuaded ye are not able to do.

15. Thirdly: The Commandment, To bless the people, is no less, if not
more general, than that, 1. COR. 14.40. Let all things be done decently,
and in order: on the which words, both Ancient and Recent Divines, do ground
the lawfullnesse of the Ceremonies which we allow.

16. Fourthlie: Since that Commandment, of blessing the People, is general,
what reason have ye, for not including other civil important Contractes,
especially that are performed with a Vow, or Promissorie Oath? A Vow made to
GOD, is a COVENANT with GOD, as well as the Matrimonial Oath. All Vows and
Oaths, are Acts of Religious Worship, although they be joined to Civil
Contractes: and, there-fore, if because of the COVENANT with GOD, ye bless
Marriage solemnlie, ye ought to do the same, to other Civil Contractes,
where-in there is the like COVENANT, by virtue of an Oath or Vow.

17. Fiftlie: Where-as ye say, that though Marriage were a Paction, meerlie
Civil, yet because it is so important, ye would not with-holde Ecclesiasticke
Benediction from it, not-with-standing of the abuse of Popery: we would
understand, how this agrees with the current Doctrine of those that are of
your mind: for we read in the Abridgement of Lincoln, Page 17, that we
should cast away even such things, as had a good original, (if they be not
still necessary, and commanded of GOD) when once they are known to be
defiled with Idolatry, or abused by it. So in The Dispute against the English
Popish Ceremonies, Part 3. Cap. 2. Sect. 2. it is affirmed, that Rites,
Ancient, lawful, and agreeable to GOD'S Word, should, not-with-standing,
necessarily be abolished, because of their superstition, and wicked abuse.
Ye add, that ye will not use Marriage superstitiouslie, according to the
praescript of the Service-booke. Ye did not find the Service-Booke, neither
in our Demaundes, nor in our Replies; yet we know not, how ye so often
reach unto it.

18. Lastly: Of the Stipulation of Godfathers in Baptism, instanced by us,
in our fifth Demand, ye have spoken nothing particularly, either in your
first or second Aunsweres. We have no Praecept, or example of it in holy
Scripture: yea, some of our learned Divines affirm, that it was instituted by
Pope Higynus: See PETER MARTYR, on the 6 CHAP. of the Epistle to the ROMANS and
GERARDVS, in Loc. Theolog. Tom. 4.
and ye will not deny, that it has been much abused in Popery. How
comes it to pass, then, that this Ceremony is allowed, and used by some of
you? We say, some; for we are informed, that some of your mind, do not use
it at all. See D. Morton, in his Defense of the three Ceremonies, Page 24.

THE VI. DVPLY.
IN your first Answer to our sixth Demand, ye answered nothing to that, which
we affirmed concerning the judgment of Divynes, Ancient and Modern, who
either have absolutely allowed these Rites, which were concluded in Pearth
Assembly, or else have thought them tolerable, and such as ought not to make a
stir in the Church: Neither did ye touch that, which we objected,
concerning the venerable custom, and practice of the Ancient Church, and the
most eminent lights of it, which ye condemn in your Interpretation of the
Negative Confession, contained in the Late Covenant. Wherefore, in our Replye
to that Answer of yours, we did hold your silence, for a granting of the
Truth of that which we said, concerning so many Divynes, Ancient and
Modern, who stand for us. Now in your second Answer to that Demand, ye
labor to bereave us of this advantage, and granting that Divynes, both
Ancient and Modern, are against you, concerning the the lawfulness of things
controverted, (a thing to be noted by the Reader, and which should make you
more sparing in your speeches of us who favor Pearth Articles, than ye are)
ye say, first, that Divynes, Ancient, and Modern, are against us also: and
that both these propositions may be true, in respect they are both indefinite
in a matter contingent. But our Propositions concerning the judgment of
Divynes who stand for us, was more than indefinite. For all-bee-it we said
not, that all are for us; yet we said, that many, yea, so many; meaning,
that a great many are for us, and against you, in matters of lawfullnesse, and
vnlawfullnesse; and, consequently, in matters of Faith. This expression of the
number, ye were glad to pass by; because ye can not say the like of these,
who favor your judgment, concerning the vnlawfullnesse of those things. For,
scarce know we any Modern Divines, without his Majesty's Dominions, that
peremptorlie condemn these Rites, as unlawful, which were concluded in Pearth
Assembly: and of Auntientes, we mean the Fathers of the Ancient Church, we
know none at all, who are of your mind. How is it, then, that for these your
New Positions, ye make such stir, and do take such Dangerous Courses in
hand?

Secondly: Ye say, that almost all Divines allow of such a Forbearance, of
things indifferent, as ye require of us. But ye will not be able to make
this good: For, who of our Divines, have anie-where allowed, in Subjectes such
a Forbearance of things indifferent, and lawful, as is conjoined with a
total and sworn Disobedience of standing Laws, against the Prohibition of
their Superioures?

Thirdly: That which ye say, concerning Innovations allreadie introduced; to
wit, that no-thing is required of us, concerning them, but a Forbearance of
them for a time; and, that we may condescende to it, without either
Disobedience to Authority, or wronging of our Flock; it is allreadie refuted,
in the two former DVPLYES.

THE VII. DVPLY.
OUR REASON proponed in the seventh DEMAND, is not sufficiently answered,
neither the Impediment removed, as we have formerlie made manifest,
especially in our fourth DVPLY, Where-as, for removing of our Scruple,
concerning your Interpretation of the Short Confession, ye tell us, that ye
urge not upon us your meaning, but leave us to our own, till the matter be
examined in an Assembly: We answer; We love not the swearing of an Oath,
without clear Interpretation thereof; and we approve not Subscription of
such a Covenant, with diverse, or doubtful meaninges: neither do we think
that a convenient mean, for solid Pacification. And as we are free, in
professing our meaning, concerning the Pearth Articles, and Episcopie; so we
require of you the like playnnesse, or then the reason of your Retyrednesse.

2. The Pearth Articles ye do vnjustlie call Novations, if by this name ye
understand, things repugnant to our Reformed Religion, or forbidden by our
Public Laws: for these Articles are not of this sort. Those of them which
we call Necessary, the Assembly of Pearth did not conclude as indifferent,
(as ye allege) neither can any such thing be inferred from the words of the
Acts of that Assembly. There-fore, we have no reason to change this opinion,
as ye would have us to do. We hold all the five points, to be Lawful, and
Laudable, and some of them more than Indifferent, which also the words of the
Synod it self do implye: So that, without just reason, it has pleased you
to say, that things formerlie indifferent, are become necessary; and what was
but lawful before, and had much a-doe to gain that Reputation, is now become
Laudable. Thus, again, we do playnlie declare unto you, that the cause of
our unwillingness to Subscrybe, or promise Forbearance, is both the
Commandment of Authority, and also the Necessity and Excellency of some of
the things commanded: besides that, we think them all Lawful, and
Laudable. What we would do, at the Commandment of Authority, in the
Forbearance of the Practice of those things, for the Peace of the Church, and
Kingdom, shall be declared in our DVPLY to your thirteenth ANSWER, where-in
ye urge this point again.

THE VIII. DVPLY.
WHERE-AS ye do remit the Reader, to your former Answer, and our Replye; we
also remit him there-to, and to our first Duplye; hoping that he shall rest
satisfied therewith.

2. We have, in those places, answered your Argument, concerning your
Swearing, the Defense of the King, and his Authority, with a Specification, as
ye call it; and have shown, that what has not been looked to so narrowly,
in this matter heere-to-fore, is requisite now, for the Reasons expressed in
our eight Replye, and first Duplye. Concerning the full Expression, of the
Loyalty of your Intentions, to maintain the King's Person, and Honor;
whether, or not, ye have given just Satisfaction, to those who are nearest to
the King's Majesty, (as ye say) we refer you, and the Readers, to that,
which ye, and they, will find near the end of our first Duplye. We wonder
greatly, ye should affirm, that we, by craving Resolution, do wrong the
King, and our selves; or that ye, by giving of it, should wrong them who are
nearest his Majesty, and also the Covenant, and the Subscrybers thereof. For
our requyring of resolution, in this matter of so great importance, is a
pregnant Argument of our loyalty toward our dread Soveraygne, and of our
care, to have always our own consciences void of offense, toward GOD, and
toward Men. And your giving of satisfaction unto us, would have served for
farther clearing of your Covenant, and the subscriptions thereof. Your
pretense, that by giving us satisfaction, ye should wrong them who are nearest
his Majesty, is grounded upon a wrong supposition, as if they had already
received satisfaction by your Declaration.

3. GOD is witness, we do not wittinglie and willingly multiply doubts,
for hindering a good work, or to oppose against a shyning light, (as ye would
have the Reader to think of us) but in all humility, and uprightness of
heart, do declare our mind, and do intimate our unaffected scruples. And we
think it very pertinent, at this time, to crave resolution of them, and to
desire your Answer, concerning this main duty, which is not fully
expressed in your Covenant; where-as a more full expression of it, had been
very needful, at this time.

4. Lastly: Where-as ye complain, that we took not sufficient notice of
you, while ye were amonst us; ye may easily consider, that our public
Charges, and Employmentes, together with the shortness of the time of your
abode here, do sufficiently vindicate us, from any imputation of Neglect in
that kind: and our doors were not closed, if it had pleased you, in
Brotherly kyndnesse, to have visited us: which we ought rather to have
exspected of you, seeing ye came undesired, to the place of our Stations, to
deal with us, and also to deal with our people, against our will, before we
had received satisfaction.

THE IX. DVPLY.
AS ye do refer the Reader, to your former Answers; so do we refer him
to our former Replies, and Duplyes.

2. The meaning of the Act of the Assembly of Pearth, citing the words of the
PSALM 95, is not (as ye do interpret it) any perverting of the Text,
neither tends it to infer there-vpon, absolute necessity of Kneeling, in
all worshipping of GOD, or in this part of His worship, in the celebration of
the holy Communion: but only to infer the Lawfullnesse, and commendable
Decency of Kneeling, in Divine Worship; and that it is such a Gesture, as our
lawful Superioures may enjoyne to be used, in GOD'S Worship; and that
Religious Adoration, and Kneeling, is to be done to GOD only, although they
sin not, who use another Gesture, where this is not required by Authority,
but another appointed, or permitted.

3. We do not kneel before the Sacramental Elements, making them the
Object of our Adoration, either Mediate, or Immediate: neither does the Act of
Pearth Assembly import any such thing. But all our Adoration, both outward,
and inward, is immediately directed to GOD only, with Prayer, and
Thankes-giving, at the receaving of so great a Benefit. Where-fore, your
objecting of Idolatry, against us here, and in your other Treatises, is most
unjust. We marvel also, how ye do here refer us, to those Treatises,
which in your twelfth Answer, ye seem to disclayme, finding fault, that
any of us should lay hold on them, or build any thing upon them. As
lyke-wyse ye here allege, That the Assembly of Pearth made Kneeling
necessary in all points of GODS Worship; and, consequently, in receaving the
holy Eucharist: not remembering, that in your seventh Answer, ye said,
the Assembly had concluded the five Articles as indifferent.

4. Concerning the Service-Booke, (which now is not urged) we have already
answered. Neither find we any reason, of your uncharitable construction of
us, or of the disposition of the people, as if they were now become
Superstitious. Nor does this time give any just cause of such fears, as are
sufficient to overthrowe the reasons of that Act of Pearth Assembly.

5. We did not in malice, but in love, say, that such a defense as ye
profess here, according to your Protestation, and such meetinges and
conventions do require the Kings consent, and Authority, to make them
lawful, according to our judgment: where-of some reasons we have expressed
before in our second Replye, which as yet ye have not satisfied.

6. It seems, that ye are either not able, or not willing, to answer
particularly and playnlie, to our intergatories proponed in our nynth Replye:
and we would understand some reason, why ye do so, in such a free and
brotherly conference; seeing although ye do otherwise interpret our meaning,
yet truly we did not propone them to be snares to you, but to obtain
satisfaction to our selves and others, for a peaceable end. As for your
questions, which ye throw against us, with plain profession to work us
coffeehouse thereby, we shall here make answer to them in meekness, and
evident demonstration of our peaceable disposition.

QVAEST. Answered.
7. YOur first Quaestion, concerning the Service-Booke, and book of Canons, is
no-wayes pertinentlie proponed to us. If we did urge upon you the said books
of Service and Canons, as ye do now the Covenant upon us, we should
particularly and punctuallie, declare our mind concerning them.

8. To your second Question, we answer, that it is our duty to inquire
carefully, what is incumbent upon us by the law of GOD, and man, toward our
Prince. We do not move questions of state, but do answer to your
propositions, resulting upon matters of state, and we do labor, as it well
becomes all good Subjects, to be well informed, before we put our hand to
any thing, which concerns our due obedience to our Prince. As for that which
here again ye allege, of his Majesty's Commissioner, and wise Statesmen,
as having received satisfaction from you, we refer you, as before, to our
Answer made thereto, in our first DVPLYE.

9. To your third Question, we answer; our assertion concerning the
unlawfulness of Subjects their resisting the Authority, of free Monarchies,
by force of Arms, even although they were enemies to the Truth, and persecutors
of the professors thereof, can not in the judgment of any reasonable man,
import that we have the least suspicion of our King, that either he shall
change his Religion, or shall fall upon his religious and loyal Subjects with
force of Arms. We have often declared in these our Disputes, that we are
fully persuaded of our King's Majesty's constancy, in profession of the true
Religion, and equitable disposition in mtnistration of justice. And in
testification heere-of, we rest satisfied with his Majesty's Proclamation,
against which ye have protested.

10. To your fourth Question, we answer, because that we do esteem
Subscription to your Covenant, neither to be warrandable by GOD'S word, nor to
be a convenient mean for pacification, we hold it our duty, both to
with-holde our hands from it, and to dehort our people from it.

11. To your fifth Question, we answer: 1. We hold it a wrong supposition
which ye make, that the Prelates and their followers, are laboring to
introduce Popery, and to make a faction. 2. We know our gracious King, to be
so just, and so wise, and so ripe in years and experience, that he will not
suffer any of his Subjects, to abuse his Majesty's name, in the execution of
any injustice. 3. To make resistance by force of Arms, against the King's
public standing Laws, and against his Majesty's public Proclamations, is
not (in our judgment) a convenient or lawful way, for defending of the
Religion, of the Liberties, and Laws of the Kingdom, and of the Kings
Authority; but on the contrary it brings Scandal upon our profession. See
our Reasons in our second DVPLYE.

12. To your sixth Question, we answer, that in all free Monarchies, there is
nothing left to Subjectes, in the case of persecution, by their own Soveraygne
Princes, but patient suffering, with Prayers and Tears to GOD, or fleeing from
their wrath, as we have at length proved in our second DVPLYE. This doctrine
did the people of Alexandria, learn of their holy Bishop Athanasius, as is
evident by their own words, in their Protestation, subjoyned to the Epistle
of Athanasius, ad vitam solitariam agentes. If (say they) it be the
commandment of the Emperor, that we be persecuted, we all are ready to
suffer Martyrdom. (...). Tom. 1. Oper. Athanas. page 868, Edit. Paris. 1627.
As for the nature of the Government of this Kingdom of SCOTLAND, read the
Book of KING JAMES THE SIXTH of Blessed Memory, entitled, The true Law of
free Monarchies, and the Praeface of the first Book of REGIAM MAIESTATEM;
where it is expresslie said, of the KING of SCOTLAND, that He has no
Superior, but the Creator of Heaven and Earth, Ruler of all things. This our
Answer, neither proceeds from Flattery, neither from any intention, to
stir up Princes against their loyal Subjectes, nor from any aim at other
worldly ends, (as ye do uncharitably judge) but from our due Fidelity to
our KING, from our true Love to our Country, and from our upright Desire to
the GLORY of GOD, and the Comfort of our own Souls, in the Day of our
Accounts.

THE X. DVPLY.
ALTHOUGH we take you to be of the number of those who penned the Late Covenant,
yet pardon us, to call your Glosses of it in question, so long as ye do not
satisfy our Arguments, which prove them to be contrary to the very words
of your Covenant. We have shown, in our Replies, and now again in our
fourth Duplye, that the words of the Covenant, importe a perpetual adherence,
to the whole external Policy of the Church, as it was Anno 1581; and the
remooving of Pearth Articles, and Episcopacie, as of things contrary to the
Liberty and Purity of the Gospel. Whence we still infer, that these who
have sworn the Covenant, are tied by their Oath, to vote against Pearth
Articles, and Episcopacie: and, consequently, can not, without praejudice,
either dispute, or give out a decisiue sentence concerning them, in the
intended Assembly.

2. Ye say, Ye will not judge so uncharitable of us, as to think us so
corrupt, that, in our opinion, since the time designed by us, no-thing has
entered into the Church, beside Episcopacie, and the Articles of Pearth, which
can be praejudiciall to the Liberty and Purity of the Gospel. We are glad,
that although ye judge uncharitably of us, yet ye judge not so uncharitably:
and, although ye think us corrupt, yet ye think us not so corrupt, as not to
be sensible of these things. We told you our mind before, in our fourth
DVPLY, concerning these Abuses, which ye think to have been occasioned by
Pearth Articles: and no we we tell you, that if Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie, for these their alleged Consequentes, be altogether remooved,
the benefit which ye think our Church may receive, by remooving of them,
shall not, in any measure, aequall Her Great Losses.

THE XI. DVPLY.
WE complained in our DEMAND, of the uncharitableness of your Followers, who
calumniate us, as if we were Favorers of Popery. And to show how unjust
this Calumny is, we declared, that we are ready, to swear, and subscrybe,
our National Confession of Faith, ratified and registrated in Parliament: to
which Declaration, we have now added our Oath, which we did swear, when we
received the Degree of Doctorate in Theology, and have solemnlie again
renewed it, PAGE 15.16. In your Answer to that Demand, ye slighted our
Complaynt, and did not so much as once mention it; which made us in our Replye,
to complain also of you, who have shown your selves so unwilling to give us
that Testimony of our Sincerity in professing the Truth, which all who know
us, think to be due to us. We exspected, that in your second Answer to
that Demand, this fault should have been amended. But, contrary to our
expectation, we perceive, not only that ye are insensible of the grievous
injury done to us, by the calumnious reports of others; but also, that ye
have busied your own wits, to inquire, as ye say, in matters, to search,
and to try our ways, and to expiscate what ye could against us, by the
unfriendly testimony of some, who, perhaps, are displeased with us, as Achab
was with Micajah, for the freedom of our Admonitions. Charity, ye know,
thinks no evil, 1. COR. 13.5, and covers a multitude of transgressions,
PROVE. 10.12. 1. PET. 4.8. But uncharitable Inquisition, and prying into other
men's doings, not only discovers those infirmities, unto which God will
have every one of us subject, for humbling of us; but also brings even upon
good men, a multitude of undeserved Aspersions. BRETHREN, we intend not to
give you a Meeting in this; for our Resolution is, not to be overcome of
evil, but to overcome evil with good, ROMANS 12.21. And we are glad to suffer
this for His Cause, whose Truth we maintain, pitying in you this Great
Defect of Christian and Brotherly Compassion; and praying GOD, not to lay it
to your charge. Wherefore, we will not search and try your ways, as ye have
done ours: but we will reflect our thoughts upon our selves, and see whether
or not we be guilty of these things, which ye here reprehende in us.

2. Ye say, first, That we have taken an ample Testimony to our selves. But
what, we pray you, have we testified of our selves; but this only, that in
sincere and zealous profession of the Truth, we are not inferior to others;
and, according to our measure, have striven to be faythfuil in all the duties
of our Calling? Ye have, in-deede, put more in-to our Apology, and say, that
we have praised our selves, from our frequencie of Prayer, extraordinary
Humiliations, and holiness of life, and conversation, etc. For, as ye are
loath to speak any good of us; so ye would have the Reader believe, that we
speak too much good of our selves. But in this, as ye wrong us, so ye make
the Reader to see, how negligentlie ye have read and considered our words.
For, where-as in the second part of our Replye, we told you, that we have
other Means, and more effectual, than your Covenant, to use, for holding out
of Popery; mentioning in particular, extraordinary Humiliation, frequencie of
Prayer, amendment of life, diligence in Preaching, and searching the
Scriptures, etc. Ye imagine, that we do arrogate to our selves, some
singularity, in using these Means; not considering, that it is one thing to
say, that we may and ought to use these Means, and an-other thing, to say,
that we are singular, and eminent, above others, in the diligent use of them.

3. Next: Where-as ye say, that ye were desirous, rather to hear that
testimony, at the mouths of others, (as if ye had never heard our Pains and
Labors, for the Truth, commended by any) who knows not, but in this case,
in the which we stand for the present, it is lawful, and most expedient to
men, to vindicate themselves, and their Fidelity in their Callinges, from the
contempt and Calumnies of others. We have in the Scriptures, notable Examples
of GGD'S dearest Saynctes, who in such cases, yea, in other cases also, without
any derogation, to their singular humility, did fall out into high
expressions, of their own virtuous and pious carriage. Who ever spoke so
humbly of himself as PAVL, who calls himself less than the least of all
Saynctes, EPHESIANS. 3.8, and yet elsewhere he says, that he was not a whit
behind the very chiefest Apostles; and, that he labored more abundantly
than they all, 1. COR. 15.10. 2. COR. 11.5.

4. The defectes, which by your strict and curious Inquisition, ye think ye
have found in us, may be reduced into two poynctes: One is, that we are too
sparing in our pains, in Preaching; and, that we often fill our Places with
Novices. The other is, that the small Pains which we have taken, are not
fruitful. And, to prove this, ye say, that Popery has no less increased
in our City, under our Ministry, than any time before since the
Reformation. As for the first of these, to omit that which Modesty will not
permit us to speak, either of our own Pains in Teaching, or of yours, it is
very well known, that in the case of Sickness, and extraordinary
Employmentes in our Callinges* which but seldom do fall forth to us, it is
both lawful, and commendable to see, that our Places may be filled, either
with some actual Minister, or, failing of that, with able Students of
Divinity, approven by public Authority, where-of your selves can not be
ignorant, in respect of your frequent Peregrinations, from your Stations.

5. As for the next point: Although it were true, yet the Parable of the Seed
sown in diverse sorts of ground, and the dolorous Complayntes, which these
most paynfull and thunderin Preachers, Eliah, 1.KING. 19. 10. Isaiah, 53. 1.
Paul, GAL. 1.6. and 3.1. yea, of CHRIST Himself, MATTHEW. 23.37. and LVKE
19.41.42. made of the hard success of their labors, may learn you to be
more benign in your censures of us, than ye are. In the mean time, it is
known to his Majesty, to the Lords of Secret Counsel, and to all the
Country here; as also it is evident, by many public extant Acts of the
said Secret Counsel, and of our Diocoesian Assemblies, that we have been as
diligently exercised, in opposing of Popery, as any Ministers in this
KINGDOM. Neither has our success heere-in been so badde, as ye have given
it out: for since our entry to the ministry here, scarce has any man been
diverted from the Truth, to Popery, some Papists have been converted, to
the Profession of the Truth, and others who were incorrigible, have been
forced to depart from this country. Yea, we think, that our success, in
dealing with the Papists, had been undoubtedly greater, if they had not
been hardened in their Error, by your strange and scandalous Doctrines,
repugnant to Scripture, and sound Antiquity.

6. That which ye say in the second part of your Answer, concerning the
powerful effects of your Covenant, meets not with that which we did
object, concerning the vnlawfullnesse of it. For, that which is not in it self
lawful, can never be truly profitable to any. And SOLOMON has told us,
the there is no wisdom, nor understanding, against the LORD, PROVERBS 21.30.

7. As for last part of your Answer, we have so often told you, that your
fear of the in-bringing of the Service-Booke, and Canons, is causeless: and
ye have so often denied this, that it were folly to weary the Reader any more
with this matter. In the mean time, we tell you, that if you Covenant be
unlawful in it self, (as we still think it to be) your fear, although it
were justly conceaved, will never free your Souls of the guiltiness of it.

THE XII. DVPLY.
TO justify or excuse your omission, of public disallowing and condemning
the public disorders, and misscarriages of some who have subscrybed the
Covenant; especially the offering of violence to Prelates, and Ministers, in
time of Divine Service, and in the House of GOD, where-of we spoke in our
twelfth Demand, and Replye: ye answer, first, that ye acknowledge not the
Service-Booke, for the LORD'S Service. Ye might say the same of any
Service-Booke, (if ye allow the Reasons lately set forth in Print against
the Service-Booke) for there a Praescript form of Prayet, is condemned, which
directly crossth the practice of the Vniversll Church of CHRIST, Ancient, and
Recent.

2. Ye allege, that ye acknowledge not the vnsurpd Authority of Prelates,
for Lawful Authority. For ought we can perceive, Altar. Damase page 120.
Dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies, part 3. cap, 8. digress. 1.
by the Doctrines of those with whom ye join, ye acknowledge no lawful
Authority at all in Prelates, above your selves, and other Ministers: and ye
seem so to insinuate so much here, by blaming us, for calling them, Reverend
and holy Fathers. We are persuaded of the lawfullnesse of their Office, and
therefore are not ashamed, with Scripture, and Godly Antiquity, to call such
as are advaunced to this Sacred Dignity, Fathers, and Revenrend Fathers.
Neither should personal faults, alleged by you, hinder our observance, till
what is alleged, be clearlie proven, For, so long as things are doubfull,
we should interpret to the better part, Favor^iliores rei potius quam actores
habentur. ff.Lib. 50. Reg. 125.
LVKE 6.37. And it is a Rule of Law, that in a doubtful case, the state of a
Possessour, is best; and consequently, of him that hither-to has been in a
Possission of a good name: as also, that in things doubtful, we should
rather favor the person accused, than him that accuses.

3. If ye be of this same judgment, with us, concerning the lawfullnesse of
their Office, why do ye not reverence them, as well as we? But if their very
Office seem to you unlawful, we esteem your judgment contrary to holy
Scripture, to all sound Antiquity, Melanch. in an Epist. to Canerarius, in
Council. Theolog.
and to the best Learned amongst Reformed Divines. Hear what MELANCHTHON
says, I would to GOD, I would to GOD, it lay in me, not to confirm the
Dominion, but to restore the Government of Bishops: Melanch. in an Epist. to
Camerarius, in Council. Theol. page 90. Quo jure enim I^c^bit nobis dissolvare
(...) Ecclesiasticam? ^i Episcopi nobis concedant illa, quae aequun esse eos
concedere? et vt liceat, c^rte non expedit. Semper it a sensit ipse Lutherus,
quem nulla de causa, quidam vt video, amant, nisi quia ^enefitcio ejus sentiunt
se, Episcopos excussisse and adept^s libertatem minime vtil^m ad post^ritatem.
So in an Epist. ad episc. Augusten, Deinde v^lim h^^ tibi persuadeas de me
deque multis aliis nos optare vt pace constituta Episcoporum p^tes^a^, sit
incolumis. Et hane plurimum prodesse Ecclesiis judicamus
for I see what manner of Policy we shall have; the Ecclesiastical Policy
being dissolved: I do see, that hereafter will grow up, a greater tyranny
in the Church, than ever was before. And again, in an-other Epistle to
Camerarius, he says, You will not believe how much I am hated, by those of
Noricum, and by others, for the restoring of Jurisdiction to Bishops. So our
Companions fight for their own Kingdom, and not for the Kingdom of CHRIST.
So in other place. See Bucer, de Regno CHRISTI, Page 67.

4.Thirdly, Ye allege the zeal of the people, by reason where-of ye say,
that it was no-thing strange, that in such a case, they were stirred up to
oppose. Suppone they had opposed, yet, that they should have so opposed, as to
have offered violence to Sacred persons, Prelates or Ministers, who are
spiritual Fathers, seems to us very strange, for all that hitherto ye have
said. There is no zeal, without the exraordinarie in^^inct of GOD'S Spirit,
which can warrant m^n desti^^^e ^f Authority, to lay their hands on ^^^h
persons. Touch not Mine anointed, and do My Prophets (...) harm, says the
LORD, PSALM 105. Let all th^nges be done decently, and in order, says S.
PAVL, 1. COR. 14.40. GOD is not the Author of confusion or tumult, but of
peace, (...)
says that same Apostle there, VERSE 33. To this purpose Grogorie Nazianzene,
in his 26 Oration, speaking of the chief causes of division in the Church,
says, One of them ia unruly, ferventnesse without reason and knowledge, and
the another is, disorder and vndecencie, (...).

5. The son should account the person of his Father Sacred, ff. de obsequiis,
Lib. 9. So we ought also to esteem of our Spiritual Fathers: and,
there-fore, to offer injury to their persons, and that, in time of Divine
Service, must needs be a grievous sin. In the Novell Constitutions of
JUSTINIAN, Si quis cum sacra mysteria celebra^tur, in sanctam Ecclesiam
ingrediens, Episc^po, aut Clericis, aut Ministris aliis Ecclesiiae (...) juriam
aliquam inserat: jubemus hunc verbera sustinere, and in exilium mitti. Si vero
haec sacra Ministeria conturbaverit, aut celebrare probibuerit: capitaliter
puniatur hoc ipso and in Litaniis, in quibus Episcopi, aut Clerici reperia^tur,
custodiendo. Et siquidem i^^uriam solum feceri^is, verberibus exilioque
tradatur. Si vero etiam Litaniam concusserit, capitale periculum su^tin^bi^^
and vindicare jubemus non solum civiles, sed etiam militares judices.
Authent. Collat. 9. Tit. 6. Novella 123. de SANCTISS. EPISCOPIS, etc. CAP 31.
there is a remarkable Law to this purpose, cited upon the MARGIN. The like
Law we find in Cod. Justin. Lib. 1. Tit. 3. de Episcop. and Clericis. Now
although in these imperial Laws, the sanction be severe, yet we wish no such
severitie to be used amongst us, but praying GOD, to forgive them who have
transgressed: We desire them to consider, that auncientlie amongst Christians,
such doings were greatly disallowed.

6. S. Chrysostom, speaking of the reverence due by people to Pastors, In his
second Homily upon these words Salute Priscilla and Aquila. Tom. 5. Edit.
Sa^il. page 327
says, A man may now see, that there are not so great Scoffs and
reproaches, used by the unfaithful, against the Rulers, as by those that seem
to be faithful, and to be joined with us. Let us therefore inquyre whence
comes this negligence, and contempt of piety, that we have such a
hostility against our Fathers. There is nothing, there is nothing, that can so
easily destroy the Church, as when there is not an exact jointure of
Disciples, to their Masters; of children to parents, and of the^ that are
ruled, with their rulers. He that but speaks evil against his brother, is
debarred from reading the divyne Scriptures, (for what have thou to do to take
my Covenant in thy mouth? says the LORD; and subjoyneth this cause, Thou
sit and speak evil of thy brother,) and think thou thy self worthy
to come to the sacred porches, who accusest thy spiritual Father? How agrees
this with reason? For if they who speak evil of Father or Mother, should dye,
according to the Law; of what judgeme^t is he worthy, who dare speak evil of
him who is much more necessary, and better, than those Parents? Why fears
he not, that the earth should open, and swallow him, or that thunder should
come from Heaven, and burn up that cursing tongue? See him also, Lib. 3. de
Sacerdotio, Cap. 5. and 6.

7. In the next place, ye say, that the keeping of GOD'S House, from
Pollution and superstition, belongs to Authority, to the community of the
Faithful, and to every one in his own Place, and Order: but, certainly if
every one, or all the community, keep their own Place, and Order, they can
do no-thing in this, by way of force, without, far less against Authority.
Hence Zanchius, in his first Book of Images, These. 4, says, Without
Authority of the Prince, it is lawful to none in this Country, to take
Idols out of Churches, or to change any thing in Religion: he that does
so, should be punished, as seditious. This he confirms by reason, and by
the testimony of Saynct Augustine, Tom. 10. de Sermon Domini in Monte,
Homilia 6. And a little after, he subjoyneth; Augustine handeleth this
Argument piouslie, he dehorteth his people, from such a practice, and says,
That it is pravorum hominum, and furiosorum circumcellionum.

8. As for your vehement Accusations and Threatenings, (here, and Answer 14)
against the writer of the late WARNING to the Subjects in SCOTLAND, ye may
easily perceive, by the Printed Edition of that WARNING, and by the Printed
Editions of our REPLIES, that, that offense is taken away. And now, Reverende
Brethren, why are ye pleased thus to digress from the matter in hand, to
waken and hold on foot, personal quarrels against your brother, by digging
up buried words, and renewing haske interpretations thereof, contrary to his
loving intention, and after that himself, for satisfaction to all men, has so
publicly disallowed and abolished these words? This uncharitable dealing,
can bring no advantage to the cause which ye maintain, but rather makes it
the more to be disgusted, in consideration of your too great eagerness to
stir up hatred against your neighbor, and to work him trouble; whom ye
ought not to persecute with implacable wrath, which works not the
righteousness of GOD; nor to exasperate against him his other dear
Contrymen: but rather, as well beseems your profession and calling, ye
ought to exhort them to the most favorable co^struction of things, and to
christian placabilitie, and to the entertaynnig of their wonted loving
affection toward him. As for these our present questions, we desire
Theologicallie only, and peaceably, to confer of them with you, or any
other our Reverende Brethren, of our own calling.

9. Ye say, that Master KNOX spared not to call Kneeling, a diabolical
invention. If ye allow this saying, how can it be, Aug. lib. de vnico
Baptismo, cap. 13. O quam detestandus est error hominum, qui elaroru^ viro rum
quada^ non rest facta laudabiliter se imitari putant, a quorum virtutibus
alieni sunt.
that in your COVENANT, intended for removing of Innovations, and recovering of
the Purity of the Gospel, ye expresslie aimed not at the abolishing of this
ceremony, which is so hateful in your eyes? But if ye do not approve this
his saying, why did ye not choose rather, in charity to cover this escape of
so worthy a personage, than openly to blaze it abroad?

10. Ye have needleslie drawn into your discourse, mention of IRENICVM. Of
which work, for mittigation of your unpeaceable censure, be pleased to take
notice of the judgment, of that most worthy Pastor, and most grave and
learned Divyne, D. James Usher, Archbishop of Armach, Primate of all Ireland,
in this his Epistle written to the Author.

VIR EXIMIE;
SVmma cum voluptate (...) tuum perlegi: eamque Patriae tuae foelicitatem sum
gratulatus, quod novum tandem produxerit (...), qui eam ipsi praestitit
diligentiam and virtutem, quam olim exteris Ecclesiis (quum non admodum
dissimiles de adiaphoris obortae lites earum pacem perturbarent) exhibuit ille
Vetus; EVSEB. LIB. 5. HIST. ECCLES. (...).
qui (...).

Nulla salus bello: ipsique bello salus si qua sit, non alio quam pacis nomine
ea continetur. Nam and de (...) 2. SAM. XI.7.
pace belli Vriam, opinor, a Davide aliquando interrogatum meministi.

Jam vero, pro (...), scriptum remitto tibi ego (...): sed quod jucundum
praebeat spectaculum Midianiticorum satellitum inter se manum conserentium,
IVDIC. VII.22.
and mutuo isto bello Ecclesiolae nostrae, pacem promoventium.

Tu quicquid, hoc est, munusculi, vt ab homine optime erga te affecto
transmissum suscipe, and me (vt facis) ama.

Pontanae, in Hibernia, III. Eid. Decembr. anno reparatae salutis 1632.

Tuus in CHRISTI Ministerio conservus IACOBVS ARMACHANVS. ARTH. IONST. PARAPH.
PSALM. 120



Me juvat alma quies, gens haec fera bella minatur,
Et quoties Pacem poscimus, arma crepat.
THE XIII. DVPLY.
YE repeat your former Answer, concerning your Interpretation of the clause
of forbearance, which we have allreadie refuted in our former REPLIES, neither
do ye bring here any new confirmation thereof: And therefore all the three
Scandals, mentioned in our 13 DEMAND, do yet remain vnremoved.

2. Although your Interpretation were admitted, which we can not admit, yet at
least the third Scandal were no ways avoydable there-by, (what-so-ever may
be supposed concerning the other two,) and that because of the reason
expressed in our 13 REPLYE; to which your Answers here are not satisfactorie.
1. Ye do insinuate, that ye think our Oath of obedience to our Ordinary,
and Pearth Constitutions, not lawful in it self: which we are persuaded is
very lawful. 2. Ye would seem to infer the unlawfulness of it, by
challenging, the Authority where-by it was exacted; and alleging that there
is no ordinance made Civil or Ecclesiasticke, appoynting any such Oath. This
reason (although it were granted) has no strength at all, to prove that which
ye intend, to wit, that either our Oath is in it self unlawful, or that we
may now lawfully break it: for our swearing of that Oath is not against any
lawful Authority, either divyne or humane: and in such a case, Oaths
concerning things lawful, ought to be kept, whether they be required by
appointment of a public ordinance, or not: which who-so-ever denies, he
opens a patent door to the breaking of lawful Oaths, in Matrimonial and
civil contracts, and many other cases, daily incident in humane
conversation. Also the exacting of that Oath, was clearlie warranded by two
Acts of Parliament, viz. Parliament 21, of King JAMES the 6, holden at
EDINBVRGH, Anno 1612. CHAP. 1. and Parliament 23. of King JAMES the 6, holden
at EDINBVRGH, Anno 1621. Act 1.

3. Ye take upon you to call in question, with what conscience that Oath was
given. How often, Brethren, shall we exhort you to forbear judging of other
men's consciences, which are known to GOD only? Judge not, that ye be not
judged. MATTHEW. 7, 1.

4. Ye allege, we can not answer before a General Assembly for our Oath,
and the Scandal risen thereupon. No man needs to be ashamed, before a
General Assembly, or any other Judicatorie, of his lawful and due
obedience, which he has given to the public Constitutions of the Church of
SCOTLAND, and to his Majesty's standing Laws; or of any lawful Oath,
where-by he has promised that obedience. As for the Scandal, it was not
given by us, but vnnecessarilie, and vnjustlie taken, by you, and some others,
upon an erroneous opinion, obstinately mayntayned against the lawfulness of
the matters themselves.

5. Ye say, That conceaving the Oath, according to our own grounds, none of
us will say, that we have sworn the perpetual approbation and practice of
these things, which we esteem to be indifferent, what-so-ever bad consequent
of Popery, Idolatry, Superstition, or Scandal, should follow there-vpon. We
answer, 1. These bad consequentes are alleged by you, but not proven. 2.
Evils of that kind should be avoided, by some lawful remedy. And we do
not esteem it lawful for us, to disobey Authority in things lawful, although
in themselves indifferent: for obedience commanded by the fifth Praecept of the
Decalogue, is not a thing indifferent. There be other means which are lawful
and more effectual against such evils, as we have specified in our eleventh
REPLYE: 3. We did not swear perpetual approbation, and practice of
indifferent things; but knowing these things in them selves, to be
approvable, we did swear obedience to the public Laws, requyring our
practice in these things, so long as the Law stands in vigor, and our
obedience there-to is required by our lawful Superioures. 4. This course we
hold to be more agreeable to our duty, than upon private conceptions of
Scandals vnnecessarilie taken, to break off our due obedience to that
Authority which GOD has set over us.

6. Out of our assertion (Replye 4.) concerning the administration of the
Sacraments in private places, to sick persons, in case of necessity, ye do
collect, that we can not forbear the practice of these, although our Ordinary,
and other lawful Superioures should will us to do so. And hence ye infer,
that heere-in Pearth Assembly, for which we stand, is wronged by us two
ways: 1. That we differ in judgment from them, about the indifferency of
the five Articles: and next, that at the will of our Ordinary, and ye know
not what other lawful Superioures, we are ready to forbear the practice of
these things, which the Assembly has appointed to be observed.

7. As for your main Question, Whether a duty necessary by Divine Law, may
be, or may not be omitted, in case, our Ordinary, and other lawful
Superioures, should will us to omit it? before we answer to it, we must
expound what we mean by our other lawful Superioures, because of your
jesting pretense of ignorance heere-of. We mean heere-by, The King's
Majesty, the Parliament, the Secret Counsel, and other Magistrates, and
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, whereunto we owe Obedience in our Practice
required by them, according to public Laws.

8. The Question it self ye do express more clearlie in your Answer to our
fourth Replye; where ye allege, that we find some of the PEARTH ARTICLES
so necessary, that although the General Assembly of the Church should discharge
them, yet we behoved still, for conscience of the Commandment of GOD, to
practice them.

Thus are we brought to this general Question;

Whether, or no, any thing necessary (or commanded) by Divine Law, may, in
any case, without sin, be omitted, when public humane Authority
discharges the practice thereof?
For resolving of this Question, we desire the Reader to take notice of these
Theological Maxims, received in the Schools, and grounded upon HOLY
SCRIPTVRE.

9. Affirmative Praeceptes, do bind at all times, but not to all times, but
only as place and time require; that is, when opportunity occurreth. [
Praecepta affirmativa obligant semper, sed non ad semper, nisi pro loco and
tempore; id est, quando opportunitas occurrit.] But Negative Praeceptes, do
bind at all times, and to all times. [ Praecepta negativa obligant semper and
ad semper. Thom. 1^ 2^, q^. 71. art. 5. ad 3m Bonavent* in 1. sent. did. 48.
art. 2. qu. 1. in Resolutione. Scotus in 3. sent. did. 9. qu. vnica, number. 4.
] As for example; A man is not obliedged to speak the truth at all times; for
he may be some time lawfully silent, but he may never lawfully lie.

10. Of Affirmative necessary Duties, some are the weyghtier matters of the
Law, [(...)] as Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, MATTHEW. 23.23. Others, less
weyghtie, such as are those of the Pearth Articles; which we call necessary,
and ye do reject.

11. The exercise of some Affirmative necessary duties, may be some times
omitted, by Authority, without sin, for the public Peace, or some pressing
necessity. Thus Moses permitted repudiation of a man's married wife, not
fallen into adultery; neither did he urge strictly the Affirmative duty of
adherence, and that for the hardness of their heart. Where-in Moses had
respect to the Peace and Unity of the Tribes of Israel, as Alexander Alensis
observes, in his Sum of Theology, Part. 3. Qu. 46. Membro 1. Art. 1. and
Art. 2. David did not execute, in his own time, judgment against Joab, for
his murdering of Abner, and Amasa, because the sons of Zerviah were too
hard for him. Circumcision was omitted, because of the uncertainty of their
abode in one place, when the people were with Moses in the Wilderness.

12. Exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline, against open obstinate offenders,
is an affirmative duty, incumbent, by divyne Law, upon the Pastoures, toward
those who are committed to their charge. Yet it may, and ought to be forborne,
when it can not be used without an open rupture, and unavoidable Schism.
Because in such a case the public peace is rather to be looked to, lest in
our inconsiderate zeal to separate the Tares, we pluck up also the Wheat.
And what we can not get corrected by censure, we can do no more but mourn
for it, and patiently wayt till GOD amend it, as Augustine proves at length,
Lib. 3. contra Epistolam Parmeniani, Cap. 1. and Cap. 2. and Lib. de fide and
operibus, Cap, 5. For in this time (says Gregory) the holy Church does
correct some thing by fervor, some thing she tolerateth by meekness, some
things by consideration she dissembleth, and bears, Gregor. respons. ad 7.
interrogationem Augustini Caentuariensis. In hoc enim tempore sancta Ecclesia
quaedam per f^rvorem corrigit, quaedam per mansuetudinem tolerat, quaedam per
considerationem dissimulat, atque portat, vt saepe malum quod aversitur,
portando and dissimulando compescat. Prosper, Lib. 2. de vita contemplativa,
Cap. 5. Propter hoc ergo, blanda pietate portandi sunt, qui increpari pro sua
infirmitate non possant.
so that often by bearing and dissembling, she compesceth [or puts away]
that evil which she hates. And Prosper says; For this cause therefore,
they must with gentle piety be borne with, who for their infirmity, may not
be rebuked.

13. When a doctrinall error (not being fundame^tall) prevails by public
Authority in any Church, a private Pastor or Doctor espying it, may lawfully
and laudablie, forbear public stryving against it, when he evidentlie
perceaveth, that unavoidable Schism would follow there-vpon. In such a case
he should content himself, to feed his hearers with that wholesome Milk of
the Word, which they may receive, and delay the giving of stronger Food unto
them, because of their infirmity: Considering that more necessary and
weyghtier Duty, which he owes for preservation of Order and Peace; and
laboring, in a myld and peaceable manner, to cure them. To this purpose
belongs that saying of Gregory Nazianzen, Nazianz. Orat. 26. tom. 1. page
446. and 447. Edit. Graecol. Paris. Anno 1630.
Let no man, therefore, be more wise than is convenient, neither more legal
than the Law, neither more bright than the Light, neither more straight than
the Rule, neither higher than the Commandment. But how shall this be? If
we take knowledge of Decency, and commend the law of Nature, and follow
Reason, and despise not good order. [(...).] And that of the Ancient Church of
Lions in France, near eight hundredth years a-goe; Who does not calmlie and
peaceably moderate that which he thinks, but is ready incontinent to
Contentions, Eccles. Ludg. Lib. de tenenda veritate Scripturae post medium [in
Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. Part. 2 Edit. 4.] Qui non tranquille and pacifice moderatur
quod sentit, sed statim paratus est ad contentiones, dissentiones, and
scandala, etiamsi non habeat Haereticum sensum, certissime habet Haereticum
animum.
Dissentions, and Scandalls, although he have not an heretical sense, most
certaynlie he has an heretical mind.

14. Divine Institution, by the Ministry of the Apostles, craveth Deacons,
ordained by Imposition of hands, for all their life time, ACTS 6. Yet in our
Reformed Church of SCOTLAND we have no such Deacons. Which OEconomicall
defect, necessitated by detention of Church mayntenance necessary for their
sustentation, we hope shall not be imputed to our Church, as sin, so long
as She despyseth not that Institution, and acknowledges, and lamenteth, this
deficiencie, and endeavors, by peaceable lawful means, to have it remedied.

15. Although some Affirmative Duties, necessary by Divine Praecept, do give
place, some times, to other more weyghtie, and more pressing Duties, (as the
saving of a stranger may be omitted, for saving my father, or my brother, or
my son, out of the same danger, when I am able only to save one of them. And
many such like examples do occur:) yet it is never lawful to condemn or
oppugn such Duties, as evil, or superstitious, or scandalous in themselves,
neither to rank them amongst things in themselves indifferent.

16. Hence we do infer, that not-with-standing of the necessity of those
of the Pearth Articles, which we call necessary, yet some times the
practicing of them, may become not necessary, and the omission thereof not
sinful, public Authority, and the necessity of the peace of the Church, so
requyring. Some time, in-deede, the omission of a thing praescrybed by an
Affirmative Divine or Humane Law, may be faultlesse: But it is never lawful
for Subjectes, to transgress the Negative part of the Divine Praecept, by
resisting with force of Arms, Thom. 2a 2ae qu. 43. art. 7. Propter nullum
scandalum quod sequ^ videatur, debet homo, praetermissa veritate, falsitatem
docere.
that Power whereunto GOD has subjected them, and to which He has forbidden
them, to make such resistance. Neither is it at any time lawful, for Pastors
and Teachers, to teach erroneous doctrine.

17. Ye do attribute to us, as a great absurdity, that at the will of our
Ordinary, and other lawful Superioures, we are ready to forbear the
practice of these things which the Assembly has appointed to be observed.
And this ye infer from the necessity of Administration of the Sacraments,
some times in private places, according to our judgment. Certaynlie, ye will
have much a-doe, to make good, by right Logic, this your inference from such
an Antecedent. But to speak of the matter of the Consequent, for satisfaction
to the Reader, we find no such absurdity in it, as ye seem to proclayme.
For, if some Duties appointed by divyne Law, give place some-tymes to other
weyghtie duties, such as is the keeping of public peace and good order, as
we have already shown; much more may a thing, notwithstanding of any humane
Law appoynting it to be observed, be for these respects omitted, at the will
and direction of those Superioures, to whom we owe our obedience required by
that humane Law, and who have power to dispense with our practice in that part.

THE XIV. DVPLY.
IF the words of the Covenant be plain, (say ye) concerning the mere
forbearance, and speak nothing of the unlawfulness, no man's thoughts can make
a change. But we have given our reasons, which justly move us to require
greater playnnesse; neither have we as yet received satisfaction, concerning
those reasons.

2. In our 14 REPLYE, we said, That your Band of Mutual Defense against all
persons what-so-ever, may draw Subjects, perhaps, to take Arms against their
King, (which GOD avert) and consequently from that loyalty of Obedience,
which they owe to their Soveraygne, and ours; except ye declare, and explayne
your selves better, than ye have hitherto done. To this ye answer, that, by
this Replye we do a threefolde wrong: One to our selves, another to the
Subscrybers, the third to the Kings Majesty. But ye have not directly
answered to the point proponed by us.

3. The wrong which ye say, we do to our selves, is in forging from the
words of the Covenant, impediments, and drawing stumbling blocks in our own
way, to hinder our Subscription. This your wrongous asseveration, we justly
deny, protesting, as we have often done, that we do walk sincerely in
this matter, according to our light, Not forging to our selves impedimentes,
nor drawing stumbling blocks in our own way; but clearlie showing the
impedimentes, and stumbling blocks, which the Contryvers of the COVENANT have
laid in our way, by their very incommodious expression, irreconciliable (in
our judgment) with your exposition.

4. Ye say, we wrong the Subscryvers, in changing the state of the Question,
and in making a divorce betwixt Religion, and the King's Authority, which the
Covenant joyneth together, hand in hand. We do no-wayes wrong the
Subscrybers, when we propone vprightlie our just Scruples, as we in our
CONSCIENCES do conceive them, where-by we are moved to with-holde our hands
from that COVENANT: where-of one is, the fear of unlawful resistance to
Authority, if we should hold to that COVENANT; how so-ever ye will not
suffer to hear patiently this objection, because in your Covenant ye do
profess, the conjunction of Religion, and the King's Authority: which
profession of yours, does not sufficiently serve for a full answer to our
objection, against those other words of that same Covenant, whereupon our
Scruple did arise. To clear this, we wish you to answer directly (to this
our present Demand: whether or no, in case of disagreement, (which GOD avert)
think ye that the Covenantors are obliedged, by virtue of their Covenant, to
make open resistance, by force of Arms? If ye think they are obliedged to
make resistance, then we desire your answer to the Reasons and Testimonies
brought in our 2 Duplye, proving the unlawfulness of such resistance. But if
ye think that they be not obliedged, then declare it playnlie.

5. But most of all, ye say, we wrong the King's Majesty, in bringing him
upon the St^ge, before his Subjectes, in whose minds we would (as ye do
vnjustlie allege) beget and breed suspicions of opposing the Truth, of
making Innovation in Religion, and of dealing with the Subjects, contrary to
his Laws and Proclamations, and contrary to the Oath at his Coronation. We
answer; we have not brought, but have found his Majesty upon this unpleasant
Stage, opposing himself openly to your Covenant, with solemn Protestations,
against all suspicions of opposing the Truth, or making Innovation of
Religion, or dealing with the Subjectes contrary to his Laws and
Proclamations, or contrary to the Oath at his Coronation. This his Majesty's
declaration, against which ye have protested, we have willingly received,
and do truly believe it.

6. What the most honorable Lords, of his Majesty's privy Counsel have done,
concerning his Majesty's last Proclamation, and upon what motives, their
Honors themselves do know, and his Majesty's High Commissioner, has
publicly declared in his printed MANIFESTO, contrary to some of your
Asseverations, concerning the proceeding of that Honorable Board.

7. Ye profess here, that, It becomes you, to judge charitablie of his
Majesty's intentions, although ye disallow the Service-Booke, and Canons, as
containing a real Innovation of Religion; and do affirm, that, the intention
of the Prelates, and their Associates, the Authors and Contryvers of the
Books, is most justly suspected by you. We have told you already, that,
concerning the matters, contained in those Books, it is not now time to
dispute, the Books themselves being discharged by his Majesty's Proclamation,
and a royal promise made, that his Majesty will neither now nor heere-after,
press the practice of the fore-sayde Canons and Service-Booke, nor any thing
of that nature, but in such a fair and legal way, as shall satisfy all his
Majesty's loving Subjects; and, that his Majesty neither intends Innovation
in Religion or laws. As for the intentions of his sacred Majesty, we do
heartily and thankfully acknowledge them, to be truly conform to his
Majesty's gracious Declaration, in that his last Proclamation. And, in-deede,
it becomes both you and us, to think so of them. Neither do we take upon
us, to harbor in our breasts, any uncharitable suspicion, concerning the
intentions of those others of whom ye speak; seeing they stand or fall to
their own master, and the thoughts of their hearts are unknown, both to you
and us: and in a matter uncertain it is surest to judge charitablie. Yea, we
have many pregnant Arguments to persuade us, that those Reverende Prelates,
and their Associates, had no such intention, as ye judge.

8. Ye make mention of three wrongs, done by us to you: The one, in the
WARNING, where-of ye have an answer allreadie given in our 12 DVPLYE, where
ye did use greater exaggerations, than either the intention of the Warner did
merit, or became your charity and profession. And by your repetition of it in
this place, ye show, that ye have too great delight to dwell upon such
expostulations, where-as Theological reasons of the matter in controversy,
would better become you in such a DISPVTE. The second wrong is, that (as ye
allege) we have wronged you. In withholding our hand and help from so good
a cause, of purging Religion, and reforming the Kirk, from so many gross
abuses, and opposing all those who have modestly labored for Reformation. But
certaynlie, the wrong is done to us by you, in that ye do, without warrant of
Authority, obtrude upon us, and upon those committed to our charges, the
swearing of an Oath, which is against our own consciences: and because of our
just refusal and opposition, ye do wrong us also, in misinterpreting our
pious and upright meanings, and in making and stirring up collateral,
Hieronym. Apologia adversus Ruffinum, quae incipit, Lectis literis, prope
finem. Talibus institutus es Disciplinis, vt cui respondere non potueris, caput
auferas; and linguam, qua tacere non potest se^^s? Nec magnop^re glorieris, si
facias quod Scorpiones possunt facere, and Cantharides. Fec^runt haec and
Fulvia in Ciceronem, and Herodias in loannem: quia veritatem non poterant
audire: and linguam veriloquam discriminali acu confoderunt. -- Adversum
impiissimos C^l^um atque Porthyrium quanti scripsere nostrorum? Qui om^ssa
causa, in sup^rflua criminum objectio^^ versatus est?
and personal quarrels against us, and threatening us therewith. Thus (if GOD
by his special grace did not uphold us) might we be driven, by worldly
terroures, to do against the light of our own consciences.

9. The third Wrong, wherewith ye charge us, and for the which ye do
insinuate, that we may fear Trouble, is (as ye allege) in our speeches,
in public, and private, and in our Missiues, etc. Hereunto we answer, as in
our former Replies, That when-soever it shall please you, to specify these
speeches, we hope to give you, and all peaceablie-disposed Christians, full
satisfaction, and to clear our selves of that imputation; so that none shall
have just reason, to work us any Trouble. In the mean time, if our
ingenuitie would permit us, (as it does not) to think it a decent course, to
make use of Hearkeners, and Catchers of words, and to wait for the haulting
of our Brethren, some of your own speeches might be represented unto you,
wherein ye would find weakness.

10. As for these Outward, or External Arguments, which ye bring here, to
prove your Covenanting, to be The work of GOD, from the Success of your
Enterpryze, from the multitude of Subscrybers, and from their Contentment, and
from their good carriage, (which we would wish, in many of them, to be more
charitable, and peaceable, and so more Christian, than it is) we can not
acknowledge, to be A Commentary written by the LORD'S own Hand, (as ye
pretend) in approbation of your Covenant; unless ye first clearlie show us
the Text or Substance of your COVENANT, to be written in the HOLY SCRIPTURES,
in all points thereof; especially in those points, wherein ye and we do
controvert, and which only, at this time, can be pretended against us,
seeing we make opposition only in those points. And we wish heartily, That
leaving these weak Notes of Truth, to the Papists, chief Acclaymers of
them, amongst Christians, (that we speak no-thing of Aliens from
Christianity) ye would be pleased to adhere, with us, unto the HOLY
SCRIPTURES, as the only sure and perfect RULE of TRUE RELIGION, and the
Heavenly Lamp, which GOD has given us, to show us the Way of Truth and
Peace: Where-in the GOD of Truth and Peace direct all our steps, for JESUS
CHRIST our SAVIOR, who is our Peace: To HIM be Glory for ever: Amen.

JOHN FORBES OF CORSE, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in ABERDENE. ROBERT
BARON, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, and Minister in ABERDENE. ALEXANDER
SCROGIE, Minister at OLD ADERDENE, D. D. WILLIAM LESLEY, D. D. and Principal
of the King's College in ABERDENE, IA: SIBBALD, Doctor of Divinity, and
Minister at ABERDENE. ALEXANDER ROSSE, Doctor of Divinity, and Minister at
ABERDENE^


Some Escapes in Printing.
Page line for read 7 23 because your Answers because their Answers 8 17
Answers Arguments 11 25 chap. 37 (...). cap. 37 ibid. ibid Novatus Novatian
(called their 13 31 discerned decerned [ Novatus) 16 14 resicere, omnesque
etiam resicere. Omnes etiam 28 9 (...) (...) 30 20 in the 33 in the 22 33 7
alleged allowed ibid. 11 Conventions, ye mean Cove^tio^s, from their purpo
35 15 and that that [sed ends, yemean ibid. last Seruice-Booke Service-Booke,
and Ca^^^ 36 1 is discharged are discharged 48 penult. condemning condemning of
52 30 contryvers recommenders 59 4 enjoying injoyning bid. last Consilio
Concilio 80 margin Leg. 42 in Sexto. Reg. 42 89 11 had we eot had we not 98 26
our Propositions our proposition 99 11 of standing to standing 100 6 Episcopie
Episcopacie 105 23 Monarchies Monarchs 115 31 Lib. 9 Leg. 9 116 6 Clericis. Now
Clericis. Leg. 10. Now ibid. 12 puniatur hoc ipso puniatur. Hoc ipso 117 4
cursing accusing 119 1. etc. (...) (...)


