THE Royal Guest: OR, A SERMON PREACHED AT LENT Assizes, Anno Dom. M.DC.XXXVI.

At the Cathedral of SARVM being the first Sunday of Lent, before Sr. JOHN
FINCH and Sr. JOHN DENHAM His Majesty's Justices of Assise.

By THOMAS DRANT of Shaston in Com. Dorset.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Walter Hammond, and are to be sold by Michael
Spark in Greene-Arbour. 1637.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL PETER BALL ESQVIRE, Recorder of the famous City of EXON.
health in this life, true happiness in the life to come.
SIR,
I Might Preface to you, with Reasons of this Dedication, or with Apologies:
You are a stranger to me, nec beneficio, nec injuria cognitus, Tacitus de
Galba, Othone, vitel. Hist. Lib. 1.
Only I affect to be known unto you; this is motive enough, nor plead I
other excuse: What your ears graced with a liking in the passage, these
sheets speak to your eyes, but more standingly, my hopes are blessed, if I
please both senses: Your applause (as it is tradition'd me) was full and
liberal, much above the worth of these thoughts; I silence the causes made
them Public, that makes them Yours; and candor it is, I honor more, than
greatness in a Patron: I owe your love an acknowledgement, deeds were little
enough to express it, but my aims are crowned, if by your Pardon or
Acceptance, this so small Book, professione pietatis, Tacitus in vita Iulij
Agricolae.
aut laudatus erit, aut excusatus: Farre-well Worthy Sir:

Shaston: Decimo Sexto Kalendarum Aprilis. Yours in all services gladly devoted
THOMAS DRANT.

The Royal Guest.
REVELAT. 3. VER. 20. Behold I stand at the door, and Knock.
WE meet here a Royal Guest, who enstated in all the Royalties of Heaven,
yet sues for a welcome on earth: and we have him in my Text.

First, for Posture, Standing, I stand.

Secondly, for Place: At the door: I stand at the door.

Thirdly, for Action: Knocking: I stand at the door and Knock.

Behold I stand at the door, and Knock. These are the several Branches the
body of this Text spreads into, where do perch on every sprigg, Wonder and
Mercy: Wonder that GOD who is all Glory, should come down unto man who is all
vileness: Mercy that Man who is a foul ragge of uncleanenesse, should be made
a temple for GOD to dwell in, who is all Holy; GOD and man were at distance but
now, nay at odds, nay at feud, if ever any, happy is that union, which brings
them under one roof, to one table: this is marveilous in our eyes, and
therefore chained in with an Ecce here; Behold, I stand at the door, and
Knock.

Behold is a word of Emphasis and Energie: if this Star stand ore the house,
a JESUS is within, nor points this hand in the Margin, but there is juice and
substance in the Text: Some of rank are in the Palace, where this Porter keeps
the gate, and fruits not to be plucked rudely, in that Paradise, where this
Cherube guardes the entry* where Ecce is written on the box, be sure the
ointment's precious, something of weight and moment does march in the rear, if
Behold leads up the front, and as the Baptist in Sacred Writ, prepares the way
to it; it is so here; GOD bows the Heavens and comes down among men, nor comes
he armed with thunders, clothed with Majesty, darkness being his pavilion
about him, as to Israel on Mount Sinay, Exodus 19. 16.
So to come, would strike terror in all hearts; nor comes he as sometime he
came into his Sanctuary, where the Singers went before, Psalm. 68. 23.
the plaiers of instruments followed after, among them were the Damsels
playing with timbrels; thus to come would be a pleasant object to all eyes: He
comes here forma pauperis, as a Mendicant who begs an alms for GODS sake: He
breaks not into our rooms, but stands at our doors, at whose least breath
the gates of hell fly open, and the bars of iron burst in pieces: here is
patience and humility to a miracle, and both stamped with an Ecce, Behold I
Stand, etc. Nay not a word here but this dash of the HOLY GHOSTS quill, the
impression of this character is due unto it.

First, I, it were enough were I a guardian Angel Quire of the Prophets, if
the least among those feathered Hierarchies above: but I, the Prince of peace,
the King of glory, the LORD Paramount of Heaven and Earth.

Secondly, I stand, I sit not in my chair of state, cushion of ease, I roll
not on beds of violets and strewings of rose-buds; but I stand, and this
posture of mine, speaks as my readiness to enter, so my patience to awaite it.

Thirdly, I Stand at the door, not in the Hall, chamber, where I might rest my
limbs on a couch of Ivory, but at the door, without shelter or penthouse;
where the drislie sleete chils, and the stormy tempest beats upon me; where
my head is is filled with the dew, and my lecks defiled with the drops of the
night.

Fourthly, I stand at the door and Knock. I stand not at the door, Prove. 9.
14.
as the harlot sat at hers in the Proverbs, to tole in, gain, and enamour the
passinger to folly: Genesis 19. 14.
nor stand I, as those Sodomites, who thronged about the doors of Lot, to shed
that blood which bedewes the earth, and with its shreekes awakens Heaven to
vengeance: I stand not with my hands in my bosom, or my arms enfolded
together, or to gaze about me, as those Idlers in the Marketplace: but I stand
to knock, nor give I a rappe and away, as a Post that flies by, but as it is a
piece of my devoire to gain an entry, so I stand to it: if by any means, they
will open to me, and their own happiness: Behold I stand at the door and
Knock.

Now, O LORD, what is Man though retinu'de with all the pomp of greatness!
what the Sons of men, those who move in the highest Orbs, what the whole
Series and descent of them, even theirs, whose blood flows from the noblest
veins? What the whole cluster and bunch of mankind, that so mighty a GOD, at
whose persence the Heavens drop, Psalm 68. 8.
out of whose mouth coals of fire devour, Psalm 18 8.
whose voice rents the rocks and discovers the forests: Psalm. 29 9.
that he should stand at our doors and knock: How many roundes of wonder in
this one Ladder, in this one chain how many linkes of Miracle? what wedges of
gold in this rich Mineral? I shall digg for some* and one precious ingot I
light on at the very head of this Mine: it is the party who stands at our
door, implied in the Greek (...), expressed in our English I, the Guest
himself; I stand.

I who? I who stretch out the Heavens like a curtain, and again make a sack
their covering, and shall shrivell them up as a parched scroule at the last
day: I who ride upon a Cherube and fly, who fly upon the wings of the wind:
Psalm. 18. 10.
I who have founded the earth upon the waters, Psalm. 28. 2.
and established it upon the floods: I who have shut up the Sea with doors, and
made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness the swaddling band for
it: Job 38. 10.
I who weigh the mountains in a balance, to whom the Nations are as the
droppings of a bucket, I who dwell above the circle of the Moon, and hold the
ball of the world in my hand: In a word, I who am Alpha and Omega, all full of
grace and truth, in whom dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily; who
think it no robbery to be equal with GOD, as being the image and character
of his goodness: whose throne is at the right hand of my Father, but my
Soveraignety is throughout all ages, and to the ends of the earth: I thus robbed
with dignity, thus engirt with power, thus bedect and crowned with Majesty; I
stand.

Now (...), Saint Chrysostom in a holy trance here: O the height and depth of
the mercy of GOD, O the bowels and entrails of the love of CHRIST: thou art O
SAVIOVR a plant of the Celestial Eden, what finger could pluck thee thence! A
stone thou art cut out of the Heavenly quarre, but by what hand? Who could
force thee from the bosom of thy Father, thy palaces of glory? Who but thy
self? 'twas for us Men, and our Salvation that thou came down from Heaven:
this Abisse of thy goodness we cannot fathom, nor measure its greatness:
we may guess at it, if we reflect, 1. On thy All-worthinesse, 2. On our
All-worthlesnesse.

First, On thy All-worthinesse: but what tongue dumb here? CHRIST comes not
for his own benefit, but ours: we solace our selves in the diffused rays of
the Sun, but does our looking on him, add the least spark to his
brightness: the earth is enricht by the showers that fall upon it, do those
drops or the ground gain? Sure our goodness extends not to thee, O LORD, or
should we impoverish our selves, what were our Mite to thy Treasure? Our Guest
here, is the Heir of all things, nor comes He to gain by us, but to gain
us: He wants not what is ours, for His is the Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens, Deuteronomy. 10. 14.
the Earth also, and all that therein is: here is worth enough, as to bless,
so entrance us.

All-worthlesnesse: alas; what impure Sties, what Stables of dung, what
Cabins of filth are we? How unworthy under whose roof such a Guest should
come? is there any beauty in us to attract his love? any comeliness to ravish
him unto us? None; Miriam was not more leaprous, never Leopard more spotty* we
are as Homer paints out Thersites, (...), (...). B.
One mass and lump of deformity: Do our garments smell of Mirrh, or are
they perfumed with the powders of the Merchant, that with the savor of our
Ointments we may draw Him after us: No, we have on no clothing, not a skirt
to cover our nakedness, or our coat is pollutio panni, Isa. 64. 6.
stains and rags, an unclean thing in the Prophet, that either way we are
the objects either of a frown or scorn: thus wallowing loathsomely in our
own gore, thus patcht up with shreds of filthiness, CHRIST now looks upon
and loves us: O the over-flowings of a gracious pity! what channels or banks
can hold it? how freely runs it, how fully? but love is strong as death, and by
that coard we might pull Him to us? Neither, how dearly we loved Him,
witness His head harrowed with thorns, His face blurred with spittle, His
eyes tortured with all spectacles of shame, His ears board with blasphemies,
those iron plates, which pierced His hands and feet, AEnaead. lib. 2.
and by which Dido did conjure her Aenaeas, corpus sanguine mersum, His body
drowned in blood: See here (...), Ephesians. 3. 19.
as the Apostle phraseth it (and it is a streine of divine elegancy) A love not
to be sampled or scand by us, above the reach of all finite Apprehension: but
pitch our selves at the highest, our purest Oar has its dross, our sweetest
fruits their sowernesse, our best works (and they too like Salomons Sculpture,
A lilly upon a pillar, 1 King 7. 19.
A lilly upon a pillar, rare and few) will they not weigh light in the Scales
of the Sanctuary? Gideons plea, when he was to rescue Israel from the Shackles
of Midian, and startled at the Summons, it may be ours, who ever are the
wealthiest among us in sacred graces, Behold my family is poor in Manasseh,
Judge. 6. 13.
I am the least in my Fathers house: what than are we, that such a visit
should be given us, how poor cottagers to entertain so great a Landlord? can
our tabernacles of sticks hold Him, whom the huge vastness of heaven and earth
contains not? Here is a Maze, who can tread it? it is not for my pencill to
limb in this piece, give me leave than to draw a veil, and pass, from the
Guest who He is, to my first general, his Posture which is Standing: Behold I
stand.

stand. First, Standing is a posture of Readiness, Acts. 7. 55.
Saint Stephen when he was to fall under that shower of stones, saw the
Heavens open, and JESUS standing at the right hand of GOD: we read often that
he sits in the conflicts of his Church not bloody. He but looks on or helps
with ease; it is but here that He Stands; Stands, now that his Saints engaged in
a fight to death, as a Champion with his sword girt unto his thigh, and so is
Ready to enter the lists upon the signal given, and though conquered to bring
him off victorious: CHRIST stands at our door in my Text, and by this gesture
shows us clearly, as if it were described by the rays of the Sun, that
with the whole train, and quire of his graces, He is ready to enter into our
hearts, if we open unto Him: what a blessing is it to be the mansions of the
blessed Trinity, the Exchequers and Magazins of all holy endowments, the
favorites and darlings of Heaven? this happiness, CHRIST is ready to make
ours, and that we may not miss it, as being bewitched with the worlds
enchantments, with what throws and pangs of love does He wish, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
O that there were such a heart in this people to fear me always! with what
patheticall Rhetorique does he persuade, Cant. 6 12.
Return, return O Shunamite return: with what deep sighs and streams of
tears laments He, Mat. 23 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee together, as
the hen her chickens: CHRIST weeps not in sport, as those two Mimiks, the
Stage Player and the Hypoerite; it is for our weal or loss that waters flow
from His eyes; if throbs and groans break from Him, it is, or for our
stubbornenesse that we not, or for His own desire, that He would have us lay
hold on mercy, if we bar our gates against Him, He deplores our contumacy,
but were He not willing to come in, He would not stand at our doors.

Secondly, Stand^ng is a posture of Expectance; 2 King. 5. 25.
In all likelihood to expect what errand, he might have for him, what dispatch
to employ him in. CHRIST stands here, His offers of love He gives not over, nor
through despair of prevailing on his own, nor through churlishness of
repulse on our parts: He stands in spite of denials, He tries the Sea, after
may Ship-wracks, puts His shoulder more strongly to the load, and beats still
at that door, which He never say opened: How, as in a visible Sampler, shines
out now the patience of my SAVIOVR, the Longanimity of my GOD: there is power
in His hand, He could make an entry by force, but there is patience in His
heart, and therefore He stands: if His words can work upon us, He will spare
His blows, nor will He double these if at the first stripe we cry peccavi:
GOD in a moment can thunder down sin with vengeance, and rain fire from the
clouds upon it; but if the dewes of His mercy will soften us, He will not
power out of the viols of His plagues: nor will He blow the trumpet to war
without a parlee, or we refuse the often proffers of a happy peace: Every
Story is a Chronicle of this truth, and the whole world the practice, nor need
I be bankrupt of instances, One Israel is able to furnish me: observe the
degrees of their obstinacy, what a climax there is in it: I have spread out my
hands all the day to a rebellious people: Isa. 65. 2.
the whole day, beat it out to its utmost dimensions, I wrestle with them by
my bounty, and gain not; but what say you to years, a long lease of them;
Psalm. 95. 10.
Forty years long was I greeved with this generation and said, it is a people
that do err, etc. In half the time, I could have greeved every vein of
their hearts, so long they grieve my soul, and I am patient: would man be so
to his brother, when an injury heats his blood? but my plea against these is
from their very cradle and first stone of their city: The children of Israel,
Jer. 32. 30, 31.
and the children of Judah, have only done evil before me from their youth
up; And this city has been to me a provocation of my anger and fury, from
the day that they built it: where is that Plato now, whose cheeks choler never
died? where that Socrates, who never spoke storms, but smiles, not when
Zantippe comes like a tempest upon him: Diog. Laert. vit. Philos lib. 2.
where that Job, who entangled in so many Labyrinths of woes, in those windings
lost not his patience, nor himself: the patience of man may be great, but
matched with GODS, how small a drop is it to that Ocean? How weak a glimmering
to that Sun, How faint a beating to that life? write it on the tablets of your
hearts, and set it up, as a trophee of his due praise, GOD only is patient at
the evils, and gracious unto the sins of men; O that spiders should suck
venom out of so sweet a flower! or because he is not quick with them,
Atheists say He is slack, and ask in scorn, Where is the promise of His
coming? not to wander after these ignes fatui: CHRIST He stands at our doors
as yet, will He do always so? the Sun that shines will it never sit? the
day is clear, may not a cloud black it? GODS jealousy is not quickly incenst,
but if once kindled, will all the rivers of the South quench it? be wise than,
and before wrath come forth, and burn like fire, have tears of Penitence in
store to quench it: whilst it is day, work, when GOD calls speak, whilst He
stands open: He who stands now, may be gone, especially if he stand without a
covert, in the street, at the door, which is my second general, the Place.

Behold I stand at the door: If some Grandee magnifico swollen with titles,
would we not have to open, and think such a presence an honor to us? this we
would do to the Nimrods of the world, and Peers of the earth: Behold One is
here to whom the greatest Monarch is more base, than the basest Boar to the
greatest Monarch, one who knocks importunately, why shut we Him out, why are
docres blockt up against Him? O our lunacy and madness! Satan angles for us,
with a bait of honors, we are caught, the world as pleasingly gives us the
music of gain, we are charmed. the flesh unvailes a beauty, a piece of clay
more handsomely attired, we burn: Riches are but the garbage of the earth,
we dig into its entrals for them; pleasures are but a flower, garish to the
eye, soon withered, Our senses are captivated with their smell; Aug. de
civit. Dei. lib 3 cop. 17.
Dignities, as Saint Augustine censures them, are but a light fume, a breath of
the chops, a fleshly pair of bellows, we are hot in the sent of these, and
for all keep open house: CHRIST in respect of whom, and those endowments He
brings with Him, all things else, as Plato stampes them, are (...), nothing and
nothing worth; He sues, as in the Canticles, Open unto me, my Love* my Sister,
my Undefiled. Open the door, of thy soul O my unspotted Church, let me come
and dwell with thee in my Graces: here we or coin excuses for delay, as the
Spouse now, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? Cant 5. 3.
I have washed my feet how shall I defile them? or we out Him into our stables
with the Bethlemites anon, as having no room in the Inn of our hearts for Him.

closet of our hearts, will take up no lodging in us; and to this the door
alludes here, so runs the stream of Expositors; not the doors of our lips we
are bid open, though these too, but the door of our hearts; GOD asks the
root of this, not the rind and shell of those* My Son give me thy heart;
not thy wisdom, for all the treasures of it are in my self, not thy wealth,
Psalm. 50.
for the earth is mine and the fulness thereof, 1 Samuel 2. 8.
not thy greatness, for it is, I who make to inherit the throne of glory; not
an outside, a plausible varnish of devotion, the eye glotted up to Heaven, the
knee kissing the earth, the hand martyring the breast, a talent of talk,
without a mite of charity, Seneca de Beneficijs lib. 1.
but thy Heart: Aeschines brought the best gift, who gave himself to his
Master, and Socrates prized it above the costlier presents of his other
Scholars: thy heart is a jewel, give it to thy GOD, this small pibble is of
more worth with him, than whole rocks of Diamonds, this one living stone than
the quarries of the vast world; all thy offerings are but Sacriledges and
Sorceries without it, all thy front of holiness but dawbe and mortar: all is
not manhood, that looks big, and spits fire as it speaks, nor is all
beauty, which the sumptuous art of a trimming sets forth: there is a dress
and paint of holiness, GOD will vvash it away with a flood of brimstone, for
without the heart no colors can take him: As man's heart is, such is he, if
this be soild, laid ore thou may be with a vermilion die, Acts 23. 3.
but GOD shall smite thee thou painted wall: if this be pure, thou art all
white as the snow on Salmon, no juice of Isop can cleanse thee more, and sure
GOD is best pleased with his own work which is that (...) David's Orizons
flew up for, Psalm. 51. 10.
Create a clean heart in me O LORD: GOD gives thee this, and give it Him
again or keep all. Keep thy alms, though alms be a sweet perfume in His
nostrils, thy prayers, though prayer be as incense in His sight, thy fasting,
though fasting be the Armor of true penitence, thy thousand of Rams to make
fat, thy ten thousand rivers of oil to glad His altars: A wreath of glory
waits on our Almsdeeds, as they are dispensed by charity, the Almoner of
faith: these she does disperse abroad, and they come laden home with sheaves
of bliss from the plentifullest fields, Prove. 13. 9.
for a good eye shall be blessed of GOD; but what are good works without the
pity of the heart, this temple must sanctify this gold, or as Daniel told
Balthasher, so GOD us, Keep thy rewards to thy self, and give thy gifts to
another: Prayer is a heavenly Dialogue, or the souls colloquy with its Maker;
it is a chain, whose linkes do reach from Heaven to Earth, and by which we
pull down GOD to us, For GOD is nigh to all that call upon Him, Psalm. 145. 18.
nay in S. Basils phrase, Basil in Epist. ad Gregor.
it is (...), a GOD dwelling in us: but what are our prayers without the
devotion of the heart? this is the wine must season those bottles, or we babble
in vain, nay to our hurt, and beg not a blessing, but a curse, as Bias told
the Mariners in a storm, when sailing with them, they were on their knees to
their gods, Diog. Laert. de vit. Phil. lib. 1.
Silete, ne vos hic illi navigare sentiant: the Jews honor GOD with their
lips alone, what is the issue, when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine
eyes from you, Isa. 1. 15.
when ye make many prayers I will not hear: Aug. in Psalm. 42
One vving in Augustine by which our prayers do soar on high, is Fasting,
nor is it a mushroome of a days growth, it is of an ancient stock, fetching its
pedigree from Paradise; where the first man forbad the tree of Knowledge, was
in that enjoined a law of Abstinence: many are the rich encomioms wherewith
it is robbed in Antiquity, Cypr. de jeju. Christi.
Saint Cyprian shall speak for all: By fasting the sink of vice is dried up,
wantonness waxes cold, concupiscences grow faint, and pleasures like
fugitives run away: but what is fasting without a contrite heart? what is it
to tame the flesh, if this mutine within us? what to graspe this shadow, if we
fathom not that substance; if that Iebusite be not subdued within thee, in
vain do thou macerate thy body into a skeleton, bury it in a shrowde of
sackcloth, and instead of sweet Odours besprinklest it with Ashes; Isa. 58. 5.
For is it such a fast as I have chosen, a day for a man to bow down his head
like a bullrush? When we fast at once from meats and sins, Ambr. Ser. 33.
as Saint Ambrose speaks, when we beat down the body, to keep the mind
chaste, this is the life of a true fast and that which crowns it: not to muster
up other instances, thus much in gross: As the trace of a could, so all our
goodness shall vanish, how-ere we parget and sleeke it ore, where the heart
is not right; is thy heart right, says Iehu, when he would feel the pulse of
Iehonadab how it bear toward him, 2 King. 10. 15.
give me thy hand, thus man does judge the root by the fruits: is thy hand
right, says GOD, is there no juggling, no imposture, no legerde-maine in what
thou do; Give me thy heart, thus GOD does judge the fruits by the root:
and sure all the wheels are set on going by this Primum mobile, all the
Planets moove, as this Sphere turns; the whole infantery, the foot are lead up
by this man of valor, the Heart, every member of the body, says to it, as the
Israelites to Ioshuah, Josh 1. 16.
All thou command us, we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we
will go: only the LORD be with thee: and doubt not, but GOD will be with it,
if it be His, if it be not, He has the more wrong, for He bought it dearly,
it cost Him that blood, one drop whereof was worth a million of worlds, it was
a spittle of filth, He has made a palace of righteousness, Satan had his
throne there, He has bound this strong man and cast him forth: so that now
it is His own house by purchase, by conquest: who than dares to keep Him out?
who so litigiously given, as not to open, when He knocks? which is my third
general, the Action it self, I Knock: Behold I stand at the door and Knock.

(...) in the Original, from (...) say Etymologists, a Metaphor taken from
beasts, whom nature has armed with horns to strike: no creature is without
its weapons, either to ward of from himself, or to thrust with a blow at
others: the Armadello on land has his hard skin for a coat, the Tortoise in
the Sea, his as hard a shell for a covering, the timorous Roe his swift feet to
fly, the wary Fox his Labyrinths, to hide from danger: the Basilisk has an
eye to kill, the Dragon a breath to poison, the Scorpion a sting to wound: the
Boar roots up with his tusk, the Griffins tear with their nails, the Eagle
with her talons rends in pieces, and the Bulls of Bashan push strongly with the
horn: to knock is tropically taken here, and borrowed from these, and it
implies a mighty stroke, as a blow from a sinew'd neck, or those horns of
iron, which Zedekiah made, when he betrayed himself to error by a false
spirit, by the gull of a false victory he cheated Ahab, 1 King. 22 11.
and told him, with these shall thou push the Syrians, till thou have consumed
them: it is than a knock with force and all GODS are so, let us rank them into
their several files.

First, GOD knocks by the Ministry of His Word.
this is a knock of power, and His, who knocks with Authority, Romans 1. 16.
for such is His Word, and so He teaches, Mat 7. 29.
what strong holds will not this engine pull down? what bulwarks of humane
policy not scale, what rampires of flesh and blood not raze and dig through?
it casts down, says Saint Paul (and he speaks it as an Oracle) every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of GOD, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of CHRIST: Men have
foreheads of Stone, necks vein'd with Adamant, hearts rib'd with Marble, these
cannot bleed, nor those bow, nor the other blush, the Word is a hammer to break
this rock a pieces, Jer. 23. 29.
a fire to melt it into softness, a rod to make waters of penitence gush out
from it: Men stop their ears like the Adder, Exodus 17. 6.
the One they couch to the ground, ram into it store of covetous dirt; the
Other they close up with their winding tale, fill it with carols and rounds of
lust; Even these Serpents have been charmed by the Word, it is heavenly
incantations have undeaft them, they have danced to the pipe of the Gospel,
the silver bells of Aaron have ravished them out of their selves, and now no
music to the sweet songs of Sion: how unfruitful a soil is man's soul, how
barren a piece of earth, till the Word distills as the dew upon it, and than O
the happy fruits of a few drops! is the heart malicious? no knee can beg a
pardon of it, as soon we may calm the Sea, when all the winds are in an
uproare: is it covetous? no balm can supple it to pity, none art extract a
mite from it: is it ambitious, and will we stay its careere! as well we may
stop the lightning: is it factious? all the harmony of Heaven cannot sing it
into peace: is it fruitless, as soon we may plow the waters and expect a crop
thence: is it hard: what means can mollify it? what oil here, what vinegar
there? Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
Behold, the Word drops as the rain upon it; as the small rain upon the
tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass: straight this flint softens
into flesh, these jars kiss in a sweet concord, this rough Ocean does cease to
rage, that Gilboah is clothed in Green, where but now no blade was, not a
leaf of grass to apparel it: as if a new soul were breathed into him, such
a change is in the whole man: Aenaead. lib. 1.
quantum mutatus ab illo: Zacheus is merciful, Paul tame as a lamb, Ahab puts
sackcloth upon his flesh, Felix trembles like an Aspen leaf: Peter taken from
the nets, does catch a thousand and a thousand souls at a draught, nay the
world is won to the faith, not by the Sages of Egypt, but the refuse of Jury,
the Rabbis with these, with those the Magi are mastered by them; the words of
Fishermen are read, says Augustine, Sermon. 59. de verbis Domini.
but the necks of Orators are subdued: that Roman Chieftaine might not more
boast his veni, vidi, A. Hirtij de bello Alexand comment.
vici, than they, they conquered as many nations as they saw: not Ore gladij,
with the edge of the sword, this can but gash the flesh, at most make a gappe
for the soul to step out at; but gladio oris the keen blade of the Word,
which divides between the soul and the spirit, no other weapon can pierce so
deep, not that fiery one, with which the Cherubins kept the passage of
Paradise: not a heart within these walls, but GOD now knocks at it by this Word,
though not by this only: for

Secondly, GOD knocks by His Mercies: His Mercies! Mercy.
A theme for Angels to descant on, the sweetest Attribute of the Deity, the
alone object of His delight; Heaven were as Hell without it, and all approach
to His Throne, Death; whom would not Majesty swallow up, did not mercy temper
it? we are consumed with His fires, as He is (...) a Capitol of justice, but
we sly into His bosom, as He is (...) an Asylum of mercy; and the best
Sanctuary He is, nay joys to be so: Tully speaks it of himself, and take
him as the Emblem of a good judge, Orat pro Luc. Murena.
Parts lenitatis misericordi aeque semper egi libenter, gravitatis
severitatisque personam non appetivi: I willingly acted the parts of mildness,
the bent of my nature was this way; the Public good is at stake, and the
dignity of the Empire to be rescued, when I put on the person of severity: if
GOD strike, as our sins may force a weapon into His hands, Isa. 28. 21.
He styles it a strange work, a strange Act: Austerity is no consort of His,
no familiar, little acquaintance He has with it, nor glories He to have any:
Suet. Tranq. de Vesp. Aug cap 15.
etiam justissimis paenis illachrymat, as Suetonius of Vespatian, he doomed not
to the most just punishment with dry cheeks, not like that bloody Massalla,
who in one day having struck off four thousand heads (so Valerius reckons
them) vaunts Valor. lib. 11.
it among those piles of carcasses, (...), O Act worthy a King: no such
tyranny in our GOD, of whom all the heavenly Coiristers chaunt it, and let us
bear a part with them: The LORD is gracious and full of compassion, slow to
anger and of great mercy, Psalm. 145. 8.
the LORD is good to all and His tender mercies are above all His works: what
above all His works? that starry roof over our heads, and those millions of
tapers which burn there? this pavement of thy workmanship, O LORD, we tread
on, every the least inch of it, the whole earth is full of thy goodness: Psalm.
119. 64.
but does it reach to that height, which to look on, tires the eye by the way?
that precious vault wherewith thou have walled in this inferior globe? Heaven
is high, nine hundred miles upwards, say some, five hundred years journey, say
others, who have calculated curiously, is thy Mercy so? can it ore-top this
Pyramid? He who said it, could speak it without an Hyperbole, Psalm. 36. 5.
Thy mercy, O LORD, is in the Heavens, Psalm. 36. it than equals them for site
here, but it transcends them there, is (...) now, Thy mercy is great above the
heavens, Psalm. 108. 4.
Psalm. 108. the whole world is a huge to me and volume of these mercies, a
large Map of them, an Abstract and Epitome of all was one Israel, they were
abrig'd into that little table, one Jacob, his portion: we have their catalogue
drawn up by Moses: He kept him as the Apple of his eye, he bore him on his
wings as an Eagle, he gave him the increase of the fields, he made him suck
honey out of the rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
fed him with butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of Lambs, and Rams
of the breed of Bashan: May I speak it to the conscience of every one here,
who has not tasted and seen that the LORD is good? Psalm. 34. 8. whom amongst
us has He not drawn with the coards of men, the bands of love? Hos. 11. 14.
as He did his Own in Hosea: we sit every man under his own vine, and beak
our selves in the Sunshine of an Halcion peace; the red sea of war is dried
to our feet, nor see we the garments roul'd in blood: we eat the finest of the
wheat flower, Psalm. 65. 3^
our presses burst with new wine: our garners are full of store, our bones of
marrow, our bellies of GODS hid treasures: our vines hang full of clusters, our
meadows shoot up their grass, our valleys are covered over with corn, they
shoot for joy and sing: we cannot say, as the Prince of the Apostles, silver
and gold have we none, we can, as Pindarus did of the city Rhodes, the King of
the gods (...), Ode.
every tide waves in rich Ore unto us, and every way showers of mercy distill
on our heads, more precious than those dewes of Hermon, which fell upon the
hills of Sion: these are blessed knockings, if they miscarry, will GOD leave us
so? no, He will knock more sharply yet, with a more smarting blow, by His

Afflictions: Afflictions.
these are knocks of mercy too, if we surveigh aright Them or our Selves.

First, Them, they are indeed the strokes of Sermon, by which GOD does preach
unto us the vileness of our sins and His loathing of them: they are eventually
a pawn of love, for as those floods rise, so with them the Arc of the Church
is more lifted up to Heaven, by these rough rocks, as Ionatthan to the garrison
of the Philistines, the Saints climb up, as by stairs to glory: crosses are
rough and pricklie, they are waters of marah, as draughts of Hemlock to an
unhallowed pallat: but there is an unction of joy, that supples them them to
the godly, honey is sucked by them from these thistles, and now here is Sampsons
riddle without a mystery, Out of the eater comes meat, and out of the strong
comes sweet: that Absynthium which smarts our eye cleares it, and we thank that
pain which gives us sight: the way to cleanse thy sore, may be to lance and
tent it to the quick, and to dead thy festring flesh thou bidst a free welcome,
even to searings and cauteries: to purge out my gross humors, I ask not for
sugared but working potions, nor will I distaste their bitterness, though
intermingled with gall: he shall die without my pity, who will languish
rather under a wilful sickness, than venture on a harsh remedy: A sound body
may house a crazie soul, and it is a rare one, that has not some notable
malady: One swells with a tympany of pride, that reeles with the staggers of
drunkenness; this rots with a consumption of envy, the other thirsts with a
dropsy of Avarice, in many the whole heart is sick; crosses are our best
medicines, what if their relish displease us? it is enough that they are
sovereign, though not savoury; if they are wholesome, why are we squeamish?
who loves his taste, above his health, may he be diseased still.

Secondly, sift we our selves, and those knockings, cross us with a blessing!
Cur bonis viris mala eveniant Sen.
Nihil infaelicius eo, cui nihil unquam evenit adversi, it was the Heroical
voice of Demetrius, says Seneca: never to be miserable is the greatest
unhappiness: should Prosperity always cast sweetning dewes in his face,
should a smooth gale ever fill his sails, what an elated meteor would man grow
to, how would this Colosse ore-stradle the world? Alexander if he be Great,
some flatterers of his court (and these burs still cleave to the coats of
greatness) will entitle him to immortality, and say, he is a god: we are
easily befooled to an over-valuing of our selves, so was he, until wounded
with a dart; Diog Laert de vita Phil lib 3. Plut. Apot^e^
Anaxarchas asks him Laertius, himself in Plutarch tells those about him, this
is not (...) (...).
Such a juice as drops from the veins of the gods: As men's pomp, so their
minds rise, these are higher, as that is more lackey'd: how can it be full sea
in the thoughts, if the ebb be low in the state, or to whom the world is
embittered, will they suck vanity from her breasts? this knockes at the rich
man's door, nor lies it on a pad of straw, but a bed of down: Pro. 1. 23.
Ease slays the foolish, it pufs up this bladder of wind, if plenty waft in
a high tide to him, and but what is in those Aires, the world fan's on his
cheeks, other happiness he knows none: what more endeeres our home unto us,
than our wants abroad? as but for the enterchange of cold and winter, who would
long for the spring, though for ornament the most gorgeous season of the year?
the Prodigal, when he feeds on husks, than thinks on his Fathers house, as
at the thought of Egypt and her fleshpots, Israel loathes Canaan it self:
where do our desires breathe so short of Heaven, as where Usury sits wrapped in
furs, where bravery fails in tissues and embroideries, where opulencie showers
down in fleeces of gold, where honors fawn, and all things flow in an over
prosperous abundance: such a wretchedness it is to be too happy: Minutius
bears away the palm of a glorious victory, and all Rome echoes as one
Theatour in his praises Fabius his wise Colleague than fears him most, and
most justly, for said that famous Orator, in a more famous Senate, Isocr.
Areop.
the Areopage at Athens, (...): Insolency is lodged under a high-built fortune,
your sober mind in one low roof: pride is usually the child of riches, and in
the seat of honor sits hautinesse: it is the misery of mean ones, not to be
thought men, and it is the misery of great ones not to think there is a GOD:
Ephraim not accustomed to the yoke, may turn the heel, but Israel being
smitten, Psalm 78. 34.
seeks after GOD early: David's sweetest songs were his lachrymae, this Saint
in a tempest how crest-fallen in his devotion, when he lies at hull at home!
Psalm 119. 71.
and therefore it is good for me that I was in trouble: it was good for Naaman
that he was a Leaper, but by his leaprosie he had not known Elisha, nor GOD,
but by his Prophet; it was good for Paul, that he had (...), a stub in the
flesh, he might through his heavenly rapture, have been enamored on
himself, but for those corasives of sharp buffetings: Even the worst men may
be made good by sufferings, they make the good happy; and so expect not their
patience only but cherfulness; Every bird can chirpe it in a temperate
Air, give me those notes are carol'd in the midst of a storm: not an Epicures
spleen but claps his wanton sides in the midst of his jollity, but O that
inimaginable joy of Martyrs, which made them sing at the stake! never repine
we, let them glad us rather, at those beatings, which humble us here, to exalt
us hereafter, the rod is worthy to be kissed, which does lash out our folly: if
therefore the sound of thy Word pearce not my dull ears, if I speak not at
the ravishing knock of thy blessings, knock on, till I not hear but smart, but
still in Mercy, O LORD and not in judgment, and this is GODS fourth way of
Knocking.

Fourthly, GOD knocks by His Judgments,

First, if at the next, His strokes there, are caveats Sodom and those cities
of the plain, which were mixed with clouds of pitch, and heaps of Ashes,
(...) at the seventh of Jude, are items to all; to all who have fronts of
whoredoms, that in those legible characters they may spell what GOD means to
themselves; to all too, who have hearts of flesh, and look on those monuments
of vengeance, as Seamen do on shelves, to shun them: Remember Lots wife, she
is made a statue to thee, a pillar of Salt to this end, ut suo te exemplo
condiret, as Saint Augustine warbles it, to season thee by her example, to
scare thee by her doom too, for it is the property of Salt, (...).
(...): So that great Ornament of the Greek Church Saint Chrysostom: the
Galileans blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, they were offered up with
their Holocausts: CHRIST told of this tragedy, samples it with another of
eighteen, on whom the tower of Shiloe fell, and buried them under its ruinous
heaps: sad spectacles both, and of both that great Pastor and Bishop of our
souls makes this holy use: Luke 13. 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: happy he, whom* others
harms make wise, and whom they teach not, he may want not grief, but pity:
Lamech slaies a man to his wounding, and a young man to his hurt, nor could the
President of Caine take of his edge from bloodshed: we need no Jury to pass
upon him, no judge to sentence him for this, his own mouth has done it: if
Caine shall be avenged seven fold, Gen 4 24.
sure Lamech seventie and seven fold: how often are men swallowed up of those
judgments, they see to ingulfe others, and slight them: Oportet abietem
ululare, quia cecidit cedrus; if the Cedar fall, let the firre-tree howl, the
next blow stocks up that too: the cloud may gather a far of, and some fury of
the storm may break on our heads: the Sword which is drunk with blood
yonder, will perhaps quaffe thine, the Pestilence which destroies in the next
City, what garrisons can keep it out of this? if my neighbors house be on
fire, shall I warm my hands at the flame? may not those sparks catch my
roof? let a Nero sing, when Rome burns, by another losses, I shall collect
mine own, what they may be, how near to arrest me, Pro. 19. 25.
Smite a scorner and the simple will beware: may others ingrosse all the skill
of Egypt, let me be blessed with this simplicity, no vatican or Library of the
world is enricht with so true wisdom: for who bleeds at another hurt does in
that forestall his own, if that punishment makes thee wary, which lies at the
next threshold, be sure, it shall not step ore thine: Otherwise

Secondly, GOD knocks by his judgments at mercy, are as the rain that comes
down upon the mowen grass, not with noise enough to rouse us: the knocks of
Afflictions gall us, but wound not, these arrows strike, but stick not in us,
with some little pains we shake them of, Virg. Aenead
non haeret lateri lethalis arundo: the knock of judgment, though at the next
wicket, is out of our hearing, and therefore out of our care, yet is it not for
want of sound in that, but for want of ears in us: but these knocks at our
own gates, no bars of iron can hold out against them, no heart so knotty, but
they cleave it: GOD smites another and we keep aloof from His soar, Lips. de
Constant. lib. 1. cap 1.
(...), as Homer does advise warily: or we look upon His Plague, but with
David's friends, those oily Sycophants of his court rather, we stand a far
of: make the case our own: our wounds corrupt and stink, our loins are filled
with a loathsome disease, we call in have, O for some sovereign Balsames, O
for some gentle Baths to wash me, O for some good Samaritan to pour in wine
and oil: Iuven. Sat. 4.
poor Codrus his lodge flames about his ears, we will not heave at a bucket
to quench it, a few sticks we tell him, and some clay, will rebuild him as
goodly a tabernacle: Let his palace of Cedar burn, or his fields of barley be
set on fire, 2 Samuel 14. 31.
what Ioab will not rise? whether not run? whom not affront with the injury?
this disease is Epidemicall, GOD may scourge those about us with whips of
Scorpions, if our own sides are not torn with those stripes, we still frolike
it, all is Comedy with us, our instruments are turned to mirth, and here is
that ignis erraticus, which still misleades us, evil is not within our
dwellings, and we say, it shall not come nigh them; but now, that it is come,
will it not dishearten and turn us into stone, as that scroule on the wall did
Balthasher? who flatter themselves with a supersedeas from all arrests, or that
they can put off judgment till a hundred years after, as the judges of
Athens, Aul. Gellius 12. 7.
so Aul. Gellius stories it, bound ore a woman for the trial of her cause,
when they could not sentence it, who descants on others falls, without the
least reflex to their own merits, or turn tail, like a weathercock in a
gentle calm, when GOD courts them by His mercies, where will these hide them,
in what rocks, under what mountains, when GOD will be known by the judgment
that he executes, Psalm. 9. 16.
and at their own homes: GOD speaks to us in a still voice, as to Eliah on
Mount Horeb, 1 King 19. 3. Psalm. 8. 7.
we will not hear, He will be heard when He speaks (...) out of the secret
place of thunder, when he speaks not to the ear only, but the sense it
self, as to Pharaoh in the voice of his signs; so those plagues are styled,
which came in with a miracle, and went out in blood, Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
a Sea of blood: he must sleep (...), Endaemons sleep in Theocritus, (...).
whom thunders startle not, and those strokes of judgments, heavier than of
axes and hammers: if this Lion roar in the forest, do not the beasts foare?
if this sword hang but by a hair ore his head, if already sheathed in his
bowels, Horat. Odar. lib. 3. Od. 1.
can Damocles relish his viands? who dare forge in the wilds of vice, Psalm.
105. 27, 28, 29.
when GOD shows (...) the words of His prodegies as the Original
emphatically: such words as darkness black as hell, and frogs in the chambers
of their Kings, and lice in all their quarters, and locusts without number, did
speak to the Egyptians, and that in a language, that was both heard and felt:
felt to, not as a goade that pricks the skin only, and smarts the flesh, but
as a flaile of iron, that does bruise in pieces: O those immaleable souls,
whom these blows rift not! I should stagger in my belief, whether any such
are, but that I know there have been: their Obstinacy is chronicled, read it
and bless your selves, Ier. 5. ver. 3. Thou have smitten them; but they have
not greeved, Jer. 5. 3.
thou have consumed them, but they have made their faces harder than a rock: So
Saint Augustine upbraideth the seduct Pagans: Perdidistis utilitatem
calamitatis, De civit Dei lib. 2. cap. 33.
miseri facti estis, and pessimi permansist is: wickedness makes you wretched,
wretchedness makes you worse, so the fruits of your calamities die in their
touch, and like those by the Lake Asphalites crumble into Ashes: Joseph. de
bello Iudaico lib. 5. cap. 5.
these Oaks will not bow, they shall break, may I swim through a river of
brimstone, wade through a torrent of Sulphur, to be eternally happy and with
my GOD: but what Heraldry can blazon their woes, what pencill paint them, who
are under the scourge here, and under the curse for ever? as they must be, at
whose doors judgments do knock without grace: which is GODS fist and last
way of knocking.

GOD fifthly knocks by the sweet inspirements Spirit.
of His holy Spirit: from whom are suggestions to holiness, excitements to
penitence, and powerful workings on the heart of faith: these motions are that
voice in Isai, we hear behind us, saying, This is the way, Isa. 30. 11.
walk in it: a voice audible to all within the pale of the Church, even those
false fires of Religion, which but glow in it: these have their pangs of zeal,
their quames of devotion, their flashes of holiness, and from this Spirit are
all these, how-ever nick-nam'd: this Spirit enkindled those sparks, Mark. 6. 20.
when Herod did many things, and heard the Baptist gladly: when rapt with Paul's
sanctified strains, Acts 26. 28.
Agrippa was at the point to turn Christian; but it blew them up into a flame,
when Gamaliels Scholar is non plust spite of his subtle disputes, and made a
Proselyte with those, whom but now he martyred: if we think a good thought,
it is grace infused, so Saint Augustine the devout patron of it, if we speak
a good word, it is grace effused, if we do a good work, it is grace
diffused; now what is done by grace, the Spirit does it, whose royal Epitheton
and character it is, The Spirit of grace: there is a Spirit of giddiness, Zach
11. 10.
it rules much in some brainesick hot-spurs, whom it does possess at once with
a zealous frenzy, and cast them, as that dumb One did the child in the
Gospel, Mark. 9. 22.
now into the water, sullen and rheumatick drivelings, spitting against the
Church, whose Hierarchy they beat down, that their own brains may sway;
anon into the fire, so hot a contention about Ceremonies, though enjoined with
equal modesty and right, as if Heaven and Earth were to little to be
mingled in the quarrel; this Spirit, whether in a Church-parlour at
Amsterdam, abroad there, or an uncharitable conventicle of our Zelots, at home
here, is as far from grace, as unity, it at once rents into Schisms, divides
that coat is seamelesse, and opens a sluice for Anarchy, disorder, irreligion:
they are other fruits, which blossom on that tree, the good Spirit plants;
James 3. 17.
these are Humility, Meekness, Brotherly love, and that rich Diamond of all
humane happiness, Union and Identitie of heart in those, who keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace: Ephesians 4. 3.
if this Spirit inspire not with holy motions to unity, we are all jars, if by
His gracious instincts He work us not to holiness, we are all profane, no
other means are effectual. First, GOD knocks by His Word, Esaias 28. 10.
this is to us, Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line, here a little, and there a little: if this Spirit inflame not
our hearts to the love of the truth, how do we look the Prophets in the face,
Psalm. 50. 17.
and cast their words behind our backs? or hear them as we do music to
stuff our ears, when our bellies are full. Secondly, GOD knocks by His
Mercies, exhausts all the treasures of them, and crowns us with His blessings:
if this Spirit mould not our hearts to thankfulness, how as wild heafers do
we kick being full, or how, like a peevish beauty, the more GOD woes us by
His bounty, the more coy and shie are we? Thirdly, GOD knocks by Afflictions,
these rise not out of the dust, none can take of, or add the least scruple to
their weight, and they are for our health those drams that are mingled to us of
them; this heavenly physic works not on our souls; if the Spirit make it
not operative, without Him the whole head is still sick, nor has any drugsters
shop that medecin can cure us. Fourthly, GOD knocks by His judgments, they
break in like waves of the sea, this on the neck of that, ere the former have
wrought all his spite: they beat with blows able to shake the center, man's
heart like the Anvill, the more it is hammered on, the harder it grows; only
this Spirit makes us flexible metal; judgments may leave an impression
behind them, but no stamp to that of Grace. Power out O LORD, of this thy
Spirit upon us; Knock by thy Word, and may it lead us in the paths of life;
Knock by thy Mercies, and may those load-stones attract our longing to thee;
Knock by thy Afflictions, and in that School, may we con new lessons of
Amendment; Knock by thy judgments, may they put us in fear, and make us know
our selves to be but dust and ashes: Knock above all by thy Sacred Spirit, O
thou who have the keys of hell and death, say effectually to our souls; Lift
up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the
King of glory may come in: So Veni Domine Jesus, Come LORD JESV, come quickly:
To whom with the Father and the Spirit, be All praise, and honor for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
Perlegi hanc Concionem, dignamque judico quae typis mandetur.

THO: WYKES R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.


