THE TRVE FRIEND, Or, A BILL OF EXCHANGE, EXPRESSED IN A SERMON PREACHED AT
WHITE HALL: Upon Sunday the XIII. of December, Anno Domini, 1629. By JOHN
DOVVLE, Doctor of Divinity, and his Majesty's Chaplain.

Luke 11. 40, 41. Date eleemosynam, and ecce omnia munda sunt vobis.

Give alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean unto
you.

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Nicholas Bourne, at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, Earl of Pembroke, Lord high Steward of his
Majesty's Household, and of his most Honorable Privy Council, Chancellor of
the University of Oxford, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter.
ALthough I can justly challenge no interest in your Lordships favor; yet your
Lordship may claim any fruit of my studies as your due, especially this
Sermon, which was at first conceived in that famous University, whereof your
Lordship has for many years been the Honorable Chancellor, and now brought
forth before that most Honorable Household, of which your Honor is right
worthily the high Steward. And besides, that small Inheritance which God of his
goodness has given me, for the preservation of me, and mine, I do enjoy
under your Lordship, and am by that likewise obliged to do your Honor and
yours all faithful service.

God and men know, that both your Lordship, and your most Noble Ancestors have
severally acted that charitable part, which here I advise others to do, so
that this discourse of mine which shall be their direction, is Pembrokes
History; which being by you continued to the end, as you have begun, your
Lordship in the end of your days shall receive the end of your hope, and of
this discourse, and be received into everlasting habitations. Such shall ever
be the prayer of

Your Lordships most humbly devoted JOHN DOVVLE.

LVKE XVI. Chap. IX. Verse. Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that
when ye shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.
THE Parable is of the unjust Steward, the Text is the conclusion of the
Parable: in the winding up whereof our Savior (blessed for ever) taught his
Disciples then, and does us now, (although it be by an ill precedent) how we
may all very well provide for Eternity. For the Steward, whether he was Saint
Paul before his conversion, as Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch would have him; or
the Devil, abusing those great gifts he had received from God, to others
condemnation, as Gaudentius thought; or the Jews sitting in the Tents of Shem,
as Tertullian would make him: Whether he be only the Rich-ma^, or only the
States-ma^, or only the Churchman, or rather Every man to whom any charge is
committed by God, (as the Doctors have severally given their opinions) I list
not here to dispute, as deeming it not much to our present purpose, to know
what he was; sure I am he was bad enough, and yet not so bad neither, but that
our Savior picks good out of him; and by his care for the world, does as it
were chalk us out a way to eternal happiness. It Is true, what ever he was,
a filthy dunghill he was, full of corruption; and yet Christ that just One
scrapes a pearl out of him; a toad he was, full of poison, and yet the great
Physician draws a precious stone out of his head: For although his heart be
not right either toward God, or Man, yet his brain serves his own turn well
enough; for, (if you mark him) though he has neither arms to dig, nor a
face to beg, yet he has no will to want neither; live he must, and if it may
be no other way, it shall be by his wit; and for this is he commended in the
Gospel, Quia prudenter agit, non quia fraudulenter, sithence he would live
dishonestly, yet he would carry it cleanely, handsomely; and thus he will do
it: The debtor that owes his Master an hundred measures of oil, shall take
his bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty; and he that owes an hundred
measures of wheat, shall write down but fourscore, and this he will do,
verse 4, that when he has lost his office, and is cast out of his Masters
doors, Recipiant, They may receive him into their houses; So I say unto you,
says our Savior, Make you friends, Learn of him.

Had it been, Discite a me, Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of me, it had been an
admirable precedent; nay had it been but, Go to the Pismire, Prove. 6. 6. I
should never have marveiled, for she would teach us honest providence; or had
it been, Inspicite in volatilia caeli, Mat. 6. 26. Look upon the fowls of
heaven, for they know their seasons: or, Observate lilia agri, ver. 28. Learn
of the lilies of the field, it had not been strange neither, for they would
teach us confidence; but learn of him? Can there come any thing that good is
from one so evil as he? any thing worthy a child of God, from a son of
Belial? any thing beseeming a religious imitation, from a man of this world?
Yes, for I tell you, he, and such as he, are in their generation wiser than the
children of light; therefore I say unto you, Learn of him. What to do? To
make you friends. How? Of the unrighteous Mammon. Why? That when you shall
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

The Text then, you see, is a Bill of Exchange, sent from one Country to
another, an exchange of earthly riches which we possess here, for heavenly
friends which we make us hereafter; one whereof shall be better to us at the
last, than all our pelf: for when our bodies shall fall to dust from whence
they came, these shall carry up our souls into Abraham's bosom: or to keep
the words of my text, That when we shall fail, they may receive us into
everlasting habitations.

The first word in my text is Quid, what you must do; and that has counsel
full of Christian policy, Facite vobis amicos, Make you friends: the second is
the Cuius, or the matter whereof, De Mammona iniquitatis, Of the unrighteous
Mammon: the third is the Cui bono, to what end all this? That when you shall
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

So that what Saint Paul made the law to his Galatians, that Christ Jesus has
made this Gal. 3. 24.
steward to us, a Schoolmaster to bring us to God: Make ye friends. In
brief, the Steward takes care before hand for hereafter, that when he has
lost his office, and is cast out of his Masters house, he may be received into
other men's: so I say unto you, Learn of him, do you provide whilst you may,
that when, your houses of clay, your bodies shall crumble, and fall to dust,
from whence they came, your souls may be received into everlasting
habitations. First,

Facite vobis amicos,
Make you friends.
And that I think is good counsel at any time, I am sure it is that which
you Courtiers bestow most of your time about, but if ever this advice of our
Saviors were more seasonable the^ other, questionles it is now, when charity
is grown so cold, that it is even as hard to find true friends, as true
faith on earth, because we are they, on whom the end of the world is come, 2 Timothy 3. 2. in which says Saint Paul, Men shall be lovers of their own selves;
therefore, Facite vobis amicos, Make you friends.

Now, if ever David's Salvum Psalm. 12. 1.
me fac, Help Lord, help, may be sung most seasonablie, For there is scarce
one godly man left, the faithful are all minished from among the children of
men, they talk of vanity every one with his neighbor; Verse 2.
they flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their double heart, says
the Translation, but that is very short; Leu veleu is the original, they
dissemble with a heart and a heart; as if now men had two hearts, one in their
bodies to treasure up their meanings for themselves, and another in their
tongues, to deceive others: and therefore I say unto you, Make you friends.

I am sure you have Enemies enough, you should make you friends. The Devil
first, he is your grand Enemy, and you are oftentimes, quasi in faucibus,
(...), even in the jaws of that roaring Lion, which goes about seeking still
whom he may devour; then Make you friends. He is the Prince of this world,
able enough to do you mischief, yea and Legion too, and many ways he has
to undermine, to overthrow you: therefore I say, Make you friends.

Then your flesh which you bear about you, and so pamper every day, as if
she were one of your best friends, is your close Enemy too, take heed of
her; nay there is a traitor at home, your own heart, like a snake in thy
bosom, is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it? (...). 17. 9.
Jer. 17. 9. And therefore, Make you friends.

Again, If ye love me, says (...). 15. 19
our Savior, and if ye love one another, the world will hate you too; Then
make you friends.

Nay there are whole armies of petty Enemies, which serve under these grand
ones, but I cannot stand to muster them up now; you know them your selves,
(...), Look about you, Heb. 3. 12
beware of them; Make you friends.

When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to become his
friends, Prove. 16. 7. Prove. 16. 7
And certainly as it is a great argument of Gods favor, so it is an high
point of Christian policy, for a man to make his enemies to become his
friends. Surely your riches, if they be the riches of unrighteousness, (as
for the most part they are) they are your foes: For it is very hard, says our
Savior, for a man that is laden with them, to enter into the Kingdom of God.
Oh therefore (my dear brethren) I say unto you, now be wise, even when you
may: Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that your enemies, even they
which of themselves would press you down into that bottomless pit, may be by
you so well employed now, that they may hereafter receive you into everlasting
habitations. Facite vobis amicos, Make you friends.

You say very well, it is very good counsel that you give, and we are willing
to follow it; but who are those friends you so commend unto us?

These friends of ours, says one, are the comfortable thoughts Theophylact in
loc.
which shall be in our minds, at the hour of death, for the right bestowing
of the riches which God had lent us here; Vt quando pusillo animo simus, When
we should with the terror of death be amazed, or, as the word is in the Text,
Quum defecerimus, when our bodies are even now falling to the earth from whence
they came, these good and happy thoughts of ours, as our best friends, may
wait upon our souls into their everlasting habitations. To this end, Saint
Chrysostom in one of his Homilies excellently compares well-doing Hom. 7. de
paenitens.
here, to Noah's Dove, in Genesis 8. 11. She goes forth from Genesis 8. 11.
Noah whilst the waters are on the face of the whole earth; but in the Evening
she returns, and lo an Olive leaf in her mouth: Even so, says he, while a
man lives here, he is tumbled and tossed in the Sea of this world, veluti
dolorum diluvio circundatum, even ready to be swallowed up; but yet in the end
of his days, at his death, his well-doing, his innocence, instar columbae,
like an harmless dove, comes home to him with an Olive branch in her mouth,
bringing the peace of God, and the peace of a good conscience, cheering up his
drooping soul, with some such friendly and comfortable thought as this, Thou
have kept thine Innocence, and taken heed to the thing that was right; and I
have brought thee peace at the Psa 37. 38
last.

Saint Ambrose makes the Lib. 7. in Luc. cap. ult tom. 5.
friends that are here commended unto us, to be the holy Angels of God in
Heaven; for those we make our friends too, (says he) when out of the bowels
of compassion, we bestow any thing to relieve the necessity of our poor
brethren here below.

Saint Augustine will have De Verb. Dom. Ser. 14.
these friends of ours to be Sancti Dei, the Saints of God, who are made our
friends likewise by works of mercy toward our brethren: The Saints here, and
the Saints above: the Saints here we make our friends, when they, seeing our
good works, do glorify Mat. 5. 16.
our Father which is in heaven; when they are led on by our good example, to
do good to others: and the Saints above likewise, who by the good they did
here, have already eased themselves of that heavy burden, which might have
pressed them downwards and velut pennati, with the silver wings of faith and
devotion, are gone up to heaven, where they expect, and desire us, the members
of the Church militant, to dwell with them in everlasting habitations.

Lastly, Amici, the friends spoken of here in the Text, are, says Haymo,
Pauperes, the poor on earth, quos Deus permisit egere, ad illorum purgationem,
et nostram probationem; Whom almighty God has suffered to be in want here, for
the trial of their patience, and the exercise of our charity: And this way
indeed runs the stream of the modern Interpreters But me thinks, without
wrong to any, we may be bold to join all these together; (and should we
leave out any of these, we might peradventure miss our best friends when we
have most need of them:) and certainly by works of mercy, by deeds of
charity to the poor, we indeare them all unto us, we make them all our
friends; our own Thoughts become friendly unto us; the holy Angels in
heaven, the blessed Saints of God, the prayers of the poor on earth; and,
which is more than all the rest, we make God himself our friend too; for He
that gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord, and look what he lays
out, it shall be paid him again Pro. 19 17
Prove. 19 17. Lay up therefore thine alms in the bosom of the poor, and he
shall pray for thee, Ecclesiast. 29. 15.
Ecclesiast. 29. But that is Apocrypha: Is it so? then, Blessed be the man that
provideth for the sick and needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble: I Psalm 41. 1
am sure that is no Apocrypha; that is Psalm 41. verse 1.

The ordinary Exposition of Facite vobis amicos, Make you friends, is, Date
eleemosynam, Give alms: And indeed, says one, Christ Jesus would insinuate
Lyra in loc.
nothing else here, but that we should give part of our goods to the poor.
Date eleemosynam, says our Savior, et ecce omnia munda Luke 11. 41
sunt vobis; Give alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are
clean unto you. Date eleemosynam, Give alms? Why? that doctrine, as well as
the practice of it, is almost forgotten; the divinity of justification by
faith alone, misunderstood by the people, like one of Pharaohs lean kine, has
clean devoured this fat one: For who is he? and where is he? (to our
everlasting shame be it spoken) that so often takes care to fill the empty
belly of a poor Brother, as he makes preparation to feast his rich Neighbor?
No: Hospitality the Mother, and Almes-giving the Daughter, left the world both
together; Now there is no plague to that of giving, nor any folly comparable
to that of charity. But I say unto you, if you will be happy in heaven
hereafter, Make ye friends here below, give alms, learn of the children of
this world; do not they give an hundred for a time, that they may gain ten;
and wilt not thou lend one, that thou may gain a thousand? Let my counsel,
says Daniel Dan. 4. 27.
to the King of Babylon, be acceptable unto thee, break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor: and it is
agreeable with that of Christ, Sell that ye have, and give alms, provide your
selves Luke 12. 33
bags which wax not old, and a treasure, which (when you fail on earth,)
shall never fail you in heaven above.

Well, the truth is, I could be contented to be more charitable then I am, and
to give more alms then I do, but that I see my charity many times abused, and
my penny that I give with a good meaning, misimploied; I pray you therefore,
How shall I give alms, and to whom? The Wiseman has given thee admirable
direction for this duty in few words, Mitte panem Eccles. 11. 1
tuum super aquas transeuntes, etc. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after
many days thou shall find it: Mark it well, for every word bears his
weight. Da, but Mitte; not Da, a thing utterlie given away, but Mitte, a thing
sent abroad, like an adventure at Sea, which shall another day return to thee
again with great advantage. Panis, Bread, says Solomon, not a stone; when thy
brother asks, thou should give him an alms to fill his belly, not a
reproach to break his heart. My Son, make not an hungry soul sorrowful,
neither vex a man in his necessity, take heed thou trouble not the heart of
him that is Ecclesiast. 4. 2, 3.
grieved already, Ecclesiast. 4. 2, 3. De pane tuo, of thine own bread; Cast
thy bread upon the waters, and Break to the hungry of thine own bread, and
bring the poor that wanders home to thine own house, Esaias 58. 7. Esaias 58. 7.
Thou must not undo an hundred men, their wives and children, by briberie,
usurie, or extortion, and then build a poor Hospital to keep seven. Cast thy
bread super aquas transeuntes, upon the waters that pass by; that is in the
next verse; Give thy portion to seven, and to eight, that is, to many; For as
the tree falls, so it lies, if to Verse 3.
the North, then to the North; If thine heart (when thou give an alms)
points toward charity, however the beggar employ thy penny, surely thou
shall not lose thy reward: Super aquas transeuntes, Upon the waters that pass
by; Ne scrutare paupere^, say not thou in thine heart, indeed this beggar is
to be relieved, but that other is not; for in the form of a stranger thou
may receive an Angel, and in the habit of a beggar, bestow somewhat on that
God, who gave thee All. And so I have done with the first word of the Text, the
Quid, What Christ would have you do, which was, Make you friends: And now we
are come to the second, and that is the Cuius, or the Matter whereof they are
to be made, and that is,


Of your unrighteous Mammon.
Make you friends of your unrighteous Mammon. Mammon in the Syrian language,
says Saint Jerome, is the same that Riches are in ours; and riches are called
unrighteous for many reasons; whereof these are some of the chiefest:

When we once have them, we do, says Theophylact, uniustly make our selves
Lords of that, whereof in truth we are but Stewards: Every one of us (if once
grown rich) being apt enough to cry out with that clownish lonne of Mammon in
the 12 of this Gospel, Luk 12. 17
Omnia mea, (at verse 17) All Is mine own; without so much as casting an eye
upon the misery of our poor brethren, for whose sakes, it may be, his barnes
were the fuller; nay indeed, whose own, the superfluity of all we possess,
is.

riches of unrighteousnes, says Saint Ambrose, because they make us more
unrighteous than otherwise we would be, still tempting us to Covetousness,
and the more we have of them, the more still do we desire.

Aut iniquus, aut iniqui haeres? The world (in the proverb) accounting that
Son happy, whose Father went to the Devil, to make him rich.



because, although some few men may come just lie by them, yet (as anon you
shall hear) it is too hard for any (the best man) to say, he will not put
his trust in them.

Augustine goes farthest of all in this point, who tells us, that to speak
truly, all riches are the riches of iniquity, because they deal uniustly with
us in every point; for we get them with labor, keep them with fear, and
lose them with grief; so that to speak truly, says he, all riches are the
riches of iniquity, unless they be those unestimable riches of grace here,
and of glory hereafter.

And doubtless it was (as the Disciples called it) an hard saying of our
Saviors in the Gospel, that it was as easy for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom Heaven; and yet
so it is, because, In eis constituunt spem, atque coptam suae beatitudinis,
When men are grown rich, they think of no other happiness at all, but say in
their hearts, Tush, we shall never do amiss Will you see how this conceit
transports a good man, a Saint, a man after Gods own heart, King David
himself is carried away with this consideration; Ego dixi, I said, Non movebor
in aeternum, I shall never be moved; but mark when it was that he said so, In
abundantia mea, I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved, Psalm. 30. 7.
Most excellently Psalm. 30. 7.
therefore does our Leiturgie teach us to pray, In all time of our wealth, in
the hour of death, and in the day of Judgment, good Lord deliver us. In our
wealth a man would think there were not so much need of prayer, but Call upon
me in the time of trouble: O yes, in our wealth specially are we to pray to
God, that we be not puffed up, In all time of our wealth, good Lord deliver us.
When men are underpropt (as it were) with wealth, they think heaven and earth
shall sooner perish, than they want any thing. And if good men be many times
so carried away, it is no marvel to hear the Fool in the 12. of this
Gospel, thus cheering up himself, with Eat, drink, be merry, and live Luke
12. 20.
at ease. Why so? Thou have enough laid up in store for many years.

Riches, unrighteous riches, are deceivable, and draw away the minds of the
best, since man is apt to say to his gold, Thou art my hope, and to his wedge,
In thee is my confidence; But what is this, says holy Job, than by setting up
a god below, to deny that God Job 31. 28.
who is above? Admirable therefore is the counsel of King David, Psalm. 62. 10.
Trust not in oppression, and if Riches increase, set not your hearts upon them.
And very agreeable is it with this advice of our Saviors here, Make ye
friends of your unrighteous Mammon.

Well, the counsel is good that you give, but how must I do it?

In brief, Thou must first competentlie provide for thine own; He that
provideth not for his own, and namely, for them of his family, is (says
Saint Paul) worse than an Infidel, and he has denied the faith. Then give
alms to thy poor Brethren, not only of thy superfluity, but even borrowing
somewhat of thy necessity; visit the fatherles and the widows in their
adversity, cloathe the naked, give meat to the hungry, drink to the
thirsty, comfort the sick, harbor the harbourlesse, do good to all,
specially to those that are of the household of faith.

There are some, says Haymo, who foully mistaking the meaning of this Text,
think they are here by our Savior Christ advised only to give alms of that
part of their substance, which they know they have unjustlie gotten; and this,
think they, must needs be the ready way to make them friends of their
unrighteous Mammon, as if God would ever endure the taking away from others to
give unto him, who has so strictly commanded us to give to others nothing but
what is our own. Indeed an alms of another man's goods, is even as acceptable
to God, as the price of an harlot, or a dead dog If therefore thou have
wronged any man, if thou be able, make him restitution; Non dimittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: (...).
Otherwise your corrupt riches, your moth-eaten garments, your cankered gold
and silver, nay the very rust of them shall one day witness against you, Jam.
5. Iam. 5. 2, 3.
2, 3. If I have done any man wrong, says the good Convert, I will restore him
fourefold: but that is not all; See, says Saint Augustine, how he runs, how
he speedes to make him friends of his unrighteous Mammon: Festinans descendit,
he comes down quickly; Verse 5.
and dimidia substantiarum mearum, and one half of my goods I give to the
poor; it was good Zaccheus the Arch-Publican, in the 19. of this Gospel,
verse Verse 8.
8.

But what? Would you have me give away my riches to make me friends? will the
man of this world say: Surely that is an ill exchange, and I like it not; I
know well enough, that so long as I have riches, I shall have friends, or, if I
have not, the matter is not great; for so long as I keep my riches by me,
they who would be mine enemies, shall be able to do me no hurt. Wise Solomon
says, That Riches gather many friends, when the poor is separated from Prove.
19. 4.
his neighbor, Prove. 19. 4. And again, Riches are a strong (itty to the
owners of them, Prove. 18. 11. What need I then go 18. 11.
about to make me better friends of my riches, who methinkes are my good
friends already?

May not a man safely (think you) say unto this wise worldling, as once Joab
did unto David, Thou love thine enemies, and hate thy friends? 2 Samuel 19. 2 Samuel 19 6.
6. Thy riches, think as thou will, they are thine enemies. I have seen,
says the Preacher, Eccles. 5. 12, Riches reserved to Eccles. 5. 1^
the owner thereof for his hurt: So reserved, that they perish by evil
travail; for he gets a son, and in his hand is nothing: As if he should
have said; I have observed a worldly man, to weary himself and his thoughts,
to rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of care all his days,
to scrape Riches together, and when all is done, leave them to a son, that
through excess and riot, dies a beggar, and there is an end. Had it not been
far better for this man, to have made him friends of his riches, and with
part of his riches have purchased for him and his, the prayers of the poor,
which would have followed him, to everlasting habitations?

For one word of instruction: If the Mammon of this world be so unrighteous, if
Riches be so full of iniquity, I beseech you (Brethren) do you your selves
judge, whither these men are transported, who adventure their honors, their
reputations, their honesties, their lives, nay their very souls too, that
they may be rich: Si possunt recte, si non, quocunque modo rem: If they may be
rich fairelie, well and good; if not, they will do, or suffer any thing,
swallow a bribe, cozen a widow, defraud orphans, drink the very blood of
the laborers for their wine, and the tears of the oppressed for their drink,
deteine the hirelings wages; and, as the Prophets phrase is, Sell the poor for
shoes, and the needy for a piece of bread. Is not this, think you, far
from, Facite vobis amicos, Make you friends of your unrighteous Mammon?

Judge again, I pray you, your selves, how they follow Christ's sweet counsel
here in my text, who Ahab-like, are ever sick of the next field, and have
never elbow room enough so long as any poor Naboth dwells near them;
nothing they possess is worth the having, if they have not all. But above all,
think what shall become of those men, who insteede of releeving the poor,
rob the Spittle, taking from them what others have already given them. Of
this sort, are those Executours, and Overseers, who being put in trust with the
estates and portions of poor widows, and fatherless children, do by some
trick in law, or crafty distinction of their own, cozen and deceive them.
Such again are they, who take away from the poor, what the law has given in
pios usus, and mingle it with their own; Do not these, and such as they,
purchase to themselves the fearful curses of the afflicted poor, insteede of
making them friends of the Mammon of iniquity?

I beseech you men of the world; you that lean so strongly on your God
Mammon; What is he in whom you trust? Is he any other, than (as Paracelsus
says of the Devil) a beggarly spirit? What can he do for you? Can he make
you honest, wise, healthie? Can he make you live more merrily, feed more
heartily, sleep more quietly? Can he prevent care, sickness, sorrow, death,
and the pains of hell after death? Or rather does he not bring, and cause all
these? If he could be friend you so, I should not blame you much to fall down
and worship him; but if (as the truth is) he rather bring all then otherwise,
then me thinks admirable is our Saviors counsel in my Text here, Facite
vobis amicos, Make ye other friends, make ye friends of your riches of
iniquity; Bestow the superfluity of your goods on the poor, Honor the Lord
with your substance, Prove. 3. 9: And great shall Prove. 3. 9.
be your reward in heaven, Matthew. Mat. 6. 6.
6. 6.

That good Martyr Saint Laurenie, being asked by Decius Caesar, says Lyra,
what he had Lyra.
done with the great treasure of the Church, which was left by Sixtus his
Predecessor, made him this answer, That it was safe enough, for he had sent
it to heaven above, by the hands of the poor on earth. And our own Warrham,
once Archbishop of Canterbury, being on his deathbed, sent his steward to see
what store of coin was remaining in his coffers; he returning brought him
word, that there was either very little, or none at all; (for indeed the good
man, being a most charitable Prelate, had given all away before) the Bishop
told his servant, Nimirum sic oportuit; When could I die better, than when I
am so even with the world? Oh could thou do so! Lay up thy gold, thy
treasures, thy garments there, neither could thieves steal them from thee, nor
rust, nor vermin consume them; And thus thou may do, if thou bestow them on
the poor, they will carry them to heaven for thee, and there thou shall be
sure one day to find them again. Had that foolish rich man, in the 12: of
this Gospel, found out this Luke 12. 18.
way, he would have had room enough to bestow his corn, had his croppe been
far greater than it was; for of every empty belly of his poor neighbor,
he might have made a new little Barn, wherein he might have laid up part of
his store.

In one word, If thou want earthly riches, says Saint Jerome, seek not to
get them by evil means; if God has already blessed thee with them, send them
before thee to heaven by thy good deeds. The Saints of God are, like Dorcas,
Acts 9. 36.
Rich in good works, and alms which they do; not which they talk of, not
which they intend to do, not which they leave to be done by others but which
they do themselves, they be their own Executors. He that gives nothing in
his life time, because he means to leave all to good uses at his death, is
much like to him in the Poet, that threw his apples to the hogs because he
could not eat them himself. I would not be mistaken, I do not, I dare not
(specially in such an age as this) speak against charitable deeds, be they
done in what kind soever; but I press this point the rather, to call to your
remembrance, how many well intended great gifts thus given, have miscarried,
and come to nothing: See our own Annals, and you shall find them only
recorded, and passed over with this cold Close; It was an ample and a large
gift, had it been performed accordingly. But I go on.

Saint Gregory in an Homily of his, (as if he would directly cross that of
holy Job: Nothing brought we into this world, neither shall we carry any
thing out of it) falls upon this meditation, That although we brought
nothing into the world, yet it is possible for us to carry something out of
it. How so? Thus, says he, If we hearken to the voice of the poor, whilst we
live, and fail not to relieve them when they ask, we carry so much of our
wealth with us hence, as we gave away here. Largiendo servamus, quae servando
amittimus: What we give away so, we keep for our selves; and what with a close
hand we keep, that we lose for ever. And another of the Ancients tells us,
(but I tremble to repeat it) that the purple glutton in this Gospel is in
hell, Non quia abstulerat aliena, sed quia non donarat sua, Not for taking any
thing from the poor, but because he relieved not their wants. He would not
hear the cry of the poor beggar on earth, and how should he look to be heard
himself being below? How could he that was merciless to others, expect to
receive mercy? or think that Abraham, or the Saints could be his friends in
another world, who had never taken any, the least care, whilst he was in
this, to make him friends of his Mammon of iniquity? To conclude this point:
Oh let not those that drink wine in bowls, and stretch themselves on beds of
yvorie, forget the afflictions of poor Joseph, Amos 6. 6. It is Amos 6. 6.
yours that are rich, (and for my part I come not hither to deny it you) to
eat the fat, and drink the sweet, but then you must remember also to send
part to them, for whom nothing is prepared, Nehem. 8. 10. And this is Nehem. 8.
10.
the very next way, I know for you, in the midst of your mirth to make you
friends of your unrighteous Mammon. But the sons of men, although they be
many times most unreasonable themselves, yet they will always expect to have
a reason for what God requires at their hands; and here in my Text so they
shall. Take his counsel, and be of courage, and do it, and the third and
last part of my Text will tell you Why.

Because a time shall come, when you your selves shall fail, and want, and
these friends of yours, shall receive you into everlasting habitations. And
there is the Cui bono, the end and purpose, for which all this is to be done;
Vt quum defeceritis, That when you shall fail, They may receive you into
everlasting habitations. (...), When you shall fail; that is, says Caietan, e
presenti vita, out of this present life, Vt cum defeceritis, When you shall
want, that is, when you shall want breath, in plain English, when we shall
dye. As if our Savior, by this very form of speech would teach us, That our
study and overmuch care for the increase of those earthly treasures here, is
an evil disease under the Sun, indeed a very consumption of our selves, for
even whilst we labor and vex our selves, and our souls to gather them, we
our selves consume, want, fail, and die.

Cum defeceritis, When you shall fail, when is that?

Briefly, when the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars shall be darkened, when
the keepers of the house shall tremble, the strong men bow themselves, the
grinders cease, and they shall be darkened that look out of the windows; as
it is, Eccles. 12. 3, 4. That is, Eccles. 12. 3, 4.
when all the powers and faculties of our souls and bodies, shall fail, and
cease; then, lo then, the remembrance of one deed of charity which thou have
done, shall do thee more good, than the possession (if thou had it) of both
the Indies. Then, and in that hour, it shall more glad thy soul, that thou
can say with meek Moses, Whose Ass have I taken? Number. 16. 15.
Number 16. 15: or with righteous Samuel, Whose Ox have I taken? 1 Samuel 12. 3.
1 Samuel 12. 3; than if thou could say, All the sheep and oxen upon a
thousand mountains were thine own, by oppression and wrong. Then, then, when
thine eyes shall wax dim, thy feet (as the Text is) fail under thee, when
thine own children are presently to be fatherless, and the wife of thy
bosom a widow, oh what an unspeakable comfort shall it be to thee, that thine
own conscience shall then cheer up thy drooping soul, with the sweet
remembrance of what thou have been unto others! I have been eyes to the
blind, and feet was I to the lame, I was a father to the poor, and I ever
caused the widows heart to rejoice, Job 29. Job 29. 15
15.

Pericles, an Heathen, (as Plutarch has it in his life) although he knew not
what should become of his soul, when his body failed, yet he could rejoice
on his death bed, for that he had never given any of the men of Athens, (for
there he lived) any cause to go from him sorrowful. Could such a
consideration as this, comfort a dying Heathen? and shall it not much more
rejoice a Christian, that he can in his dying bed say truly to his soul, I
have done no man wrong, I have taken away no man's ox, I have oppressed no man?
I have labored with my hands, I have eaten mine own bread, I have now
finished my course, I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is
at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give unto me, and not to me only, but unto them also who love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4 5, 6. Cupio dissolve, I desire 2 Timothy 4. 5, 6.
therefore to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Beauty shall wither, knowledge decay, strength fail; and therefore
dum body, whilst it is yet called to day, before you fail too, Remember thy
last end, and non peccabis in aeternum, and thou shall not do amiss for ever;
Thou may do amiss again and again, but not for ever; the end of such a
man is peace at the last A time there shall be when Riches, Beauty, Knowledge,
Strength, yea your selves shall fail; and in that day, and that hour, shall
the rich man say of his gold, his silver, and his store, as Job did of his
friends, Miserable Comforters are ye all; then shall the wiseman say of his
knowledge, his Arts, his skill, as Job did of his friends, Miserable Comforters
are ye all; Then shall the Minion say of her Beauty, her cropping, her
curling, and her painting, as Job did of his friends Miserable Comforters are
ye all, Job 16 2. Then shall the consideration Job 16. 2.
of one hour spent in devotion be more worth than all the gold of Ophir So
let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like unto his.

The worldling who had his hope here below, shall sing Loath to depart, Then
shall the Saint be comforted, then shall he despise this thick clay, and
tread the Moon under his feet; then cries he in his heart, Woe is me that I
am constrained to dwell in Mesek, and to inhabit in the Tents of Kedar. Cupio
dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, for that is best of
all; and therefore, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Cum defeceritis,

When you shall fail; If you fail thus, your failing is no fail; for
although your legs fail under you, your tongues fail in your mouths, your
eyesight fail, your strength fail, your friends fail, your selves fail, all
fail you at once; yet all this is no fail, but a retreat, that by such going
backward, you may gather strength to gain eternity in heaven, where there
shall be no more decaying, no more failing, no more disease, no more death.

To conclude this point, when we die, we fail al earthly things which have
depended on us, And on the other side, all those things fail us, in which we
have trusted; we then part with all our goods, our wives, our children, nay
with our very faith and hope too; only our charity, she follows us still, in
death we take our leave of all our friends, but only our good works, and they
will follow us: so says the voice from heaven, Rev. 14. 15, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, for they rest Rev. 14. 15
from their labors, and their works follow them: Or, as our Text is, they are
like so many Harbingers, they go before to receive us into everlasting
habitations; and that is the last word of the last part of my Text. And of that
together, for that I cannot now take it asunder. They, there is the parties;
Shall receive, there is the action; Into everlasting habitations, there is the
place. They shall receive you, In aeterna tabernacula, Into everlasting
habitations.

They shall receive you. They? Which they? Your friends which you had before
gotten, by your charity, you heard before who they were, the blessed Saints,
the holy Angels, they shall receive you, carry you into Abraham's bosom: The
Poor, they shall receive you; poor friends God wot, yet such as shall another
day do you rich favors; for they shall receive you. They: The Poor: Either
Pauperes spiritu, says Bona venture, The poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Mat. 5. 3.
God, Mat. 5. 3. Or, Pauperes in August.
sacculo, The poor who live in want here, their prayers shall receive thee.
Orabit pauper prote, The poor shall pray for thee, Ecclesiast. 29. But is that
all? Ecclesiast. 29.
That is but cold comfort; for alas! how shall he, who whilst he lived here
could not help himself, and which is worse, it may be, went to hell himself
after his death, be able to receive me into everlasting habitations? Why? he
shall send up his prayers to heaven for thee; and although perhaps he do it
not, or not as he ought, it matters not. Thine alms are ever had in
remembrance in the sight of God, Acts 10. 31. It is the sweet meditation of
the blessed Psalmist on this point; Psalm. Psalm. 16. 2.
16. 2: Tobathi bal gnaleka: Likedoshim asher baaretz. My goods, and my
goodness, O Lord, are nothing unto thee, thou art in heaven, and they cannot
reach up to thee; therefore they shall be extended to the poor Saints which
are on the earth; and why to them? It may be, thou will take it as done to thy
self, so thou shall receive us thy self, but according to all the kindness
we have showed unto them. Christus recipiet, Christ Jesus, says Haymo, shall
receive us for that good which we have done unto others. Such, if you mark it
well, is the proportion of the last doom, when the Saints are received into
glory: Matthew. 25, Come ye blessed Mat. 25.
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Come, I say, I know you
all: Thou gave me once in such a place a cheerful penny, else had I gone
supperlesse to bed, Come, receive a Crown for it, now thou shall sup with the
Lamb. At another time thou gave me a garment, else had I starved for cold,
Come, receive thou a wedding garment. Thou gave me meat when I was hungry,
drink when I was thirsty, Come, thou shall have the bread of life, and the
water of life, of which whosoeever eats and drinks shall hunger and thirst
no more. Lord, when saw we thee hungry, naked, or in want? I say unto you, In
as much, as you did it to one of these little ones, you did it unto me: Come ye
blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for Mat. 25.
you.

almes-giving, and our other deeds of charity be able to reconcile us to God
at first, and shall afterward receive us into everlasting habitations, then by
our good works may we obtain heaven, and merit eternal life; and, if that be
so, in vain do we believe that Christ's death and passion was all-sufficient
for us; or, as Saint Paul says, That he died for our sins, and rose again
for our justification.

England, in which we live, which in the Homily of alms deeds teaches us
expreslie thus. That Our good works are not the original cause of our
acceptance before God, but consequents, fruits and signs of our
Justification. Neither do those Fathers of Trent any more, (for any thing I
could ever see) after al their traversing this point in their sixth Session,
but propose the Exercise of good works to the just, to those who are justified
before; which if our Church did not likewise, in vain have I been preaching
unto you all this while, who at this present, meant to do nothing else. For
although we like not the Rhemists doctrine, who teach, That the kingdom of
heaven is to be had for money, (the very words of their note upon my Text) nor
their Mother the Church of Rome, who puts the same in practice, as it
appears by that Catalogue not long since printed at Bolonia in Italian,
wherein every Ecclesiastical preferment and office, is valued at so much to
be purchased; (Oh new way to heaven!) yet we teach, that after our first
justification, which is by faith, (Vivit iustus ex fide) that good works are
prepared for us to walk in; they are, as the Ancients taught, Via regni, not
causa regnan^i: we show the fruits of that in our sanctification, growing from
strength to strength, from one degree of grace unto another, until we appear
perfect before our God in Zion, Psalm. 84. 7. And so at last God Psalm. 84. 7.
looking upon these fruits of our righteousness, being Tincta sanguine
Christi, dyed in Christ's blood, as Bellarmines phrase is, at last is pleased to
grant them a recompense, and to crown them with a reward of victory. And thus
in my Text, are they said to receive those that do them into everlasting
habitations, into the joys of heaven above; and when they are there, no doubt,
all of them are fulfilled with glory, yet as one star differing from
another; The twelve Apostles sitting upon twelve seats, Elias and John Baptist
shining as greater lights; For in my Fathers Kingdom, says our Savior, are
many dwelling places, Ioh. 14. 2. There shall be paritas gaudii, disparitas
gloriae, parity of joy, disparity of glory, yet every vessel shall be full
according to the measure of its own capacity.

Lastly, as they shall be habitations, not one, but many, so, says the text,
they shall be everlasting also: For we know (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 1.)
that if 2 Cor. 5. 1
our earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be destroyed, we have a building
given of God, an house not made with hands, but (...), everlasting in the
heavens.

Unwise men that we be, let us give over laboring for those things which
perish, and wea rying our selves and our thoughts to gain those flitting
riches, which on a sudden take the wings of the morning, and forsake us; and at
last learn to build for eternity. Let us no longer vex our selves to
compass transitory pleasures, and momentanie delights, which for the most
part are gone from us, before we can truly say they are come; and now at the
last by our good deeds of charity, lay up for our selves true treasures in
heaven above, which can never be taken away from us, nor we from them, seeing
they be everlasting habitations.

Let us lose all, that we may gain these, let us sell all that we may buy
these: Let us never think our selves at home, but ever Pilgrims and
strangers, until we possess these, these everlasting habitations. In one
word, let us make us friends of our unrighteous Ma^mon, that when we our selves
shall fail, they may receive us into everlasting habitations, in which we
shall dwell forever, and for ever sing, Halleluiah: Glory, honor and praise be
unto God the Father, to the Lamb, that sits upon the Throne, and to the
holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

